FT  24 NOV 93 / Survey of the Basque Country (7): Important group / Profile
of Mondragon Co-operative movement
There can be little stronger evidence of the spirit of co-operation which
infuses Basque industry and finance than the manufacturing groups of the
Mondragon Co-operative Corporation.
The MCC has its roots in the work of Father Jose Maria Arizmendiarrietta,
the Basque priest who inspired the development of the first of Mondragon's
co-operatives, Ulgor, in 1956.
Tucked away high in the mountains of the Guipuzcoa district, the MCC has
grown in the past 37 years from being a single manufacturer of white goods
into a leading diversified group employing a total of 25,322 people, with
total turnover in 1992 of almost Pta4bn.
The MCC, now the most important business group in the Basque Country and
ranking 15th in the whole of Spain, boasts some 90 separate companies,
according to Mr Javier Mongelos, president of the MCC's general council, its
governing body.
Of its three divisions - financial, industrial and distributive - the
industrial arm is by far the most important. Its manufacturing base includes
machine tools, automotive components, electronics, construction parts and
domestic appliances of all kinds.
In 1992 the industrial division achieved a turnover of more than Pta2bn,
25.5 per cent of which was in exports, an increase of just 1 per cent over
1991. Given that industrial output was down by 1.7 per cent in Spain
overall, and by 4.1 per cent in the Basque Country in 1992 against 1991 - as
a result of the international recession - that performance must be seen as
impressive.
In Spain overall, the machine tool sector saw a 20 per cent drop in
production in 1992, compared with 1991. Yet MCC machine tool exports
actually increased by 1.6 per cent in 1992, compared with a 14 per cent drop
in this export market for Spanish machine tool manufacturers generally.
But Mr Mongelos hopes that the recession may be passing its peak. He
believes 1993 may see the industrial division's exports grow by an average
of 15 per cent compared with 1992, while its production overall will be
about 3 per cent greater than in 1992. He thinks total turnover for the
whole corporation could reach Pta5bn for 1993.
Mr Mongelos says that the organisation has gone through a lengthy and
continuing process of 'reconstruction and elaboration of its future
strategy.'
Spain's EU membership has meant that the previously protected market for
much of the MCC's products has disappeared.
'The competition is no longer with other Spanish manufacturers but with
Siemens-Bosch, Electrolux and so on; companies which are perfectly capable
of operating in a global market,' says Mr Mongelos.
The immediate difficulty, not just for the MCC but for Spain in general,
according to Mr Mongelos, is one of catching up with the past.
'It's impossible for a country or an industry which was isolated for 50
years from international competition to adapt itself to complete world
competition in 6 1/2 years. This metamorphosis, done in such a short time,
has also not been accompanied by other transformations which are necessary
for a truly competitive environment.
'Of course, here in the Basque Country we have certain advantages,
particularly in the Mondragon Corporation, because the benefits or otherwise
of productivity go directly to the person who works; the owner of the
company is the same as the person who has to work there.'
In other words, the Mondragon enterprises have the advantage of flexibility,
of being able to change according to the needs and pressures of the markets,
without having to engage the massive bureaucracies of Spain's employment
laws and trades union opposition.
According to Mr Mongelos, the MCC's co-operative nature means that people
behave reasonably because they are all kept well informed about the ups and
downs of their own enterprise.
'We don't have strikes, for example. When there is a problem then a general
assembly is organised to sort it out.'
At the same time, unemployment within the MCC is almost non-existent.
Unemployment is defined as more than 100 hours a month without work - a
working month has 170 hours - and the unemployment figure within the
corporation is now about 200 people.
'The Basque Country is a poor country, without its own natural resources. We
have to import everything. It's also a country which traditionally has seen
a lot of emigration, to other parts of Spain and other countries. Life has
normally been very hard for the people who live here, and the only way they
could get out of that hardship has been to work. The co-operatives grew out
of this culture of poverty, of difficulty,' explains Mr Mongelos.
'The future for the corporation must be one of further adaptation to this
new world of international competition; one in which all the protective
measures which existed either have disappeared or are disappearing. One of
the implications of that is that the small and medium companies, which have
worked well here in the past, will not do so in the future in Europe. They
don't have the financial, or research and development capacities to compete.
'But it is also necessary to alter our customs, our management practices and
our attitudes - and that's a very complicated business,' adds Mr Mongelos.
