FT  26 MAR 93 / Survey of Bangladesh (1) Poverty and democracy - Bangladesh,
one of the world's most aid-dependent democracies, has been meeting economic
targets set by the international lenders. But it has a long way to go
alleviate its people's poverty and to revitalise its inefficient state
industries
TWO years after its first free elections, Bangladesh's fragile transition to
democracy is holding firm. Prime minister Khaleda Zia, the country's first
democratically-elected ruler, can boast substantial progress in economic
reforms and, after three bumper crops, near self-sufficiency in foodgrains.
Though this represents a remarkable turnaround for Bangladesh, half its 118m
population still lives in poverty.
Mrs Zia, widow of soldier-president Zia ur Rahman whose assassination in
1981 forced her into the political arena, can point to some notable
achievements.
First is the transition to parliamentary democracy after more than 20 years
of military rule. The army, says Talukder Maniruzzaman, a political
scientist at Dhaka university, is unlikely to attempt to seize back the
power it lost in 1990 when General Hossain Ershad was forced to resign
following student demonstrations and opposition pressure.
Second, the government, buoyed by higher tax revenues, is making a larger
contribution to its annual development programme for capital projects. For
years the programme has largely been paid for by foreign aid because of a
lack of local funds. This year, the government hopes to make a 27 per cent
contribution to the Taka 86.5bn (Pounds 1.48bn) programme.
Bangladesh is one of the most heavily aid-dependent economies in the world.
It receives annually the equivalent of some 7-8 per cent of gross domestic
product in foreign aid. Bangladesh has been pledged about Dollars 29bn in
aid since independence. Insufficient matching funds and long civil service
delays have continuously hampered disbursement of aid. In December alone six
ministries were unable to disburse Dollars 34.31m; Dollars 5.5bn has
accumulated in the aid pipeline waiting to be spent.
In April donors meet in Paris to decide commitments for the next 12 months.
Pledges for 1993-94 are unlikely to equal last year's Dollars 2.2bn.
The government faces strain on several fronts. Its biggest concern is that
the economy is not growing fast enough to alleviate poverty. It has
fulfilled most macro-economic targets set by the International Monetary Fund
and last year achieved 3.8 per cent growth in GDP. Annual inflation is 5.0
per cent, down from 7.2 in the previous year; narrow money growth has been
contained to less than 14 per cent, state spending has been curbed; the
current account deficit is down and foreign reserves have reached a record
Dollars 2bn, enough to cover seven months of imports.
However, according to the World Bank, with population growth now curbed to
2.4 per cent, a minimum of 5.5 per cent GDP increase is needed to improve
the lot of the 50m living in absolute poverty - defined by the Bank as those
consuming less than 1,800 calories a day. In the capital, Dhaka, the
population rise is 8 per cent a year because of an influx of people seeking
work.
The reform package has also included a cut in the fiscal deficit, measures
to boost foreign investment such as allowing overseas companies to hold 100
per cent equity in a local subsidiary and attempts to reduce the size of the
public sector.
However, the government is encountering political opposition to its World
Bank-designed reforms to revive overmanned and indebted industries such as
jute.
Mr Saifur Rahman, finance minister and free-market advocate, has earned
praise from donors and the World Bank for his handling of the economy. But
he faces criticism from Bangladeshi commentators that he answers only to a
constituency in Washington.
Equally angry are the unions which still exert a powerful disruptive
influence. Bangladesh has a poor industrial relations record, and the
frequent strikes seriously harm business. Unions are stepping up their
campaign to protect jobs but the government is resisting wage demands which
it says threaten reform.
The bureaucracy, a traditionally privileged class, is responsible for
implementing the reforms. However, it feels that its own interests are
threatened and opposes the general thrust of the policy. It has a tendency
to obstruct their introduction, for example by delaying decision-making.
Unemployment is also rising. Some 10m are officially out of work, including
an increasing number of educated young. About 1.5m people come on to the job
market each year.
Mrs Zia is trying to address these and other economic issues. In part this
is forced on her; she must maintain the momentum of reform to sell the World
Bank package to the people. Discipline and sacrifice is what she has been
asking of her 500,000-strong audiences in recent speeches. 'We must work
harder and increase productivity,' she says.
Such effort has already borne fruit in the performance of agriculture, which
contributes 38 per cent to GDP and from which 58 per cent of the population
earns its living. Measures such as the withdrawal of fertiliser subsidies,
the privatisation of fertiliser distribution, the introduction of wells and
better irrigation have helped boost agricultural output and efficiency.
For the first time in 20 years, Bangladesh is self-sufficient in rice.
Bumper rice crops have stabilised domestic prices.
Yet this policy has not been without its problems. The government's
determination to boost foodgrain production has adversely affected cropping
patterns. More than 80 per cent of land is allocated to rice, and overall
cereal crop production accounts for 80 per cent of total income from
agriculture. The cultivation of pulses is a casualty; it is often displaced
by a winter rice or wheat crop. Pulses have traditionally been a source of
cheap protein.
In addition to the success in agriculture, the private sector can boast
several accomplishments. The garments sector now employs 738,000 and last
year earned Dollars 1.5bn in exports, about double the level in 1989.
Grameen Bank, an innovative bank founded by Mr Mohammed Yunus, has won
praise around the world, including an endorsement from President Bill
Clinton. Grameen lends more than Pounds 25m a year mostly to poor rural
women. It recovers more than 98 per cent of its lending.
This is in contrast to the nationalised commercial banks. In the 1980s,
these banks made big loans to industry. The result is an accumulation of
Dollars 2.1bn in bad debts, about 33 per cent of total outstanding loans.
The government is overhauling state-owned banks ahead of their privatisation
and strengthening the central bank's supervisory powers. Reform, now in its
second year, is under way.
The same cannot be said of the government's infrastructure project to reduce
the impact of floods. A five-year (1990-95) Flood Action Plan (FAP) was
prepared by the World Bank and presented to Bangladesh's main donors in
1989. The plan envisages the construction of embankments to control three of
the world's largest rivers, the Ganga, Brahmaputra and Meghna.
FAP is widely opposed by local economists and environmentalists who say
embankments are too expensive and inappropriate for Bangladesh.
If FAP goes ahead it would be Bangladesh's biggest single civil engineering
project. But its implementation would pose a huge challenge for a civil
administration already under pressure. There is increasing disquiet that the
government has failed to improve the quality of public administration.
Woeful lack of co-ordination between ministries and an inexperienced cabinet
have inspired complaints about a rudderless government.
Yet the prime minister confidently talks of renewing her mandate with the
people. 'I am confident of winning another term (in 1996),' she says.
Mrs Zia is popularly known by the Bengali nickname of pupul, which means
doll or puppet. But she is clearly determined to prove that she is not
anyone's puppet.
