FT  21 JUL 93 / VW to face more scrutiny in secrets dispute
THE latest twist yesterday in Germany's industrial secrets row indicates
that Volkswagen is set to face increasing pressure on a number of issues
relating to its appointment of Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua as a
director.
Speculation is mounting that, as an early development, state prosecutors
investigating possible criminal charges will make a formal statement later
this week on inquiries so far.
The decision by a Hamburg civil court to loosen reporting restrictions
imposed last month on Der Spiegel, Germany's leading news weekly, will
re-open the public debate on claims by General Motors of the US and its
German subsidiary, Adam Opel, that Mr Lopez, a former GM director, and
several of his associates who joined VW with him, took industrial secrets
with them to the German group.
After yesterday's ruling, which followed an open hearing last Thursday, the
magazine can resume reporting on its earlier claims that Mr Lopez took boxes
of secrets with him when he quit GM in March.
It may also pursue its charges that Mr Jose Manuel Gutierrez, a close
associate of Mr Lopez who followed his former GM chief to VW almost
immediately, asked for and was given 'strictly confidential' details of a
new GM diesel engine.
The court, which imposed a gagging order at VW's request last month after
the publication of two detailed articles, also lifted the injunction in
regard to a claim that Mr Lopez had 'reached an agreement' to join VW with
Mr Ferdinand Piech, at the start of this year.
In an affidavit presented in court last week, and signed by Mr Piech, the VW
chairman stated that Mr Lopez decided to move on March 9.
The court also received testimony that Mr Lopez had in effect written a
speech, intended to explain to GM employees why he had decided not to join
VW, which was not in the event delivered. After checking the final draft on
the morning of March 15, he left the US for Germany.
Mr Lopez stated in an affidavit presented last Thursday that he did not
write it, and that it had been written by 'GM'.
Mr Lopez and VW were represented at the hearing by a single lawyer while Der
Spiegel had more than 20 witnesses, all GM employees, on hand to support its
case. although only three were called.
All the claims on which the court loosened the gag yesterday have been
firmly and consistently denied by VW and its executives, although as Mr
Harald Ficus, presiding judge, said last week, his court was not the place
for deciding the truth or otherwise of the suspicions aired in Der Spiegel.
However, Volkswagen was obliged to bear most of the costs of the case.
In German courts apportionment of costs shows the extent to which the
parties involved have gained or lost, according to legal experts.
On the single issue of Der Spiegel's reports on the diesel engine secrets,
Mr Gutierrez was made responsible for the whole DM100,000 (Pounds 38,759) in
costs.
In another case, which concerned complaints made in the German group's name
 -including Mr Piech's claims on the planning and timing of Mr Lopez's
switch - VW was obliged to pay two-thirds of the DM500,000 costs.
