FT  29 MAR 93 / Gas engineers fear loss of 30,000 jobs
GAS ENGINEERING companies could see the loss of 30,000 jobs by the end of
the year because of the uncertainty hanging over the industry, the president
of the Society of British Gas Industries warned yesterday.
More than 200 engineering and service companies which supply British Gas
with pipes, valves, meters and other infrastructure have shed more than
10,000 jobs between them since the start of the year as British Gas has cut
back on investment, Mr John Cull, society president and managing director of
Amec Utilities, told the Financial Times.
The society represents about 90 per cent of the engineering and service
companies supplying British Gas.
Mr Cull said that British Gas has cut its Pounds 300m investment programme
by 20 per cent this year because of uncertainty over the outcome of the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission inquiry into its business.
The inquiry should set a rate of return for British Gas's pipelines business
as well as determine whether it should be sold off, Mr Cull said. Ofgas, the
industry regulator, has proposed that British Gas should earn a return of
between 2 per cent and 4.5 per cent on its pipelines. But the company says
this is far too low to encourage ongoing investment in infrastructure.
Mr Cull said that manufacturing throughput among the society's members has
declined by 60 per cent compared with the same time last year. He believes
that British Gas is running down its stocks of pipes and not ordering new
ones.
Service companies working under contract to British Gas, for example laying
pipes, were seeing a fall of between 30 per cent and 50 per cent in turnover
from the same period last year, Mr Cull said.
'This is forcing our members to contract - several companies have closed
additional sites and pulled business back to one location. Several have
merged and some are facing receivership,' he added.
'These companies are well-managed, but they're suffering because of the
battle between British Gas and Ofgas. In this battle we're the only
sol-diers getting killed.'
Mr Cull has met Mr Tim Eggar, the energy minister, to express his worries
about the industry. But Mr Eggar said the matter remains in the hands of the
commission.
The commission's report is due out by the end of April, but Mr Cull fears
that the government will not take decisive action on it until close to the
end of the year.
By that time, he believes, service companies which rely on British Gas as
their main customer will be facing severe difficulties.
Once the commission's report has been published, Mr Cull believes it will
take another year before levels of investment are restored.
'By this time, there will be very little left of what was once a healthy and
technically advanced industry with a very strong skills base,' he said.
Mr Cull met Sir James McKinnon, director-general of Ofgas, earlier this year
to warn him of the problems in the gas supply industry.
Mr Cull warned: 'The government is just watching while this industry tumbles
apart.'
