FT  17 JUL 93 / VW shares fall as conflict with GM intensifies
VOLKSWAGEN SHARES fell on the Frankfurt stock exchange yesterday as the
industrial espionage battle between VW and General Motors of the US
intensified and traders reacted to court evidence related to the
confrontation.
The tussle between the biggest volume carmakers in Europe and the US took a
new turn as GM confirmed that the US Justice Department was conducting an
investigation into the possible theft of GM documents by former employees.
No further details were given, although the probe is understood to involve
the group led by Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, who was the head of
global purchasing at GM before joining VW as production director in March.
Meanwhile, it is understood that Mr Louis Hughes, president of GM Europe,
was offered the chairmanship of VW on two occasions last spring.
In a statement this week, Mr Hughes referred to one approach and said he
made it clear he was not interested.
His statement came in response to earlier jibes from Mr Ferdinand Piech, the
current head of the German group. Mr Piech suggested in a newspaper
interview that GM's accusations against VW were inspired by pique over Mr
Hughes's not getting the VW job.
Despite upbeat forecasts from Mr Werner Schmidt, Volkswagen finance
director, the group's shares shed DM5.20 yesterday in a rising market,
closing at DM360.50.
According to Mr Schmidt, even if the car market does not improve, the
company expects to return to profit in 1994.
Traders said the VW price had been affected by evidence heard in a civil
case in Hamburg on Thursday in which the news magazine Der Spiegel attempted
to have lifted a gagging order preventing it printing further articles
containing allegations about Mr Lopez and the GM colleagues who followed him
to VW.
Witnesses, all GM employees, gave evidence which contradicted some of Mr
Lopez's formal statements and denials on the GM affair which Der Spiegel had
earlier been obliged to publish by the Hamburg court which issued the
gagging order.
It also emerged that Mr Hughes, head of Opel until last summer, was
approached last spring by Mr Carl Hahn, then VW chairman, who handed over to
Mr Piech when he retired in December.
Tricky feats at the top, Page 8
Volkswagen 'will return to profit in 1994', Page 12
