FT  08 JAN 93 / Bonn to speed talks on pact
THE next two weeks will see a sharp increase in the tempo of negotiations to
agree a 'solidarity pact' in Germany, between central and local government,
opposition, trade unions and employers, before the end of the month.
Senior officials said yesterday that Chancellor Helmut Kohl remained
committed to the idea of a broad agreement on budget cuts, wage restraint
and increased private-sector investment, in order to boost the east German
economy.
It would be submitted to the parties in the German Bundestag by the end of
January.
A deal is seen as essential to pave the way for a cut in interest rates by
the Bundesbank. The bank has been insisting on clear evidence of wage
restraint from the unions, and budget discipline from central and local
government, before it relaxes its tight monetary policy.
Government and trade union officials dismissed claims yesterday by
opposition Social Democrats that the negotiations had collapsed because of
the insistence of Mr Kohl and Mr Theo Waigel, his finance minister, that
savings must include significant cuts in social spending.
The need for social spending cuts is one main conflict area, while another
is how to share the burden of spending cuts between the central government,
the 16 federal Lander, and local authorities. How far the trade unions can
go in publicly committing themselves to wage restraint, in both east and
west Germany, is also open to question.
The first round of talks of the year is scheduled for the weekend, when Mr
Waigel will meet a committee of finance ministers from the Lander in
Stuttgart, to try to agree on measures to keep their spending plans to a
maximum 3 per cent growth. If they fail, Mr Kohl will be advised by his
officials to take over the negotiations.
Talks also begin today on a public-sector pay deal. The trade unions are
seeking a pay rise of up to 5.5 per cent, while the government side wants to
keep the increase to a maximum 3 per cent.
The most obvious sign of progress in the solidarity pact talks has been the
agreement by Mr Kohl to draw up a new industrial policy for east Germany.
The aim is to preserve 'core industries', even if they cannot immediately be
sold off to the private sector.
The problem remains to define which industries can be saved, and how long to
give them to restructure before cutting off support.
Officials say a general willingness exists in the business sector to step up
investment in east Germany, provided a clear commitment is made by the trade
union side on wage restraint. The pact could end up as a joint declaration
of all participants, or a series of independent declarations.
