FT  03 SEP 93 / Arts: Comedy gets serious - Edinburgh Festival
THERE IS nothing more certain to kill a sense of humour than a comedy
festival, and since the Edinburgh Fringe is in danger of degenerating into a
comic's convention it is a place to tread warily.
Even the winner of the Perrier Award for best cabaret performer, Lee Evans,
could trip up many people with his idea of what makes a laugh. Evans was
born into the entertainment business which might explain why his physical
contortions owe much to Norman Wisdom, and his painfully fractured delivery
is reminiscent of Frankie Howerd. Evans was the clear favourite and a
popular choice. He will transfer well to television and could become a
typical British star comedian, loved by those who find every jerky grimace
side-splitting, hated by those who expect wit from a comic.
The new wave comedians who flock to Edinburgh each Festival rarely tell
jokes: they make quirky observations on the passing scene. Perrier's most
promising newcomer award went to Dominic Holland, who fits neatly into this
category. Holland relies on bags of charm and naivety to win over the
audience. He has worked the London circuit with a 20-minute act which leaves
him looking threadbare filling an hour at Edinburgh, but there is enough
jokey humour to suggest success. Along with Donna McPhail, who managed to
find loads of laughs in lesbianism, he was the pick of the 'funny old world,
innit' school of comedy.
It would be helpful if the organisers of the Perrier Award could spell out
their ambit more clearly. By far the happiest hour at Edinburgh was spent
with Dave Schneider and Armando Iannucci. They are hardly household names
but their On the Hour series for Radio 4 presumably makes them Perrier
non-starters. Schneider throws himself around the stage. He lifts familiar
material - the world's worst magician, Zero Talent, and quick-fire pop
impressions - out of the mundane. Iannucci is more cerebral. He pushes the
possible into the surreal. The sketch of the juggler adapting his act to
take account of Stephen Hawking's theory of the expanding universe is
sublime.
Equally unacceptable to a Perrier judge is another young Radio 4 stalwart,
Richard Herring. Like many comedians he has progressed into situation
comedy: in Ra-Ra-Rasputin he makes the obvious link between the Russian monk
and the German disco group, Boney M, taking in fancy cakes, a pickled penis,
a naked Prince Charles, and plenty of good natured bawdy. This mindless fun
was a welcome relief from stand up comedians determined to wring your
conscience dry.
Not all those grim faces you see at a Fringe event hide bad consciences.
Many represent agents and critics and radio and TV producers checking out
the talent. Sometimes the paying punters seem an insignificant minority and
you worry that the whole carnival is just some gigantic audition, a trade
showcase. For one student production of Much Ado About Nothing the audience
consisted mainly of Richard Eyre, director of the National Theatre, and
Dennis Marks, director of English National Opera: the actors should not get
over excited. The production was directed by Eyre's daughter and there was a
Marks girl in the cast.
But with the Television, Film, Jazz, and Book Festivals happening
co-incidentally Edinburgh inevitably becomes the national arts scene, and
many performers prepare an act which keeps them in genteel poverty for the
rest of the year. The professional reaction at Edinburgh either makes them
or breaks them.
Genteel would be a dangerous description of Kit and the Widow, back in
Edinburgh with a fistful of new songs. They look and sound so respectable
(although Kit's recently shaven head adds an air of menace) but their lyrics
spit out poison capsules. In the past Kit begged not to go to bed with
Madonna; now the unlikely coupling of Virginia Bottomley and Delia Smith has
been added to the list of ladies who need better PR.
Kit and the Widow carry traces of the Western Brothers and Flanders and
Swann but are really very hard indeed. Their strength is contemporary jokes:
wondering whether Michael Jackson could be caught up in blackmail, being so
black-ish and male-ish.
Finally congratulations Emily Woof. Her show Revolver faced two potentially
scuttling setbacks: she was not allowed to use songs from the Beatles album
'Revolver', the basis of her show, and she broke her leg. Woof ignored these
petty handicaps.
Part of the attraction is such a mimsy girl talking dirty but, in spite of
the plaster cast, she brings a stunning physicality into her soliloquy,
which links a planned video based on the songs from 'Revolver', with a
Beatles fan of the 1960s desperate to consumate her love for John Lennon.
Woof makes things complicated by introducing subsidiary characters, which
distract from her central image, a vulnerable woman abandoned in the flat of
a footloose television producer with only the gun in his desk for sinister
company. But the climax is suitably cathartic.
