FT  07 JUL 93 / The infection deep inside Italy's health ministry: Haig
Simonian dissects the latest stream of corruption revelations
THE stream of revelations about corruption in Italy's ministry of health
suggests health was at least as lucrative an activity for Italian
politicians as telephones and transport - two of the main areas of
corruption revealed so far.
The investigations have triggered the arrest of a string of leading
executives from the pharmaceuticals, advertising and public relations
sectors. They have tarnished the reputations of some of Italy's top medical
men and already caused one probable suicide.
At the root of the investigations are Mr Francesco De Lorenzo, the former
health minister, who resigned in February after being accused of running a
jobs-for-votes scam in his native Naples, and Mr Giovanni Marone, his
ex-secretary. Mr De Lorenzo, for whom magistrates have asked that his
parliamentary immunity be lifted, has pleaded innocence. Mr Marone, arrested
earlier this year, has sung like a bird.
So far, his testimony, widely leaked by magistrates, has cut a swathe
through the medical and pharmaceuticals establishment, taking a good swipe
at advertising and PR on the way. The impact of the allegations is that the
ministry and some of its top officials were open to financial incentives for
a variety of favours.
Magistrates have arrested Mr Ambrogio Secondi and Mr Cristiano Steigler,
chairman and managing director of the Italian subsidiary of SmithKline
Beecham, the multinational pharmaceuticals group.
Other arrests include Mr Giampaolo Zambeletti, the former owner and managing
director of one of Italy's leading independent pharmaceuticals companies,
and Mr Claudio Cavazza, chairman of Sigma Tau, another leading independent
pharmaceuticals group.
Mr Secondi is also chairman of the industry association, while Mr Cavazza is
a former chairman.
The latest arrests take to double figures the number of leading drug company
executives arrested in the past fortnight. Others include Mr Andrea
Montececchi of Schiapparelli and Mr Paolo Raimondo of Zambon.
Mr Zambeletti, accused of making illegal contributions to political parties,
allegedly paid L600m (Pounds 235,750) to an advertising agency for
fictitious services. The money in fact went to finance the election campaign
of the small Liberal party, of which Mr De Lorenzo is a leading member.
Mr Secondi and Mr Steigler have also been arrested regarding allegedly
illegal contributions. They are accused of giving Mr Marone L600m to a speed
up approval procedures and influence pricing policy.
This week, the plot thickened with the arrest of Mr Elio Guido Rondanelli,
one of Italy's best-known medical academics, and the issue of cautionary
warrants against Mr Duilio Poggiolini and Mr Francesco Antonio Manzoli, two
leading medical academics closely linked with the health ministry.
All three men also sat on Italy's independent pharmaceuticals pricing
advisory committee, which reports directly to the ministry on the sensitive
issue of drug prices. According to the magistrates' allegations, some
committee members received kickbacks from drugs companies to influence their
decisions. Last month, a morbid twist was added to the tale with the
mysterious death, believed to be suicide, in Naples of Mr Antonio Vittoria,
chairman of the pharmacy faculty at Naples university and a committee
member.
However, the allegations about the health ministry go much further than
drugs, reflecting the fact that its edict covers a range of other, less
obvious sources, of patronage.
Last week, police arrested Mr Carlo Violati, the former chairman of the
Ferrarelle mineral water company, on charges of making illegal political
contributions. Mr Violati allegedly paid L200m to Mr Marone to speed up
analytical work by the ministry.
Italy is the world's biggest mineral water market, and brands compete
fiercely on a variety of factors, including the 'healthiness' of their
products. The allegations against Mr Violati has already led to suggestions
that other entrepreneurs may also have sought to accelerate the ministry's
activities.
The investigations into the ministry have also broken new ground in that
they for the first time in the corruption scandal involve third parties,
such as advertising agencies and big PR companies.
According to Mr Italo Ghitti, one of the Milanese magistrates closely
involved in the investigations: 'Not only did some agencies pay kickbacks,
but they also lent themselves as channels for kickbacks to be paid.'
Magistrates yesterday arrested Mr Claudio Masi di Vargas Macciucca, managing
director in Italy of the FCB Mac/Publicis advertising agency. The arrest
followed the detention last month of Mr Alessandro Incecchi, a former
managing director of the Young &amp; Rubicam advertising agency in Italy, and Mr
Marcello Di Tondo, an executive of the Burston Marsteller group.
Mr Di Tondo's arrest is believed to concern allegations over the health
ministry's big anti-Aids campaign - the same issue that prompted the arrest
last month of Mr Aldo Brancher, an executive of Mr Silvio Berlusconi's
Fininvest media group.
Mr Brancher, a lobbyist for Fininvest and assistant to Mr Fedele
Confalonieri, its managing director, allegedly paid Mr Marone L300m in
kickbacks on a television advertising contract during the anti-Aids
campaign. According to normally reliable leaked testimony, Mr Brancher, who
is still in jail, has claimed he was acting in a private capacity on behalf
of his own company rather than Fininvest.
