FT  17 MAR 93 / The Budget (Government Statements): Borrowers will find it
easier to move home - Mortgages
This section contains details of the government's planned tax changes which
were given in separate announcements from the Inland Revenue, Customs and
Excise and other government departments after the chancellor had made his
publication of the Budget details in the Finance Bill.
BORROWERS whose houses are valued at less than their outstanding mortgages
will now find it easier to move home, said the Inland Revenue.
Mortgage interest relief will be allowed on a loan originally used to buy a
borrower's previous home as though the loan had been used to buy the new
home, if that new home is substituted for the previous one as security for
the loan.
Lenders may keep an old loan in existence, rather than redeeming it and
advancing a new one, without the borrower losing entitlement to mortgage
interest relief.
The Inland Revenue said the loan would be treated as made on the day that
the security substitution takes place, and treated as used to buy the new
home.
It said: 'As a result, mortgage interest relief is to be available on the
loan as though it was a new loan taken out to buy the home. The amount of
the loan that is eligible for mortgage interest relief - subject to the
Pounds 30,000 limit - will be the smaller of the purchase price of the new
home (less any new loan taken out) and the amount of the old loan
outstanding at that time.
'Unmarried people sharing together whose loans were originally made before 1
August 1988 may at present be receiving relief on more than Pounds 30,000.
Their combined relief will be restricted to Pounds 30,000 when they move, in
the same way as it would be if they took out a new loan in the conventional
way.
Mortgage interest: extension to temporary relief:
The circumstances in which borrowers moving home may continue to claim
mortgage interest relief on their old homes for a limited period after they
have moved have been extended. Under the new rules, which are to come into
effect immediately, it will no longer be necessary to take out a loan to buy
a new home in order to continue to claim relief.
Anyone over 65 with a life annuity home income plan may leave their home
without losing interest relief on the loan used to buy the annuity.
The Inland Revenue said the intention was to give to people moving into
rented properties who were unable to sell their existing homes at once the
benefit which was now available to people who were buying their new homes.
A similar benefit is to be made available to elderly people with home income
plans who are no longer able to stay in their homes, perhaps because they
have to move into a nursing home, and whose old homes cannot be sold
immediately.
