FT  20 DEC 93 / Reynolds warns IRA of crackdown: Irish PM will help UK over
security if peace moves fail
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, yesterday warned he would help
Britain impose a tough security clamp-down against the IRA if it did not
respond positively to the two governments' bid to bring peace to Northern
Ireland.
As Mr Reynolds sought to put further pressure on the IRA to give up its
25-year armed struggle against Britain's presence in Ulster, Mr John Major,
the British prime minister, appealed to Ulster unionists to recognise the
initiative as the last chance for peace.
Mr Reynolds warned on BBC radio that both governments 'would be expected to
respond' if loyalists and nationalists resumed the path of violence: 'After
a period in which such strong support has been expressed by the people in
both communities for peace, I think there would be revulsion over a
resumption of full-scale violence,' he said.
Mr Reynolds ruled out a return to internment for terrorist suspects, which
he said was 'the strongest recruiting platform that the IRA were handed'.
It seems increasingly unlikely that Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing,
will deliver an early response to the two governments' declaration last
Wednesday.
An indication of Sinn Fein's position came from Mr John Hume, leader of the
Social Democratic and Labour Party, speaking after talks yesterday with Mr
Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president. Mr Hume said he believed Mr Adams was
'very serious' about peace in the region.
In the Sunday Tribune newspaper in Dublin, Mr Adams said: 'Republicans will
be considering (the joint declaration) in the context of Sinn Fein's peace
strategy. We will approach it positively and seek to move the peace strategy
forward.'
The Republican movement, he said, would consider the declaration 'over
Christmas and for some time after that . . . There are no quick fixes in
this situation'.
However, a bomb explosion in Londonderry yesterday showed the IRA was not
committed to an unofficial ceasefire while deciding what action to take.
Three children and two adults narrowly escaped being killed in the blast,
which was the first attack since Wednesday's Downing Street declaration.
Mr Reynolds tempered his warning about a security clampdown with hints of
benefits to the IRA if it sued for peace.
He also suggested London might negotiate over 'the future of prisoners' held
in British jails: 'I think that's what the British government would have in
mind in exploratory talks with Sinn Fein which they said would be within
three months.'
Downing Street officials said that the subject of prisoners was not among
initial proposals for talks with Sinn Fein in the aftermath of a ceasefire.
A Downing Street spokeswoman emphasised that British jails contained
'criminals' not 'political prisoners'.
Unionist politicians also warned that they would oppose any amnesty for IRA
prisoners as part of an overall deal.
Mr Major's appeal to Northern Ireland's Unionists to accept the peace
initiative, in an article for the Belfast newspaper, Sunday Life, said the
joint initiative did not undermine the union between Britain and Northern
Ireland.
Mr Major said: 'I support the union. I have always supported the union. That
is my personal right.' However he went on: 'But I shall not seek to impose
my view on the greater number of people of Northern Ireland if they decide
otherwise.'
Prisoners' pivotal role, Page 6
