FT  26 FEB 93 / Arts: ENB's 'Swan Lake' - Ballet
English National Ballet has just presented us with a new Swan Lake. More
exactly, the company has invited Raissa Struchkova, greatly loved ballerina
of the Bolshoy Ballet for more than three decades, to mount a version of the
production which she knew in her home theatre during the 1940s and '50s. And
as frame for it, the designs that Carl Toms made for ENB's Swan Lake
before-last have been restored. The result is an effective and acceptable
presentation.
The company's track record with this ancient death-trap has not been happy.
One staging in the mid-1960s brought financial ruin; others have played
merry hell with the text; much of the designing has been unspeakable.
The rescuing of the Carl Toms decorations reveals them as being better than
memory recalled in the John Field production for which they were made in
1984.
A Gothic palace, a mistily evocative lake, a grand ball-room, provide
excellent locations for Mme Struchkova's production.
Costuming tends rather to an unsaturated and creamy beige, but outlines are
handsome, and when von Rothbart has been treated for his make-up - galloping
sequinitis - all will be visually well.
In matter of staging, Mme Struchkova has clearly had to reduce and edit the
text she knew as ballerina, but the choreographic vision is consistent and,
mostly, coherent.
The first three acts - and there is, mercifully, no attempt to jam acts
together in order to shorten running time - are the text according to
Alexander Gorsky, who made no less than five Swan Lake recensions in Moscow
in the first decades of this century when he directed the Bolshoy Ballet.
The choreography is fluent, interesting in its patternings. The final
lake-side act is that provided by Asaf Messerer for the Bolshoy in 1937.
None of this choreography can efface the merits of the Petipa/Ivanov text we
know, but it is sympathetic to its dancers, and to its viewers. There are a
few navetes, and the national dances of the third act - staged and rehearsed
by another Moscow artist, Alla Boguslavskaya - are beyond the competence of
any Western European dancers. (When Natalia Makarova staged ENB's previous
Swan Lake she excised them, rather than see them abused. As performed by the
Russian artists they can be the best thing of the evening: a look at a
currently available video of the Kirov Swan Lake testifies to this. But
Petersburg and Moscow train specialists in national dance; we give them to
the nearest available dancer). Only the tarantella, brightly done by Alice
Crawford and Eugenio Scigliano on Monday night, when I saw the staging,
looked credible.
This Swan Lake, as with so many Soviet-age productions, has the happy ending
demanded by socialist realism. Love conquers von Rothbart's spell, and
though the stage action sits oddly on the music (and von Rothbart's last
moments are not unlike a man trying to tango with himself), we are spared
the sight of Odette and Siegfried going to paradise in a spectral dodgem
car. We accept the good emotional intentions.
The production, in sum, is a success, and more than that, it has engaged the
attentions of ENB's artists, who are dancing with a sense of purpose that
seemed missing in the quagmire of last season's repertory. But Swan Lake is
still a 19th century ballerina-vehicle, and in an age perilously short of
artists worthy of the title, this must present serious problems. Agnes Oaks,
the Odette/Odile on Monday night, has a clear, true physique.
Her view of the double role is dutiful, but as yet she has not found the
lyric urgency, the hallucinatory beauty, that will bring this choreography
to full emotional life. At her best, in the final act, she shows a grieving
dignity that is appealing, and a largeness of physical outline to make the
final happy resolution credible.
It is Thomas Edur, as Siegfried, who dominates the evening by the elegance
of his means. As a dancer, his every step, every action, is polished,
graceful. His manner combines purity with very considerable technical
resource - movement deeply satisfying not just because he jumps high, turns
well, but because he shows how noble is his art in its physical ideals. As
an actor he is sensitive, and establishes a climate of feeling proper for
the action. His 'quietness' on stage is fascinating: nothing is forced, or
misshapen by temperament. He is an aristocrat, and he dignifies everything
he dances.
In an age over-populated with swans - most of whom, as readers of these
columns must be aware, are hideous mutants - this staging does its duty by
Tchaikovsky and by the popular image of Swan Lake.
It shows not only what audiences want to see, but what they deserve to see.
And that is no mean achievement.
English National Ballet is touring this new 'Swan Lake': at the Mayflower
Theatre, Southampton until February 27; at the Manchester Opera House from
March 8 - 13. The production is sponsored by Unilever
