FT  15 MAR 93 / Kohl clinches pact on east Germany
A BEAMING Chancellor Helmut Kohl, accompanied by opposition leader Mr Bjorn
Engholm and state premiers from east Germany, announced agreement at the
weekend on the public financing package to underpin a 'solidarity pact' for
the east German economy.
The cross-party deal, finalised in 2 1/2 days of almost uninterrupted
negotiations, puts into place the last main element in the pact which Mr
Kohl has been seeking since September with the opposition, the 16 federal
states, employers and trade unions.
The package of tax increases, spending cuts and increased subsidies and
credit for the east was welcomed across the political spectrum as a deal
which would revive the standing of the leading political parties in Bonn.
There was no immediate reaction from the German Bundesbank which has been
watching the talks closely as the key to future public spending control.
The central bank was not prepared to give any indication to financial
markets about its future interest rate policy, seeking merely to play down
speculation that a solidarity pact agreement would automatically lead to
further relaxation. The agreement received a cautious welcome from German
industry.
Mr Theo Waigel, finance minister and principal architect of the package,
said it would have a positive impact on international attitudes to Germany
and in giving the Bundesbank room for manoeuvre. 'It will have a positive
effect on the financial markets, and I am sure it will also have positive
effect on the future decisions of the Bundesbank.'
Mr Waigel spelt out the details on Saturday night of a package which will
raise income tax by 7.5 per cent through a reintro-duced 'solidarity
surcharge' from January 1 1995, and raise public borrowing for east Germany
by some DM60bn (Pounds 25.4bn).
The increased borrowing consists of DM30bn for the Treuhand privatisation
agency to finance the continuing restructuring of unprivatised 'core
industries' in east Germany and DM30bn for housing modernisation to speed up
privatisation of dilapidated state-owned apartments.
In return for a delay in the tax rise, Mr Engholm's Social Democrats have
won agreement that no social spending will be cut in a package of DM9.2bn in
central government budget savings. They have agreed that a campaign against
false social security and unemployment claimants should be launched.
The deal they were condemned to do, Page 13
