FT  28 MAY 93 / International Company News: Japanese airlines sharply lower
THE TIGHTENING of Japanese corporate purse strings dealt a heavy blow to the
country's airlines.
Japan Airlines (Jal), the national flag carrier, fell into the red and All
Nippon Airways (ANA), the second largest airline in Japan, reported sharply
lower profits in the year to the end of March.
As expected, Jal suffered a Y53.8bn (Dollars 495m) pre-tax loss and passed
its dividend. Sales were down 7 per cent to Y1,033bn.
The carrier, which was privatised in 1987, blamed the downturn in corporate
and consumer spending and excessive price competition on international
routes for its disappointing results and warned that recovery would be slow.
The economic slowdown in Japan affected international flights both for
passengers and cargo with demand for first and business class particularly
hit. Business class travel was down 16 per cent while first class travel
fell 18 per cent during the period.
Jal has implemented a wide-ranging restructuring programme which aims to cut
costs substantially over the next few years. Hiring of cabin staff this year
has been postponed while employee benefits are under review.
It has also closed some unprofitable routes. Jal is aiming to reduce its
dependence on international routes, on which it relies for more than 50 per
cent of its revenues, and work towards building at least a 30 per cent share
of the domestic market.
Pre-tax profits at ANA, meanwhile, fell by 34 per cent to Y13.3bn hit by the
fall in business and first class travel and high costs due to an expansion
programme.
The fall in ANA's profits came despite a 1.2 per cent increase in operating
revenues to Y808.4bn. Passengers carried on international routes rose 7 per
cent.
In the current year, Jal aims to raise turnover to Y1,064bn and break even
at the pre-tax level. It is forecasting net profits of Y4bn.
ANA forecasts parent operating revenues will rise 1.7 per cent to Y822bn and
net profits will increase 7 per cent to Y2.6bn.
