FT  03 NOV 93 / Kenya may seek debt rescheduling: World Bank, IMF support
economic reform package
MR MUSALIA Mudavadi, Kenya's finance minister, warned yesterday that Kenya
might have to reschedule part of its Dollars 7bn (Pounds 4.7bn) external
debt because of an accumulation of Dollars 700m in arrears resulting from
the suspension of foreign aid.
Mr Mudavadi raised the probability of debt renegotiations as the World Bank
and International Monetary Fund announced their support for a three-year
programme of economic reforms designed to mend Kenya's estranged relations
with the international donor community.
The IMF's endorsement of Kenya's new economic policies is critical for the
success of a donors' conference in Paris this month which will discuss the
renewal of financial aid. However, there were no immediate signs that the
IMF was preparing to resume financial assistance to Kenya.
It would be the first time Kenya has sought to refinance its foreign
obligations with the Paris Club of creditor nations. Kenya took pride on its
repayment record until donor governments, irked by corruption and economic
mismanagement, suspended balance-of-payments aid in November 1991, worth
about Dollars 40m a month.
'The arrears component of our foreign debt may require rescheduling,' Mr
Mudavadi said in an interview with the Financial Times. Apart from the issue
of arrears, Kenya also faces a large balance of payments gap due to its
trade deficit and heavy debt servicing obligations.
Mr Mudavadi declined to put a figure on the balance of payments shortfall,
which will form the basis of Kenya's appeal for the resumption of financial
assistance. To avoid disappointment, Mr Mudavadi said he was not going to
Paris with a shopping list of demands.
But given the central bank's foreign exchange reserves of just Dollars 260m,
private-sector economists believe Kenya is heading for a balance of payments
crisis unless donor governments are prepared to resume a measure of
financial support.
Mr Hiroyuki Hino, head of the IMF delegation to Kenya, said the economic
programme which had his blessing would be presented at the donors' meeting
in Paris.
The policy framework paper outlines Kenya's commitment to cutting the budget
deficit, curbing inflation from its present 50 per cent a year, and rooting
out corruption in the state sector.
The economic programme will be an important factor in the discussions with
donors, but by no means the only one. Donor governments have recently voiced
concern over the rising level of ethnic violence in Kenya, and the
government's apparent indifference to the plight of thousands of displaced
peasants in the Rift Valley.
There are also concerns despite recent government moves to clamp down on
financial improprieties in the banking sector, not a single wrong-doer has
been brought to justice. Mr Mudavadi said it was the government's intention
to investigate all cases of corruption and to bring them to justice. But his
priorities were to seal the loopholes that had been abused.
This was the aim of all his recent reforms, including the abolition of
import licences, the merging of the official and market foreign exchange
rates and the deregulation of the maize trade which was previously a state
monopoly.
