FT  01 MAY 93 / Books: Back to the books
MORGAN: A BI0GRAPHY OF E M FORSTER by Nicola Beauman Hodder &amp; Stoughton
Pounds 20, 404 pages
LITERARY biographers seem to be increasingly tempted to focus on the detail
of their subject's life rather than the substance and achievement of his
books. Some of them compound the offence (no doubt profitably) by
highlighting who-did-what-to-whom. Here, thank goodness, is a splendid
exception - a biography whose aim is 'to study the life in order to
understand the novels . . . ' In other words, Nicola Beauman puts the books
first. To confirm her priority, she allows only 40 pages for the last 45
years of the life. She also - correctly - assumes that her readers will
already know the novels.
A new biography of E M Forster must have needed courage. P N Furbank's
two-volume 'authorised' version is extremely good and only 15 years old. But
it is fair to say that Furbank concentrated on the 'life'; on a re-reading,
he turns out to be curiously sketchy on the creation and analysis of the
novels, though he is fascinating about Forster's long, uneventful, rich,
suburban, decent and homosexual life.
Nevertheless, it is still easy to lose sight of the central mystery -
tragedy? - of Forster's career, which is that he wrote six great novels and
at 45 he was finished. There followed, of course, many years as the 'sage',
the voice of British liberal humanism, latterly resident at King's - Beauman
arguably under-covers this role - but the novels are what matter, and indeed
the films, which have brought them to a wider audience and must certainly
not be sneered at.
Forster was trapped, for most of his life, in an intense relationship with
his widowed mother; Beauman writes of the 'glueing' of mother and son. In
his childhood, they lived in the Hertfordshire house which was to be the
model for Howards End, and were forced to move out - a seminal event]
Thereafter they lived in Tunbridge Wells and Weybridge, where he wrote all
his novels.
His homosexuality was repressed until, at 37, he was posted to Alexandria in
the Great War; thereafter he was actively promiscuous, taking working class
lovers in the Bloomsbury style, before settling for one of the three great
loves of his life, Bob Buckingham, a married policeman through whom he found
a family of his own. It is impossible to deny that when Forster 'came out'
(privately, of course), the novels came to an end; he only finished A
Passage to India with difficulty in 1924, and seems never to have expected
to write another.
All this is known, but the story is explained and developed by Beauman with
constantly interesting reference to the novels. She has had access to some
sources unavailable to Furbank (though the diaries at King's are embargoed
after 1949): for example, she gives fuller details of the background to
Maurice (the homosexual novel which was suppressed by Forster in his
lifetime) and she goes into more detail about the changes Forster made
between early and later drafts of A Passage to India. In the first version
of the scene in the Marabar Caves, incredibly, there is an actual assault;
in the final version, Forster has arrived at a void which only Mrs Moore can
comprehend.
Beauman also allows herself to insert her own speculation and opinions - it
is a very personal book. (Sometimes she goes too far - did Mrs Forster
really take her son to Italy to avoid the Oscar Wilde trial? Is Where Angels
Fear To Tread sensibly described as 'the first modern novel'?).
But again and again she makes points which are helpful, even revelatory. She
is very good on the initial nine-month visit to Italy and its impact on the
young man's 'suburban soul'. Lucy, of A Room with a View, is trapped and
escapes to Italy as did Forster; she is not so much Forster en travesti, as
she symbolically loses her Baedeker, but 'what matters is that her situation
is his. He had become coerced, imprisoned in a way of life which is usually
the lot of women . . . ' Mr Emerson, in the same book, who so memorably
speaks for Forster's life-long rejection of 'muddle', is related to Edward
Carpenter, the sandal-wearing and homosexual socialist and free-thinker who
had an important influence on Forster at a critical moment even before they
actually met.
And throughout all this, Beauman clings to the main point, which may help
explain his lop-sided career - that by great good fortune he discovered his
'theme' very early: 'the English middle classes exposed to something other
(a foreign country, an expedition away from their normal territory), who are
mocked for their insularity and obtuseness, and who then discover something
so disconcerting that they are forced to realise, even if sub-consciously,
that they have confronted something vaster than themselves; in the end they
are either saved - or not.'
No wonder he is one of the great English novelists] Sometimes, as I say, the
enthusiast in Beauman goes overboard. To my mind, she is too keen on Howards
End, to the point where she describes the odious Mr Wilcox as the heir of
Margaret Thatcher, and she understates Forster's congenital inability to
understand marriage - his famous reference to 'the astonishing glass shade .
. . that interposes between married couples and the world' surely comes
close to disqualifying him from writing about one of the most fruitful areas
of the novelist's art. But this is a biography which is a pleasure to read,
and which will fascinate and delight and sometimes provoke all those who
continue to esteem Forster - his books, and now the films.
