FT  19 MAR 93 / N Korean war call 'sparked by power struggle'
NORTH KOREA'S declaration of a 'semi-war' status is part of efforts to boost
the authority of Mr Kim Jong-il as the country's next leader, Mr Han
Sung-joo, South Korea's foreign minister, said yesterday.
Mr Han, in a meeting with foreign journalists, also described North Korea's
rejection of the nuclear non-proliferation treaty as a 'quasi-crisis' and
predicted that the problem will eventually be resolved.
He said there were no plans to ask US troops in the Team Spirit war games to
remain in South Korea after the exercise ended yesterday because North Korea
appeared not be seeking a military conflict.
Mr Han suggested Mr Kim Jong-il had decided to place North Korea on a
'semi-war' footing last week because doubts had been raised about his
authority after the Team Spirit exercise was resumed this year.
Team Spirit, the annual US-South Korean military manoeuvres, were suspended
last year as a goodwill gesture to Pyongyang following the signing of a
non-nuclear agreement between the two Koreas.
Mr Kim told North Koreans that he was responsible for the suspension of Team
Spirit, which Pyongyang claims represents a security threat.
But the military exercise was resumed this year after North Korea refused to
allow challenge inspections of suspected nuclear facilities by South Korea.
Mr Kim Jong-il is the son of President Kim Il-sung and his designated
successor. But it is thought he might face opposition once his father dies.
The International Atomic Energy Agency yesterday gave North Korea an
extended deadline of March 31 to agree to inspections at two sites near its
Yongbyon nuclear complex.
A special meeting of the agency's 35-member board of governors in Vienna
insisted that the nuclear safeguards agreement between the IAEA and North
Korea was still in force despite North Korea's announcement last week that
it was withdrawing from the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
Since ratifying the NPT last year, North Korea has received six inspection
visits from the IAEA, which is responsible for monitoring compliance with
the treaty.
The IAEA board told North Korea, which was represented at yesterday's
meeting, that it was 'urgent and essential' for it to allow the agency to
carry out the additional inspections.
Experts believe the sites may reveal the extent of North Korea's programme
for separating plutonium, which it could use for nuclear weapons.
On February 25 the IAEA gave North Korea a month to respond to its request.
