FT  18 AUG 93 / Tories to set up anti-EC forum
TORY Euro-sceptics are to set up a fully fledged secretariat as the next
stage in their struggle to shape the government's European policy to their
liking.
The decision reflects their determination to continue campaigning on
European issues even though Britain has now ratified the Maastricht treaty.
Well-marshalled Euro-sceptic opposition to Maastricht in parliament last
month forced Mr John Major, the prime minister, to stake his government's
future on a confidence motion after a humiliating defeat over the treaty's
social chapter.
The new body, which is expected to be known as the European Foundation, will
pick up the baton from the group assembled by Mr Bill Cash, the leading
Euro-sceptic Tory MP for Stafford, primarily to try to block Maastricht.
It is likely to concentrate on utilising and making more widely available
the welter of EC-related data the anti-Maastricht campaign has collected. To
do this it is expected to employ a small number of full-time staff.
Since the Maastricht Bill gained Royal assent, the Euro-sceptic camp has
been keen to emphasise that its campaign would include continuing to take a
stand on fresh Europe-related legislation.
A new flashpoint has already been threatened when the government brings
forward a bill on EC finance in November.
The proposed legislation will implement the agreement which was reached at
the Edinburgh summit increasing national governments' contributions to the
European Commission. Although ministers have described it positively, they
have conceded it will probably be opposed by some hardcore Tory rebels.
Senior ministers headed by Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, have
attempted to heal Tory wounds over Europe before elections to the European
Parliament next June.
The Conservative European election manifesto is expected to concentrate on
policy areas about which there is consensus within the party.
The Euro-sceptic operation will probably shift headquarters from its elegant
Westminster town house later this year.
