FT  20 MAR 93 / Leaked route to Channel angers Kent villagers: Fresh
protests planned over tunnel link
HOWEVER ANGRY Mr John MacGregor, transport secretary, might feel over the
leaked Channel tunnel rail plans, the mood in some of the villages along the
proposed line yesterday was even more bitter.
With the plans widely perceived to represent a cheaper - and more
environmentally damaging - option than previous proposals, the leak has left
residents and council groups in Kent wearily plan-ning a new set of
protests.
The plans revealed by Mr John Prescott, shadow transport secretary, show
that the line is planned to run mostly above ground between the Channel
terminal and London, with fewer tunnels than originally expected.
With some details of the leaked plan still to be decided, Kent County
Council refused to speculate on the precise impact of the plans on the
region.
Mr Sandy Bruce-Lockhart, chairman of the planning committee, said: 'We
recognise that you can't build a railway through Kent without causing some
environmental harm. But we are insisting that the plans should conform to
the highest standards.'
Nevertheless, the council admits that the delays in the decision and the
nature of the leak have left many in the area feeling deeply frustrated.
Mr Andrew Rowe, Conservative MP for Mid Kent, said: 'Nothing in this
long-running saga has been well handled and this is no exception.'
Meanwhile, along the route of the line the mood was mixed, with most
villages greeting the proposals with confusion and anger.
Starting in the west, one area with some cause to celebrate is a six-mile
stretch west of the village of Boxley, where it seems that the line will run
through a tunnel, instead of overground as once feared.
Mrs Molly Tipples, a regional campaigner, said: 'Where I live we are
obviously delighted.'
A few miles further east, in the picturesque Boxley valley, the villages are
in uproar. Although this part of the line was planned as a tunnel, the new
proposals suggest it will run above ground, 300 metres past a new housing
estate, then slice through a section of the green belt which separates the
Medway conurbation from the Maidstone area.
Mr Garreth Thomas, chairman of the Boxley village protest group, said:
'We're very disappointed. The land is geographically so important.'
He fears that if that section of the green belt vanishes 'we could end up
with a conurbation the size of Manchester.'
His anger is echoed six miles further along the route in the village of
Harrietsham. Villagers originally hoped to have a 'cut and cover' tunnel in
the area but now also face an overground option.
Residents in Harrietsham are furious that although British Rail has offered
some compensation, it covers only those living within 100 metres of the
track.
Mr Robert Taylor, chairman of Harrietsham parish council, said: 'There are a
lot of people here who want to move but cannot sell their houses.'
A few miles further east, on another stretch of the overground route, the
villages of Lenham Heath and Charing fear that they will no longer be
protected from the effects of noise pollution.
Mr Martin Pym, a farmer, said: 'The prevailing wind will blow all the noise
and dust to the village. But now it seems that a lot of the protective
fencing will be left out.'
