FT  09 JUL 93 / Management: Lunch your way to the top - Culinary contacts
can help you influence policymakers / Peter Marsh offers a user's guide
In the realm of economics, there has rarely been a better time to eat your
way to the centre of UK policymaking.
The pound's disastrous exit last year from the European exchange rate
mechanism, coupled with the need to rebuild business confidence after the
recession, has spawned a series of efforts by policymakers in Whitehall to
step up contacts over lunch or dinner.
That applies particularly to the Treasury, which is increasing its meetings
with outside economists and business people in an effort to make its
policies more sympathetic to wealth creation.
The following is a user's guide to how the culinary contacts can help you to
win friends and influence people at the centre of the mandinarate.
As a start, you could do worse than to target Alan Budd, the amiable and
thoughtful chief economic adviser at the Treasury.
Appointed just under two years ago as a successor to Sir Terry Burns, now
Treasury permanent secretary, Budd has told associates he wants to make the
department much closer both to people in industry and in the City. His lunch
diary is booked up months ahead.
If you are a manufacturer, and want to entertain a top Treasury official to
lunch plus a day's visit at your factory, you could talk to Duncan Wilson,
of the department's industry division.
Under an edict at the end of last year from Sir Terry, all the department's
top 100 officials are to make at least one industrial visit a year. So far
the programme is going well, with about 50 visits completed or arranged, but
more contacts are needed.
If you fancy a few hours inside the Treasury's immensely gloomy building
close to parliament, you could always try to get on to the Treasury's
industrial prospects committee, which Budd set up last year. Every four
months about 15 planners and economists from companies talk to Budd and
fellow Treasury officials about how they see economic activity.
At these gatherings, some of the more revealing comments are made over lunch
at the Chancellery, the Treasury's private dining room where menus have been
greatly improved over the past two years. 'The food is now quite decent, the
sort you might expect at the City, with reasonable wine as well,' according
to one participant.
If you can't get on to the industrial prospects committee but are
economically qualified, you could try your luck as one of the Treasury's
seven wise men of economic advisers. The group - set up in January - is
showing every sign of working cohesively. However a vacancy may arise soon,
either because of the pending retirement from Cambridge University of
Professor Wynne Godley, one of its members, or because one of the other wise
men becomes disillusioned with the results of their six meetings a year.
Assuming you have an interest in good food as well as economics, you could
contact Walter Eltis, chief economic adviser to Michael Heseltine, trade and
industry secretary.
Until his heart attack, Heseltine had been showing an increasing interest in
talking to top industrialists about how they see the economy, leaving it to
Eltis to arrange meetings with lesser lights in big companies at the level
of senior economist or finance director.
Although the future status of a 'round table' of industrialists set up by
Heseltine and which met for the first time recently is unclear, the lunch
was described as 'fantastic' by one of the people attending, Sir Christopher
Lewinton, chairman of engineering group TI.
Maybe you hanker after something slightly less formal. Top civil servants,
many from the Treasury, meet industry leaders 10 times a year under the
auspices of the Open Dining Club. The gatherings are normally held in a
London club or hotel, the food is good and the conversation relaxed.
Membership is by invitation only but if you are feeling confident, why not
talk to the man in charge, David Kendall, chairman of paper company Bunzl.
If you have a penchant for finance, then another dining club, White City,
may be for you. The members are mainly from the Treasury, banks and finance
houses and the gatherings are organised by David Anderson of Lazard
Brothers. At a slightly lower level, regular lunchtime meetings involving
civil servants and industry managers are held under the auspices of the
Institute of Management. If interested contact Alex Beattie of engineering
company Haden Young. The Department of Employment normally hosts the
sessions, but the food is nothing special.
The Confederation of British Industry has been finding more of a voice
recently on economic policy and the best way to influence this is to join
its economic affairs committee, which meets monthly in the afternoon.
Although occasionally luminaries such as Treasury officials turn up to give
a presentation, one drawback is that the only food or drink on offer is a
cup of tea.
Probably the grandest place to have lunch while discussing matters of
economic import is at the Bank of England court or directors' council. No
one quite knows how people are invited on to this but the current crop of
non-executive directors contains a fair sprinkling of well-known names from
industry who are brought in to advise the Bank's full-time executives.
Meetings are every Thursday, when matters discussed can include monetary
policy and how the pound is faring outside the ERM. The lunch is described
by one insider as 'plain cooking, the kind one would find on a weekday in a
country house'. Soup followed by veal cutlet is often on the menu and the
dessert is nearly always rice pudding.
Finally, who from the business community has the best record in getting to
grips with government on economic policies? A strong candidate is Sir David
Lees, chairman of GKN, who is on good terms with the Treasury as chairman of
the CBI committee and also a court member at the Bank.
Others on anyone's list of outsiders with an inside track include Ross
Buckland, chief executive of Unigate, Roger Hurn, chairman of Smiths
Industries, Nigel Whittaker, a Kingfisher director, Ian Gibson, head of
Nissan's UK manufacturing arm, Richard Freeman, ICI's chief economist, and
Howard Davies, the ex-Treasury man who is CBI director general and who meets
his old colleagues roughly once a month.
However, this list is not exhaustive. With enough imagination and
persistance - plus a decent appetite - you could find yourself on it, too.
