FT  28 SEP 93 / Leading Article: Debt relief cannot wait
AN OPPORTUNITY will go begging in Washington this week. Without a radical
initiative to reduce sub-Saharan Africa's external debt burden, there is
little chance of relieving the region's deepening economic crisis. On that
issue, at least, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and Oxfam,
the international aid agency, can all agree. The onus should now be on
developed countries' finance ministers to put this premise into practice.
Yet no new African debt initiative looks likely to materialise. The British
government has declared, once more, that it will lobby this week for debt
reduction for low-income countries, using a formula which Prime Minister
John Major proposed in Trinidad over three years ago. Past experience does
not suggest it will have much success.
Meanwhile, growth in Africa continues to stagnate, the debt burden is rising
and the chance of the region's creditors, now mainly individual governments,
receiving repayments is receding. Sub-Saharan Africa's debt stock has risen
from some Pounds 60bn in 1980 to over Dollars 183bn today, more than the
value of the region's gross domestic product, as Mr Lewis Preston, president
of the World Bank, pointed out in the FT yesterday. Servicing this debt now
consumes 25 per cent of sub-Saharan Africa's export earnings, far higher
than in any other region.
This debt service imposes an intolerable burden on many African economies,
sucking abroad resources which should be being invested at home. And that is
only part of the problem. Debt relief has become Africa's obsession. Finance
ministers and World Bank officials alike seem to spend an inordinate amount
of their time lobbying for rescheduling and reduction, at the expense of
implementing and monitoring the detail of reform programmes upon which
future progress depends.
Flawed strategy
The developed country's current strategy is flawed. According to the World
Bank, the Trinidad terms - a two-thirds write-off of bilateral government
debt of low-income countries - are still not enough to ensure that many
African countries can service external debts in the medium and long term. It
cannot make sense to make relief conditional on governments first
implementing economic programmes which their debt burden make unsustainable.
In any case, success is inadequately rewarded. Even Ghana, which has pursued
a recovery programme for a decade with the IMF's blessing, still exports
more than 25 per cent of its export earnings in debt service payments and
then has to ask for aid to cover its balance of payments deficit.
Tougher conditions
A substantial write-off of Africa's debt now does not mean an end to
conditionality. It requires a new approach, both from African governments
and from the donors. Debt relief must be conditional on the country reaching
an agreed economic reform programme with the IMF. More important, African
governments must be willing to accept much tougher transparency conditions
than the international financial institutions have so far been willing to
demand. At a minimum, governments must publish an annual and externally
audited budget and allow publication of World Bank country reports.
Thenceforth, new aid flows must be conditional on governments meeting the
agreed economic targets and on these good governance requirements. That will
require a much tougher stance from the bank, IMF and the donors. For too
long, they have been willing to tolerate and excuse missed targets or proven
cases of corruption.
Of course, the most important penalty for backsliders will be imposed by the
market. It is the responsibility of African governments to pursue the kind
of policies that encourage the private sector and attract foreign investors,
without whom Africa's recovery will never get under way. If visas, work
permits and expatriate quotas continue to feed an undercurrent of hostility
towards foreign investors, then Africa will remain marginalised.
Only African governments, openly pursuing sensible economic policies, can
revive the region's sick economy. Debt relief is a necessary first step.
Alone, it will solve nothing.
