FT  19 AUG 93 / Leading Article: Beefing up the SIB
IN THE regulation of retail financial services, Britain's Securities and
Investments Board has been given a clear and demanding blueprint, courtesy
of the Treasury, on where to go next. Yet in the wider securities area there
is considerable discontent over the workings of the 1986 Financial Services
Act, without any general agreement on the remedies that are needed to
address the flaws in the system exposed by Polly Peck, Blue Arrow, Guinness
and others. Some clues as to the likely evolution of the regulatory
structure are nonetheless beginning to emerge, notably from the stock
exchange and the SIB itself. They involve a degree of centralisation, based
on an enlarged role for the SIB, that may well ruffle the odd feather in the
City and Whitehall.
The first plank in the argument for an enlarged role for the SIB is that
surveillance of market malpractice is hobbled from the outset if it is
carried out by different agencies. The initial steps towards countering many
forms of market malpractice, for example, lie in identifying suspicious
trading patterns. But different regulators are monitoring trading
information across a range of markets open to the insider dealer, including
formal derivative markets such as Liffe, over-the-counter markets, so-called
non-markets such as Reuters' Instinet dealing system, as well as the stock
exchange itself. In that fragmented market environment, a centralised
approach to monitoring data, supplemented by whatever additional information
is available under existing international agreements, would clearly be more
effective.
Investigatory process
Equally compelling is the case for a more coherent investigatory process. In
most insider dealing cases, the initial work is undertaken by the stock
exchange. Evidence is then passed on to the Department of Trade and
Industry, which in turn makes a decision on whether to shunt the paper in
the direction of the Crown Prosecution Service.
Small wonder that so many probes into suspicious trading activity before
takeover bids start with a bang and end in a whimper. In the absence of a
single authority with responsibility for seeing the investigation through
from beginning to end, impetus is lost.
Investigations are not helped by the fact that the powers of the stock
exchange to interrogate and demand documents are inadequate, especially in
relation to people outside the financial services sector. Those of the DTI,
meantime, are extensive but expensive. While the powers and resources to
address wrongdoing exist, they are unevenly distributed around the system.
Prosecution powers
The final area in which both the SIB and stock exchange share common ground
relates to prosecution. Here the options are too narrowly polarised between
the regulatory sanctions available to the SIB and the self-regulatory
bodies, and the criminal law. The SIB is already moving further into the
middle ground by preparing to deploy the hitherto unused sanction in Section
59 of the Financial Services Act, which permits it to disqualify people from
the financial services industry. Yet it could also be argued that the
protracted proceedings and unsatisfactory outcomes in the highly technical
Guinness and Blue Arrow affairs might well have been avoided if there had
been an alternative to blanket resort to criminal law, with its onerous
requirements in relation to proof.
It is striking that one of the main differences between the US Securities
and Exchange Commission and the SIB lies in the ability of the US agency to
mount civil actions. The question is whether some form of US-style plea
bargaining could provide a filtering mechanism to ensure that only those
misdeeds with a strong chance of resulting in successful prosecution find
their way into the criminal courts. A wider range of civil options might
then be made available to the SIB.
Expanding the powers of the SIB in this way would make for more effective
enforcement. But there are questions of cost. Fewer headlines about botched
prosecutions involving City institutions might, at a pinch, be an acceptable
trade-off to practitioners. The more important question, to which time alone
holds the answer, is whether an enlarged SIB would deliver on its promise to
perform.
