FT  08 APR 93 / Exchange probes Queens Moat shares
THE Stock Exchange's insider trading group is expected next week to pass to
the Department of Trade and Industry the results of a preliminary
investigation into possible insider trading of shares in Queens Moat Houses,
an official disclosed yesterday.
The DTI will then decide whether to launch a formal investigation under
Section 177 of the Financial Services Act. This could involve the
appointment of a lawyer and accountant as inspectors, because Queens Moat's
financial problems partly stem from its accounting policies.
News of the Exchange's probe emerged as the international hotel group's
bankers held an emergency meeting yesterday afternoon to receive details of
Queens Moat's financial condition. Its shares were suspended last week when
the company discovered that 1992 pre-tax profits were going to be
significantly lower than the Pounds 80m it expected.
Queens Moat's 60 banks were told the group would make a loss for the year,
but that the group still has a sizeable net asset value. These are the
preliminary conclusions of an investigation of Queens Moat's finances by
accountants from Grant Thornton, appointed by the banks to conduct a review.
They were also told that a financial restructuring, involving rescheduling
principal payments on the Pounds 1bn bank debt, will be necessary, once
Grant Thornton's investigation is completed.
Bankers have been told that the company has made considerable progress in
finding a new caretaker chief executive. The company last week suspended its
finance director, Mr David Hersey, and its deputy chairman, Mr Martin
Marcus.
The Exchange's share probe focused on the sale in early February of 1.1m
Queens Moat Shares by Mr Marcus for Pounds 627,000. He sold the shares
shortly before the start of the company's close season, when directors'
share sales are banned. The company's merchant bank adviser, Charterhouse,
and its two lead bank creditors, National Westminster and Barclays, are
trying to persuade the other banks not to call for the resignation of the
company's founder and chairman Mr John Bairstow. Bankers said that it was Mr
Bairstow who originally identified that the group's profits had been
inflated by some of its accounting policies.
