FT  13 JUL 93 / Arts: Sunset Boulevard - Theatre
Given the imminent closure of City of Angels, which I described as the
wittiest musical I have seen, I shall try to be exceptionally careful about
any adjectives applied to Sunset Boulevard, the new show by Sir Andrew Lloyd
Webber.
Certainly 'witty' is not a word that comes to mind. The nearest it comes to
a mordant joke is 'It's fun to see how bad bad writing can be.' There's also
a rather good line about it taking tiles to tango. But perhaps the absence
of wise-cracking, double meanings and sly asides is part of its charm.
Possibly City of Angels failed to be appreciated in London because it seemed
too clever by half, trying to combine a script with a musical.
There is no such distraction in Sunset Boulevard, which is odd in a way
because it comes from a similar Los Angeles set-up. The piece is based on
Billy Wilder's 1950 movie and there is plenty of pain in the background.
Firmly in the foreground, however, is a sentimental show with some of the
stunning Lloyd Webber staging to which we have become accustomed over the
years.
In Patti LuPone, there is also a star. Ms LuPone played Evita on Broadway in
what has always seemed to me Lloyd Webber's best work. As the faded movie
idol, she is no less glittering now. It must be deliberate: the show does
not effectively get under way until she appears, which is 20 minutes into
the first act. Then Sunset Boulevard takes off.
There is something else about Ms LuPone's first entry. She starts to sing
almost without having bothered to talk: not just one song, but two. That is
when you think what a clever composer Lloyd Webber is: the master of the
slow build-up. The sound of a growingly confident orchestra fills the house
and you are persuaded that the piece can never look back.
The illusion lasts through the interval and into the start of the second
act. As the curtain goes up again, the writer Joe Gillis launches with great
panache into the song which has the same name as the show. It looks as if he
has come to terms with living off the riches of Ms LuPone's Norma Desmond
and is at home in her palatial house and (no doubt) palatial bed.
Yet illusion it is. There is another, younger, poorer girl who also writes
scripts. Joe falls for her and she for him. It is not the sentimentality
that one objects to. After all, why not? It is the fact that Sunset
Boulevard then begins to lose its power. All the momentum that has been
built up starts to ebb away. The plot, never the strongest point, becomes
ridiculous. It is a curious dramatic failing that the girl, having been
invited to the great house, should depart with a line as banal as 'I can't
look at you any more, Joe.' She leaves an extraordinary sense of
anti-climax.
Again, there is the strange business of Ms LuPone's protective butler. Quite
late on he claims that he was her first husband and first director. Is it
true? Does Norma Desmond remember or has she simply forgotten as she dreams
of returning to stardom? Nothing of this is explained; nothing is developed.
True, there are great set-pieces still to come, not least the finale, though
even that is prefaced by the rather feeble shooting of Joe by Ms LuPone as
he walks down her stairs. Still, she gets her last great moment. When the
media arrive to cover the killing, the butler tells her that the cameramen
have come to film her for a new movie. And, of course, she believes it:
'This is my life. Just a camera and all you wonderful people out there in
the dark.'
The sets, designed by John Napier, are as ambitious as you would expect in a
Lloyd Webber spectacular, so much so that the production was postponed for
two weeks because the machinery failed to work. Ms LuPone wears some
wonderful costumes, the work of Anthony Powell, though the variety of gear
worn by the extras does not make for great visual harmony in the chorus
scenes. This can be distracting from the music.
One song, in particular, stands out and passes the hummable test. 'The
Perfect Year' is composed to go along side 'Auld Lang Syne' on New Year's
Eve, and at one stage cleverly it does. What I admire about it is that it
looks forward not back, even when the grounds for hope are slim. The words
are simple, but touching.
I also admired Kevin Anderson's performance as Joe, very casual at first,
very straight and therefore a hard part to play. Yet the trouble with a role
like this is that it doesn't lead anywhere. He's just a decent guy who isn't
even allowed a dying word. It's a great pity that Noel Coward wrote the song
'Mad About the Boy' some years ago. Sunset Boulevard quotes it several
times, and it would have fitted very well, for that largely is what the
piece is about.
Daniel Benzali sings very well as the butler, and he, too, has played in
Lloyd Webber before. But it is too strange, phantomish a part to be
convincing. Trevor Nunn directs.
Adelphi Theatre (071) 344 0055
