FT  18 AUG 93 / Monopolies Reports on British Gas: Gas chief defends
decision over MMC inquiry - The Monopolies and Mergers Commission yesterday
delivered its far-reaching report on the future of the UK gas industry. The
report took a year to prepare and recommends a plan to take the industry
into the 21st century. Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary,
will decide whether to implement the recommendations
MR CEDRIC BROWN, chief executive of British Gas, was convinced yesterday
that his decision to submit the company to a wide-ranging inquiry by the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission was the right one, in spite of the
commission's proposal that British Gas sell off its trading activities.
Mr Brown said: 'We now have the MMC setting out a framework for the next 10
years. A year ago we didn't know what would happen in the next six months
and we had no way to develop and plan our business.'
Mr Brown will be involved in intense negotiations with the government in
coming months. He will try to persuade Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and
industry secretary, to adopt all the recommendations in the report and not
to proceed with a piecemeal implementation of the plan.
'I hope we don't have a quick-fix job cobbled together without keeping the
framework in place,' he said.
British Gas does not believe it is necessary to split up the company in
order to encourage the development of further competition. But Mr Brown
regards the commission's proposals for selling its trading arm as the best
option for its shareholders under the circumstances.
The commission differs from the industry regulator, Ofgas, on who should pay
for the divestment.
The cost of selling pipelines - arising from loss of economies of scale and
duplication of certain functions - will be about Pounds 130m, Pounds 80m a
year more than the company's current plans for separating its transport and
trading divisions.
The commission recommended that consumers bear this cost because the
development of competition would benefit them in the long run. British Gas
believes shareholders should not carry the cost of splitting up the company.
However, Ofgas says shareholders who have benefited from higher prices under
British Gas's monopoly should pay for divestment.
These details will be hammered out between the regulator, British Gas and
the government. Mr Heseltine could shy away from suggestions that household
customers pay for introducing competition as politically unpalatable.
British Gas has warned of higher prices for some customers - particularly
those using less gas - in a more competitive market. The company says a
separate pipelines company could have to charge customers living farthest
away from gas terminals more for their supply.
Ofgas calls these fears 'alarmist'. Mr Greg McGregor, director of
competition and tariffs, said he believed price rises to household customers
could be minimised. 'It is complete nonsense for British Gas to conjure up
the image of cross-subsidies in the system and maintain that smaller users
will end up paying more than large users.'
The commission has recommended adjusting the formula governing domestic
prices from next year so that consumers' gas prices should fall more slowly
than would have been the case. This will give British Gas additional
revenues of Pounds 300m from 1994 to 1997 before more competition is
introduced.
Competition will be introduced in phases. The commission recommended that
competition be extended to customers using more than 1,500 therms a year on
March 31 1997. The limit is currently 2,500 therms. This change will add a
further 500,000 customers to the competitive market - 100,000 industrial and
commercial consumers and 400,000 domestic.
The commission also recognised that British Gas's trading arm may have to
raise its prices when it is sold, in order to make a profit. This has
angered consumer groups which say households will pay the cost of transition
in the industry.
The commission, however, did not embrace British Gas's claims for a much
higher rate of return on its pipelines network. This is the formula that
governs the charges British Gas can levy on its rivals which use the system
for sending their own gas to industrial customers.
The commission proposed that British Gas's rate of return be 4 per cent to
4.5 per cent for existing assets - slightly lower than at present - and
between 6.5 per cent and 7.5 per cent for new investment.
But British Gas's competitors and consumer groups would like to see the
speedier introduction of competition for households. Ofgas agrees, and
believes that the government should aim to free gas supply in line with the
electricity industry, which will be opened to full competition in 1998.
The government's own date for opening up the market had been set for 1996
before the commission inquiry. Some competitors would also like to see
British Gas's monopoly reduced more quickly than the commission has
proposed.
At least 30 companies - including many of the regional electricity companies
which have set up gas trading arms - had been gearing up to move into
household supply.
But British Gas says important issues have to be addressed before
competition can be introduced, such as safety in the system and social
obligations of the gas suppliers.
Mr Brown said he would have liked the commission to have provided answers to
all the questions about opening up the market. 'There are a whole range of
major issues that need to be resolved, but a whole raft of them await
political decisions which may not be as clear-cut as this report,' he said.
The changes proposed by the commission - particularly the sale of the
company's trading arm and the abolition of its monopoly - would require
legislation.
Mr McGregor said the report was designed cleverly to work on two levels if
the government decided not to go ahead with its full implementation. 'The
internal re-organisation of British Gas prior to the sale of its trading
activities could stand on its own independent of any decision on
divestment,' he said.
