FT  27 OCT 93 / UK Company News: Declining fortunes of Ferranti - The
softly, softly approach to a former force in the defence industry
A BUYER of Ferranti International would be acquiring a mixed bag of
businesses. Today the company is a software house and systems integrator
with a staff of 3,700.
It has a Pounds 200m order book, a pensions surplus of more than Pounds
100m, and shareholders funds of roughly Pounds 55m. It has large accumulated
losses that could be offset against taxation.
Net debt is Pounds 85m.
Perhaps its most successful business is the 50:50 joint venture in sonar
with French company Thomson-CSF, which has a contract to supply sonar for
the UK's Trident nuclear submarine programme.
Ferranti also has an installed base of customers for naval command and
control equipment. Customers include the Royal Navy and the navies of Brazil
and South Korea.
In systems integration, it has a business that has worked on Saudi Arabia's
air defence system and is still awaiting confirmation of a Pounds 100m order
for a similar system for Bahrain.
Finally, it has a series of small suppliers of training services and
components such as fuses for munition.
The dismantling of Ferranti was precipitated in 1989 by the discovery of
huge fraud in International Signal and Control, the US subsidiary which it
bought in 1987.
The bulk of the activities of ISC, a secretive dedence group, had
traditionally been in supplying bombs and security systems in the Middle
East.
Ferranti's merger with ISC in 1987 was hailed as a natural marriage, even if
its motivation for Ferranti was basically defensive. Both companies were
military electronics contractors, but seemed to overlap very little. With 59
per cent of the combined group, Ferranti's control of it was assured.
A new group thus came into being with a market value of Pounds 1bn. It was
hailed as a major force in global defence industries, with 26,000 employees
in a dozen countries and an order book worth more than Pounds 1.5bn.
Two years later, Ferranti revealed it had been the victim of a cleverly
orchestrated fraud. The UK company had paid Pounds 420m for a company which
it later said had zero net worth at the time of the purchase and made no net
profits in the five years before the merger.
Mr James Guerin, ISC's founder, had become deputy chairman of Ferranti. He
is now serving a 15-year sentence for financial fraud and illegal arms
sales.
Discovery of the fraud blew a hole in Ferranti's balance sheet which it has
since been desperately struggling to repair by selling bits of itself -
including parts that were its pride and soul.
GEC picked the prize fruit of the Ferranti empire after the ISC debacle. In
1990, it paid Pounds 310m for Ferranti's radar division.
The business dated back to the Second World War and included the project
leadership for the radar to equip the European Fighter Aircraft.
Last year, GEC-Marconi bought the company's missile business for Pounds 38m.
KPMG Peat Marwick, the UK's second largest accountancy firm, paid Pounds 40m
to Ferranti to settle litigation over the acquisition of ISC, a former Peat
Marwick audit client.
However, when Mr Eugene Anderson became chairman of Ferranti in 1990, it
became clear that the ISC fraud was only part of Ferranti's problem: the
rest of the business was not particularly well-managed either.
For Ferranti, which had been demoralised by government retrenchment, the
1987 merger had been meant to cushion the group against its former
dependency on the UK Ministry of Defence and possible future failure to win
important contracts such as the European Fighter Aircraft radar contract and
the Type 23 frigate command and control system.
Mr Anderson would not criticise his predecessor, Sir Derek Alun-Jones.
Nevertheless, it was clear that he did not think highly of the group's
organisation, the role played by head office, or the supervision of
contracts.
Earlier this month Mr Anderson warned shareholders that Ferranti's
first-half losses were likely to be higher than deficit of Pounds 10.9m in
the corresponding period last year.
He said the company would continue to focus on its priorities of
strengthening the balance sheet by equity injection or through strategic
partnership while seeking to win new orders.
