FT  14 AUG 93 / Pact may clear way to free trading in N America
CANADA, MEXICO and the US agreed measures yesterday that could clear the way
to implementing a comprehensive North American Free Trade Agreement,
creating a free trade zone of 370m people.
However, the measures to protect workers and the environment may not be
enough to make the US Congress back the deal. If approved by Congress, the
agreement is expected to be implemented next January.
In telephone negotiations late into Thursday night, Mexican and US officials
bowed to Canada's refusal to allow the treaty to be enforced through trade
sanctions against offending countries, ending an impasse that might have
blocked the agreement.
Under a compromise, Canada will have special treatment. Complaints brought
under the treaty against Mexico or the US would be enforced through trade
sanctions. In Canada, they will be enforced through the courts.
The original Nafta was agreed last year by former US president George Bush,
President Carlos Salinas of Mexico, whose term ends in September next year,
and Mr Brian Mulroney, the former Canadian prime minister.
President Bill Clinton has insisted that he could not support the agreement
without the additional measures providing adequate protection for US workers
and for the environment. However, Canada's new prime minister, Ms Kim
Campbell, has resisted making concessions to US demands in the run-up to a
general election.
The so-called side agreements spell out principles of labour and
environmental protection, including commitments to equal pay for men and
women, restrictions on child labour and the right to strike. They provide
for any Nafta country to complain against the persistent failure of another
country to enforce its own laws in these areas.
If the complaint is upheld by an arbitration panel, the offending country
could be obliged to remedy its failure and be fined up to Dollars 20m
(Pounds 13m).
'In all of trade history, this is the first agreement that ever really got
any teeth in environmental standards, any teeth in what another country had
to do with its own workers and its own labour standards,' Mr Clinton said
yesterday.
But it is already clear that the side agreements reached this week have not
defused the hostility of trade union and environmentalist groups, which fear
Nafta could encourage jobs and polluting industries to migrate to Mexico,
where environmental laws are less stringent and workers' rights less well
protected.
Some US Congress members appeared satisfied by the new agreements. Senator
Max Baucus of Montana, who chairs the Senate environment committee, said he
was generally pleased. But Congressman Richard Gephardt, leader of the
Democratic majority in the House of Representatives and a key figure in the
vote on Nafta, said he could not support the agreement as it stood.
While most Republicans seem likely to support the deal, Mr Clinton is not
eager to force the trade treaty through against his own party's wishes, and
is equally reluctant to divert political capital from the battle to pass
healthcare reform, which is more central to his programme.
Mr Mickey Kantor, the chief US trade negotiator, acknowledged that it would
be difficult to win enough votes to pass Nafta. 'I think it is going to be a
very tough fight but I think we are going to win,' he said yesterday.
Details, Page 3
