FT  22 SEP 93 / Recruitment: What distinguishes play from working - The
danger of careless language is that the way we talk of things affects how we
think of them
WHETHER parents gave up saying such things after about 1950, the Jobs column
can only conjecture. But there's no doubt that its own old ears still ring
with a phrase dinned into them in boyhood, to wit: 'The time for play is
over; get down to some work]' The result is that I've grown up believing
those two activities are importantly different.
What causes me to suspect parental habits changed years ago is that,
nowadays, even people of fairly respectable ages don't share the same
abiding belief. Or so it would seem, at any rate, from the way they talk.
Only one among many recent examples was a comment made by the chief of a
company about executives being thrown out of their jobs. His words were:
'Increasing competition means we can't afford to pay any players who aren't
absolutely first class.'
The term players struck me as so wrong in the context that my impulse was to
ask him which games he paid them to play. Experience, however, led me to
stay silent. When I have raised the same point with others on previous
occasions, their typical response was to peer at me oddly and say they must
move on.
Even so, I have finally decided to raise it just once more because another
of my abiding beliefs is that the way we talk about things reflects how we
think of them. In which case, there are surely dangerous implications in
calling people 'players', as though they were indulging in mere pastimes,
when actually referring to their efforts to earn their bread.
There could well be a warning in the only other society which, to my
knowledge, has failed to distinguish between the two activities. It is the
Yir Yoront tribe of aboriginals in north-east Australia whose language,
according to a study by the anthropologist Lauriston Sharp in 1958,
recognises no difference between work and play. While that may serve them
OK, though, English-speaking nations aren't in the Yir Yoront's economic
position - or at least not yet. We might therefore be wise to avoid
following suit.
For it might be that the steps the Brits have already taken along that
particular linguistic road are not entirely unconnected with what has
happened to native British manufacturing.
It perhaps bodes no harm to talk of 'players' when referring to financial
go-getters in the City of London, where I first heard the term used in that
way. After all, 'playing' in the restricted sense of 'gambling' is a fair
description of what they do. The trouble is that the usage has since spread
to manufacturing and other sectors where the same justification does not
hold good.
Moreover, the people who now apply the term cavalierly across all sectors
include politicians as well as economists and such. Hence there might be a
deep-seated assumption in influential quarters that manufacturing and all
the rest are much like City operations. As further evidence, it is not all
that long since I heard certain policy-advisers, if not policy-makers,
privately welcoming redundancies in the finance sector on grounds that
they'd free 'clever' City people 'to go and run industry'.
But notions like those amount to a ludicrous oversimplification of the
activities of the other sectors in which just risking money, however
cannily, is far from the only thing that counts. Hence, for industry's sake,
it seems time we ceased calling workers 'players' altogether, and began
focusing sharply on the important differences between games and the business
of earning our keep.
For a start, although the basis of City operations can sensibly be likened
to 'playing at the tables', that does not place the finance sector's
activities on the sporting side of the divide. The fact that they have a
far-reaching effect on countless types of real-life work makes them an
instance of it too.
A further instance is politics. It's true the western democratic sort hinges
on games of make-believe, with different parties publicly indulging in
flights of fancy with the aim of attracting votes. It nevertheless belongs
in the work category because which party wins power has an impact on the far
from make-believe prospects, and perhaps survival, of large numbers of
people.
The same does not apply to games and sports which are played more or less
according to their own man-made rules, if not for their own sake. Moreover,
while they might have had a real-life application when first devised, they
often leave it behind in their development.
An example is the high-jump event. Excellence at it could enable people to
escape a pursuer by clearing a lofty obstacle that forced the chaser to make
a detour - always provided that the jumper was able to go on running quickly
after landing.
At the time the Jobs column was nearing mere middle age, the world high-jump
record had been inched up to some two metres. Since then the record has
soared by about a quarter as much again.
The inching-up was done with techniques like the Straddle in which good
jumpers landed feet downwards so that, despite falling on hard earth, they
were fit to get up and go. The soaring came with the change to the Fosbury
Flop. But it entails a back-down descent which would scarcely guarantee the
jumpers' fitness if they had to land on solid ground instead of a cushion.
So the height has gone up at the cost of real-world application. Since the
rule-makers aren't interested in the coming-down bit, however, that doesn't
matter.
Yet oddly enough, although such exercises belong to the games category, they
are found in the world of work including even manufacturing industry. An
example has just been reported by a necessarily anonymous reader in the
shape of the frequent management committee meetings of his outfit, a large
group's subsidiary.
When he joined 20 years ago, he says, the meetings spent a good deal of time
on innovation. The various managers bounced speculative ideas off one
another in front of the listening chief, who rarely said anything but 'Yes,
start on that' or 'No, forget it'. Nowadays the free-wheeling speculators
have been succeeded by aggressively ambitious heads of sections, and the
chief does much more of the talking.
'If you came along, you'd be very impressed because they all not only know
their stuff, but can put it over cleverly,' he adds. 'Anyone who says
something contradicted by the known facts gets cut to pieces, and nobody
cuts better than the managing director. Unfortunately, the fear of being
razored stops people from saying anything they are not sure of, and in my
experience making new discoveries often depends on people being willing to
risk being exposed as ignorant. Thus we've gained in knowledge of what we're
doing now, but lost out on innovation.'
Now, unless the Jobs column is one of the Yir Yoront, that's a case of the
Fosbury Flop in an industrial arena - which has implications for the focus
on the differences between work and play. For the two aren't totally fenced
off from each other. Games, at least, spill over into work activities. Even
if possible, identifying and ejecting such games need not be beneficial,
since they may be productive and perhaps fun too. But if they are neither,
it's surely worth moving mountains, not to mention the rule-makers, to get
rid of them.
