FT  28 JUN 93 / Survey of World Automotive Suppliers (1): Shockwaves keep
coming - The pressures from hard-hit vehicle makers are inevitably forcing a
far-reaching restructuring of the components industry. Parts makers are
drastically cutting the numbers of their own suppliers and are also moving
towards global sourcing
THE bruising legal battle betweeen General Motors and Volkswagen, the
biggest car makers in the US and Europe, over the services of Mr Jose
Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua has concentrated a harsh new light on the
critical relationship of the world's leading vehicle makers with their
components suppliers.
The conflict over Mr Lopez, formerly global purchasing director for GM and
since March VW's purchasing and production director, has arisen as two of
the world's top four vehicle makers are fighting to cut costs in order to
staunch heavy losses, (see profile, page three).
The world's car and commercial vehicle makers in North America, Europe and
Japan are facing an unprecedented financial squeeze in the face of weak
demand and the intensifying pressures of a global market.
With 50-70 per cent of the production cost of a car being accounted for by
components and materials bought from outside suppliers, it is the automotive
components makers that are in the direct firing line, as the vehicle makers
seek to make good the damage that is being wrought in their own profit and
loss accounts.
Last year the biggest shock-waves in the automotive components sector were
passing through General Motors' army of suppliers in North America, as the
ailing giant of the US industry started to take drastic action to staunch
its record losses.
This year the tremors have reached Europe, where Volkswagen is being forced
to undertake a wide-ranging restructuring of its operations, especially in
Germany, where it has become Europe's highest cost volume carmaker.
The leading actor in both dramas is Mr Lopez. In spring last year he was
plucked by GM in Detroit from its European operations to head its newly
instituted worldwide purchasing organisation. He also became a member of
both of GM's key North American and European strategy boards.
His reputation for tough cost-cutting and an innovative approach to forcing
greater efficiency out of GM Europe's suppliers, was quickly borne out in
Detroit.
His supporters claimed that Mr Lopez was implementing a long-overdue
shake-up of GM's ties with suppliers. But some parts makers accused him of
undermining their relationship with GM by putting existing contracts up for
renegotiation and demanding unrealistic improvements in what they argued
were already good productivity records and thin profit margins. During his
ultimately brief sojourn in the US, Mr Lopez claimed that many US parts
manufacturers were less competitive than those in Europe and were indeed
capable of huge productivity improvements. GM was trying to form a new,
closer partnership with its best suppliers, including advising them on
efficiency and offering long-term contracts, he argued.
Mr Ferdinand Piech, the chairman of the management board of the troubled
Volkswagen group since January, was clearly impressed by the efficacy of the
Lopez approach to dealing with suppliers, and became convinced that he was
the man he needed to help him lead a new industrial revolution at the German
carmaker.
Stung by its loss of a key executive along with seven other members of the
Lopez team, GM is seeking retribution through the courts in Germany, where
Mr Lopez is now under investigation by the public prosecutor for alleged
industrial espionage, including the removal of hundreds of confidential GM
documents detailing the manufacturing costs of each of Opel's plants in
Germany along with the individual prices its pays for around 60,000
different components.
GM's allegations have been robustly rebuffed by VW, and publicly Mr Piech is
giving his unqualified support to Mr Lopez.
The battle between GM and VW must now be decided in the courts, but the
wider battle of the industry to cut costs and increase efficiency and
quality will be played out in every relationship between the vehicle makers
and their myriad suppliers.
The pressures on GM and VW are being felt by all vehicle producers, and the
crucial relationship between the assemblers and their suppliers is being
fundamentally transformed. The leading vehicle makers are creating global
operations, forcing the component producers to match this international
expansion if they wish to maintain their central supplier roles.
The makers are trying to bring new products to the market faster by reducing
product development time, and the suppliers must play a key role in meeting
this goal.
The vehicle manufacturers are seeking to spread more of the research and
development burden for new products on to the component makers. The leading
suppliers are taking on the role of being systems producers, rather than
suppliers of individual components. They are needing to commit themselves
early in the product development cycle, working closely with the carmakers
through simultaneous engineering, so that they are integrated into both the
design and manufacturing engineering processes.
Longer-term partnerships are emerging linking the vehicle producers with
favoured key suppliers, but replacing the old adversarial relationships is
not always proving easy.
In the present case of Volkswagen, for example, the German carmaker insisted
this month that the answer lay in pooling 'the mutual interests of suppliers
and manufacturers by intensifying co-operation between them.'
Mr Lopez claimed that 'our policy is one of partnership, not of opposition,
since this is a matter of survival for us all.'
Some component makers facing demands from Wolfsburg for price cuts of up to
30 per cent over the next three years may retain a justifiable scepticism
about how fairly the burdens of cost cutting are to be shared, but there is
little doubt of the rigour with which VW is launching its new approach. Its
conversion to new ways of conducting its purchasing operations has come
late, so it must move even faster than its rivals, if it is to catch up.
It is planning a drastic reduction in the number of its component suppliers,
as it seeks to rationalise its production and purchasing operations.
According to Mr Piech, VW is seeking to move to a system in which some of
its leading suppliers will become so-called 'logistical partners'. These
first tier suppliers will take over responsibility for supplying complete
modules rather than individual components.
'Around the year 2000 our group will have 100-200 logistical partners.
Toyota has 220 logistical partners today,' says Mr Piech. At present, the VW
division alone has 1,500 suppliers; and Audi, the group's executive car
division has around 800.
Since the arrvial of Mr Lopez, VW has moved quickly to start to build a
global purchasing organisation with the aim of cutting its costs and
reducing its dependence on its high cost German supply base.
Volkswagen has created seven purchasing centres around the world. The
regional purchasing offices have been set up to serve all four of the
group's brand divisions, Volkswagen, Audi, Seat and Skoda, and under the
Lopez system all the groups will be seeking to scour their regions for lower
cost suppliers at high levels of quality and service.
The regional teams will include buyers individually specialising in
electrical, mechanical and chemical components and in plant equipment and
general supplies.
According to Mr Frans Boot, head of the recently established VW group
purchasing office in the UK, the group is seeking to standardise many
components across model ranges to cut down the current unnecessary
proliferation of parts - 'we want to benefit from high volumes.'
The pressures from the vehicle makers are inevitably forcing a far-reaching
restructuring of the components industry. Players in the first tier of the
industry are undertaking similar actions to the vehicle makers themselves.
They are drastically cutting the numbers of their own suppliers and are also
moving to global sourcing as the pressure for rationalisation rapidly moves
down through the ranks of the sector worldwide.
The industry, traditionally highly fragmented, is starting to become more
concentrated. The biggest groups are growing through acquisition - as
witnessed most recently by the UK group T&amp;N's purchase of Goetze, the German
piston ring maker.
At the same time large corporations for which the auto industry has
previously played a somewhat peripheral role, such as Siemens and
Mannesmann, are moving rapidly into specialist areas of the automotive
components sector, where they can bring their technological and financial
strengths to bear.
According to a recent Economist Intelligence Unit study some 65 companies
now have sales in the automotive components sector in excess of Dollars 1bn
a year and this group alone accounts for more than 55 per cent of a total
worldwide industry turnover estimated at around Dollars 400bn.
ON OTHER PAGES:
Worldwide production: page 2.
US suppliers: page 3.
Japanese producers: page 4.
European scene: pages 3,5,6.
Car of the future: page 6.
