FT  12 AUG 93 / Bid rivalry raises hopes for sold-off coal mines
HOPES THAT the private sector will take on discarded British Coal mines rose
yesterday as the corporation revealed that 10 companies had submitted bids
for the five latest collieries to be put out to tender.
The pits, the second batch to be advertised, have drawn at least one bid
each, and Betws in south Wales is thought to have attracted three. Most of
the 10 bids involve mining, although two or three are thought to suggest
only the use of the land and assets.
The first batch of four mines attracted only one bid involving mining.
British Coal is advertising 19 pits in all. Bids for the remaining 10 are
subject to various deadlines over the next weeks.
The latest batch of five, for which the deadline was Monday, is thought to
be the most attractive because of the pits' location and coal quality.
Although British Coal yesterday would not reveal the bidders' identities, it
is thought that Betws has attracted offers from Ryan International and a
consortium led by Mr Malcom Edwards, former British Coal marketing director,
as well as a management buyout team.
Mr Edwards is also interested in Markham Main and Rossington in Yorkshire.
He is thought to be facing competition at both from RJB Mining.
RJB is also thought to have bid for Clipstone and Bevercotes in
Nottinghamshire.
A report by McCloskey Coal Information Service yesterday predicted that 20
per cent of electricity generating capacity will be closed in the next five
years, most of it coal-fired. It also suggests that British Coal will have
to offer generators coal at less than half the price of existing contracts
if it is to win the additional sales essential for keeping reprieved mines
open. 'It does not augur well for any of the reprieved mines or indeed in
the short term for any third-party (independent) supplier,' it says.
However, the report concludes that 'there will still be a substantial market
for coal-fired plant to supply during the winter months for many years to
come'.
Meanwhile British Coal yesterday denied claims by officials of the National
Union of Mineworkers that it wants to contract out all jobs at its Tower
mine in south Wales. It is, however, seeking 200 voluntary redundancies
among the 500-strong workforce in the autumn.
The UK's Coal Power Stations. McCloskey Coal Information Service, 2, Pages
Court, St Peters Road, Petersfield, Hampshire, GU32 3HX.
