FT  11 MAR 93 / Parliament and Politics: Iraq arms inquiry aims for early
hearings
PUBLIC HEARINGS in the judicial inquiry into the arms-for-Iraq affair are
expected to be completed before parliament rises for the summer recess,
sources close to the inquiry said yesterday.
Lord Justice Scott, who is heading the inquiry, plans to set out before
Easter details of how the hearings will be held.
Lord Justice Scott was appointed to lead the inquiry in November last year
after documents released during the trial of senior management of Matrix
Churchill, the UK maker of machine tools, indicated the possible involvement
of government departments in defence or military-related trade with Iraq in
the years before the Kuwaiti invasion.
The hearings will almost certainly involve current and former ministers.
Lord Justice Scott is preparing a list of who will be called.
Some members of the inquiry team favour the hearings being monitored on
closed-circuit television to enable as many journalists as possible to view
the proceedings.
The intention to finish public proceedings while parliament is in session is
significant, because it suggests that opposition spokesmen will be able to
press ministers on their testimony with the protection of parliamentary
privilege by tabling written and oral questions.
Parliament would normally rise for the summer recess in late July, but there
are suggestions at Westminster that this might be delayed by the progress of
the Maastricht bill.
It is understood that Lord Justice Scott wants the hearings to take place
while parliament is sitting as a political safeguard against any attempt by
officials at prevarication.
Lawyers advising in recent cases relating to exports to Iraq have voiced
concern about the possibility that Lord Justice Scott may face obstruction
from officials and ministers refusing to give evi-dence.
Yesterday Ms Liz Symons, general secretary of the Association of First
Division Civil Servants, the trade union representing the top ranks of the
Civil Service, said that a number of her members were worried that any
evidence they might give to the Scott inquiry could involve a breach of the
Official Secrets Act or their employment contracts, which contain
confidentiality and loyalty clauses.
It emerged yesterday that all eight members of the Scott inquiry team,
including three officials seconded from the department of trade and industry
and the Treasury solicitor, have been vetted by the security services.
Lord Justice Scott has called for and received numerous documents from a
number of government departments and from the intelligence services.
He is also understood to have received documents from the US and studied
other independently provided evidence relating to exports to Iraq which has
recently come to light.
The evidence includes a hand-written minute by a civil servant on August 24
1989 and details of how the UK exported machine tools worth millions of
pounds for Iraq's poison gas programme, reported in a recently published
book by British journalist Mr John Sweeney.
Lord Justice Scott's office said last night: 'It is obviously important for
witnesses not to feel inhibited about speaking freely to the inquiry and we
shall do everything we can to ensure that.'
It is understood that Lord Justice Scott intends to spell out what legal
protection will be offered to witnesses as he approaches them individually
over the next month.
