FT  04 AUG 93 / Anger over curriculum reform delay
SIR Ron Dearing's recommendation that the national curriculum in England and
Wales should remain un-changed for the next two years while changes are made
to testing came under attack from a leading academic yesterday.
Professor Sigmund Prais, of the National Institute for Economic and Social
Research, said the decision would mean a further 1.2m children would have to
take an 'unworkable' technology curriculum.
He said: 'Since the existing curriculum has been condemned as unworkable by
the National Curriculum Council and the secretary of state, I find this very
wrong and retrograde. Until the national curriculum, each school had the
right to choose whatever it wanted. Subjects like woodwork and metalwork
have now been withdrawn.'
A review of the content of the technology curriculum had been ordered and
was due to take effect by the education year 1994-95.
A similar review of the English curriculum, which had controversially called
for increased concentration on grammar and spoken standard English, will
also now be delayed.
Dr Hilary Nicolle, chief executive of the National Curriculum Council, said
Sir Ron had written to head teachers giving them an interpretation of the
current technology orders which gave them more flexibility. Although the
entire syllabus, which is very broad, must be covered by the end of each
year, schools would be allowed to specialise more than the curriculum
implied, she said.
Government hopes that the Dearing review would lead to a period of peace
with the teachers' unions, who this year boycotted curriculum tests, were
also dimmed by the Association of Teachers and Lecturers, which advised its
members not to co-operate with the Department for Education's new proposals
for teacher training.
These would allow non-graduates to qualify as teachers for children up to
the age of seven on the basis of a year's school-based training. This would
require extensive co-operation from teachers, who would need to work as
mentors to the trainees. The ATL is the first union to advise
non-co-operation with the scheme, which could come into effect in the
academic year 1994-95.
