FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Argentina (8): Diplomatic talks go on - The
Falkland Islands
ARGENTINA is obsessed with the Falkland Islands. Eleven years after its
defeat in the 74-day conflict with Britain, the country's overriding foreign
policy aim is winning sovereignty over the islands.
In every important speech, President Carlos Menem makes a ritual reference
to Argentina's sovereignty over the Falklands. He claims his policy of
rapprochement - rather than confrontation - with Britain will enable
Argentina to 'recover' sovereignty over the islands by 2000.
Mr Menem said: 'We will continue talking. In the world of diplomacy one
needs great patience. There is no possibility of taking this conflict over
the Falklands to a situation similar to 1982.'
His aim is to draw the UK into as close a relationship as possible. Stronger
trade and investment links with Argentina would gradually reduce the
importance of the Falklands to Britain. Eventually, London will have
sufficient confidence in Argentina to consider transferring sovereignty.
Several British companies already operate privatised utilities in Argentina.
But instead of receding, the Falklands question remains an open sore in
bilateral relations.
Argentina continually presses for greater involvement in developing the
natural resources. In 1991 the UK agreed to co-operate to conserve
fisheries. Last year Argentina began to issue fishing licences, muscling in
on the main source of revenue.
Ordinary Argentines are frustrated that Mr Menem's policy has still not led
to any talks over the crucial issue of sovereignty. London has remained
unyielding in its insistence that co-operation with Argentina does not imply
any recognition of its claim to the islands. The UK foreign office says this
policy will change only if and when the islands' fewer than 2,000
inhabitants agree to a change in their status.
Last month, Argentina suffered another diplomatic slap in the face when
Britain announced it would extend territorial waters to 200 miles around the
remote and uninhabited South Georgia and South Sandwich island groups, which
Argentina also claims.
Oil is emerging as another source of friction. The Falklands are believed to
have big oil and gas deposits and Argentina wants to tie Britain into a
joint oil regime. London has ignored Argentina's arguments, and last year
licensed two companies to carry out seismic exploration in two blocks around
the islands. Britain refuses to discuss oil co-operation until studies
confirm the region does have hydrocarbon reserves in commercial quantities.
There is scant chance of a shift in the islanders' virulently anti-Argentine
attitudes. Memories of Argentina's three-month military occupation remain
fresh.
And Britain has still not lifted its arms embargo on Argentina. London has
also successfully persuaded Washington not to sell two squadrons of ageing
Skyhawk fighter bombers to Argentina. However, talks are planned later this
year to resume training courses for Argentine officers at British military
academies.
