FT  17 JUN 93 / London Stock Exchange: Shares advance as rate hopes revive
DEVELOPMENTS in the currency markets revived hopes among UK equity investors
that a cut in German interest rates might open the door for Mr Kenneth
Clarke, the UK chancellor of the exchequer, to reduce base rates in Britain.
A recovery of 13 points to 2,883 took the FT-SE 100 Index to the top end of
its trading range, but traders again warned that the impending expiry in
stock index futures was exerting pressure on the equity market.
The stock market appeared satisfied with the important economic speech from
the new chancellor in the City of London on Tuesday evening. His
confirmation that no changes of substance in economic policy are planned
encouraged confidence in the market.
Share prices opened lower in London, subdued by Wall Street's fall of 22 Dow
points overnight, but quickly turned upwards when the stock index futures
opened strongly. With the June contract on the FT-SE 100 Index expiring on
Friday, attention is now focused on the September contract, which traded
comfortably above 2,900 again yesterday.
Base rate optimism, calmed down by the relaxed tone of the speech from the
chancellor, returned to life at mid-morning when the D-Mark began to fall
after comments from German government sources were read as implying a
quickening pace of German rate cuts. At the same time, the move towards the
US dollar benefited overseas earning stocks in the London market.
News of a disappointing fall of 0.2 per cent in April retail sales, while
hardly encouraging evidence for recovery in the domestic economy or
corporate profits, was seen as strengthening the chances for a cut in base
rates. The Public Sector Borrowing Requirement for May, slightly below some
forecasts, did nothing to change views in the stock mar-ket on government
borrowing prospects.
The FT-SE 100 advanced to a day's peak of 2,888.3, but again showed
unwillingness to break through into what would be seen as peak-challenging
territory. Some analysts, pointing to the upward pull on share prices as the
big securities houses grappled with positions in stock index futures, warned
that the top end of the market range has yet to be convincingly broached.
The FT-SE Mid 250 Index also rallied, although less aggressively, closing
6.9 up at 3,212, just 1.4 under the peak reached a week ago.
Seaq volume was slow to develop but increased as basket trading between
equities and stock index futures was joined by at least one genuine
investment programme. By the close, the Seaq total stood at 607.3m shares.
The focus on the Footsie-listed stocks occasioned by futures-related trading
reduced business in non-Footsie issues to only about 51 per cent of the
day's total, significantly lower than usual.
On Tuesday, Seaq volume of 512.3m shares brought in retail business worth
Pounds 1.16bn, a comfortably profitable level from the point of view of the
London-based securities houses.
While London market strategists refused to demonstrate too much enthusiasm
on the prospects for the meeting this morning of the Bundesbank's policy
council, for which no press conference was planned, it was clear yesterday
that interest rate optimism has remained a significant factor for UK
investors.
