FT  23 SEP 93 / Yeltsin confident as direct rule wins military support:
Foreign backing for president grows; Economic plan in pipeline
RUSSIAN president Boris Yeltsin survived his first day of direct
presidential rule showing increasing confidence as a chorus of support from
the military, former Soviet neighbours and foreign states greeted his
decision to abolish the parliament and hold elections.
The parliament, after a blaze of defiance early yesterday morning, found its
parallel presidency lacking levers to pull, and its calls for strikes,
protest meetings and civil disobedience had no apparent effect.
Early yesterday it had voted to strip Mr Yeltsin of power and install his
conservative deputy, Mr Alexander Rutskoi, as president.
Mr Yeltsin also shrugged off the Constitutional Court's decision to
pronounce his decree unconstitutional.
He walked genially about central Moscow in the autum sun, promising that
'there will be no blood' as a result of his action. 'If the parliament does
not exist, there is not, there must not be, any dialogue with it.'
The international support for Mr Yeltsin strengthened as Nato and the
European Community joined the US, Japan and most of the European countries
in backing the Russian president.
Mr Willy Claes, Belgian foreign minister, said on behalf of the EC that
member states supported Mr Yeltsin's move, even though it was
unconstitutional.
Mr Manfred Worner Nato secretary-general, insisted the alliance would
support democratic forces to prevent Russia from falling into chaos.
US president Bill Clinton, expressed his confidence that the situation would
remain calm and Mr Yeltsin retain control until elections in December.
In Germany, which had initially reacted with caution to the events, Mr Theo
Waigel, German finance minister, said Russian leaders must make it clear
that economic reforms would continue or lose international financial aid.
Senior officials of the Group of Seven and International Monetary Fund, said
Mr Yeltsin had appreciably improved his chances of receiving the assistance
which had been delayed as the reform process stalled.
Mr Yegor Gaidar, who has returned to the cabinet to head economic reform,
appeared before the press for the first time since assuming office and said
his three main tasks were to deal with inflation, to avoid populist policies
and further to liberalise the economy.
Mr Gaidar is preparing a raft of economic measures, which are likely to
include raising energy prices and further liberalisation of trade.
He may also consider cutting subsidies to the agricultural and defence
industries - constituencies which are unlikely ever to support radical
reform and which can be acted against with relative impunity.
Mr Vladimir Shumeiko, another first deputy prime minister, said that in the
weeks before the elections on December 11-12, a draft constitution would go
before the constitutional assembly and preparations for elections would be
made to the State Duma, the lower house of the proposed new Federal
Assembly, which would replace the Supreme Soviet.
Mr Viktor Chernomyrdin, the prime minister, who confessed he had been 'a bit
frightened' by the prospect of life after Mr Yeltsin's decree, was in
confident mood late yesterday after a conference call with most of Russia's
regional and republican leaders. He said that Mr Yeltsin had the support of
nearly all of them.
General Pavel Grachev, the defence minister and Mr Viktor Yerin, the
security minister, threw their weight behind Mr Yeltsin. 'We are sure we are
fully in control of the situation,' said Mr Yerin.
The defence ministry issued a statement saying that Mr Yeltsin's finger was
the only one empowered to touch the nuclear button.
Nearly all of the leaders of the former Soviet republics - due in Moscow
tomorrow to sign a treaty of economic union - backed Mr Yeltsin, including
President Leonid Kravchuk of Ukraine.
Page 2
Reformers' cause to hope
Pure theatre in the streets
Regions divided over battle
Markets stay calm
Morning after night of the generals
Whine and poses, Page 17
Lex, Page 18
Prices see-saw, Page 26
A test for Globex, Page 26
Currencies, Page 35
