FT  08 NOV 93 / Monday Interview: Gaze fixed on the far horizon - Takashi
Imai, president of Nippon Steel, talks to Robert Thomson
When Nippon Steel announced it was shedding 7,000 employees, the common
interpretation last week was that the world's leading steelmaker was
reacting to recession. As the architect of the plan, Mr Takashi Imai was
irritated that his company should be assumed to be thinking short term, when
he believes that Japan is in the middle of a far deeper restructuring, not
just a recession.
Mr Imai has spent his first few months as president scrutinising the
hierarchy of Nippon Steel, spotting the flaws and inefficiencies hindering
long-term profitability. Around him, Japan has acquired a new government;
some of the country's stronger companies, including his own, have slipped
into the red; and the yen has risen to nearly Y100 to the dollar - that is,
parity with the cent.
'For the steel industry, the present downturn is far more severe than seven
years ago. Then, it was the appreciation of the yen, but also the
depreciation of the dollar against most currencies,' says Mr Imai, referring
to exchange rate movements after the Plaza Accord of 1985. 'Now, the yen has
appreciated by 20 per cent against the dollar, but it has also appreciated
against the D-Mark, the Korean won and other currencies.'
The higher yen means that Japanese steel companies lose export market share,
and it also hurts two of their largest domestic customers, the electronics
and car industries. Meanwhile, says Mr Imai, the excesses of the late 1980s,
when stock prices rose to dizzy heights and companies expanded well beyond
their means and expertise, have added to the economic woes.
'We could see the signs of downturn from 1991, and we started an inventory
adjustment (or a reduction in stocks), but our customers were somewhat
delayed in adjusting their inventory,' says Mr Imai. The implication is that
other companies would be in a better position had they done the same as
Nippon Steel, which tends to see itself as the natural leader of industry.
There is a hint of the self-conscious industrial trend-setter when Mr Imai
describes his plans to revise the management structure of his company,
saying it needs to make 'crystal clear' its systems of responsibility and
decision making.
An emphasis within the company on reaching consensus means an endless round
of consultations at all levels of the corporate hierarchy, delaying
important decisions and diluting responsibility. Mr Imai does not want to
decide everything, but he wants to be able to identify who should take
responsibility for a decision.
'We have so many management levels that we must go through to make one
decision. When you look at the production side, the superintendent of the
steel works does not have concrete targets. And when you look at the sales
side, they should have concrete targets, but they do not,' he says.
'I want to minimise the size of head office, and I want to abolish the
tedious vertical system of decision making. Under the president, we have an
executive vice-president, managing director, general manager, deputy general
manager and so on, but authority is not clearly delegated.'
Mr Imai has experienced the complexity of the hierarchy, having taken 41
years to climb to the top, and serving previously as executive
vice-president. Nippon Steel was created when Fuji merged with Yawata Steel
in 1970, and executives from the two companies have since taken turns as
president.
Mergers are rarely seamless in Japan, and the alternating presidency is a
sign of how difficult it is to leave the past behind. The company has also
been criticised from within for devoting too much energy to acting on behalf
of Japan's steel industry, and not enough to expanding its own market share,
though it is expected to be more aggressive under Mr Imai.
He acquired experience of different management styles when he was in charge
of ordering raw materials in his early years at Nippon Steel, negotiating
iron ore deals in Australia, coal agreements in Siberia and mining ventures
in Brazil. To complete his education in management, he spent the last few
years overseeing the financial operations, corporate planning, and the
company's diversification into electronics.
His fondness for strategy is reflected in an enthusiasm for Go, a Chinese
board game in which players plot to surround their opponents' pieces, and he
has a reputation for loyalty to managers who have served with him.
Promises will be kept, he stresses, in dealing with the 7,000 workers in the
steel division who will lose their jobs. They will be transferred to
subsidiaries and affiliates - 'we have 200 companies in which we have a
stake' - and his company will pay the difference if these smaller companies
pay lower wages.
Nippon Steel cannot afford such benevolence indefinitely, as it is
forecasting a pre-tax loss of Y15bn for the first half from April to
September, and a similar annual loss. The figures have prompted Mr Imai not
only to reform the management structure, but also to look differently at the
core workforce. In good times, staff numbers have tended to expand rapidly,
and tradition has compelled the company to keep these workers. This has left
Nippon Steel with a 'bulge' that takes many years to be worked out of the
system.
Did you know, asks Mr Imai, clearly surprised himself by the figure, that
Nippon Steel took on 5,000 people in one good year, 1962 - equal to almost
10 per cent of the entire steel division? 'We hired so many people. When you
look at the structure of the company you can see quite a big bulge from that
year.' It is his intention to beat the bulges by halving the graduate
intake, and relying more on a new type of seasonal worker.
His theory is that the current drive to deregulate Japanese industry will
dislodge workers from inefficient sectors such as distribution, which have
layer upon layer of middlemen, each taking their cut. This new pool of
potential employees will be tapped by Nippon Steel and other companies when
needed, but there will be an understanding that, in tough times, they will
be laid off.
The core workers will receive the traditional treatment. They will be
rotated around the company to broaden experience, and a commitment to
lifetime employment will be made and kept.
Mr Imai's proposal would create a two-tier system of employment, and
presumes that unemployment in Japan will be higher than the present 2.6 per
cent. However, Mr Imai's past experiences in searching for natural resources
have given him a sense that the wealth of his resource-poor country is
fragile and deep reforms are needed to keep Japan competitive.
'In the US in the 1980s, it was presumed that jobs lost in production would
be found in the service sector, but that did not happen and we don't want to
repeat that pattern. In Japan, we can't supply ourselves with enough energy
and food, and we must earn enough through exports to cover import costs. We
have to make products that are competitive. We have to fill the gap of
jobs.'
In the shorter term, Japanese steel companies must confront a listless
domestic market. The automotive and electronics industries have matured, and
are now selling to saturated markets, reducing demand for steel: 'We are
looking for some other industries that will replace these industries as a
source of demand, but we haven't been able to find them.'
Political scandal has also shaken the steel industry, which relies on
construction companies for about 50 per cent of sales. Executives from five
large construction companies have been arrested for alleged involvement in
the bribery of provincial politicians, and building projects are being
suspended or shelved. Although construction accounts for only 30 per cent of
Nippon Steel's sales, it still hurts in a difficult year.
'I am confident that the Japanese economy will eventually recover from
recession,' says Mr Imai. But his longer-term proposals for Nippon Steel,
its management structure and workforce will set in motion changes from which
the old corporate structure may never recover.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
PERSONAL FILE
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1929 Born Kamakura, Japan.
1952 Graduated from law faculty, Tokyo University.
1952 Joined Fuji Iron and Steel.
1963 Manager, raw materials.
1970 Deputy general manager, fuel and ferrous materials, Nippon Steel.
1973 General manager, iron ore.
1983 Managing director.
1989 Executive vice president.
1992 President.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
