FT  10 MAR 93 / Judge will view arms documents
THE LORD Chief Justice, Lord Taylor, is to examine confidential government
papers about defence exports to the Middle East.
The move comes after it was revealed that a businessman convicted of
conspiring to ship artillery fuses illegally to Iraq had also worked for
Britain's security and intelligence services.
Mr John Grecian, a former managing director of Ordinance Technology (known
as Ordtech), a Reading-based engineering company, pleaded guilty in February
last year to conspiring to breach controls on the exporting of military
equipment to Iraq. He received a one-year suspended sentence.
Yesterday Mr Grecian's counsel, Mr Peter Clarke, told Lord Taylor and two
other Appeal Court judges that Mr Grecian had supplied information to both
MI5 and MI6 in the late 1980s. The information was passed to the Foreign
Office and discussed with King Hussein of Jordan, he said.
Mr Grecian and three other men pleaded guilty to conspiring to evade export
controls after their trial judge accepted the government's arguments that
sensitive information about trading with Iraq should not be put before a
jury.
They are now seeking leave to appeal against their convictions in the wake
of last year's Matrix Churchill trial, when ministers' use of public
interest immunity certificates to suppress sensitive information was
successfully challenged.
The three other men are Mr Brian Mason, Ordtech's former engineering
director, Mr William Blackledge of Preston, Lancashire, and Mr Colin
Phillips of Poole, Dorset.
At their trial prosecutors alleged that the four men were part of a
conspiracy to use bogus end-user certificates to evade the ban on arms
exports to Iraq and supply fuses for 155m heavy artillery shells.
The fuses were never exported, but the certificates stated they were
destined for Jordan, the trial judge was told. The four maintained that the
British authorities had been aware of their activities.
Yesterday's preliminary hearing - to decide whether the four men should be
allowed leave to appeal - was adjourned to allow Customs' prosecutors time
to decide which documents could be handed over to defence lawyers and which
should be left for the Lord Chief Justice to decide on their disclosure.
