FT  13 NOV 93 / Pink Snow - FT Guide To The World's Best Ski Resorts (14):
Virtually the real thing
SCIENTISTS IN Japan have developed an electronic simulator that will give
skiers the sensation of skiing while, in actuality, they remain at a fixed
spot, writes David Goldsmith. The simulator is based on virtual reality, the
brain-deceiving computer science.
The idea that your grey cells can be taken over by a computer linked to a
skiing machine and video monitor might strike you as scary. Even more
sinister is the fact that it works.
NEC, the electronics and communications corporation, claims it is the first
company to think of applying virtual reality to skiing. Because of the
complex feelings fed back by skis - slipping, sliding, acceleration and
deceleration - it faces a formidable challenge. The NEC project is based at
a research building on the west of Tokyo. A chalet-free zone, the place
seemed an unlikely location for a ski run. Project manager Asao Kaneko
explained the principles of NEC's technology. 'We started in 1988. It is
based on the concept of a virtual slope to enable you to ski and practise
with no snow.'
I was taken to the lab, stacked with computers. A group of technicians
hovered around me. Playing for sympathy as the human guinea pig, I received
puzzled glances. In reality (virtual or otherwise) I felt like Frankenstein
Goes Skiing.
On one side of the room was the raised skiing platform. Mounting it in a
pair of standard ski boots I was instructed to step on to a pair of short
skis supported by hydraulic pistons. Mr Kaneko handed me an electronic
sensor to slip over my finger. 'That will measure your blood flow and
determine your stress level,' he said.
Gripping the handles of two ski poles permanently planted in the deck, I
felt the skis float upwards on their hydraulics. Hovering above the
platform, waiting for the skis to start tipping and rolling, was unnerving.
The 'ant's head' virtual reality helmet, usually associated with this type
of technology, had been replaced with a giant projection screen in front of
me that proved more capable of providing the feeling of open vision on a
mountainside.
Five bleeps signalled the start of the run and the huge computer-generated
image burst into life: a strange rolling snowscape of mountain peaks and
crudely exaggerated features at close range: trees and giant slalom gates
that popped alarmingly out of the piste, just a few yards ahead.
My skis were represented by two yellow ski tips at the bottom of the screen.
The objective was to ski around the obstacles by applying turning pressure
to the skis. By switching weight between the two skis I found myself
narrowly avoiding the hazards, but it was hard work. My stress level was
evidently too low because the run then became even trickier. As obstacles
flashed and zoomed in front of me I fought to control the skis.
Skiing over each bump and undulation in the run, there was an uncanny sense
of unweighting and forward motion. The hydraulic skis tipped me forward and
backward to simulate acceleration and deceleration. Particularly impressive
were the feelings of traversing the slope and the camber of the bumps.
In all, the equipment delivered a far closer sense of the real than I had
expected. As a former ski instructor I could see its potential for teaching
in safety, not to mention a lot of fun. NEC plans to launch virtual reality
skiing in Europe in the next two years.
