FT  11 MAR 93 / Egyptian crackdown leaves 14 militants dead
EGYPTIAN security forces have shot and killed 14 alleged militants in a
bloody two-day crackdown on Islamic groups behind recent attacks on
tourists. At least four policemen, a woman and a child also died in the
raids - among the bloodiest clashes in Egypt in a decade.
Thirteen people died in shootouts in and around Cairo yesterday as police
and special operations officers launched nine dawn raids on alleged Islamic
militant hideouts. A further seven alleged militants died in a clash on
Tuesday night after police surrounded a mosque in Aswan, the popular tourist
resort in Upper Egypt.
The incident is only the second in Aswan since the recent spate of violence
in Egypt. Two police officers guarding a church were shot dead by militants
on March 6 and Tuesday's raid appears to have followed a tough police
response to the attacks.
The police crackdown is the harshest and most violent yet in the
government's continuing fight against the Gama'a al-Islamiyya, the shadowy
Islamic militant group which claims to be behind recent attacks on tourists.
There have been few more violent clashes between police and alleged
extremists since the aftermath of President Sadat's assassination in 1981.
Police have rounded up hundreds, and possibly thousands of alleged Gama'a
al-Islamiyya activists since attacks on tourists began last summer and
clashes between militants and police have been sustained at a low level over
the past several months leaving, by some estimates, 15 dead and 33 wounded
before the last two days' violence.
But yesterday's raids appear to signal a new resolve within the government
to bear down even more heavily on the militant groups, whose attacks on
foreign visitors have devastated the country's tourism industry.
Cancellations are estimated by the government to be costing Dollars 70m
(Pounds 49m) a month.
President Hosni Mubarak said in a recent US newspaper interview that he was
prepared to use a 'very heavy hand' against the Islamic militants. Saying
that he believed their attacks had peaked, he nevertheless told the
Washington Post: 'I'll be very strict with them. I'm very strict with these
people for the sake of the country and the people.'
An Interior Ministry statement yesterday said that the series of raids,
which took place in central, northern and western Cairo, led to several
arrests, including that of two un-named men claimed to be among the 'top
leadership' of the Gama'a al-Islamiyya. The ministry said several guns and
explosives were also seized.
