FT  16 JUL 93 / Red faces at World Bank as HQ costs break budget
THE World Bank has sent three managers on administrative leave after 'loose
project management' pushed the cost of its new headquarters building in
Washington Dollars 83.5m over budget.
The the building was now expected to cost around Dollars 290m, compared with
a 1990 budget of Dollars 206.5m, the bank said. However, an internal inquiry
had concluded that most of the overrun was due to unrealistically low
initial estimates.
'Cost overruns for large buildings are not uncommon, but in this case, much
of the problem could have been avoided if realistic estimates had been
presented at the outset,' said Mr Ernest Stern, who is acting as president
while Mr Lewis Preston recovers from surgery.
'This was compounded by loose management and a failure to bring problems to
the attention of the bank's senior managers on a timely basis.'
A bank statement said the inquiry had found that 'all funds committed to the
project had been spent on essential components of what remains a strictly
functional building and there is no suggestion of financial impropriety of
any kind'.
However, Mr Sven Sandstrom, the World Bank managing director appointed to
head the inquiry, found that project managers had failed to inform either
senior management or board of the cost overruns. They had also spent Dollars
22m without authorisation on two buildings which are to be refurbished as
part of the overall headquarters project.
A second phase inquiry will begin immediately to assess the actions of the
managers and 'appropriate disciplinary measures, if any'.
The World Bank's construction problems are particularly embarrassing, coming
as they do on the heels of the furore over the lavish London headquarters
built for the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Even critics of the World Bank's operating expenses, however, acknowledge
that the new headquarters, whose Dollars 123 per square foot construction
cost falls within central Washington norms, includes none of the expensive
marble or frills of the EBRD building.
'This is home grown incompetence, not imperial arrogance,' commented one
person familiar with the project.
In another sense, however, the bank's failure to oversee its own project
adequately is even more embarrassing, because of the institution's long
experience of advising borrowers in the developing world on project
management and supervision.
The preliminary budget, submitted to the board in February 1989, was set at
Dollars 186m. After a design competition and negotiations with the winning
architect, the budget was revised the following August to Dollars 206.5m.
The bank said yesterday it had ignored independent consultant engineers'
estimates that the building would cost Dollars 250m, in the expectation that
low demand in the construction sector and cost-saving measures would allow
it to stick to the approved budget.
