FT  30 OCT 93 / EC Summit: Disunion greets birth of the European Union
THERE were plenty of politicians and officials ready to fete the birth of
the Maastricht treaty in Brussels yesterday, but with the baptism fast
approaching - the treaty comes into force on Monday - nobody is really sure
what to call their pride and joy.
The treaty itself is pretty explicit: it plumps for European Union in the
first paragraph. That is all right for grand statements of vision -
President Mitterrand of France was already referring to the Union in his
opening statement to fellow summiteers yesterday - but the problem is that
less integrationist members of the Community find it, well, a little too
federal for their liking.
What is more, the 'old' EC has not quietly been put to sleep by Maastricht.
The EC, set up by the Treaty of Rome, lives on, alongside new joint
responsibilities for a common foreign and security policy, and a common
policy on justice and immigration matters.
Confused? The EC Council of Ministers thought you might be, and some weeks
ago set some of its keenest legal brains to work on a solution.
So far, nobody has, and Community (or Union) officials were keen to play
down the debate yesterday - presumably to avoid accusations that they are
merely fiddling while the Treaty of Rome burns.
* * *
Still on the subject of unions, yesterday's summit was picketed by Belgian
workers, protesting against Belgian government plans to freeze wages and cut
the country's looming budget deficit.
Most Belgians, however, took predictions of traffic chaos as an excuse to
enjoy a sunny day off ahead of the All Saints Day long weekend, leaving the
roads emptier than usual. That did not prevent the unions drawing a
parallel. 'The newspapers were forecasting that we'd mess up Brussels
today,' one unionist said, 'but the real mess isn't here but up at the
European summit - a monetary and social mess.'
* * *
Fog at Brussels airport was considered more of a problem for EC leaders than
the traffic. Flown to Aachen by helicopter early yesterday morning,
Chancellor Kohl decided to forge on ahead of his motorcade. Drawing up 15
minutes late for the summit - after Mr Mitterrand, traditionally the last to
arrive at such events - a shirt-sleeved Mr Kohl fazed the Belgian protocol
experts by emerging from a smallish police car at the head of the
procession, rather than the more ample diplomatic Mercedes behind.
* * *
As a location for the European Monetary Institute, forerunner of a European
central bank, Frankfurt did not get everybody's vote. Some central bankers
viewed the possibility of frequent trips to Germany's financial centre with
ill-concealed distaste. 'I have to admit that the idea of spending much time
in Frankfurt fills me with horror,' said one central bank governor. Some
bankers seemed to prefer the candidacy of Bonn, 'if only because it's more
lively at night' - not a compliment usually paid to the sleepy German
capital. But then central bankers do spend a lot of time in Basle.
* * *
Not much should be read into seating plans at European summits - they tend
to follow the alphabetical rotation of EC presidencies - but yesterday's
arrangement seemed calculated to irritate the British.
Mr John Major, the prime minister, and his foreign secretary, Mr Douglas
Hurd, found themselves squeezed in between two smaller powers - Portugal and
Luxembourg - staring across the table at the much weightier triumvirate of
Germany, France and Spain.
