FT  03 DEC 93 / UK Company News: P&amp;O invests in another Chinese container
port
Peninsular &amp; Oriental Steam Navigation yesterday announced its second
investment in Chinese container ports in 10 days.
The group is to take a controlling stake in the Yangtze river port of
Zhangjiagang.
The terminal is being expanded to develop two container berths, and P&amp;O
believes it will become the focus of one of the main industrial centres of
central China, between the cities of Wuxi, Suzhou and Changzhou.
The Zhangjiagang port can handle Panamax carriers, and the leading Chinese
shipping groups already operate services to ports around Asia. The total
cost of constructing the two berths will be about Dollars 50m (Pounds
33.5m).
Last week, P&amp;O joined forces with Hong Kong's Swire Pacific to purchase 50
per cent of the container terminal at Shekou, in the Pearl River delta, for
HKDollars 615m (Pounds 54m).
The port will have container throughput of 1.1m TEU's.
The investment in Zhangjiagang is less ambitious.
The terminal is situated approximately five hours upstream from Shanghai and
currently has container capacity of 150,000 TEU's. However, the investment
underlines the group's determination to develop its transport-related
activities throughout China.
Mr Brian Baillie, deputy chairman of P&amp;O Asia, said that growth in
export-oriented manufacturing around Zhangjiagang was similar to that of the
Pearl River delta, which in the past decade has become one of the world's
biggest export-processing centres.
P&amp;O has bought the majority of a company which owns 51 per cent of the port,
but Mr Baillie would not reveal the amount of P&amp;O's investment.
The Chinese government has been anxious to bring in foreign expertise to
improve the efficiency of its ports.
Mr Li Ka-shing's Hutchison group has already taken stakes in the ports of
Zhuhai, Yantian and Shanghai, while the late Sir YK Pao's Wharf (Holdings)
has secured the deep water port of Ningbo.
Mr Baillie said P&amp;O was analysing a number of other investment opportunities
for ports along the Yangtze,and in north-eastern China.
