FT  01 JUN 93 / Mates tries to calm Nadir-link row
MR MICHAEL Mates, a middle-ranking minister, yesterday sought to quell the
political row about his connection with the fugitive businessman Mr Asil
Nadir. He made clear that he had no idea that the former chairman of the
collapsed Polly Peck empire was planning to leave the UK.
Mr Nadir also defended the minister's conduct, saying that his help had been
'much appreciated by me in my fight for justice'.
Labour gave notice that it intended to pursue the matter further.
Mr Mates, a minister in the Northern Ireland office and MP for East
Hampshire, said in a statement that he had been advised that it was proper
for him to pursue matters raised by a constituent who was one of Mr Nadir's
advisers, even after he became a minister last year.
As for the watch that Mr Mates had given Mr Nadir after the businessman's
own had been taken by solicitors for trustees in bankruptcy, Mr Mates said
it had been 'intended and accepted as a light-hearted gesture'.
Mr Mates emphasised that he had not known of Mr Nadir's plan to break the
terms of his bail and leave the UK for Cyprus, and added that it was an
action of which he strongly disapproved.
Explaining why he had acted as he did, Mr Mates said: 'Some months after I
had been appointed to the government further matters were brought to my
notice which seemed again to merit examination.
'Having obtained advice that it was still proper for me to do so, I again
met the attorney-general. There followed further exchanges of
correspondence, all of which took place well before Mr Nadir left the
country.'
Mr Nadir, speaking from Cyprus, said that Mr Mates had acted after being
asked by one of his constituents to refer 'certain wrongdoings of the
Serious Fraud Office and others to the attorney-general'.
Mr Nadir said: 'I thank God that there are people in Britain who are
prepared to see justice prevail, in particular Mr Michael Mates MP.'
Mr Alistair Darling, Labour's City spokesman, insisted that Mr John Major
should look into the minister's actions.
He added: 'I have asked Mr Major to find out why Mr Mates took up this case.
MPs do not normally take up cases of those who are not their constituents
unless there are compelling reasons.'
He also questioned Mr Mates' judgment in giving Mr Nadir the watch, even as
a joke by the minister.
This view appeared to be endorsed by Mrs Betsy Wilson, Mr Mates'
constituency chairman.
She said: 'Perhaps with hindsight it was not very sensible. Obviously it has
not done him, the party or his future much good.'
