FT  30 SEP 93 / The Labour Party Conference: Smith basks in close-run vote
victory
LABOUR leader Mr John Smith said he was 'absolutely delighted' last night by
his victory over plans to modernise the party.
Immediately the outcome of the voting was announced, a beaming Mr Smith
shrugged off the narrowness of his victory and declared: 'It is a great day
for the Labour party.'
Asked to agree that with such a close margin he had courted disaster he
said: 'Yes. But I won.'
Mr Smith maintained that from time to time it was necessary to take
decisions that could not be put off.
It had been vital to carry forward the improvements in Labour's internal
democracy initiated by his predecessor, Mr Neil Kinnock.
Mr Smith called on Labour to put the controversy over its constitution
behind it and concentrate on the major issues of full employment, combating
cuts in the social services and fighting the government's proposals for
extending Value Added Tax.
Mr Smith also insisted that the approval given to the motion submitted by
the TGWU general workers' union should not be a cause for concern.
He said: 'The key vote was for the rule change and that has been clearly
carried.'
Before the crucial votes were taken Mr Smith had warned delegates that
defeat for the principle of one-member-one-vote would destroy the
credibility of Labour's radical agenda for constitutional change for the
country.
He insisted: 'As the party of change we must surely be able to change
ourselves.'
Mr Smith said that what millions of union members and party supporters all
over the country wanted above all else was a Labour government.
To sustained applause, he declared: 'As leader of our party, charged with
the responsibility to secure that victory, I say to this conference that the
changes I propose today are vital - absolutely central - to our strategy for
winning power. And I ask you to unite behind them.'
Only a few isolated hecklers challenged Mr Smith's claim that for some years
there had been growing agreement within the party about the need to
dismantle the block vote.
He stressed that trade unionists formed the majority of the new members in
constituency parties with the best recruiting record, describing this as
'proof positive that we are not proposing an increase in individual
membership at the expense of the trade unions'.
Mr Smith said one-member-one-vote already applied to the selection of
candidates for local-government elections.
Calling for the extension of of one-member-one-vote for the selection of
parliamentary candidates for Westminster, Mr Smith said: 'The principle is
clear, simple and democratic.
'All Labour party members should have equal rights to choose the party's
representatives.'
Mr Smith emphasised that what conference was being asked to decide did not
involve a choice between one-member-one-vote and a role for the trade
unions.
He said: 'It's the chance for more trade unionists than ever before to take
part in all the decisions and campaigns of the Labour party.'
