FT  02 SEP 93 / UK Company News: Wickes calls for Pounds 58.1m
WICKES, the DIY and timber retailer that came close to collapse two years
ago, yesterday announced a Pounds 58.1m rights issue to fund an aggressive
programme of expansion, including doubling the number of its UK stores to
150.
The money will initially be used to reduce borrowings, which were a net
Pounds 70.6m at the halfway stage in June, giving gearing of 88 per cent.
Mr Henry Sweetbaum, chairman, said: 'The group's level of debt has been a
constraint on its ability to expand.
'As a result of the rights issue, Wickes will have the financial resources
to take advantage of the attractive opportunities currently available at
this stage of the economic cycle.'
The 2-for-9 issue of 67.9m new shares at 88p each is fully underwritten by
SG Warburg and SG Warburg Securities is the broker.
In the current year the company plans to open 18 stores at an average cost
of Pounds 600,000.
Mr Sweetbaum said the company had taken over the leases on about six or
seven sites of the loss-making Do It All chain, which is a joint venture
between WH Smith and Boots, and a similar number from Texas, part of
Ladbrokes.
Wickes is also planning further expansion of the 36 stores in Belgium,
France and the Netherlands, as well as accelerating the expansion of
Builders Mate, the discount builders merchant.
Mr Sweetbaum believes that the DIY market in the UK is not yet 'saturated'.
He thought the market could 'easily support' 150 Wickes stores, compared
with the current 77.
There was also room for more than 200 Builders Mate stores.
COMMENT
Tactical, if a little tactless, was the verdict on Wickes' latest call on
its investors and the shares closed down 4p at 102p. Wickes only returned to
the dividend list two weeks ago after a two-year absence while management
tackled its disastrous foray into the timber market. Rights issues funded
both the foray and the subsequent rescue. Not surprisingly, the market
wonders how management will cope with the strain of the ambitious programme
at home and abroad. Against this, the funds will go to Wickes' core stores
business, which has been profitable throughout the recession, and the new
trade business, Builders Mate, which is breaking even. Pre-tax profit
forecasts have been revised upwards by Pounds 1m to about Pounds 19m, but
show earnings diluted at 4.2p (4.3p) and a fairly demanding multiple of 24.
