FT  03 AUG 93 / Taiwan charts uncertain course over China: Divisions widen
between business seeking closer ties with the mainland and cautious
political groups
TENSIONS are emerging between the Mainland Affairs Council, responsible for
charting Taiwan's policy towards Beijing, and the unofficial group
established to conduct negotiations with China.
'We have our foot on the brake, while the Straits Exchange Foundation has
its on the accelerator,' says Mr William Li, director of the MAC.
His comment reflects broader divisions in the community - between business
which, by and large, wants closer ties forged across the Taiwan Strait and
political groups, such as the opposition Democratic Progressive party, which
counsel against a further slide into China's embrace.
Just a few months after historic talks in Singapore in April between Mr C F
Koo, the millionaire head of the SEF, and his Chinese counterpart, Mr Wang
Daohan of the Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Strait (Arats),
Taiwan appears like a startled rabbit caught in a car's headlights,
uncertain which way to move.
For the moment, Taipei is unlikely to make further gestures in the direction
of Beijing, beyond maintaining the dialogue started in April.
Mr Jason Hu, chief government spokesman, says a Beijing proposal that Taiwan
allow direct trade and travel should be treated with caution. 'These are
some of the final chips in our hands,' he says. 'Why play them now?'
Business, on the other hand, is becoming restless, asking why it should be
subjected to the added cost and inconvenience of channelling its dealings
with the mainland through third parties, namely Hong Kong. The SEF, set up
in February 1991 as the unofficial intermediary between Beijing and Taipei
as neither recognises the other, has become a conduit for these concerns.
Mr Ching Ping Lee, SEF deputy director, notes that since an absolute ban on
visits by Taiwanese to the mainland was lifted in November 1987, trade has
soared. Exports are expected to total USDollars 9bn (Pounds 6bn) this year,
and direct utilised investment exceeds USDollars 2bn, with many times that
figure committed to new projects. Mr Ching estimates that about 12,000
Taiwanese companies are represented in China.
He criticises the MAC's 'go-slow policy' as impractical, and says his body
favours more frequent contact with Beijing and at a higher level.
'Our aim is to reduce tensions and build up mutual trust,' says Mr Ching,
who visited the Chinese capital in June for talks following the Wang-Koo
Singapore meeting.
Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui set the tone for the latest phase in an
intriguing relationship when he said in May that it was important to
maintain peace in the Taiwan Strait, encourage close interaction across the
divide and build mutual trust. 'To go from mutual trust to mutual
recognition that each government is a legitimate entity would be a major
advance,' he added.
Beijing, for its part, seems anxious to force the pace. Since elections last
year brought the independence-committed Democratic Progressive party within
sight of gaining power in a democratising Taiwan, the Chinese have
accelerated efforts to engage the Taiwanese in discussions about the future.
Opinion polls, which show that more than 20 per cent of Taiwanese favour
independence from the mainland (up from the usual 10-12 per cent), appear to
have concentrated minds in Beijing, where leaders had traditionally
maintained there was plenty of time to bring about reunification. For the
moment, it seems, the political tide in Taiwan is running against Beijing;
although the meshing of economies across the Taiwan Strait provides a
powerful countervailing force.
Officials of the DPP, which gained 51 out of 161 seats in Taiwan's
legislature with 31 per cent of the popular vote in the recent election, are
adamant reunification is out of the question. They want a plebiscite to
allow Taiwanese to pronounce on their future.
Mr Chiou Jen, the DPP's deputy secretary-general, cautions against the
Wang-Koo talks, 'not because China has a bad attitude, but simply because no
consensus exists in Taiwan in support of those talks'.
Mr Chiou is correct when he talks about lack of consensus within the ruling
Kuomintang, which clings to the notion that its remains the legitimate
government of all China. Some KMT members, however, make little secret of
their sympathies for the independence option espoused by the DPP.
The MAC, meanwhile, has been cast in the role of buffer in what could become
an acrimonious and divisive debate. Mr Li insists any step towards a 'united
China' must be gradual. He is candid about the political dangers. 'If we go
too fast the government may lose the next election,' he says.
He believes that Mr Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, is a barrier to
swift progress because of his outdated ideas about reunification. Mr Deng
has talked about a 'one China, two systems' special administrative region
solution for the Taiwan issue, similar to the one proposed for Hong Kong.
Among conditions laid down by Taiwan for progress in the Wang-Koo process
are that Beijing renounces the military option to bring about reunification,
and that it refrains from barring Taipei's entry to international
organisations. Taiwan is presently engaged in a 'noisy reconnaissance,' as
one western official put it, to gain entry to the United Nations.
The MAC and other elements of Taiwan's propaganda machine have taken to
issuing warnings about the dangers to the local economy of becoming too
dependent on the mainland.
A recent MAC publication warned that 'with the rapid increase in Taiwan
enterprises investing across the Taiwan Strait. . . the threat that the
local industrial sector will be hollowed out looms large.' It cited a study
which showed that, in 1986, manufacturing accounted for 39.7 per cent of GDP
while the service sector's share was 46.82 per cent. By the second quarter
of 1992, manufacturing had shrunk to 33.66 per cent against 54 per cent for
services.
The propaganda also falls back on the perceived evils of communism.
'Communist Chinese leaders love to boast that what they practise on the
mainland is socialism with Chinese characteristics,' wrote one commentator
recently. 'We in Taiwan sincerely hope there will be more and more Chinese
characteristics, and less and less socialism on the Chinese mainland.'
