FT  12 AUG 93 / FT-SE 100 breaks 3,000 level for first time: Anticipation of
rate cuts boosts markets
THE FT-SE 100 index, the London stock market's favourite method of measuring
its daily performance, broke through the 3,000 level for the first time
yesterday amid increasing speculation that UK base rates would be cut,
boosting the performance of Britain's industrial and commercial companies.
The index, which tracks the share prices of the top 100 British companies by
market capitalisation, rose 34.5 points yesterday to close at 3,006.1.
The strong performance, which shrugged aside concerns in British industry
about the weakness of the recovery, was accompanied by a rise in UK bond
prices and a record high for equities in the French stock market.
All of these markets have rallied powerfully in the wake of the recent
widening of the fluctuation bands in the European exchange rate mechanism as
investors take the view that European governments, including Britain's, will
cut interest rates in an attempt to boost their economies.
Although most European countries have left their interest rates unchanged
since the reform of the ERM, France yesterday triggered renewed enthusiasm
in British and French equity markets by cutting the cost of overnight
lending to commercial banks by  1/2 a percentage point to 9.25 per cent.
The move was interpreted by some financial market analysts as modest,
because France has not reduced its official interest rates since the ERM
reform.
But the franc appreciated against the D-Mark in the wake of yesterday's
easing in monetary policy, suggesting that the French central bank may have
room to cut interest rates again in the near future.
In London, the French move was seen as another indication that the UK
authorities could cut rates later this year without adversely affecting the
pound. This week the Bank of England raised hopes that rates could be cut by
saying the prospect of a rise in inflation was very low.
Yesterday's advance in the London stock market followed a series of rallies
which have already pushed equity prices up by about 2.5 per cent this month.
Overall, the index has risen by some 26 per cent since sterling left the ERM
on September 16.
The latest surge in the FT-SE 100 has mainly been led by financial, property
and consumer stocks, all of which could benefit if base rates were cut from
their current level of 6 per cent.
The property and stores sectors have also moved up sharply, and there has
been a significant recovery in construction, engineering and motor stocks
which stand to benefit quickly from overall economic improvement.
The leading performers, however, have been shares in the merchant banking
sector which have outperformed the equity market by nearly 12 per cent this
month. Increased trading in securities, and the prospect of lower interest
rates, have led investors to believe that this sector will enjoy improved
profitability.
In France, the CAC-40 share index rose 27.61 points, or 1.29 per cent, to
finish at an all-time high of 2,167.39. The Paris bourse has already surged
some 3.9 per cent since the ERM reform. But the rise follows a string of
poor sales figures announced by companies for the first half of this year,
and some analysts have suggested that the rise in equity prices may be too
optimistic.
In New York, the Dow Jones Industrial Average also closed at a record high
of 3,585.35, up 10.62 points, as US equities edged higher on the back of
tumbling bond yields.
Overnight rate cut in France, Page 2
Lex, Page 14
Government bonds, Page 21
Currencies, Page 23
World stocks, Page 29
London stocks, Page 32
