FT  18 NOV 93 / Survey of China (41): High price of entry -
Telecommunications market
FOREIGN manufacturers are waging an intense battle to win a greater share of
China's booming multibillion dollar telecommunications market.
'There is fierce competition, because the stakes are so high,' says a
western business executive involved in telecommunications. 'China could buy
more phones than many countries combined.'
China has about 17m phone lines and about 1.6 phones for every 100 people.
This compares with about 60 phones per 100 in the US. Beijing's goal is to
have 100m lines in operation by 2000.
The focal point of the competition is China's public switching sector. The
government is expanding and modernising its telephone exchanges by
installing 'stored program computers' (SPCs) to replace the older
electro-mechanical equipment to do the switching.
The leading manufacturers in this market are Alcatel, Ericsson, Northern
Telecom, Siemens, NEC, Fujitsu and AT&amp;T. However, the price for entry into
the market is high. Companies have been told that to manufacture switching
equipment, they must also make semiconductors in China, according to western
businessmen.
'The Chinese want semiconductor lines - it's the basis of everything from
modern weapons to computers,' a western diplomat says. 'It's more important
than the internal combustion engine was, 100 years ago. And it's extremely
expensive to set up.'
Most manufacturers have little choice. To sell their array of other
communications equipment, they must be in the switching market, the diplomat
adds.
Nearly all of the western telecommunications manufacturers in China have
established, or are in the process of establishing, micro-chip production
plants.
Siemens has a chip factory in Wuxi near Shanghai, Alcatel has a similar
arrangement with its Chinese joint venture partner in Shanghai, and the
Japanese multinational NEC produces semiconductors at the state-run Capital
Iron &amp; Steel plant in Beijing.
AT&amp;T is also believed to have reached agreement to set up semi-conductor
operations to support the manufacture of its planned switching joint
ventures in Qingdao, a port in north-east China, and Chengdu, the capital of
Sichuan. These joint ventures are expected to begin operation in 1995.
Northern Telecom has nearly concluded negotiations to make switching
equipment in Shunde in Guangdong province and expects to begin production of
switches by the end of this year or early 1994. It will use semiconductors
manufactured by two other joint ventures which the Canadian giant is
establishing in Shanghai.
Northern Telecom has also recently won Dollars 159m of contracts to sell
switching equipment to the provinces of Henan, Jiangxi, Shaanxi, and Yunnan.
Northern Telecom's sales follows a period when the State Council initially
allowed only three multinationals to form Sino-foreign joint ventures to
manufacture switching equipment. These were Alcatel affiliate, Shanghai
Bell, a Beijing-based Siemens joint venture, and an NEC company in Tianjin.
Other multinationals were frozen out, but under pressure from Washington and
other companies, industry sources said the Chinese Ministry of Posts and
Telecommunications agreed to ease its restrictions on the lucrative
switching market.
Of the foreign telecom companies, Alcatel is the market leader in the
switching business with about 30 per cent of the market; Siemens has
approximately 15 to 20 per cent, NEC a smaller share, with the rest split
among other foreign manufacturers, say industry sources.
Alcatel is the most aggressive. Its joint venture with Shanghai Bell has
tripled its design capacity to produce more than 2m lines last year  - and
Alcatel has sold an additional 2m lines direct to local branches of the
Ministry of Posts and Telecommunication since the 1980s.
Siemens also plans to dramatically increase its production capacity from
1.5m lines this year to 3m by 1995 at its Beijing operation. Last year, the
joint venture produced 370,000 lines.
Meanwhile, Ericsson plans to install 1.8m lines in Guangdong over the next
few years.
Apart from switching equipment, demand for the latest technology in optical
fibre networks to transport speech or data is also acute, western
businessmen say. The government recently had tenders for large long-distance
optical fibre networks crisscrossing the country.
'China is developing so fast that it wants to go in at the highest level,
rather than spend years with older equipment,' says a western businessman.
'The Chinese weren't buying optical fibre equipment in 1988 and '89. Now,
they are poised to take advantage of the latest technology.'
Because of the country's telephone shortage, mobile phones and radio pagers
have proliferated wildly in an unregulated atmosphere, often with network
frequencies interfering with each other. To impose more order on the market,
retain its monopoly and cash in on the huge consumer demand for pagers and
other datacommunication services, the Ministry of Posts and
Telecommunications recently issued new licensing regulations.
Foreign manufacturers welcomed the decision, saying it would help stop the
production of poor quality and counterfeit pagers.
