FT  09 JUN 93 / Great Portland joins rights issue wave
GREAT Portland Estates yesterday announced a Pounds 95m rights issue, making
it the latest addition to the ranks of property companies raising money from
the equity market.
The move takes the total raised by property groups this year to more than
Pounds 900m. They have taken advantage of a revival in their share prices to
repair their balance sheets and fund acquisitions.
The rights issue was accompanied by the announcement of a 16 per cent fall
in net asset value per share from 212p to 178p, and of a rise in pre-tax
profits to Pounds 34m from Pounds 20.3m, as restated under the new financial
reporting standard FRS3.
The company also projected a cut in its dividend to 8p in 1994, from 10p
this time. The company's cash flow is expected to be constrained by the
expiry of some of its leases in the next few years.
The rights issue was welcomed by the stock market which pushed the shares up
8p to 197p. It shrugged off the announcement of the dividend cut next year,
which had been foreshadowed last November. Mr Richard Peskin, chairman, was
cautiously optimistic about the property market. 'The recovery in the
economy is proving to be patchy and fragile but, after the darkest period
for property since the second world war, I think that, at long last, we are
beginning to see some light.'
Great Portland justified the rights issue by arguing that its gearing, which
had risen from 75 to 91 per cent, might otherwise constrain it from making
acquisitions. It said it was in discussions concerning potential property
deals which could amount to some Pounds 70m.
It also announced the redevelopment of Portland Court, an 80,000 sq ft
office building in Great Portland Street at a cost of Pounds 20m.
The rights issue, which is on a one-for-four basis at 150p a share, was
underwritten by Baring Brothers. An extraordinary general meeting will be
held on July 2 to approve an increase in the company's authorised share
capital.
Great Portland has become one of the first property companies to implement
FRS3, which requires companies to include profits and losses from the sale
of investment properties in arriving at earnings per share.
Rental income rose by 19 per cent to Pounds 83.8m. The investment portfolio
was written down by 9 per cent to Pounds 823.4m. Earnings per share rose to
11.7p compared with 4.8p for 1992, as restated under FRS3. A maintained
final dividend of 6.6p makes a total for the 12 months of 10p.
Lex, Page 22
