FT  27 FEB 93 / Pit consortium seeks investor
THE miners' consortium which last year leased Monktonhall colliery near
Edinburgh from British Coal is to seek a partner or outside investor to
provide finance to overcome funding problems.
Monktonhall Mineworkers is owned by its 160 employees, who have invested
Pounds 10,000 each in the company. It blamed the need for additional finance
on a three-month delay in starting production. It wants to buy equipment to
develop a second coalface.
The colliery, closed by British Coal in 1987, resumed production at the end
of last year. It has a contract to supply 87,000 tonnes of domestic coal to
British Coal and is fulfilling a trial order for 12,000 tonnes of power
station coal for ScottishPower.
Mr Jackie Aitchison, Monktonhall chairman, said the company was continuing
to operate thanks to the support of its bank, Bank of Scotland, and 'the
understanding of our suppliers'.
It had decided to ask Price Waterhouse, its financial adviser, to gauge the
level of interest from potential partners and investors.
Monktonhall hopes that either a financial institution or a company involved
in the coal industry will step in.
The consortium failed to attract investment from outside institutions or
public funding agencies last year and is financed entirely by the Pounds
1.6m subscriptions of the miners, many of whom took out loans to buy their
shares. Mr Aitchison said it was receiving no government or European
Community subsidy.
Last December Mr Jim Parker, the mining engineer who led the consortium and
put together its business plan, resigned as managing director after a
disagreement with other members of the consortium.
Council leaders from mining areas yesterday urged the government to retain
all 31 pits threatened with closure when it announces its expected rescue
package next month.
Chief executives and councillors from 14 district councils in England and
Wales also pressed British Coal to extend the special redundancy package
beyond the deadline of March 31.
