FT  03 JUL 93 / Lawyer wants inquiry into bribery allegations: The barrister
 -This week claim, counter-claim and hoax over the Asil Nadir affair
competed for attention in parliament and the press. FT reporters look at the
latest twists in an increasingly bizarre saga
MR ANTHONY Scrivener QC, the barrister who acted for Mr Asil Nadir,
yesterday called for an independent inquiry into allegations of attempts to
bribe the trial judge. He also called for Sir Nicholas Lyell, the
attorney-general, to publish all correspondence from himself and Mr Michael
Mates on the subject.
In his contacts with the attorney-general Mr Scrivener raised the conduct of
the Serious Fraud Office in the handling of the allegations.
However, Mr Scrivener distanced himself from Mr Mates and rejected
suggestions that he had acted as a personal adviser to the MP in his
campaign on behalf of the fugitive businessman.
The barrister refused to go into the detail of his correspondence with Sir
Nicholas, or enlarge on his comments about the SFO, insisting that court
orders prevented this.
Yet he insisted that an inquiry had to be held into the unprecedented
allegations. He said: 'It is not every day that it is alleged your client is
conspiring with the judge. I have not known this happen in the history of
the judicial system since the time of Henry II.'
Mr Scrivener dismissed suggestions that he had acted as the driving force
behind Mr Mates's campaign, saying the MP had only checked factual details
with him and Mr Scrivener had only agreed to do that with Mr Nadir's
approval.
Mr Scrivener said: 'I am not advising Mr Mates. That is ludicrous. Mr Mates
can look after himself.' MPs often made such requests and, provided clients
agreed, their questions were answered, he said.
Mr Scrivener also denied any knowledge of the claims made by Mr Mates about
the alleged involvement of intelligence services in an attempt to undermine
Mr Nadir.
The attorney-general said yesterday no evidence implicating Mr Scrivener in
the alleged plot to pervert the course of justice was ever discovered.
Writing in a response to a letter from the barrister requesting that his
name be cleared, Sir Nicholas said no credible evidence had been produced
implicating the judge. 'I understand from the DPP's office that the same is
true of you.'
Mr Scrivener said Mr Nadir could still get a fair trial in Britain. He no
longer acted for Mr Nadir and his fees stopped after the businessman's
flight.
