FT  23 OCT 93 / How to Spend It: From costume to fancy dress - Chanel has
come full circle with its new collection of real gemstone jewellery
NOW HERE'S a thing. The founder of the house of Chanel, Coco Chanel, was
almost single-handedly responsible for investing costume jewellery with the
kind of chic that once pertained to real gems. But next week Chanel launches
a sumptuous collection of jewellery that is flamboyantly, indubitably,
gloriously real.
While today's working girls may be twisting ropes of fake pearls round their
necks and wealthy socialites are trading in their diamonds for paste, Chanel
is launching rings of peridot and amethysts and pearls, necklaces of
diamonds and platinum, of coral and hand-carved agate, of sapphires, rubies
and emeralds, rings and bracelets of diamonds, quilted gold and pearls.
There is something outrageously grandiloquent about the move, a kind of
perverse contra-cyclical decision which cocks a snook at the recession and
treats such dreary things with the contempt which Lady Bracknell reserved
for people in found in handbags.
For those of us who remember Coco Chanel as the woman who changed forever
our notions of elegance it is all quite a turn-up. She was the first truly
modern dresser, the woman who cropped her hair, who first saw the sense and
comfort in soft jersey trousers and silky cardigans, who persuaded the world
that wealth was not the prerequisite of style and that there was as much
chic in a string of false pearls worn with panache as in any number of
diamonds,
However, remember that she was not short of the real thing herself. Her
lovers were many, legendary and either very rich or very grand, or both.
Bendor, Duke of Westminster, lavished jewels of every kind on her and the
Grand Duke Dmitri (alas, not very rich and, even worse, 'looked marvellous
but there was nothing behind it all - just vodka and void') gave her the
Romanov pearls which he had saved when he fled the Russian Revolution.
Some she wore, others (notably the Romanov pearls) she copied. 'A woman,'
she said, 'should mix fake and real' and so she did, wearing Bendor's rubies
and emeralds, (as in the photograph here) with a string of fake pearls and
Verdura's enamel and paste cuffs.
Above all she was against the banal, the timid, the meagre. She hated the
jewellery-as-investment, the jewellery-as-status cast of mind, the vulgarity
of huge solitaires set in rings ('One might as well tie a cheque around
one's neck'). What she valued, above all, was panache.
In her own person - in the photograph here - her whole philosophy can be
seen. Be bold, be adventurous, was her motto. Price is beside the point and
so is the matter of whether it is real or fake - what really counts is the
overall decorative, aesthetic effect.
And here, of course, is the point of the new designs. They may be real, they
may cost a small ransom, but it is the brilliance of the designs, the skill
with which they are made and the way they chime with the tradition of the
House of Chanel which is their raison d'etre - not the status they might
confer upon their owner.
House of Chanel tradition has it that in the days of boom and opulence you
sell glass gewgaws 'because they are devoid of arrogance in an epoch of too
easy luxe,' as Mlle. Chanel put it to The New Yorker magazine. When times
get hard you do as Mlle. Chanel did when the pre-war depression reached its
nadir - you decide that real jewels are fashionable again and have them
glinting in your windows while everybody else is still brooding over bottom
lines.
The House is already richly endowed with costume jewellery - its pearl and
gilt earrings, its chains of gilt and pearls, its gilt crosses and watches
have long been the staple of jet-set dressing. Now faithful fans with the
bank-notes to match can do as Coco Chanel herself did and mix the real with
the fake.
The way to wear these new jewels then, for the lucky few who can afford
them, is to wear them with the utmost panache. Mix them with strings of fake
pearls, with great over-sized brooches of paste and gilt, with punchy
crosses and glittering pins. When you choose the costume jewellery remember
Coco Chanel's adage: 'When you make imitation jewellery, you always make it
bigger.' As Miss Piggy, glamour-girl of the Muppets, said in another
context: ''Less is more,' is the silliest thing I have ever heard. Less is
always less.' And if you cannot afford them, console yourself with the
thought that these days even Barbara Cartland has to wear fake because real
diamonds do not look good on television.
Some of the pieces in this new collection are precise renditions of pieces
that Mlle. Chanel designed herself in the 1930s - these are mainly the
diamond pieces which have been faithfully reproduced. Then there are precise
copies of her own personal jewellery such as the ring shown here. Yet
others, such as the coral and pearl necklace photographed here, echo
original designs but, for reasons of cost, are made up out of different
materials.
There is also an entirely new collection which takes its inspiration from
the history and spirit of the House. The bracelets and rings, for instance,
use the quilting theme so closely associated with Chanel's handbags, using
platinum, diamonds and pearls to created the quilted effect.
Prices start at the equivalent of about Pounds 1,000 and go on up to Pounds
300,000 for the most expensive. For the moment the collection is available
only at Chanel, 7 Place Vendome, Paris 1 and 40 Avenue Montaigne, Paris 8.
Anybody who can afford the jewellery, reasons Chanel, can afford the flight
to Paris . . .
