FT  13 FEB 93 / Gene therapy for an industry's health: Clive Cookson on UK
efforts in a crucial area of research
Government, industry and scientists in the UK are scrambling to mobilise the
country's resources in the international race to exploit the astonishingly
rapid pace of genetic research.
At stake is the future of the only manufacturing sector in which the UK is
still an undisputed world leader - pharmaceuticals. Its success has been
based firmly on conventional chemistry. But a different industry will emerge
over the next 20 years, based on genetics and aiming directly at the
ultimate cause of disease - the genes that give instructions for every
living process.
'Our historical success with a chemistry-driven pharmaceutical industry does
not mean we will automatically succeed in the biology-driven industry of the
future,' warns Dr David Owen, industrial collaboration director at the
government's Medical Research Council.
Every week, the world's molecular biologists announce the discovery of new
genes associated with human disease. They are not only identifying the
precise molecular causes of classic inherited disorders, such as cystic
fibrosis, but are also finding unexpected evidence for the way particular
genes trigger the most widespread illnesses of modern society, includ-ing
forms of cancer and heart disease.
Scientists have already identified several thousand of the estimated 100,000
genes that make up the whole human genetic blueprint and, working through a
loosely co-ordinated international effort known as the Human Genome Project,
they expect to have decoded the entire 'handbook of man' within 10 years.
At the same time, other scientists are rapidly developing ways to manipulate
the newly discovered genes. More than 20 clinical trials have started within
the last two years, mostly in the US. Some involve 'gene therapy' - giving
patients perfect copies of defective genes. Others are testing 'anti-sense
therapy', a bizarrely named technique for switching off malfunctioning
genes. Target diseases range from rare inherited blood disorders to cancer.
Leaders of UK biomedical research such as Sir Walter Bodmer, director of the
Imperial Cancer Research Fund, insist that the country's basic genetic
science still matches the best in the world. But its application through
human gene therapy is lagging two to three years behind the US.
Professor William Stewart, the government's chief scientific adviser, sees
human gene research as the most important of all the scientific issues
facing the UK. 'It will make a big impact on improving health care, quality
of life and industrial competitiveness,' he says. Over the last month he has
orchestrated a series of moves, in concert with leading scientists and the
pharmaceutical industry, to improve the UK position:
A new Advisory Committee for Human Genome Research will draw up a national
strategy. Its members include research directors of the four largest
UK-based drug companies (Glaxo, SmithKline Beecham, Imperial Chemical
Industries and Wellcome).
The Department of Health has approved the first UK gene therapy trial;
doctors at Great Ormond Street Hospital in London will soon inject
genetically engineered bone marrow cells into a child suffering from a rare
immune disease. Next week the department is expected to announce permanent
arrangements to supervise gene therapy; until now these have been in the
hands of a temporary committee chaired by Sir Cecil Clothier.
The allocation of next year's government science budget includes several
million pounds more for genetic research. The Pounds 25m Clinical Sciences
Centre which the Medical Research Council is building at the Hammersmith
Hospital will become an important centre for gene therapy.
The UK is bidding to bring the proposed European Bioinformatics Institute to
Cambridge - the first instance for many years of the UK government setting
out to win an international science facility. EBI will provide computerised
information about human and animal genes to researchers throughout Europe.
Germany is competing to host EBI in Heidelberg.
The government cannot afford to appear overtly nationalistic in its EBI
campaign, for fear of offending the other 14 European nations that will pay
a total of Pounds 5m a year to fund the institute. But Dr Richard Sykes,
Glaxo research director, has no doubts about its potential benefits: 'EBI
will send a positive message to young scientists in the UK and will create
excitement and enthusiasm,' he says.
One advantage which Britain enjoys in increasing support for genetic science
is the new wealth of the Wellcome Trust, the world's richest medical
charity, after last year's sale of its majority stake in Wellcome, the drug
company. That doubled the trust's income to more than Pounds 200m a year -
almost as much as the state-funded MRC. Dr Bridget Ogilvie, the trust's
director, has moved fast to help the MRC build genetic research facilities.
However there is nothing in the UK to match the hundreds of millions of
venture capital dollars pouring into dozens of new US companies established
to commercialise genome research and genetic medicine. The MRC struggled
hard to attract enough seed funding to start one small company to exploit
its gene therapy technology; Therexsys, as it is called, will apply the
technology 'in a number of disease areas including cancer, cardiovascular
and inflammation'.
Besides funding, an important obstacle to the exploitation of genetic
research in the UK is the restrictive attitude taken by overseas companies
to licensing out patents for vital techniques. The best known case is PCR,
the gene-copying technology invented by Cetus in the US and bought by Roche
of Switzerland for Dollars 300m.
'At present progress is being held up in critical areas, where diagnosis is
being impeded,' says Dr Peter Doyle, ICI research director.
Dr Sykes agrees: 'The only thing some biotechnology companies have is their
intellectual property so they patent everything in sight. That inhibits
research.'
