FT  14 DEC 93 / UK Company News: Coda plans listing in new year - Float
proceeds of up to Pounds 25m will be used for R&amp;D and expansion
Coda, the Harrogate-based accountancy software designer for standard,
mid-range computers, is to seek a main market listing early next year to
raise up to Pounds 25m.
The bulk of the money will go towards speeding up research and development
of new products, and expansion in the US, EU and Asia-Pacific.
Coda's latest results, published yesterday, showed pre-tax profits of Pounds
3.75m at the October year-end, a rise of 16 per cent. Turnover rose 31 per
cent to Pounds 23.5m.
Mr Rodney Potts, chairman, who founded Coda with two friends in 1979, said
expansion so far had been financed by growth. NatWest Markets, the sole
outside investor - but with only 7 per cent of equity - was not pressing for
an exit.
However, flotation will also help fund an employee share ownership programme
to give a stake in the business to as many of Coda's 300 staff who want it.
Since the company trades on selling accountancy packages designed by
accountants to accountants, Mr Potts sees wider share ownership as an
important potential motivator in a competitive market.
County NatWest Ventures bought in eight years ago, when Mr Potts and Mr
Chris Lennox, technical director, needed to buy out their co-founder, who
wanted to leave.
Coda concentrates exclusively on accounting software, functioning
independently of hardware manufacturers but using open systems which can run
on IBM, Digital or Hewlett-Packard computers, as well as interfacing with
popular relational databases.
Its integrated accounting system runs in more than 1,000 companies in 40
countries. Customers include P&amp;O, Reckitt &amp; Colman, TDK, Caterpillar, Sears,
Nedlloyd and Superdrug.
Business is also growing for accountancy software run on personal computers
linked to mainframes or joined into local area networks.
This accounted for nearly Pounds 1.5m of last year's sales.
North American sales, where Coda has eight offices, were Dollars 16m (Pounds
10.7m), ahead more than 40 per cent. Its Asia-Pacific headquarters is in
Singapore with branches in Australia, Hong Kong and New Zealand.
The remaining nine offices are in Europe, where technical obstacles have
included different accounting standards and tax regimes, automatic language
translation and the need for bigger entry fields in Italy to get all the
figures in.
As part of going public, Mr Colin Gaskell, chief executive of 600 Group, and
Mr David Eggleton, until 1990 head of corporate information systems for BP,
have joined Coda as non-executive directors.
