FT  08 JAN 93 / Property: Markets for the brave - Global opportunities for
investors
Where in the world should investors buy property? Even if there is an
improvement this year on the past 12 months, the search for new
opportunities is strictly for the brave.
There is no guarantee that the first into the property recession will be the
first out. The severity of the property downturns in the US and UK - which
entered the downturn well before Japan and continental Europe - is so bad
that recovery is likely to be slow and halting.
Less mature markets also promise a rocky ride. The emerging markets of
central and eastern Europe are riven by political and legislative
difficulties and even the fast-growing markets of south-east Asia are
suffering from oversupply.
While the weaknesses of the large industrialised economies are the main
factors contributing to this malaise, there are other reasons why most
markets are suffering together.
The increasingly global flow of funds in the 1980s allowed banks and
investors to export property booms from one market to another. At the same
time, the rapid expansion of the financial services industry set off periods
of heady construction in New York, Tokyo and London.
The result is that the world's biggest cities are full of empty offices.
More than a fifth of all office blocks in the City of London, Sydney,
Melbourne and Perth and the US are empty. Paris is heading towards a vacancy
rate of 10 per cent. In Germany, and even Japan, which have had the lowest
vacancy rates in the world, rates are creeping up significantly.
Rising interest rates towards the end of 1989 dried up liquidity and burst
the bubble, leaving an oversupply of buildings, rapidly falling prices, a
shortage of capital and credit and a near-crisis in the banking industry,
which had lent heavily to the sector.
The severity of these problems defies any easy solution. Falling interest
rates in Japan and the US have not stopped the rot. Much of Europe does not
even have the panacea of cheap money: tight monetary policy in Germany, the
result of the huge cost of reconstructing east Germany, has kept interest
rates high across most of the European Community. Indeed, with continental
markets in decline after the good times of the past decade, Europe has now
fallen out of favour with prospective investors.
Between 1985 and 1990, rents in good quality property in leading European
cities rose by an average of 14.4 per cent annually and capital values by
17.8 per cent a year, according to Jones Lang Wootton, chartered surveyor.
The growth prospects proffered by the single European market - which came
into effect at the start of this month - and the gradual lifting of
investment restrictions in recent years across the continent, has encouraged
companies and investors to snap up offices across Europe.
Average capital values across continental Europe have already fallen by 23
per cent from their peak in 1991, says Jones Lang Wootton, and there is
every sign that the decline will continue. Only Hamburg posted any rise in
rents in 1992.
Spain is enduring the steepest fall in values in the EC, apart from the UK.
Capital values of prime offices have fallen by about 30 per cent in the past
year in Barcelona and by 28 per cent in Madrid over the same period.
In Milan, office values have fallen by a fifth. However relatively modest
gearing has given the Milan market some resilience.
France probably provides the greatest cause for concern. Banks and insurance
companies are closing ranks in an attempt to reduce the damage from the up
to FFr80bn (Pounds 9.6bn) of estimated doubtful debts in their property loan
portfolios.
The French government has proposed measures such as granting tax advantages
and deferment of stamp duty to help the industry. However, the government is
reluctant to be seen to be bailing out speculators and its half-hearted
measures are unlikely to stabilise the market given the large supply of new
office space that is due to come onto the market this year.
Recession and high interest rates have sent much of the German market into
reverse. The reconstruction of eastern Germany, like other markets in
central and eastern Europe, is being held back by problems of land
restitution. Economic hardship and the difficulties in imposing a market
structure after decades of communist rule are additional difficulties in
Hungary, Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovakia.
Opinions differ about the UK, the worst-hit market in Europe. In spite of
severe structural problems of oversupply and weak demand, a small but
growing number of investors believe that the decline of the past three years
has run its course. 'This is a good time to buy,' says Mr Gerald Blundell of
Jones Lang Wootton. 'This year will be the turning point.'
Similar arguments are promoted by optimists in Australia and the US.
Australian real estate represents 'an excellent countercyclical play,'
according to Baillieu Knight Frank Research, property advisers.
Some property specialists also believe that US markets, where office values
have fallen by more than 50 per cent in the past four years, are through the
worst. 'Although there is no sign of improvement yet there are growing signs
that we are at the bottom,' says Mr Sol Rabin, a partner of TCW Realty
Advisers.
The bull case for US property is that new construction has ground to a halt
and recovery is gathering pace. For all that, it usually takes several years
of growth before companies take new premises. And the construction peak of
the 1980s will take years to work through: some 40 per cent of buildings in
the US were built in the past 10 years. Moreover, lower interest rates have
not yet encouraged a resurgence of investment, which has fallen from Dollars
21bn in 1988 to about Dollars 3bn in 1992, says Mr Rabin.
An aspiring investor would do well to examine the property markets of Asia,
which in spite of oversupply problems are generally supported by robust
economic growth, with the notable exception of Japan. 'Asia still continues
to be one of the brightest areas in the world,' says Mr Alan Hill of Jones
Lang Wootton.
Malaysia has attracted much attention from investors. Factors such as
political stability, a shortage of office space, and its bid to hold the
1998 Commonwealth Games have led to rising values and the launch of big
developments.
But there are also many risks in Asia. Thailand and Hong Kong are dogged by
political uncertainty; Singapore has a large oversupply of office space,
which has resulted in a fall in excess of 20 per cent in rents since the end
of 1991.
Another concern is that Japanese banks and investors, which have supplied
much of the capital for investments in the region, have withdrawn, forced in
large part by severe problems in their domestic property market. Values have
fallen by 30-40 per cent in Tokyo; non-performing loans are estimated to be
in the order of Y30-Y50 trillion.
The property losses suffered by many big banks are perhaps the most worrying
consideration for would-be investors. This is because property prices are
heavily influenced by the availability of credit. Although investors may be
encouraged by the possibility of buying near the bottom of the cycle,
caution is likely to remain the watchword in 1993.
