FT  02 OCT 93 / The Labour Party Conference: Support for referendum on
electoral reform
CONFERENCE yesterday gave hesitant backing to the proposal by Mr John Smith
that the next Labour government should hold a referendum on changing the
first-past-the-post system for elections to the House of Commons.
Initially delegates refused to accept the verdict of Mr Tony Clarke, the
conference chairman, that a resolution supporting the referendum had been
carried on a show of hands.
To the relief of the party leadership, a card vote resulted in the motion
being approved by just over 3 percentage points - 45.491 to 42.021.
The extent of the divisions in the party on the issue was underlined in a
further vote when a motion calling for the continuance of the
first-past-the-post system was approved by 44.606 per cent to 35.225 per
cent.
That motion had been sponsored by the GMB union, which earlier in the week
had led the fight against one-member-one-vote.
A fiercely argued debate, which spilled over from Thursday, was dominated by
warnings by constituency party delegates that the Liberal Democrats and
other minority parties would be the main beneficiaries of a switch to
proportional representation.
Strongly disputing this view Mr John McAllion, MP for Dundee East, argued
that for 14 years the first-past-the-post system had resulted in 'a Tory
minority imposing its will on a permanent anti-Tory majority in Britain'.
He failed to convince Ms Marie Harris from the Cathcart division of Glasgow,
who maintained that talk of changing the electoral system was 'at best
premature and at worst a waste of time'.
Proportional representation would not be the issue at the next general
election, she said, but jobs, housing, education, health and social
services.
Mr Larry Whitty, the party's general secretary, said it would be unwise to
introduce substantial changes to the electoral system without the widespread
consultation which a referendum would make possible.
The resolution backing the referendum also endorsed recommendations made by
the Plant commission advocating the use of the regional list system of
proportional representation for an elected second chamber to replace the
House of Lords, and for elections to the European parliament.
A statement by the party's National Executive which also committed a future
Labour government to a referendum was approved on a show of hands.
