FT  14 AUG 93 / Finance and The Family: Don't take college life for granted
 -Education is an expensive business. Bethan Hutton guides new students
through the financial maze
EVERY NEW student is bombarded with offers of bank accounts, but there is
more to student finance than cashcards and overdraft limits.
Students these days have to juggle grants, parental contributions and loans,
as well as any sponsorship they are lucky enough to get. Income tax can
complicate the picture, while some unwary students can end up paying council
tax.
A bank account is still a first-year student's most urgent requirement. If
you are looking for incentives, the free gifts available this year range
from the TSB's four cinema tickets, a clutch of discount vouchers and a free
driving lesson, to a more straightforward Pounds 25 cash credit from
NatWest. The Royal Bank of Scotland will give you Pounds 10, Lloyds is
offering a free student rail card, and Barclays has a Pounds 10 Our Price
music voucher. Midland will credit Pounds 25 to accounts opened before
September 30, and Pounds 15 after that. The Bank of Scotland has declared a
policy of 'no hype, no bribes, just better banking'.
Most now insist on receiving your grant or maintenance cheque before handing
over the bribe, so the days of doing the rounds and collecting every freebie
appear to be over.
All the big clearing banks offer students interest-free overdrafts up to
Pounds 400, together with cash card, debit card and cheque book - but that
does not mean all the accounts are the same.
The Royal Bank of Scotland's Pounds 400 overdraft is free only for the first
year of study; after that interest is charged at 1 per cent over the base
rate. At the other main banks, overdrafts up to Pounds 400 remain free as
long as you are still studying. NatWest will increase the free overdraft
limit to Pounds 500 for your final year.
If you think you are about to exceed your arranged limit, get your bank's
agreement before you do. The interest charged on unauthorised overdrafts is
very high, and you may also have to pay for bounced cheques and letters
informing you of your overdraft.
First-year students who already have a bank account should check whether
their bank will extend its free gifts and special terms to existing
customers. If not, it could be worth opening another account elsewhere.
The Co-operative Bank does not treat students any differently from other
customers, which means no free overdrafts or gifts, but its ethical stance
still attracts environmentally-aware students who object to the fur trade,
tobacco companies, animal experimentation and so on.
The Halifax is one of the few building societies which welcome students as
current account customers. There are no sweeteners attached to its Maxim
student/young worker package, but it does offer an interest-free overdraft
up to Pounds 300, and interest on credit balances of 4.25 per cent gross, as
well as the usual cash/debit card and cheque book.
Most bank accounts pay interest on credit balances, but often at very low
rates. The Royal Bank of Scotland pays 0.25 per cent on balances up to
Pounds 1,000, Lloyds and Barclays pay 1 per cent gross, and NatWest pays 2
per cent. If you think you can keep your account in credit much of the time,
then the TSB or the Bank of Scotland, which pay 4 per cent gross, or the
Midland, which pays 3 per cent gross, might be a better bet.
If you have more substantial savings, perhaps accumulated from work during a
year off, a separate building society account could be worthwhile. Check
which ones offer the best rates, and if you are a non-tax payer, remember to
fill in the form to have interest paid without deduction of tax.
Your bank may offer you a credit card - Barclays even encourages you to
apply for one with an extra music voucher or other gift. A credit card can
provide useful flexibility in how and when you pay for things, but it is
also an easy way to get into debt very quickly. If you do not pay off your
balance every month you will be charged far more interest than on a student
overdraft. Make sure that any card you apply for does not charge students an
annual fee.
Student grants in the UK have been frozen since 1990, at Pounds 2,265 a year
in most parts of the country, Pounds 2,845 in London, and Pounds 1,795 for
students living with their parents. Grants are means tested, so more and
more parents are obliged to pay part of their children's maintenance, though
not all manage to do this. Students are no longer able to claim housing
benefit, or income support during vacations.
To make up the shortfall most students experience, the government operates a
student loan scheme, through the Student Loans Company, which charges very
low rates of interest: 1.2 per cent for 1993-94, down from 3.9 per cent for
1992-93. You do not start repaying the loans until the April after you
graduate. If your earnings are low, repayment can be deferred.
Final year students this year can borrow Pounds 685 in London, Pounds 585
elsewhere, and Pounds 470 if they live with their parents. Students at an
earlier stage in their courses can borrow Pounds 940 in London, Pounds 800
elsewhere, and Pounds 640 if they live with their parents. You can apply for
a loan at any time in the academic year, but you can only get one loan a
year. Applications have to be made through your university or college, which
will certify your eligibility. The loan can be paid in up to three
instalments.
If you think you are likely to need a loan - 46 per cent of students did
last year, according to a Barclays survey - it could be worthwhile applying
at the beginning of the academic year, before you really need the money, and
putting it in a deposit account to earn some interest. Only do this if you
have the willpower not to spend all the money at once, or alternatively pick
an account where you have to give a month or two's notice before making
withdrawals.
The government provides a little extra help for students in dire financial
straits, in the form of access funds administered by each university or
college. To get any money from the access fund, a student has to prove he or
she is suffering severe financial hardship, and has exhausted other sources
of funds. The amount of money available is so limited, and demand is so
high, that many institutions run out before the end of the academic year, so
access funds cannot be relied on as a last resort. Students at wealthier
institutions, such as Oxbridge colleges, may be able to tap into other
hardship funds or bursaries.
Income tax is not a subject that most students think much about, but it does
occasionally crop up. The typical student is entitled to the single person's
tax allowance of Pounds 3,445. Grants and parental contributions do not
count as taxable income, but holiday earnings and some forms of sponsorship
do. However, very few students will earn more than Pounds 3,445 on top of
their maintenance, so if you get a holiday job, ask your employer for form
P38(S), to make sure your pay will not have tax deducted at source. The
Inland Revenue has a leaflet, 'Income tax and students' (IR60), which
explains how tax can affect you.
Council tax is something else most students should not have to pay, but if
you are not careful about your living arrangements, you could end up having
to. Buildings or houses occupied solely by students are exempt from the tax,
but if you live in a bedsit, where there are other bedsits in the building
occupied by non-students, the landlord could be liable for council tax on
the tenants' behalf, and pass the cost on to you through the rent.
Also, if you share a house or flat with non-students, the property will not
be exempt. The amount of council tax due will depend on how many
non-students live there, but students are not personally exempt and it is up
to the occupants how they split up the bill: your flatmates may insist that
you pay your share. Check on the council tax position before you commit
yourself to living somewhere.
In spite of their lack of money, students are sometimes targeted by
companies selling life insurance. It is hard to see why a single student
with no dependants should need life insurance so, if you are approached by a
salesperson, treat them with the utmost scepticism.
