FT  28 MAY 93 / World Stock Markets: Foreign investors drawn into Brazilian
equities - Sao Paulo's strength
Brazil has a monthly inflation rate of nearly 30 per cent and the average
tenure of a finance minister is about two months, but its equity market is
still dancing. On Wednesday, the Sao Paulo Stock Exchange's Bovespa index
registered its twelfth consecutive gain.
The Brazilian market is up by more than 15 per cent this month in dollar
terms. Daily turnovers of Dollars 150m, once unprecedented, have been the
norm this week. Part of the spurt can be explained by the market's
favourable reaction to the appointment of Mr Fernando Henrique Cardoso, a
former senator and foreign minister, to the finance post. The Bovespa jumped
7.1 per cent last Thursday, the day after a midnight cabinet reshuffling
transformed Mr Cardoso into President Itamar Franco's fourth finance
minister since he took office in October.
Mr Cardoso, a sociologist turned politician, may not be a 'man of the
market', as traders say. But 'he has demonstrated that he is a serious
politician, and he has good common sense', in the words of Mr Ronaldo
Nogueira, a director of the Brazil Fund, a close ended fund managed by the
US investment firm Scudder, Stevens &amp; Clark.
The euphoria over Mr Cardoso's appointment only tells part of the story.
Brazil is the only Latin American market to show an overall gain this year,
according to figures released by the International Finance Corporation.
Foreigners are taking note. In April a record Dollars 1bn entered Brazilian
capital markets. This was offset by remittances of Dollars 657m, but the
Dollars 350m balance was also a record since institutional investors were
first allowed to operate directly in Brazilian markets in mid-1991.
Many analysts believe that investors have been attracted by stock prices,
about half of book value on average, considerably lower than in places such
as Argentina and Mexico.
Investors have also been attracted by favourable company results. Leading
companies have reversed dismal performances in 1991 and early 1992, often
showing dramatic improvement in the fourth quarter of 1992 and the first
quarter of 1993. Examples can be drawn from diverse sectors: Villares (a
manufacturer of elevators and steel), Brasmotor (home appliances), Duratex
(wood products and home fixtures), and Alpargatas (textiles and footwear).
Even though analysts had been predicting the profits upturn, its
confirmation provided a psychological boost - and a much-needed source of
hope for Brazil's short-term future. 'If companies are doing well in the
current environment, what will they be able to do if things get better?'
asked Mr Robert Barclay, president of Baring Securities Brasil.
There have also been some improvements in economic data. Industrial sales
are up, led by a strong recovery in the automobile sector. Trade
liberalisation was reflected in record imports of Dollars 2.43bn in April,
while robust exports ensured a healthy trade surplus of Dollars 589m. Partly
as a result, international reserves stand at a comfortable Dollars 23bn.
Analysts offer other explanations for this year's upswing. In January and
February, electric utilities helped to sustain the market. Their shares were
in the spotlight as legislation that would allow them to set higher prices
worked its way through Congress. More recently, President Franco's
determination to cut interest rates has moved money out of fixed income
investments and into equities.
Trading remains hopelessly concentrated in shares in Telebras, the
state-controlled telecommunications holding company. On Wednesday, Telebras
shares were responsible for 61.5 per cent of trading volume, a common
occurrence. Telebras accounts for nearly half of the Bovespa index.
'There is some demand for other shares,' notes Mr Julius Buchenrode,
director of investments for Banco Chase, Chase Manhattan Bank's subsidiary.
'But there is no liquidity because most companies have not issued stock in
several years.'
