FT  19 JUL 93 / Zurich tries new fix for drugs problem: Swiss initiative
legalises the use of heroin
ZURICH has never been known as a centre for bargains, but starting next year
a few selected heroin addicts will be able to get their fixes in the city
legally for only about SFr3 (Dollars 1.90) a time.
The offer is part of the city government's latest initiative, unveiled this
week, for dealing with its outsize and persistent drug problem.
The initiative is itself part of a three-year national study involving 700
addicts to provide evidence on the pros and cons of legalising hard drugs.
Switzerland has an astonishingly high rate of hard drug addiction, with an
estimated 30,000 addicts, nearly 1/2 per cent of the 6.8m population. The
phenomenon is generally attributed to disaffection from a stiflingly orderly
society and to the country's very high level of affluence.
Zurich has long been the magnet for the country's addicts, notably because
the city's socialist-green coalition government has favoured a liberal drug
policy. It has stopped the police making arrests for minor offences and
provided shelter and rehabilitation programmes for those in need. Since
1988, it has offered free needles to all to prevent the spread of Aids.
By the late 1980s, about 1,000 people were regularly congregating in
Platzspitz, the once beautiful park behind the main railway station
transformed into a ghastly scene of decline and death.
Platzspitz, or Needle Park, as it was sometimes called, also became a huge
drug dealing centre, attracting mob dealers and hundreds of cash-and-carry
customers from Zurich's rich suburbs. And, as the park was very close to the
downtown business and shopping area, muggings, robberies and petty crime in
the area soared.
The city's business community protested, eventually winning the council's
commitment to close the park early last year.
City leaders then implemented a dispersal policy, sending non-Zurich
residents back home and billeting local addicts in small hostels. But within
days, the drug scene was reforming in an adjacent run-down neighbourhood,
and efforts by the police to break it up were about as effective as trying
to scare off pigeons from London's Trafalgar Square.
In the past few months, the scene has gradually moved to an abandoned
railway station a few hundred metres from Platzspitz. Last month, police
staged a surprise inspection and discovered that the congregation there was
much the same as it used to be at Platzspitz.
Of the 931 people checked, only 178 were city residents. Most of the dealers
were former Yugoslavs, many of them asylum seekers who, under Swiss law,
cannot be expelled until their applications have been processed.
'Things have got worse,' Mr Andres Oehler, the town council's spokesman on
drug matters, admits. 'The closing of Platzspitz has not had the hoped-for
effect.'
Mr Oehler says fresh attempts will now be made to disperse the non-resident
addicts, and most of the residents will become involved in the planned new
legal drug distribution programmes.
The city itself will set up a new treatment centre where it will supply 50
addicts with not only heroin injections and cocaine impregnated cigarettes,
but also with counselling. A private charity will do the same for another
150 female addicts, most of whom earn their drug money from prostitution.
Mrs Emilie Lieberherr, head of the city's social services department, said
the aim of the programme was to help the addicts survive, stabilise their
physical and mental health and, ultimately, to get them off drugs.
Unfortunately, it will not help answer two key questions associated with
hard drug liberalisation  - whether more people would be attracted to drugs
and whether the criminal problems associated with it would abate.
Mrs Lieberherr admitted that the programme was only 'a drop in the ocean' in
trying to solve Zurich's drug problem. But for the moment, it is all the
conservative leaders of the federal government will allow.
Meanwhile, the city has finally completed cleaning up Platzspitz at a cost
of SFr1.6m, much of it spent on sifting painstakingly through the earth in
search of used needles that would be deadly for a crawling baby.
The park, which now has high grille fencing all around it, is open only from
11am to 2pm on Tuesdays and Thursdays. Drug addicts are not welcome.
