FT  20 JAN 93 / Business and the Environment: Audubon finds new nest - Karen
Zagor explains how to create a beautiful office, save money and improve the
environment
With its high ceilings, skylights, picture windows and striking centre
staircase, the foyer of the US National Audubon Society's new headquarters
seems more fitting for an advertising agency than a non-profit environmental
advocacy group.
Yet the 101-year-old terracotta building in downtown Manhattan, complete
with gargoyles and Romanesque arched windows, was recently renovated at a
cost of roughly Dollars 14m (Pounds 9m) to prove that it is possible to
improve the environment, create a beautiful office and save money. 'Our main
motivation was financial,' says Tom Exton, director of corporate
fundraising.
The society, which had been renting for decades, decided to buy its office
to take advantage of Manhattan's property tax exemptions for non-profit
organisations. It also benefited from New York's weak property market and
low interest loans.
Tax and borrowing advantages, plus a successful Dollars 14m fundraising
campaign, are expected to save the society nearly Dollars 1m a year. It also
had a perfect opportunity to create a blueprint for an economical, yet
environmentally sound, office.
The society first decided it would be cheaper to renovate a virtually
derelict building than to build new offices from scratch. It paid Dollars
10m for the building, an eight-story former department store turned sweat
shop designed by George Post, the architect who designed the New York Stock
Exchange. Audubon said the cost of building a new office would have been
Dollars 33m.
It teamed up with Croxton Collaborative, an architectural firm whose track
record in designing healthy buildings included three floors of offices for
the Natural Resources Defence Centre, another environmental lobby group.
Audubon and Croxton adopted a cradle-to-grave approach to evaluate each
product that came into the building from how it was made and where the raw
materials came from to what would happen to the materials after the
product's useful life.
In choosing materials for the building, three criteria were used: they
needed to make environmental sense, be easily replicated with products
available on the market and be cost effective.
'If recycled goods cost too much we didn't use them,' said Peter Berle,
Audubon's president. For example, the tiles in the hallways and bathrooms
are made from recycled crushed glass but the society decided against using
toilet-stall dividers with recycled content because the dividers could not
be found on the market.
Another consideration was the impact of the building itself on the
environment. It is estimated that buildings, with their inefficient lighting
and antiquated air conditioning and heating systems, are responsible for 25
per cent of the ozone-depleting chlorofluorocarbons in the US, 22 per cent
of the carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases and 15 per cent of
acid-rain causing sulphur oxides.
Audubon and Croxton set about creating a healthy work place, since illnesses
related to poor ventilation and airborne pollutants (known as sick building
syndrome) are estimated to cost the US economy Dollars 60bn annually. Most
buildings suck in fresh air from street level. Audubon brings in its air
from the roof. Industry standards call for buildings to filter out 30 per
cent of air particles. Audubon filters out 80 per cent. Air in the building
turns over 6.3 times an hour, instead of once or twice as in most buildings.
And most of the windows can be opened.
To cut electricity costs, rooms have sensors which switch off the lights
after six minutes if there is no motion in a room. Daylight sensors read the
amount of natural light entering the windows and dim or increase the
electric lights accordingly. Lighting fixtures are suspended instead of
recessed to prevent the loss of overhead light.
Croxton knows that these techniques translate into savings. Consolidated
Edison, a local utilities company, monitored the NRDC offices for three
years and found that power consumption for lighting had been cut to less
than 25 per cent of the level deemed efficient.
'When we started doing this five years ago, there was a substantial penalty
in terms of the cost of substances available and lighting supplies,' says
Kirsten Childs, Croxton's director of interior design. 'There is still some
penalty, but what we do in terms of energy consumption pays back in five
years and after that there are savings in the region of 75 per cent.'
Perhaps the most impressive aspect of the building is its floor-to-ceiling
windows. To preserve the building's original window space without
sacrificing energy efficiency, each window frame was fitted with a 'thermal
gasket' made from activated charcoal which prevents air from seeping
through.
Each window contains a sheet of chemically-treated polymer plastic
sandwiched between two panes of thermal glazing. The sheet deflects the
sun's ultra-violet radiation and helps keep the building cooler in summer.
It also reflects back the infra-red radiation from the building's own
heating, helping retain warmth in winter. Audubon says its windows have the
same insulation value as a brick wall.
To heat and cool the building, Audubon says it chose natural gas because it
is more energy efficient and cleaner than oil. Unlike standard air
conditioning systems, natural gas does not produce CFCs or sulphur dioxide
and it reduces carbon dioxide emissions by 60 per cent. The society decided
not to install solar panels because solar heating is not yet cost effective.
Audubon House expects to trim Dollars 100,000 a year from its energy bill by
using 68 per cent less electricity and 61 per cent less energy than a
comparable building using conventional technology. 'We tend to overlook the
fact that an enormous am-ount of energy goes into the heating, cooling and
lighting of a commercial building,' says Berle. 'This is a gold mine of
energy just wait-ing to be saved. For example, you don't need as much air
conditioning if you've improved the efficiency of the lights and the
insulation.'
For insulation, Audubon used a product called Air-Krete made from sea water
and magnesium salts which, unlike some foam insulation products, does not
emit CFCs and does not contain carcinogenic long fibres of fibreglass.
According to the society, Air-Krete's insulation value is three times as
efficient as city regulations require. It is not, however, as effective as
other less environmentally sound products.
In addition to the recycled glass in its tiles, Audubon used dry-wall made
of 25 per cent recycled gypsum and 100 per cent recycled paper. The counter
tops in the bathroom and kitchens are made from recycled plastic bottles.
The society estimates that the recycled products it used were only slightly
more expensive than more conventional alternatives and it expects prices to
fall as demand grows.
'Part of our intention in telling the world about Audubon House is to
engender a demand for green building products,' says Tom Exton. Wherever
possible, building materials were chosen that reduced or eliminated toxins.
The Glidden paint brand was used because it has no volatile organic
compounds, such as benzene and formaldehyde which are poisonous.
Plywood was avoided because pressed wood products are glued together with
solvents which emit formaldehyde. For the sub-flooring, Homasote, made from
recycled newsprint, was used instead.
Audubon estimates its renovation costs were equivalent to those of a
conventional building because it spent less on non-essential materials such
as brass and marble.
The money-saving message of energy conservation is starting to filter
through to more mainstream organisations. 'This is not a fad,' says Childs.
'You might expect an Audubon Society or the NRDC to do this but we are
working for Home Box Office and Veriphone and talking to other companies.'
