FT  25 MAR 93 / Press privacy law proposed by Commons committee
A LAW to protect privacy, allow legal aid for libel actions against the
media and create two watchdog bodies with wide-ranging powers to punish
unreasonable intrusion by the press are recommended in a Commons committee
report published yesterday.
The report, by the national heritage committee, rejected the proposal by Sir
David Calcutt, in a recent report to the government, that a statutory
tribunal be established to deal with complaints against the press.
However, the committee recommended certain types of intrusion be made
criminal and civil offences, and that the government appoint an ombudsman
with statutory authority to supervise the conduct of the media.
The report drew widespread criticism from national newspapers and industry
organisations, which accused the committee of recommending costly and
unnecessary intervention in the affairs of the press.
Sir Frank Rogers, chairman of the Newspaper Publishers Association, called
it 'an extraordinary document - diffuse and even incoherent'. Lord McGregor,
chairman of the Press Complaints Commission (PCC), the self-regulatory body
established in 1990, accused the report of 'slovenly procedures'.
The committee says the PCC has been ineffective in enforcing the industry's
code of practice. It calls for a tougher press commission in its place with
the right to impose fines and require compensation.
The proposed body would be backed up by a publicly funded press ombudsman
with statutory powers to impose penalties. The ombudsman would be
accountable to parliament and could refer cases to the High Court.
The committee calls for a privacy act to make electronic bugging and
trespass criminal off-ences. It would be a civil offence to obtain or
publish harmful or embarrassing personal material or photographs, to publish
misleading personal information and persistently intrude into privacy.
The committee recommends that legal aid be available to permit aggrieved
citizens to bring actions under the bill and under defamation laws.
The report says that although public figures cannot expect the same right to
privacy as ordinary citizens, all individuals are entitled to a 'zone of
privacy'. 'Even the Queen and the prime minister must have the right to keep
some aspects of their lives away from the public gaze,' it says.
The committee says the main purpose of its recommendations is to protect
innocent members of the public who face distressful and unwelcome media
attention. It says freedom to report is essential to a free society, but
must be balanced against the damage caused by excessive and thoughtless
invasion of privacy.
MPs mollified while the industry seethes, Page 8
