FT  27 OCT 93 / Survey of Sri Lanka (2): Separatist war is still critical
factor - The economy
SRI LANKA'S ambition, as stated by President D. B. Wijetunga, is to move
into the league of newly-industrialised countries by the year 2000.
Economic growth in recent years has been moving ahead at a respectable pace.
Sri Lanka's GDP grew by 6.2 per cent in 1990, 4.6 per cent in 1991, 4.3 per
cent last year and, according to central bank officials, is likely to expand
a further 5.7 per cent in 1993.
There is an air of economic confidence about. The shop shelves are full;
Colombo's roads are becoming clogged with imported cars. Officials talk of
economic lift-off.
'We are pushing forward to achieve our NIC goal,' says Mr Ranil
Wickremesinghe, prime minister since May. 'We want to move from a lower
income to a middle income country.'
But while short-term prospects remain bright, there are many who question
the realism of the government's long-term objectives. The continuing war in
the north and east of the country looms like a dark cloud over the economic
future.
On the plus side, there has been a vast improvement in economic performance
in the past few years. Through much of the 1980s, the government had to
fight not only a war against Tamil separatists in the north and east but
also a Maoist-style insurgency in the south. The economy stagnated.
Investment declined. The tourists stayed away.
That has all changed. Industrial output, mostly based on textiles and
garments, has expanded rapidly. In 1992, the value of industrial exports
surged by more than 40 per cent, with the textiles sector accounting for
nearly 50 per cent of total export earnings.
In the first half of 1993, industrial exports rose more than 30 per cent.
Agriculture, which accounts for about 25 per cent of export earnings,
suffered due to a prolonged drought last year and output declined by 1.5 per
cent. But figures this year are far healthier, with a nearly 40 per cent
rise in the output of tea, Sri Lanka's main crop, and a 22 per cent rise in
rubber output in the first six months.
Direct foreign investment last year nearly doubled to Dollars 120m. More
than Dollars 400m of foreign investments are now in the pipeline. In
addition, nearly Dollars 30m of portfolio investment came into the local
stock market, attracted by the government's economic liberalisation policies
and the partial privatisation of several state entities.
Tourist arrivals were up 24 per cent last year and will get close to the
record figure of 407,000, set in 1982, the year before the main outbreak of
ethnic troubles on the island.
Meanwhile, average per capita incomes have risen from Dollars 214 in 1976 to
Dollars 553 a year last year. According to official figures, unemployment -
one of the problem areas in the economy - has dropped from about 24 per cent
10 years ago to 14 per cent.
The government's overall financial policy has also met with some success.
The budget deficit was reduced to 7.4 per cent of GDP in 1992, compared to
11.6 per cent of GDP in the previous year. In 1992, for the third year
running, there was an overall balance of payments surplus, helped by an
inflow, now running at Dollars 400m per year, of remittances from Sri
Lankans working abroad.
A few years ago, Sri Lanka had zero foreign exchange reserves and foreign
exchange controls led to a thriving black market in the rupee. Now most
exchange controls have gone, the rupee is free floating and, according to
official figures, foreign reserves have risen to Dollars 1.7bn, enough to
cover up to six months' imports.
But there is still a lengthy list on the minus side of the economic table.
There seems little hope of any further reduction in the budget deficit, at
least in the short term. Government spending went up by nearly 40 per cent
in the first five months of 1993, in part due to substantial increases in
the cost of fighting the war.
The jump in spending is also a byproduct of the continuing fight against
inflation, described by President Wijetunga as 'the great monster of our
times'. The central bank says inflation was 11.4 per cent last year. The
overall inflation rate is now estimated to be between 12 and 15 per cent.
Treasury officials admit that efforts to stem inflation have so far failed.
High interest rates of more than 20 per cent, designed to counteract
inflation, have attracted large amounts of funds into the country. Portfolio
investments from abroad have added to the inflationary pressures. The
central bank has had to spend large amounts mopping up excess liquidity in
the system. The broad money supply has increased by about 20 per cent so far
this year.
To bridge its budget deficit, Sri Lanka is still largely dependent on
considerable amounts of foreign grants and aid, which totalled more than
Dollars 800m in 1992.
While exports have been growing fast, they have been outpaced by import
growth. The value of imports rose 24 per cent in the first five months of
this year and the trade deficit widened to Dollars 673m.
Some of these economic difficulties might be seen as only short-term
structural deficiencies, to be tackled over a period of time. The more
difficult question, given Sri Lanka's NIC aspirations, is how does the
country achieve the next stage of development.
To ensure onward development, investments need to be made in more value
added industries. But such long-term and capital-intensive investments are
not being made. Sri Lanka's economic position is still fragile: upward
pressures on wages could lead to its textiles industry decamping to lower
cost countries such as Vietnam and Bangladesh.
Above all else, the war remains the critical factor. It soaks up increasing
amounts of precious government funds. Multi-million-dollar long-term
investments in power plants, fertiliser factories and in textile mills are
unlikely to be forthcoming given the present security problems.
The government places high hopes in the tourism industry. But a target of
doubled tourist arrivals to more than 800,000 by the end of the decade seems
unrealistic in the present circumstances, with some of the country's best
tourist facilities on the east coast of the island virtually out of bounds
due to the war.
Sri Lanka has made impressive short-term economic gains. In the long term,
an end to the war and continuing political stability are the keys to whether
or not the country will achieve its NIC goal.
