FT  12 JUN 93 / Arts: St Lucia finds a voice - Poetry
THE TINY, volatile Caribbean island of St Lucia is a paradise of sorts, and
Derek Walcott, this year's Nobel Laureate, is its most celebrated son.
Walcott is most famous for his poetry, less famous for his plays and least
famous of all for his paintings, though his painterly skills - as an
observer of the abundance of natural life on the island, for example - are
everywhere evident in the poetry.
By a happy coincidence, Walcott's reading from his epic-length poem Omeros
at the Purcell Room in London this week coincided with the first publication
of his Nobel Lecture, The Antilles Fragments of Epic Memory. A theme common
to both is the question of the status of the Caribbean and its indigenous
culture.
To the Victorian traveller, the Caribbean was an illegitimate, rootless
place. 'There are no people there,' said Froude, ' - in the true sense of
the word.' And even in our own day, a common Western attitude, no less
patronising, has been one of elegaic pathos. It is a culture fit to be wept
over - but not one to be taken too seriously. One of the most important
consequences of Walcott's Nobel Prize is that it has given a legitimacy to
Caribbean writing that many thought it lacked.
Walcott's 350 page narrative poem embraces many themes and characters. In
his reading he chose to concentrate on an under-explored thematic inlet: the
characters and pre-occupations of Major Dennis Plunkett and his Irish-born
wife Maud, a childless couple who settle on the island after the second
world war.
The Englishman Plunkett is a study in post-Imperialist disease. A veteran of
Monty's African campaign, he has grown accustomed to playing the officer's
pitch - all grit in the throat. The couple have retired to St Lucia because
it is a place 'where history cannot happen'. (History, of course,
disagrees.) They exchange the pastoral calm of rural England for the
'loud-mouthed forests on their illiterate heights', and the problems and
challenges of a society that has survived its French and English colonisers.
Walcott squats on a high stool for the reading, as if preparing himself,
like Plunkett, for the first drink of the evening. He looksmuch younger than
his 60-odd years. There is something imperious about the lordly nod he gives
the audience in return for their tumultuous reception of his presence. This
is the fourth time he has read from Omeros to a large London audience, and
his lulling baritone sounds curiously disengaged for most of the 150-odd
minutes that he reads - until he reaches the final section of the poem, an
account of Maud's death, which includes a marvellous mock-Imperial flourish:
'She was his orb and sceptre, / the shire of his peace.'
This is followed by a catalogue of the detritus of Empire, all mimosa
memories, ostrich-plumed Viceroys and felt-footed houseboys. The shock of
colliding with such marvellous poetry shakes Walcott into vigorous life in
the closing minutes. And next time he comes he will perhaps read from
something different . . .
What is the opposite of a Derek Walcott? Try Roger McGough. McGough, most
companionable of the Mersey Poets, raced through a dozen jaunty family
favourites in London last week. McGough's poems are not so much a plundering
of the word hoard as the springing open of a delectable box of tricks - all
puns, word play and happy chorus lines. An evening of Liverpudlian verve and
patter of this kind even makes you wonder whether poetry might not be a
participation sport after all. For all his virtues, Walcott never made it
sound easy.
The Antilles: Fragments of Epic Memory. The Nobel Lecture. Derek Walcott.
Faber, 32 pages. Pounds 2.99
