FT  16 JAN 93 / International Company News: Escada teeters on solvency
catwalk - The fashion house's struggle for survival in the 1990s
but shares in the German company are anything but.
Since the beginning of the year, Escada's ordinary shares have tumbled by
more than 20 per cent and at yesterday's closing price of DM108 (Dollars
66.69) they stand at about an eighth of last year's high point of DM855.
Escada has denounced the share collapse as unjustified and rebutted
widespread rumours that it was on the verge of insolvency.
However, last week the company confirmed that it is in serious financial
difficulties. A third of its equity is to be wiped out as a result of
operating losses in the year ended October, it said.
Operating losses are likely to be in the region of DM100m, following net
profits of DM45m in 1990-1991 and DM58.7m the year before. Escada said it
would have to sell one of its major subsidiaries in a bid to plug the hole
in its balance sheet.
It did not name the subsidiary, but the most likely candidate is the 80 per
cent-owned St John Knits, the high quality knitwear business bought in 1989.
Analysts calculate that the sale of the stake in the California-based
company will raise DM80m, compared to a purchase price of about DM30m.
Escada, founded by the late Mrs Margaretha Ley (she died in June last year)
and her husband Wolfgang in 1976, was one of the great success stories of
German business in the mid to late 1980s.
It was enthusiastically received when it came to the stock market in 1986
and between 1989 to 1991 its sales doubled to DM1.36bn, reflecting a
sequence of acquisitions designed to supplement the core high price labels
Escada and Laurel.
At the heart of the company's success were the clothes designed by Mrs Ley
herself and marketed under the Escada label. Flashy, bright, energetic,
colourful and expensive, they were at one with the spirit of the 1980s,
redolent of self-confidence and success.
The spirit of the age has changed, and the St John Knits clothes - expensive
but subdued - are more attuned to a time when the seriously rich do not want
to flaunt their wealth.
It is a measure of the company's difficulties that this profitable and
successful business is now up for sale.
Ironically though, it is not a falling away in demand for the Escada label
which has led to the current crisis. Analysts say that such clothes have not
lost their cachet with women for whom money is no object and the brand is
still highly sought after.
It accounted for 41 per cent of group turnover in 1991: details for 1992 are
not yet available although the company said last week that group turnover
held firm at 1991 levels despite the downturn.
As with many companies in the UK and the US, Escada owes its current
troubles as much to the after-effects of over-expansion in better days as
the downturn itself.
In 1987 it made its first acquisition with the purchase of Schneberger
followed by Kemper, a high-quality coat-maker, a year later. It also bought
the licence to distribute Cerruti in Germany plus the stake in St Johns
Knits. These deals were followed by the purchase of Blusen Neumann in 1991,
a company which makes inexpensive blouses and everyday clothes.
At the same time, Escada moved into retail, opening a network of boutiques
to sell its top products. These shops are thought to contribute DM50m to
sales.
In 1990-1991, profits fell by 23 per cent, reflecting reduced sales as
recession took effect, especially in the US. In the latter part of the last
financial year, the downturn finally caught up with the domestic German
market, taking management by surprise as the company said last week. The
more price-sensitive brands have been particularly badly hit, analysts
believe.
Profits were hit by a simultaneous 'cost explosion', as the company
struggled to integrate its acquisitions. A new logistics centre at Poing
near Munich will open this summer, two years later than planned.
The company took steps to remedy the problems - in the last six months
appointing two new board members to look after distribution and
organisation, and a thorough cost-reduction programme is underway - but this
not enough, as last week's statement showed.
Further details will be available in a shareholders' circular later this
month. It is possible that the company will be able to report a profit for
the current year if it holds St John Knitwear on its books to the year-end.
In 1993-1994, analysts think the company will be in the red again.
Thus - despite the huge fall in the share price - it could be well into 1994
before the shares once again become fashionable.
