FT  22 APR 93 / People: A sugared path to altruism
Nicholas Nightingale, Tate &amp; Lyle's company secretary, is leaving in the
autumn to become National Secretary to the National Council of English
YMCAs, the Christian youth welfare charity.
The first outsider to be appointed to the position, which is effectively
that of chief executive, in the 149-year history of the organisation,
Nightingale, who has turned 50, says it had been on his mind for a while to
do something 'more altruistic'.
Last summer he became a lay board member of the City chapter behind his
Barbican home, and says he was struck at once 'both by the calibre of the
people who worked for the charity full-time, and by the power of the
organisation'. It has an annual budget of around Pounds 60m and deals with
1.5m people a year.
Also influencing his career volte face was watching his wife train to be
ordained, next September, as a Church of England deacon. He was headhunted
by Saxton Bampfylde, itself a company with strong Christian principles.
He stresses that he is leaving Tate &amp; Lyle, where he was not a member of the
slim executive board, 'with mixed feelings', and says that he was 'very
comfortable' with the new team at the top, put in place this spring. A
solicitor by training, he had, until the takeover by Nestle, previously been
a main board director of Rowntree.
Nightingale is a familiar face in the City, having been in charge of
investor relations in both his last two jobs. Communication will be one of
his principal initial tasks for the YMCA, he believes - internally among the
200 separate local associations, as well as externally.
He joins at a time when the organisation is coping with problems ranging
from finding relevant accommodation for single-parent families to the extra
strains imposed on the YMCA's emergency services by the influx of refugees.
Despite the 'very significant' drop in salary, his family, including the
three offspring aged between 15 and 20, are firmly behind the idea.
