FT  10 FEB 93 / International Company News: Disposals bring Nestle close to
EC compliance
NESTLE, the Swiss food group, has found a buyer for most of the mineral
water assets which EC competition authorities required it to dispose of
after it acquired Groupe Perrier of France last year.
However, the proposed FFr750m (Dollars 134m) sale - to Societe
d'Investissement d'Aquitaine, holding company for the French Castel
beverages company - does not fulfil all the conditions which Brussels has
insisted on before it approves the Perrier take-over.
The Commission requires Nestle to sell to a single buyer mineral water
springs with a total annual capacity of 3bn litres and several specified
brands, including Vichy, Thonon, Pierval and Sr Yorre. But the deal with SIA
covers capacity of less than 3bn litres and excludes the Pierval brand.
Nestle said yesterday that SIA was not interested in Pierval, and that it
doubted whether any other buyer could be found for it. The Swiss company was
putting the proposed sale to Brussels, in the hope that it would nonetheless
be approved.
The Commission said that it had not yet received details of the proposed
sale from Nestle. However, a spokesman said that Nestles agreement to meet
the conditions specified last year amounted to a commitment.
Until Nestle disposes of the Perrier assets to a new owner approved by
Brussels, the Swiss company may not complete the sale of Volvic, another
large Perrier brand, to BSN, France's largest food manufacturer.
The Swiss company is counting on the proceeds of the Volvic deal to cover
part of the FFr13.4bn it paid to acquire Perrier after a hard-fought
takeover battle in which it was supported by Mr Antoine Riboud, BSN
chairman.
Nestle had apparently hoped that the Volvic sale would defuse objections
from EC competition authorities. However, Brussels judged that Nestle and
BSN would together enjoy a duopoly of the French mineral water market and
ordered disposal of some of Perrier's assets to reduce the Swiss company's
dominance.
The assets which SIA has agreed to buy had sales of more than FFr620m in
1991. The Castel group has annual revenues of FFr5.6bn.
As part of its agreement with SIA, Nestle will buy out minority shareholders
in Compagnie Fermiere de Vichy, developer of a spa and hotel project partly
financed by income from Vichy mineral water sales.
