FT  04 MAR 93 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Toasting the appeal
of cider - A wider variety has helped revitalise sales and attract more
consumers
Cider is the fastest growing sector of the UK drinks market. Intensive brand
advertising, increased distribution through pubs and supermarkets and lower
excise duties have contributed to the growth. However, cider sales have been
driven in particular by a vigorous, industry-wide programme of new product
development which has attracted new consumers and revitalised the appeal of
older, mainstream brands.
Since 1988, the industry has shown remarkable vitality in raising sales 36
per cent to 84m gallons a year with an estimated retail value of Pounds
750m. Even in the face of recession last year, volume sales increased nearly
10 per cent while beer consumption declined 3 per cent.
Until the early 1980s, consumers were offered little choice beyond dry and
sweet cider. Then Merrydown, the small, Sussex-based cider-maker,
established a premium segment. Unable to compete against the mainstream
volume brands, such as Bulmer's Strongbow and Woodpecker and Taunton's Dry
Blackthorn, Merrydown carved out a higher-margin niche for its bottled
vintage cider, which it packaged and positioned as an alternative to wine.
It was several years, however, before the rest of the industry began to
exploit the opportunities, opened by Merrydown, to move cider into the more
fashionable sector of the drinks market.
Taunton started the push for growth through the development of new products
in 1986. Diamond White, a bottled, strong white cider, was introduced as a
competitor to premium lagers. It was an instant success. Today, with Diamond
Blush, a pink-tinged, lower-strength cider aimed at women, the brand
dominates the premium sector and is still growing strongly.
Taunton followed with the launch in 1989 of Red Rock, a draught cider made
less gassy and acidic for 'session' drinking and aimed once more at young
lager consumers. Supported by Pounds 5m of quirky advertising, it has
secured a 3.5 per cent share of the draught cider market.
'Fermented apple juice can provide a basis for an extraordinary range of
drinks of different colours and tastes,' says Andy Nash, Taunton's marketing
director.
Learning from Taunton's initiatives, the rest of the industry quickly
widened the search for new ways of presenting its basic product and the pace
of innovation accelerated. It sought ideas by investigating trends in
international drinks and consumer goods markets as well as in the UK.
'Talking to consumers can help to identify gaps in the market and enable you
to design products to fit them,' says Elaine Robinson, marketing director
for Gaymer Group, the industry's third-largest company. 'But you have to
look elsewhere for the big ideas, the leaps of imagination that really
change the market.'
Gaymer, anticipating the revival of real ale in the UK, introduced
Addlestone's, a cask-conditioned cider. But it drew inspiration from the
port wine industry for the 1989 launch of K, a strong, dry, bottled cider.
Packaged in a matt black bottle, labelled with a bold red K, it is aimed at
young, style-conscious drinkers. It is the most expensive cider, selling at
up to Pounds 2.50 a bottle, but it is already in the top four premium
brands.
Gaymer and Merrydown have now joined forces to push another new product,
Merrydown's vintage draught, in the UK pub market.
Bulmer, the industry leader, concerned primarily with the distribution and
marketing of Strongbow and Woodpecker, its big volume brands, reacted slowly
to Taunton's new product introductions. It launched Max, Strongbow Super and
1080 as premium products; and all readily found profitable niches.
But it is only in the past two years, with a development team under Gray
Olliver, Gaymer's former marketing director, backed by a Pounds 2.5m
technical research centre, that Bulmer has focused on new products.
They have been pouring on to the market at an impressive rate. Scrumpy Jack,
a half-forgotten brand owned by Bulmer's subsidiary, Symonds, was subtly
refined and revived. With promotional support of only Pounds 500,000, it has
already overtaken Red Rock to become the leading premium draught cider.
Discovery, made from the first apple pressing, has been introduced as a
lightly sparkling 'cider nouveau'. There has been another premium bottled
product, 1727, and Hockhams, a wine alternative.
Black Jack, now being test marketed, combines cider with extracts of malt
and yeast. From its Stassen subsidiary in Belgium, Bulmer is introducing
ciders flavoured with natural fruit juices.
Olliver says he is now investigating the use of cider as a base for
higher-strength aperitifs and liqueurs.
With consumers eager for choice and more adventurous in their tastes,
Taunton's output of new products shows no signs of flagging. It brought five
products to market in seven months last year: Brody, a golden cider which
sold 1m bottles in six weeks after its launch; Applewood and Moonstone,
adult long drinks; Fres, a light sparkling cider; and Drum, a white perry.
All this activity has not only helped lift the overall cider market but has
increased the premium sector from 2 per cent in 1986 to 16 per cent last
year.
