FT  19 MAR 93 / BR seeks help for expansion of Thameslink
BRITISH Rail yesterday appealed to the private sector to come forward with
ideas for financing a Pounds 325m expansion of the Thameslink cross-London
line.
It said it hoped to fund the long-outstanding project by taking advantage of
new Treasury guidelines aimed at encouraging private-sector participation in
transport infrastructure projects.
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, announced in his Budget speech on Tuesday
that three rail projects - the Pounds 300m Heathrow Express, the Pounds 2bn
CrossRail scheme from east to west across London and the Pounds 2.5bn
Channel tunnel rail link - were to be taken forward as joint ventures
between the public and private sectors.
British Rail said it was now looking at the possibility of applying a
similar approach to all its outstanding investment projects, including the
Thameslink expansion and the upgrading of the west coast main line between
London Euston and Glasgow.
The Thameslink line allows suburban and long-distance trains to cross the
City from north to south and back instead of terminating on one side of the
capital. However, limited capacity on the central London stretch means it
can carry only six trains an hour each way.
BR's Thameslink 2000 project, involving the expansion of stations and
junctions in central London, would quadruple capacity to 24 trains an hour
each way, turning Thameslink into a high-frequency operation serving a much
wider choice of destinations.
Separately, BR also wants to move the Thameslink station at King's Cross
from its present site in Pentonville Road to a new underground terminal
beneath the main King's Cross station. This would cost a further Pounds
650m.
BR's Network SouthEast division strongly denied speculation that the
decision to re-site the Channel tunnel rail link terminal at St Pancras
meant that the King's Cross project was dead.
In what appeared to be an unintentional leak of the contents of next week's
announcement of the Channel tunnel rail link plans, it said the plan to use
St Pancras as the international terminal 'also embraces the new low-level
station needed by the Thameslink 2000 service.'
Last week it emerged that three of Britain's biggest engineering companies -
GEC Alsthom, Trafalgar House and Balfour Beatty - had put forward a plan for
funding the Pounds 900m West Coast main line project. The transport
department welcomed BR's efforts to attract private-sector participation.
Channel rail link, Page 10
