FT  01 OCT 93 / Unpresidential prose: Germany's livelier tone of political
debate
What is wrong with the following statements, made recently by Mr Steffen
Heitmann, the minister in the east German state of Saxony proposed by
Chancellor Helmut Kohl to become Germany's next president?
'Maastricht has been imposed from above . . . Europe cannot be forced on
people . . . the Holocaust does not mean that Germany should have a special
role until the end of time . . . when there are only a few homes available,
you can say quite soberly that other people can move in to them, rather than
asylum-seekers.'
The answer is: not much. However, amid a political struggle in Germany about
who should succeed President Richard von Weizsacker next summer, Mr
Heitmann's utterances have caused a stir.
Left-leaning magazines such as Der Spiegel or Stern claim they place him on
the far right of the political spectrum, while a conservative
Kohl-supporting newspaper such as the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung asks
what all the fuss is about.
The controversy is important for what it tells us about political discourse
in Germany, and about the changes there. Whether or not the
less-than-awe-inspiring figure of Mr Heitmann actually wins the presidential
race is secondary.
Germany is a country where politicians cloud statements with high-sounding
phrases designed to obscure and even mislead. We may now have to become used
to more direct language.
In view of the economic and political problems of reunification, Germany has
become a less well-balanced, less stable country than the old Federal
Republic.
By commenting on the country's preoccupations with less than the
sanctimonious decorum expected from a contestant for highest office, Mr
Heitmann has injected a note of realism into public debate.
All this is not to suggest that Mr Heitmann would be an ideal president. He
has been chosen by Mr Kohl on the somewhat spurious grounds that he embodies
the rough-hewn views of many east Germans.
Since the junior party in the coalition, the Free Democrats, has voiced
misgivings about Mr Heitmann, his chances of taking over the presidency are
not assured.
Mr Heitmann admits that, under the former Communist regime, he was 'no
hero'. One point about him, though, is incontestable. His views on the three
subjects outlined above - Europe, Germany's history and asylum-seekers - are
neither startling nor original.
EC governments accept that Maastricht did not sufficiently take into account
sensitivities of Community electorates. The desire to make Maastricht
'closer to the people' accounts for the EC's new emphasis on subsidiarity.
No foreign government wants Germany to forget the Nazi past. But most of
Germany's partners would like it to throw off some historically-imposed
shackles. Nato backs Mr Kohl's efforts to relax the 1949 constitution to
allow Bundeswehr (army) troops to take part in peace-keeping abroad.
On asylum-seekers, Mr Heitmann could have been more tactful in view of
recent attacks on foreigners in Germany. But no one can ignore that high
immigration has increased pressure on German housing and social security.
Both Mr Kohl's Christian Democrats and the opposition Social Democrats
jointly decided during the summer to tone down Germany's previously generous
asylum law.
A German president, a figure without real power, is supposed to provide a
form of moral or ethical leadership. But he also has to ensure his views are
not too far removed from public opinion. During the past decade, Mr von
Weizsacker achieved this balancing act with aplomb and authority. His
best-regarded speech, in 1985, on the 40th anniversary of the end of the
second world war, was a masterpiece; its message calling on Germans to come
to terms with their history was popular and thought-provoking.
In two years, when the 50th anniversary of Germany's capitulation is
commemorated, a different speech will be required. The new German head of
state will have to talk about Hitler and the Holocaust. But he (or,
possibly, she) will also have to explain how Germany can achieve its
priorities: to resurrect east Germany without bankrupting west Germany; to
forge a new sense of nationhood and at the same time integrate its 6m
foreigners; to rebuild the nation without disrupting the course of European
unity.
All this requires hard choices, in the past, often befogged by the soft
opacity of German political parlance. By reminding onlookers that united
Germany has a new set of priorities, Mr Heitmann deserves a modest medal,
struck in east German bronze: not for nobility or vision, but for plain
speaking.
