FT  26 JAN 93 / Malaysia's disaster warnings go unheeded in Strait of
Malacca: Maersk Navigator collision was the latest in a series of accidents
EVERY 24 hours as many as 600 vessels, some small fishing craft, some
300,000-tonne tankers, pass through the 600-mile-long Strait of Malacca. It
is one of the world's busiest shipping channels, a vital conduit of world
trade.
Malaysia has been at the forefront of efforts to have the strait better
policed. It has warned that sooner or later an environmental disaster will
occur. Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the Malaysian prime minister, has talked of 'a
state of near lawlessness' in the area.
Last week's collision involving the Maersk Navigator supertanker was only
the latest in a series of accidents in the strait in recent months. Last
September a collision between a tanker and a container ship resulted in
13,000 tonnes of crude oil being spilled, much of it on the beaches of
Malaysia. In August 10 passengers were drowned after a collision between a
cruise liner and a fishing trawler off the Malaysian coast.
Attempts to improve controls in the waterway are hampered both by
differences between the three adjacent states - Malaysia, Singapore and
Indonesia - and by international law.
Singapore, while it has rigid anti-pollution regulations of its own, does
not want to take action that might deter shipping from the region and
jeopardise its position as one of the world's main shipping hubs. Singapore
is now the world's largest container port.
Indonesia has scant resources to spend on any proper policing measures which
would cover its waters - stretching across an area wider than the US.
Malaysia says the littoral states of the Strait of Malacca should not have
to pay for pollution caused by others. Mr Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, foreign
minister, addressing the United Nations General Assembly last year, said
international maritime law and regulations had to be revised to take account
of modern conditions and to ensure that all those using the Malacca Strait
shared responsibility for pollution and safety problems.
'When such accidents occur, we have to do the cleaning up - which is a
financial burden - as well as endure the sudden harm and destruction to our
marine resources . . . this is too much for the poor littoral states to bear
alone.'
Malaysia has suggested that ships passing through the strait pay a levy for
each journey. There have also been calls for a proper traffic separation
scheme, with designated shipping lanes.
Shipowners are likely to resist any move which would impose greater costs on
their operations. The Strait of Malacca is an international waterway and a
levy system or traffic control scheme cannot simply be imposed by the
surrounding countries.
The other very prickly problem in the area is piracy. While recorded acts of
piracy in south-east Asian waters decreased last year, attacks still occur.
In one recent attack pirates boarded a container ship, killing the British
captain and his first mate.
In another incident some time ago pirates boarded a supertanker, tied up its
crew and left it cruising, unpiloted.
While there have been efforts by Indonesia, Singapore and Malaysia to try to
fight the piracy problem, these have been hampered by regional sensitivities
and questions of sovereignty.
Most pirates are believed to operate from bases in Indonesia but both
Singapore and Malaysia are reluctant to lay the entire blame on their
powerful neighbour.
Malaysia has called an international conference next month to discuss some
of these problems. 'If things go on as they are there is going to be a
disaster,' said one Singapore-based shipping expert. 'If it's not happening
right now, it's just a question of time.'
