FT  20 MAY 93 / Arts: Von Otter and Tan - Recital
In the Wigmore Hall on Tuesday, Anne Sofie von Otter sang Haydn, Mozart and
Schubert to Melvyn Tan's 'fortepiano' (a modern copy, I think). The hall was
packed, of course; this young mezzo is nowadays a universal favourite, and
Tan is the man to persuade us that period Lieder - from, say, Schumann and
Loewe back - are best accompanied on a period piano. At the end,
nevertheless, when Miss von Otter was cheerfully guying both her Haydn
encores, the recital seemed to have been less than the sum of its parts.
She was in lustrous form. There are voices that sound best in the Wigmore
simply because they do not carry as well in larger halls, and other,
grand-opera ones that need to be kept on a tight leash. Von Otter's is one
of the lucky few that can sound unstintedly vital and vibrant there, and
still listener-friendly. Her programme culminated with Haydn's 'Ariadne on
Naxos' cantata, which she delivered as a towering dramatic scena: certainly
it bounced off the back wall, and yet it left no bruises on the ear.
Earlier she had delivered Schubert's 'Erlkonig' with comparable force and
intensity - though the tiny, wheedling voice she adopted for the erl-king
himself was too much of a conscious trick. The real revelation of that
performance was owed to Tan: viz. that a 'fortepiano' can do its brilliant
utmost with Schubert's desperately taxing accompaniment, where a pianist
with a modern grand can never afford to let rip for fear of drowning out the
singer. What that illustrated was no quaint, trivial advantage for the
old-style instrument (such as every great song-composer until Wolf and
Debussy had in his mind's ear), but a serious modern challenge.
If fearsome problems of balance in many Lieder simply evaporate when the
right kind of piano is in play, why should we go on assuming that for
general purposes there is no alternative to the 20th-century grand? Pianists
will say: with the big hi-tech instrument, we get subtler note-by-note
control of the sounds we make. But before Wolf and Debussy, do they need
such hyper-refined control?
Von Otter's other best Schubert was the little 'Romance' from Rosamunde,
delivered with lovely simplicity, along with the Gothic narrative of 'Der
Zwerg' (a newly popular rediscovery). Though never far below her best,
technically she slipped more often than she needed to - as did Tan. In
Mozart she scored several near-misses on quick springs to high notes, just
as Tan let his fluent fingers skitter over too many of Mozart's notes, and
even sometimes the basic beat.
His solo offering, Haydn's A-flat Sonata (no. 31, by the Robbins Landon
count), was too bonelessly pretty and unstructured to make its proper mark,
and his rhythmically wayward reading of Schubert's 'An die Musik' was less
pointful than just fitful. Though most of his accompaniments were brighter
than that, one had expected more sober penetration, and was therefore just a
little disappointed.
