FT  18 NOV 93 / Survey of China (6): Austerity reduces demand - Abolition of
the two-tier exchange rate systems and the shift to convertibility could
happen soon / Foreign exchange
THE thrice-weekly foreign exchange market at the Tianjin foreign exchange
adjustment centre opens promptly at nine in the morning. Seated in rows
wearing numbered bibs, the traders - from banks, large enterprises or
brokers representing smaller companies - first speak into their microphones
the amount of dollars they want to buy or sell. Then the buying and selling
begins.
'Trader number 19 wants to sell 50,000 at Yn8.7 per dollar - who wants to
buy?' cries the blue-cardiganed young auctioneer, the bid illuminated on the
electronic trading board behind. Laughter rings round the room - the 'swap
market' exchange rate has been stuck at 8.7 for a number of weeks now,
despite the fact that demand for dollars has dwindled.
The market was much busier in the first half of the year, with a daily
turnover of Dollars 3-5m, but the government's austerity measures appear to
have reduced the demand for foreign exchange and turnover has fallen to
Dollars 3m a day on average. State enterprise traders appear to have stayed
away - only 16 of the 51 trading seats are filled - and business is
completed within 45 minutes.
'About a month ago the seats were all filled,' says trader 19, a 37-year-old
woman named Xu Cuie who buys and sells on behalf of enterprises in Tianjin's
free trade zones. 'There are too many sellers of dollars and not enough
buyers - the enterprises just do not have enough local currency.'
The Tianjin swap centre is one in a national network of 100 regional FEACs,
established in 1987 when the government moved officially to a dual exchange
rate system, and which today form the backbone of what has become a
relatively free floating foreign exchange market. Reform began a decade ago
when the government relaxed rules requiring exporters to submit all their
foreign exchange at the official rate. Instead, it allowed them to swap
their currency for Foreign Exchange Entitlements (FEES) which then could
then use at a later date to buy currency.
In 1987, the government established the swap centres at which these FEEs
could be traded, thereby establishing a dual exchange rate system. Access to
these swap markets was initially very restrictive, but the regulations have
been progressively eased.
Today, 80 per cent of China's current account transactions occur at the swap
 -or floating - rate: the official rate is used mainly for tourists who, by
law, must exchange foreign currency at the punitive official rate.
Companies must also sell 20 per cent of their foreign exchange earnings to
the state at the official rate, and the government has the right to buy
another 30 per cent at the swap rate. The rest can be retrained or sold for
FEEs which can then be traded at the swap market, although these days the
majority of trading occurs in currency. But the foreign exchange rate is far
from being a free market: the government still controls 50 per cent of
foreign exchange, which it purchases outside these markets and uses to
manage the swap rate, and access to the market is still restricted.
Moreover, the government responded to the overheating in the first half of
the year by trying to re-impose control, first by not devaluing the official
rate as the swap rate fell in response to heavy demand for foreign exchange
and then by trying to cap the swap rate through administrative
interventions. The result was to open wide a 45 per cent differential
between the official and swap rates and to force transactions into the black
market until the government allowed the swap rate to fall in June.
Yet, despite this year's difficulties, many observers believe that the
government's stated next stage of reform - abolition of the two tier
exchange rate system and the shift to convertibility - could happen soon.
That will require a national swap market, an abolition of restrictions on
access to the FEACs and abolition of remaining surrender requirements so
that the government has to buy all its foreign exchange at the swap markets.
For the central bank, this will mean that the exchange rate becomes a more
effective monetary policy tool and will sharpen the link between interest
rates and the real economy. But for the government and some state
enterprises, it will remove a convenient source of cheap currency.
'Now is the right time to unify,' says Mr Qin Chijiang, director of monetary
research at the central bank. But Mr Liu Zhongli, finance minister, is more
cautious. 'We are gradually closing the gap between the official and the
swap market rates,' he says. 'But there is no timetable yet for
unification.'
