FT  06 AUG 93 / Personal View: Save the planet without costing the earth
'Better in the black than clean and green'. The title of David Lascelles'
review of the new publication, Environmental profiles of European business
(July 15), encapsulates one of today's most crucial issues - how to regulate
for environmental improvement without impairing the wealth-creation on which
we all depend.
Worldwide, the liberal market economy is now accepted as the most efficient
and responsive basis for economic activity. Certainly the more successful
non-OECD economies are industrialising and developing at breathtaking pace.
Meanwhile, world population is growing at 80m a year. It is not fanciful to
project fourfold growth of the world economy over the next 30 years and a
doubling of global demand for energy and other natural resources. The impact
on the natural environment of human activity expanding at this rate
represents a formidable challenge.
The all-important question is how to devise environmental policy and
legislation which leads to a positive relationship between economic
development and environmental improvement. When founded on sound principles
and proper cost/benefit analysis, this can stimulate innovation and
ingenuity in pursuit both of environmental improvement and of market
competitiveness.
But in Britain - and Europe - the pressures on politicians to respond
rapidly to environmental concerns have led to a wave of regulation, too much
of which is ill-considered, prescriptive, and uncosted. Some of the effects
will be perverse, damaging business confidence, discouraging investment, and
driving industrial activity abroad. This will impair the very economic
development and innovation on which environmental improvement depends.
Europe's oil refining industry is a case in point. A big environmental
challenge is certainly posed by continuing growth in car use, and related
urban pollution. Influenced by US practice, and particularly by California,
the EC has been introducing progressively more stringent specifications for
automotive fuels. Yet trade-offs between different environmental objectives
have not been fully resolved. Nor have the different environmental impacts
of different vehicle emissions. Nor, indeed, has the fundamental mismatch
between the costs faced by Europe's refining industry to achieve compliance,
and the funds being generated by this industry from intensely competitive
markets.
Environmental choices are clearly illustrated by the EC requirement to lower
the sulphur content of diesel fuel. There is a trade-off between achieving
this and tackling the threat of global warming. Removing sulphur takes more
energy, which means that the additional carbon dioxide from refineries will
be about 10 times greater than the sulphur dioxide eliminated from exhausts.
This is emphatically not an excuse for inaction. We must continue to invest
in improving the quality of our environment. But we must do so with a clear
understanding of the costs and trade-offs, and with a clear order of
priorities.
Today, European refiners face having to invest more than Pounds 40bn for the
piecemeal application of tighter fuel standards. This is without a
comprehensive assessment of the costs, benefits and impacts of the package
as a whole, and without similar consideration of other options. In road
transport, these include incentives to greater fuel efficiency, more
stringent environmental standards for older vehicles, or speed controls.
Ultimately, consumers will bear the consequences, either in higher costs
passed on in the marketplace, or in reduced security of supply as Europe
becomes more dependent on imported oil products.
The current environmental debate, and much of the regulation flowing from
it, is flawed - by an unwillingness to accept how little we know, and by a
mistaken belief that improvements come at little cost. Environmental
measures are proposed which place a burden on businesses disproportionate to
their benefits. The burden affects companies' profitability,
competitiveness, costs to their customers, and ultimately the health of the
entire economy.
Political leaders must decide environmental goals and priorities. But we
have a right to expect them to do so with an informed grasp of the
implications and thorough analysis of the costs and benefits. We in business
must continue to demonstrate our commitment to real environmental
improvement, not only by harnessing technical expertise to practical
solutions, but also by clearly articulating costs and implications of
proposed measures. The environmental debate must now be conducted with a new
realism.
The author is president of the UK Petroleum Industry Association and
managing director of Shell UK.
