FT  09 SEP 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Pakistan mobilises locust
defences - A battle that many villagers fear is a lost cause
AS THE sun rises over the village of Mithi, on the Pakistani border of the
Thar desert, an ominous silence is broken only by the tinkling of bells tied
around the necks of goats and camels coming out of a nearby valley, followed
by bare-footed herdsmen in torn clothes.
'Makhar aayo' shouts one suddenly - 'the locusts have come' - and all eyes
turn towards a band of hundreds of pink insects flying off some nearby
trees.
A few miles up the desert track, villagers wait for the bus to take them to
irrigated sugar-cane fields in search of seasonal jobs. They have seen a
drought this year followed by the locust invasion, and fears of widespread
fodder shortages are gradually convincing many to migrate, at least until
the locust attack is past.
Aerial and ground sprays have left grim reminders of the potential
catastrophe that haunts them. For miles around the road-side is littered
with dead yellow hoppers and pink locusts in the flying stage. But the
problem is far from over.
The scene is only one example of Pakistan's most recent emergency in the
agriculture sector. The scale of the problem is huge, claimed by some to be
the worst locust plague in more than three decades.
The government this week called in the army to help with the monitoring of
locust bands and with aerial spraying, after the department of agriculture
found itself unable to meet the challenge. According to official estimates,
at least 47,000 bands of locusts have been eliminated in spraying over an
area of about 12,000 sq km. But that is only a small portion of the massive
task at hand. At least 50,000 sq km of desert land in Thar (Sindh) and
Cholistan (Punjab), remains as a breeding ground for the voracious insects.
Shortage of equipment and pesticides has raised concerns that the defence
operation will prove futile. Pakistani experts expect more swarmlets to
arrive from India by the middle of this month, amid fears of heavy breeding
currently in progress there.
The desert is the last frontier before lush prime farmland begins, and with
Pakistan's prime cotton land at the greatest risk western experts and some
officials fear that the shortages have caused irrecoverable delay in
launching the operation. Mr Ali Khan Junejo, agriculture minister, said this
week, that the attack could become 'terrible' if allowed to spread. Earlier,
Pakistani senators bitterly criticised their government's inaction.
Despite the criticism, some government officials defend their position. Mr
MB Mohsin, one of the government's most senior entomologists, says: 'A lot
of swarms came, but none of them could come out of the desert. This is proof
that we acted in time.'
Mr Mohsin is confident that the attack will be contained in the desert. He
also denies that there are any shortages of pesticides. But many local
villagers see the fight as a lost cause. 'The spray planes come here every
day,' says Mr Bhai Khan, a herdsman, 'but so do more and more locusts'. Mr
Haji Mohammad, a local school teacher comments: 'The agriculture people have
mostly gone to areas close to roads and tracks. But out in the distant
valleys the locusts have destroyed crops and grass'.
Some lower-level agriculture officials share these concerns. One junior
government entomologist says the equipment and pesticide shortage has caused
the most serious setback. 'We need at least 100 exhaust vehicles, we have
only 15. How can we fight like this.'
Some pesticides have been supplied in assistance from bilateral donor
agencies and the UN's Food and Agriculture Organisation. Some officials
fear, however, that unless a massive operation is launched with all the
required resources delivered within the next couple of weeks, the locusts
may cross the desert and penetrate inland. How much crop damage would result
is anybody's guess.
According to government forecasts earlier this year, Pakistan expected to
produce up to 12m bales of cotton from its current crop. Some officials say
this must be now lowered to 11m bales, but only as a starting point for
assessing the possible damage caused by the locust invasion.
Whatever the final outcome, the catastrophe for the desert herdsmen has
already taken place. For some, it may be years before they can repair their
livelihoods, which were at a minimum subsistence level to start with.
