FT  20 DEC 93 / Japanese banks' loan woes: 1980s 'bubble' has hit their
reserves, study shows
Japanese banks are so underprovided against bad loans from the 'bubble
economy' of the late 1980s that they would be left only with 'hidden
reserves' of capital from holdings of securities if provisions were raised
to the right level, according to a study of the profitability of 300
international banks.
The study by the European bank ratings agency IBCA finds that the aftermath
of the late 1980s boom has left the Japanese banking system as the least
profitable in the world outside Nordic countries.
Akita, the most profitable Japanese bank, is only the 107th most profitable
in the world.
The study argues that Japanese banks remain 'substantially underprovided'
compared with banks in other big countries. It says that if they were
correctly reserved against poor loans, they would need to have 'accumulated
provisions of an amount equivalent to their current capital'.
However, it acknowledges that Japanese banks - unlike those in other
countries - can fall back on 'hidden reserves' of undervalued securities
holdings. It says their capacity to fund write-offs from these would be
'threatened if the Tokyo stock market went into free fall once again'.
The study, which calculates 'real profitability' for banks by applying a
common equity-to-assets ratio of 4 per cent and a common taxation rate of 50
per cent to each, finds that Banco Popular, the Spanish retail bank, is the
most profitable in the world for the third year in succession.
Banco Popular is followed by Bangkok Bank and Hang Seng Bank, reflecting the
high profits of banks in the Asia-Pacific region because of strong economic
growth and the lack of sophisticated capital markets.
US banks, which have recovered strongly from problems in the late 1980s,
also feature prominently, providing 11 of the 20 most profitable banks. The
US market is found to have the highest returns on equity, of 14.2 per cent,
compared with a return of 3 per cent in Japan.
British banks achieved a varied performance, with Barclays dropping to 285th
in the top 300 banks in terms of profitability from a peak of ninth in 1981,
and Bank of Scotland dropping to 128th from 2nd in that year.
However, Lloyds Bank has risen to 25th from 125th three years ago.
The most profitable British bank is HSBC Holdings, which is 16th most
profitable as well as 15th largest bank in terms of assets.
HSBC is the only one of the top 50 banks in terms of asset size to rank in
the 20 most profitable, and seven of the most profitable are among the
smallest 100.
Retail Banking Profitability 1993-94; Lafferty Publications, IDA Tower,
Pearse Street, Dublin 2, Ireland; Pounds 399.
