FT  23 MAR 93 / Red tape deters foreign investors
RUSSIA'S Ilyushin aircraft design bureau, together with US engine makers and
avionics companies, is preparing to unveil a US-Russian airliner at the end
of this month. In the centre of Moscow, a cinema 'hijacked' by its Russian
workforce two years ago has yet to be returned to the French investors who
refurbished it.
Between these two extremes of success and failure, foreign investment in
Russia has lagged sharply behind the opportunities suggested by the
country's enormous natural wealth and unsatisfied demands for consumer goods
and services.
The failure of foreign investment to materialise on any significant scale -
just over Dollars 1bn (Pounds 700m) last year, according to a government
official - has been largely Russia's fault. But President Boris Yeltsin's
showdown with the Russian parliament may help change the picture, even if it
promises to create even greater political instability in the near future.
'This instability is better than the status quo because it might lead to
some more permanent improvement,' says one western commercial counsellor.
The 'elementary order' Mr Yeltsin has promised to restore in Russia if he
wins a popular vote of confidence on April 25 is the most basic requirement
of foreign companies discouraged by red tape, corruption, and political
instability.
Apart from asking the country whether it wants a strong presidency and
private land ownership, Mr Yeltsin also mobilised western governments into
focusing on ways in which they can help revive the floundering Russian
economy. One part of the answer is to step up official encouragement for
western companies to invest in Russia and provide badly-needed capital
investment and management skills.
Mr Alexander Shokin, deputy prime minister for foreign economic relations,
complained last week that foreign investment so far was minimal compared
with Russia's needs and with the political stakes for the west in the
success of Russian economic reform. He said the government was creating a
database to help provide foreign companies with information on
opportunities, while both his Agency for Foreign Economic Co-operation and a
new Russian state corporation to insure investment risk were also available.
But behind the new schemes, the obstacles are very elementary indeed. Some
of it is basic law enforcement. In the case of the French cinema, a court
order was served in January for the labour collective - still a powerful
institution in Russia after 70 years of socialism - to reopen the business
to France's UGC cinema group.
But Mr Marc Ruscart, commercial director for the Russian-French joint
venture when it operated the cinema, says he is still waiting to see if it
will ever be enforced.
Much red tape could be abolished fairly quickly. For instance, even
representative offices of western banks in Moscow have to file reports twice
a year to the central bank on details ranging from their customers to what
cars they drive.
Other problems are due to conflicting government regulations and frequent
changes in taxation.
But Mr Genrikh Novozhilov, head of the Ilyushin design bureau, argues that
his joint project with US aero-engine maker Pratt &amp; Whitney proves that
foreign investment is possible in key sectors like aerospace.
But looking at the much more active participation of foreign companies in
neighbouring China, some Russians believe Mr Yeltsin's promise to restore
order can only succeed if it leads to a dictatorship, for instance to stop
squabbling between central and local authorities.
'You in the west have already forgiven the Chinese for Tiananmen Square,'
says one official. 'Dictatorship is bad but it must be accepted as a
necessary evil to switch to a market economy.'
