FT  15 OCT 93 / Still gently as he goes: The case for speedier reform in
Egypt
Mr Hosni Mubarak, who assumed Egypt's presidency on the assassination of
Anwar Sadat in 1981, this week began a third presidential term which,
barring upsets, should last until 2000. This much was clear long before the
formality of last week's referendum, in which 95 per cent of Egyptians who
voted endorsed six more years of Mr Mubarak's rule.
Less clear is what Mr Mubarak will do with his six years. Before the vote he
stressed that, though he ran unchallenged, 'no one should think this vote
won't change things'. Yesterday saw the first signs of change, as Mr Atef
Sidki, Mr Mubarak's long-serving prime minister, finalised a shuffle of 16
of the cabinet's 34 portfolios.
The reshuffle was a long-awaited response to domestic pressure for new faces
in what was looking a tired government. But many old faces remain,
particularly in the powerful defence, interior and central economic posts.
'He's given the impression of change and dynamism,' was one diplomat's
response, 'but most of the old guard is still there.'
The pressure for change is also strong among Egypt's allies, as well as the
International Monetary Fund and World Bank - custodians of Egypt's economic
reforms.
The need for action on the economy is acute. A quarter of Egypt's 58m people
live on less than Dollars 35 a month, according to the World Bank,
unemployment is officially 20 per cent and unofficially twice that, and a
plodding, public sector-led economy cannot keep pace with population growing
at 2.3 per cent a year. Worse, a rising wave of Islamic extremism is feeding
on the discontent that has resulted: in the past 18 months there have been
bombings in Cairo, assassination attempts on ministers and clashes with
security forces that have left 200 people dead.
After 12 years at the helm, Mr Mubarak is no stranger to these problems. But
his instinct has been to address them cautiously, with the help of a close
coterie of trusted aides and ministers - almost all of whom survived the
reshuffle.
'Mr Mubarak's cautious style, which served him well in the 1980s, is still a
very cautious style and maybe not right for the '90s,' says Mr William
Quandt of the Brookings Institution, the Washington-based think-tank. 'There
are many who hold the perception that things are now changing too fast for
him.'
In numerous statements before and since the referendum, Mr Mubarak
emphasised more of the 'steady as she goes' policies which characterised his
first terms, during which he relaxed restrictions on opposition political
parties, began IMF and World Bank adjustment programmes and oversaw big
improvements in infrastructure. On Wednesday he told his ministers that
Egypt's priorities were economic reform, security, social justice,
unemployment, improving education, and tackling rising population and
cumbersome bureaucracy.
Nowhere, however, has Mr Mubarak suggested reforms to Egypt's political
system. Yesterday's cabinet reshuffle will do nothing to satisfy a
frustrated body of critics in Egypt who claim that systemic reform is
essential if the government is to counter the appeal of Islamic
fundamentalism. They argue that Egypt's political institutions are so
corrupt that the system can neither accommodate moderate Islamic opinion nor
offer modernising alternatives a popularly based platform.
In place of a vibrant democracy, say the critics, Mr Mubarak's tenure rests
on the backing of Egypt's influential military and on the powerful patronage
of the ruling National Democratic party. Referendum results showing 95 per
cent support for him partly strain credulity, but partly also highlight the
lack of democratic choice, they argue.
Critics like Mr Mohammed Sayed Ahmed, a leading commentator, as well as
opposition parties, recite a well-rehearsed wish list of reforms. Many say
the 21-year-old constitution should be rewritten. They say Mr Mubarak should
step down as president of the National Democratic party, because by holding
both party and national leadership he makes it impossible for other parties
to challenge the NDP effectively.
Critics also point out that Mr Mubarak has ruled Egypt under a state of
emergency since 1981, giving him virtually unchecked power. As a minimum,
they say, he should appoint a vice-president - a post unfilled since Mr
Mubarak himself held it under Sadat.
But by retaining Mr Sidki, not noted as a zealous reformer, and other close
aides, it seems Mr Mubarak's instincts are unaltered: that Islamic
fundamentalism must be crushed before any political changes are possible,
and that economic reform has to take priority. 'Mubarak does not want to
make a big jump in democracy without a parallel and equivalent progress in
economic development,' says Mr Mamdouh Beltagui, yesterday named tourism
minister.
Mr Mubarak campaigned hard on impressive progress made under the first
stages of the IMF and World Bank reforms - during 1990-92, inflation halved
to about 12 per cent, the budget deficit was slashed from more than 20 to
4.7 per cent of GDP, reserves rose to Dollars 17bn and the currency was
stable. The watchword for his third term, he suggested, would be more - but
steady - economic adjustment.
But even on economic policy, many wonder if his present government, in spite
of its new faces, has the ideological commitment or technical competence to
push through the next stage of structural reforms. Economists close to
Egypt's reforms say the country is merely at the threshold of the tough
structural changes that might enable the private sector to make
growth-producing inroads into the leaden, public sector-dominated economy.
'The government doesn't yet have even the minimum of technocracy in place
for these reforms,' says one. 'They are also about the most reluctant
reformers of the public sector you could conceive of.'
These economists hold out little hope that Egypt's economy will reach the
IMF target of GDP growth rates of 4 per cent or more over the next few years
without structural reforms which 'cut to the muscle'. An ambitious
privatisation programme, which the IMF considers the most important
indicator of the government's commitment to inspiring private sector-led
growth, is already suffering bureaucratic delay.
Even a half-baked stab at the next stage of economic reforms will incur
substantial social costs: higher unemployment in the short term. Without
attendant political and democratic reforms, opposition to these effects
could find vent through further Islamic extremism. The danger is that Mr
Mubarak's insistence on gradualism and stability will translate into
government inertia. But Egypt's problems are not standing still. 'The worst
thing that can happen to Egypt,' says Ms Judith Kipper, of the Brookings
Institution, 'is that nothing happens.'
