FT  06 APR 93 / Fear of redundancy haunts company loyalists
A JAPANESE executive returned to Toyko from business in the US recently to
find that his job had gone. He is still on the pay roll but now he gives
lectures on sexual harassment to colleagues being posted abroad.
He is one of a rising number of employees at Japanese companies whose roles
are redundant but who are still on the payroll because of the Japanese
corporate aversion to compulsory redundancy.
Kigyo-nai shitsugyo, or unemployment within companies, has become a growing
concern as companies struggle to cut costs in the face of a persistent
economic downturn.
Research institutes warn that unemployment, officially only 2.3 per cent at
1.57m, will rise sharply if economic activity fails to revive and companies
start to shed already 'redundant' staff.
Nissei Research Centre estimates that more than 600,000 paid workers were
redundant in all industries, excluding construction, in the fourth quarter
last year, the highest level of internal unemployment since the previous
peak after the first oil shock in the 1970s.
Nikko Research Centre believes the number is even higher. It estimates that
in manufacturing alone kigyo-nai shitsugyo in the fourth quarter of last
year was 1.15m.
The Bank of Japan, in its latest quarterly business survey, says the
proportion of manufacturers believing they have excess labour rose to 19 per
cent from 13 per cent in the previous survey.
Company after company has announced plans to cut recruitment next year, and
several, including NTT, the telecommunications group, and Japan Air Lines,
have announced plans to reduce significantly the number of employees on
their payrolls over a number of years. But there is concern that corporate
Japan is doing too little to deal with the burden of excess labour.
Faced with recession and dwindling profits, large Japanese companies have
generally cut staff costs by reducing overtime and bonuses, hiring fewer
contract employees and cutting the number of recruits.
Some are moving workers into areas where demand is stronger and seconding
some to subsidiaries; some are even asking staff to stay at home.
Voluntary early retirement is a last resort, while compulsory redundancies
are still unheard of among virtually all large corporations. Pioneer, which
makes compact disc players and video equipment, caused an uproar earlier
this year by forcing 35 of its senior directors into early retirement.
'People are not things,' says Mr Tsuyoshi Kawanishi, senior vice president
of Toshiba. 'We must find a way to employ our staff.'
Many of the Japanese corporations curtailing employment are having to pay
for the high number of recruits they took on in the boom years of the late
1980s. Fujitsu, Japan's largest computer company which is cutting
recruitment to 300 next year, took on nearly 4,000 in 1989.
Nikko Research warns there is a limit to the amount companies can achieve
with cost-cutting measures short of redundancy.
Mr Yasuo Kuwashima, chief economist at the Federation of Labour Unions'
Research Centre, believes it is difficult to quantify how many are
internally unemployed, but he is concerned that unemployment could rise in
coming months.
If job cuts start to feed through now, it is likely unemployment will drift
up until the end of the year, assuming the first quarter was the bottom of
the economic cycle (unemployment normally lags recovery by three quarters).
'But then again we don't yet know if the first quarter was the bottom,' says
Mr Kuwashima.
