FT  22 JUL 93 / GM-VW inquiry statement due
FRESH light is expected to be shed on the industrial espionage battle
between General Motors and Volkswagen later today when criminal
investigators are due to issue their first formal statement since they
started the search for evidence in late April.
The Darmstadt state prosecutor's office, which took up the investigation at
GM's request after Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua defected from GM to VW
in March, said its statement would cover progress so far.
Most interest is focused on recent finds, especially four boxes discovered
on July 12 in a Wiesbaden apartment previously occupied by two of Mr Lopez's
colleagues. The duo quit GM's German subsidiary, Adam Opel, shortly after Mr
Lopez was appointed production and procurement director at VW. The cartons
are known to have contained details of a secret new car model, but it is
understood that further confidential information was also discovered.
Mr Lopez and his associates, backed by VW and the group's supervisory board,
have consistently denied that they took or delivered any secrets to VW.
The state prosecutors, who launched their probe after GM established grounds
for suspicion of industrial spying by presenting affidavits from its
employees, have already interviewed more than 30 employees of the US-based
automotive group.
VW staff have also been called in, but it is understood that Mr Lopez and
his associates who joined him at VW when he quit General Motors, have yet to
be interviewed.
Mr Lopez and Mr Jose Manuel Gutierrez, his closest aide at GM and now at VW,
are believed to be on holiday. Personal testimony and affidavits from GM
staff played a key role in a Hamburg court ruling earlier this week in which
VW failed to prevent Der Spiegel news magazine from continuing to publish
allegations of industrial espionage against VW and its employees.
Opel said yesterday that if VW pressed on with a full court hearing to try
to reimpose a gag on Der Spiegel, it expected its employees would be
prepared to appear again to support the magazine's case.
Volkswagen confirmed that it was considering restarting legal proceedings
after this week's setback, but it wanted to see the court's reasoned opinion
on the rulings first. According to VW, it could be several weeks before the
written opinion is ready.
