FT  12 MAY 93 / International Company News: Martinez moves quickly to bring
a new vision to Sears, Roebuck - Laurie Morse and Nikki Tait examine the
embattled US retailers' new merchandising chief's attempts to reposition in
the market
SEARS, Roebuck, one of the largest and most heavily criticised companies in
the US, will tomorrow confront its shareholders. The annual meeting, in
Kansas, promises to be flinty, though it is unlikely to be as contentious as
in previous years.
Institutional shareholders are likely to take a soft line on the shopkeeping
side of the business and, instead, focus their anger on the failures and
foibles of Mr Edward Brennan, Sears' chairman.
In the past 10 months, Mr Brennan has been forced to abandon his vision of
Sears as an integrated financial company selling 'stocks and socks'.
As the financial businesses are spun off - Dean Witter and Discover Card
operations were sold in a popular public offering last quarter - Sears is
returning to its merchandising roots.
To the relief of shareholders, America's retailing dowager is undergoing a
long-overdue facelift. In a last-ditch effort to retrieve sagging lines and
return its large retailing operations to profitability, Chicago-based Sears
is offering cosmetics and fragrances, silk blouses, where once it offered
staples such as tools and hardware in its mall-based stores.
These signs of a fundamental overhaul are being orchestrated by Mr Arthur
Martinez, Sears' new merchandising chief, who arrived from Saks Fifth Avenue
seven months ago. Despite the brevity of his tenure, he has moved quickly.
He has wielded the axe. Sears' 97-year-old catalogue has been dropped, more
than 50,000 employees have been made redundant, and 113 of the company's 850
stores have been closed.
The cuts, reckoned to add Dollars 300m to annual profits, have been
applauded on Wall Street, where the retailer has been accused of feinting
reform for 15 years. Sears' shares have risen from around Dollars 37 a year
ago to around Dollars 55 - one reason shareholder discontent may be less
pronounced at the annual meeting.
Mr Martinez has also unveiled plans to spend Dollars 4bn over the next five
years refurbishing stores and to make them attractive to the nation's middle
class, and increasingly female, shoppers. Furniture and hardware lines will
be shifted, in some cases to free-standing Homelife stores which will
compete with specialty chains such as Home Mart and Ikea.
All Dollars 4bn must come from group operating profits. Mr Martinez says
that, to fund the strategy, 'we are not dependent on the parent company, or
the fortunes of other subsidiaries, like Allstate'.
Analysts say the affable executive has made all the right moves so far.
Retailing consultant Leo J. Shapiro says: 'He's taken the important first
step, which is getting Sears to stop doing things wrong.'
But no one, least of all Mr Martinez, pretends that repositioning Sears' 740
remaining stores will be easy. He is saddled with retail properties of
diverse standards situated in mid-market malls of 1960s and 1970s vintage.
His target shopper, the middle class woman, is not used to finding glamour
at Sears while shifting hardware lines elsewhere might alienate faithful
male shoppers.
But Sears' re-positioning efforts may be inadequate. Wal-Mart Stores, the
aggressive discount retailer, has a capital expenditure budget averaging
about Dollars 2bn a year and K mart is spending Dollars 3bn to renovate its
discount stores.
Part of Sears' problem is that discount store competitors continue to
undercut prices, while specialty retailers are building ever-larger
superstores and attracting shoppers with larger product ranges.
Many traditional department stores, meanwhile, have moved upmarket,
stressing service levels in an effort to better the discounters. 'Our
biggest vulnerability is the distance we have to come,' says Mr Martinez.
The figures reveal the scale of the task. Last year, the core retailing
operations made a tiny Dollars 55m profit. Total revenues from the
merchandising division were Dollars 32bn. Credit operations then contributed
Dollars 411m, leaving the net profits for the division (before non-recurring
items) at Dollars 271m.
Same-store sales growth was inconsistent, sagging badly in the early-summer
but recovering towards the year-end.
Despite Mr Martinez's aggressive cuts, Sears' selling costs still take 28
cents out of every dollar of sales compared with about 16 cents at Wal-Mart
and about 20 cents at K mart.
Analysts suggest Sears is targeting an expense ratio of 22 per cent within
three years, which would rival other department stores and specialty chain
operators. It will need to achieve steady sales gains to hit that target.
Analysts note that previous cost cuts - all Dollars 1bn-worth - were simply
counteracted by lower margins.
The 57-year-old Mr Martinez knows competitors will not wait while Sears
catches up. 'The pace of change in this business gets faster and faster each
year,' he says, estimating he has about a year to show results before Wall
Street critics rise again.
Taking out the high-cost catalogue business should significantly cut selling
costs, alongside attempts to lighten Sears' cumbersome buying organisation.
This cut to the heart of Sears' culture. Last century, the retail operation
was founded on the catalogue business and executives were reluctant to
abandon it - even though it had been bleeding about Dollars 150m a year for
the past eight years. Mr Martinez's advantage is that he is an outsider.
This is a sharp contrast to Mr Brennan, who surrendered the merchandising
division's reins after fumbling two reform attempts. Mr Martinez says he has
Mr Brennan's full support for his reforms, but he is emphatic that the plan
to reposition Sears in the market is completely his own.
He has also been replacing old Sears hands with new blood, particularly in
his marketing department, and is conducting a competition to determine which
agency should win Sears's lucrative advertising business.
But, somewhere down the line, Mr Martinez must bring forth some fresh ideas.
One possibility stems from his belief that paper catalogues are becoming
obsolete; so Sears must position itself for video shopping.
'Interactive home shopping may be finally, finally coming into its own,' Mr
Martinez says. 'I've got board support to commit some research and
development dollars in this area.'
Sears is part-owner of the Prodigy home computer network, and its Craftsman
tools are pitched on the Philadelphia-based QVC television shopping channel.
Radical ideas, such as video shopping, are the kind of risky long shots
analysts say are necessary if Sears is to leapfrog its rivals. However, with
department stores such as Macy's already on that trail, Mr Martinez may
again find himself trying to catch up.
