FT  25 NOV 93 / International Company News: Deutsche Bank offshoot in L470bn
Italian deal
Banca d'America e d'Italia (BAI), Deutsche Bank's big Italian subsidiary, is
paying L470bn (Dollars 277m) to buy a controlling 58.07 per cent stake in
Banca Popolare di Lecco (BPL), a profitable northern regional bank.
BAI will also have to mount a compulsory offer to minority shareholders in
BPL, which is quoted on Milan's unlisted securities market, at the L18,279 a
share it is paying the bank's controlling shareholder, Banca Popolare di
Novarra. The offer will add an estimated L340bn to the transaction.
Final pricing, and terms of the public offer, will only be established in
early April 1994, after a due diligence examination of BPL's accounts.
The deal is the biggest single investment by Deutsche Bank in Italy since
its December 1986 takeover of BAI for Dollars 603m. Since then, the Italian
subsidiary has expanded its branches. Last year it made an unsuccessful bid
for Citibank's southern Italian retail banking operation.
The purchase comes at a time of ferment among Italy's medium-sized regional
banks, which have tended to steer clear of the big loan-loss provisions now
being made by the country's larger financial institutions.
Banca Popolare di Verona, a leading north Italian regional, has launched an
unprecedented hostile bid for Banco San Geminiano e San Prospero, a
medium-sized bank based in Modena. Separately, the Parma savings bank, which
has already grown through local mergers, last week confirmed it was in talks
to buy Credito Commerciale, a slightly bigger Milan-based counterpart.
In some cases, as in the BPL and Credito Commerciale deals, the
once-inconceivable sales of prized subsidiaries has become necessary to
staunch financial difficulties at their parent companies. In the case of
Banco San Geminiano, high profits and good geographic coverage have drawn
the unwanted attention of an ambitious neighbour taking advantage of
indirect encouragement from the Bank of Italy for more bank mergers.
BPL has about 1,200 staff and 100 branches in Lombardy, Italy's richest
region. The bank, which has total assets of about L6,000bn, will continue to
operate independently of BAI for the time being. BAI now has around 150
branches nationwide and about 3,000 staff.
