FT  07 SEP 93 / Renault and Volvo agree to merge vehicle operations
RENAULT and Volvo are to merge their automotive operations to create
Europe's second largest vehicle maker and one of the world's 20 biggest
industrial groups, the companies announced yesterday.
The merger is one of the most significant steps in the restructuring of the
world auto industry and is aimed at strengthening the two companies in the
face of depressed markets and growing competition.
The deal, which will take effect from the beginning of next year, will also
clear the way for the sale of the French government's controlling stake in
Renault as part of its ambitious privatisation programme to be launched this
autumn.
The French state will initially hold, directly and indirectly, 65 per cent
of the newly formed Renault-Volvo Automotive, with Volvo holding the
remaining 35 per cent. The merger will include all of Renault, but only
Volvo's automotive operations. It will exclude the Swedish group's marine,
aero-engine and food interests.
France will have an upper hand in the management of the group. Mr Louis
Schweitzer, Renault's chairman, will be chief executive and chairman of the
management board of Renault-Volvo Automotive in charge of the day-to-day
operations of the group.
But the Swedish company will retain a powerful influence through the
adoption of a German-style supervisory board which will be chaired by Mr
Pehr Gyllenhammar, the Volvo chairman.
The decision to move from the existing alliance to a full-scale merger has
been accelerated by the decline in the European car market, which is set to
contract by about 16 per cent this year. The two companies say they will
achieve substantial economies through the merger by sharing costs across a
larger production volume.
But both companies stressed that the identities of their cars and trucks
would remain distinct.
Both Mr Gyllenhammar and Mr Schweitzer expressed confidence that the two
companies could be merged smoothly. They said they were aware of the dangers
and difficulties involved in merging two large industrial groups but that
the experience of their three-year alliance would facilitate co-operation.
Mr Gerard Longuet, the French industry minister, said that the merger and
the privatisation of Renault would make it easier to raise capital. He said
he hoped the sale of the government's stake in Renault could be achieved
from the second half of 1994, depending on conditions in the car market and
the performance of the merged company.
The structure of the merger means that the French government along with
Volvo should retain control of the group even after the sale of the state
holding in Renault. A financial holding company, owned 51 per cent by the
French government and 49 per cent by Volvo, will hold a 35 per cent share in
Renault-Volvo Automotive. The French stake in this holding company is
expected to form the basis for a core of long-term French investors.
Reaction in Sweden to the long-awaited merger ranged from angry denunciation
in a popular newspaper to strong support from prime minister Carl Bildt's
centre-right government.
Market reaction was subdued as the deal had largely been discounted. Volvo's
B share fell SKr7 to close at SKr483.
Hard slog to make the marriage work Page 19
Editorial Comment Page 19
Lex Page 20
Analysis Page 28
World stocks Page 39
