FT  04 DEC 93 / Major shifts position in Ulster talks: Dublin stresses end
to IRA violence - Go-between explains republican 'pique'
Irish persistence paid off at yesterday's Anglo-Irish summit in Dublin, with
the British delegation being persuaded to work intensively on the joint
declaration being sought by Dublin aimed at a permanent halt to IRA
violence.
Considerable differences remain over its phrasing, which will be discussed
in subsequent summits scheduled for later in the month. Agreement is by no
means assured. But the Irish government can derive some satisfaction in
having convinced Mr John Major to tackle the peace process before moving on
to British concerns over constitutional issues, in particular the Irish
republic's territorial claim to Northern Ireland.
The Irish proposal, contained in a document tabled last July, has been back
and forth between the two governments since, and disagreement over its focus
on the issue of Irish self-determination has been the principal stumbling
block to progress on the peace initiative.
Self-determination is viewed as a loaded term by the British and by Northern
Ireland's unionists, who see it as implying a veto by the republic over
constitutional changes in the north. The Irish insist that this is not so.
Mr Noel Dempsey, the Irish government chief whip, said: 'There seems to be
some confusion in the British government's mind as to what we mean by
self-determination.'
He added: 'What we are talking about is separate referenda, north and south,
where both peoples in both parts of the island can make their views known.
If consent is freely given, if a majority in both parts of the island decide
that they want a united Ireland, of whatever form, then we will abide by
that. We are not talking about collective self-determination.'
In Belfast, Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, last night said that
hopes for an immediate unilateral ceasefire by the IRA was 'unrealistic'.
Mr Richard Macaulay, Sinn Fein official spokesman, said: 'It is unrealistic
to expect that the IRA will unilaterally end their actions without political
progress.'
Mr Jim Rodgers, deputy leader of the official Unionist Party on Belfast City
Council, warned that loyalist paramilitaries were preparing a backlash if
the London-Dublin peace process led to big concessions to the nationalist
community.
While the talks were taking place the army discovered a 1,000lb IRA bomb
intended for an army patrol. The device was planted on the outskirts of
Belfast near a primary school.
The nationalist goal of a united Ireland does not seem to be as crucial to
Catholics in Northern Ireland as many have believed. An opinion poll in
yesterday's Irish Times indicated that only 32 per cent of Catholics in
Ulster favour a united Ireland, although 65 per cent favour a constitutional
change involving a greater role for Dublin.
