FT  11 JAN 93 / McCurdy the victim in Congress feud
WASHINGTON knows no fury like a speaker scorned. This is the conventionial
interpretation of last Friday's decision by Mr Tom Foley, the speaker, to
remove Congressman Dave McCurdy, the rising star from Oklahoma, from the
chairmanship of the House intelligence committee.
Yesterday, for the record, Mr Foley flatly denied he wanted to take Mr
McCurdy down a peg.
Intelligence committee members were only supposed to serve for six years,
whereas Mr McCurdy had done nine, the last two as chairman, he said. 'I
thought others should have the opportunity to serve,' he added, while
praising Mr McCurdy's 'credible and innovative' chairmanship of the panel.
In reality, Mr McCurdy, 42 and fairly close to President-elect Bill Clinton,
has been a thorn in Mr Foley's flesh for some time.
At the height of the House bank scandal last year, he questioned the
speaker's leadership and even spoke of launching a challenge for his job. Mr
Foley was returned unopposed to his position last month.
More recently, Mr McCurdy had seemed to be campaigning a little too openly
for the position of secretary of defence or possibly director of the CIA in
the Clinton cabinet. This put him up against Mr Les Aspin, the chairman of
the House armed services committee eventually chosen for the Pentagon job.
Mr Aspin and Mr Foley are close. Adding insult to injury, Mr McCurdy took to
warning that if Mr Aspin did move into the cabinet, the next person in line
for the committee chairmanship would be Mr Ron Dellums of California, the
dovish black congressman from California.
Whatever his policy inclinations, Mr Dellums is also very much a senior
member of the House leadership club under Mr Foley's direction.
Mr McCurdy has also been a prominent member of the Democratic Leadership
Council, the southern-dominated centrist grouping in which Mr Clinton was
long active.
The DLC and its think-tank, the Progressive Policy Institute, provided many
ideas for a successful presidential campaign, from which the congressional
leadership sometimes felt a little excluded.
Mr McCurdy himself issued a statement on Friday seeming to acknowledge that
the speaker had put his foot down. He cited Mr Foley's 'desire to place his
own team' on the intelligence committee.
He remains, however, a member of the armed services committee, with plenty
of opportunity to get his views over.
