FT  26 APR 93 / US Money and Credit: Clinton's Congress defeat shrugged off
by markets
THE killing of President Bill Clinton's economic stimulus package has
injected some fresh political anxieties into the US credit markets, though
these were hard to discern in last week's directionless trading pattern.
Mr Clinton suffered his first large defeat in Congress on Wednesday when
Democrats abandoned his much-vaunted economic stimulus package in the face
of a prolonged filibuster by an unexpectedly united Republican Party.
The setback, combined with the new administration's clumsy handling of
several other issues, raises questions about Mr Clinton's ability to push
through Congress the more important items on his legislative agenda,
especially large cuts in the federal budget deficit.
Failure to cut the deficit would be very bad news for the credit markets,
since it could stoke inflationary pressures and increase the supply of
government paper, thus tending to put downward pressure on bond prices.
However, the markets took Mr Clinton's defeat in their stride, with the
benchmark 30-year Treasury issue ending the week at a yield of 6.79 per
cent, just four basis points higher than the 6.75 per cent of seven days
earlier.
There are several reasons. First, the new administration is on a steep
learning curve and Mr Clinton is expected to learn from his strategy
mistakes over the stimulus bill.
Second, the credit markets were opposed to the stimulus package as
potentially inflationary, even though in its final Dollars 16bn form it
would have had minimal impact on the direction of the economy.
Third, the consensus Wall Street view of the economy presents a benign
backdrop for bonds: the US is expected to remain in a slow but sustainable
expansion, with both real gross domestic product growth and consumer
inflation for the year likely to be around 3 per cent.
These assumptions will be tested on Thursday when the Commerce Department
releases its report on first quarter GDP, which will show a sharp slow-down
from the 3.7 per cent and 4.7 per cent growth rates recorded in the last two
quarters of 1992, possibly to around 2 per cent.
The slow-down was underscored on Friday when the government released
statistics showing that orders for durable goods fell 3.7 per cent in March,
the biggest decline in 15 months and more than Wall Street had been
expecting.
However, both these figures and those for first-quarter GDP will have been
distorted by the severe storms which disrupted business activity in the
middle of last month, and the underlying economic picture seems rather
healthier than the GDP figures are likely to suggest.
Wall Street should get a clearer view of the momentum in the first week of
May, when the first statistics for April are released, and these could
propel the market out of its narrow trading range.
The market remains prone to inflation scares - the weakness of
interest-sensitive share prices and the strength of gold prices last week
has some analysts warning of a build-up in inflationary pressures - and
signs of an April bounce-back could unnerve bond traders.
The first week of May will bring details of the Treasury's refunding plans
for the month, as well as the results of a government study into the mix of
maturities that make up the federal debt.
The new administration has been considering a shift of emphasis from
long-dated to shorter-dated instruments, although Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the
Treasury secretary, repeated last week that nothing radical was planned.
Even so, the market has been subject to speculation that the government may
not auction 30-year bonds in May, which has been one of the factors keeping
yields steady over the past week.
