FT  26 OCT 93 / Labour calls for EC recovery fund
LABOUR yesterday urged the European Community to set up a multi-billion
pound fund as part of a seven-point plan for a co-ordinated EC economic
strategy.
The idea is part of a submission to Mr Jacques Delors, president of the
European Commission, who is preparing a white paper on growth and
unemployment.
Under Labour's plan, the fund would be used to reduce unemployment and speed
Europe's economic recovery. Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor, said the
fund would be in addition to a Ecu5bn (Pounds 3.88bn) bridging facility
proposed by Mr Delors.
Labour says only joint action by the EC and member states can promote
sustainable growth and a reduction in Community unemployment, which totals
18m.
'The economies of the Community are now so inter-dependent that expansionary
measures undertaken in concert can achieve common benefits which cannot be
realised by any single member state acting alone,' Mr Brown said.
'This is particularly so where, as in Britain's case, capacity weakened by
under-investment and balance of payments problems mean that recession in the
rest of Europe is one of the biggest barriers to recovery at home.'
Mr Brown said the proposed recovery fund would take advantage of EC
credit-worthiness to raise funds to be made available as grants or loans to
member states.
The money would be spent on infrastructure, training, environmental
protection, and maintenance work, mainly in areas of high unemployment.
'The aim should be to operate the fund at a deficit in periods of recession
in the Community, and in surplus when economic recovery is secured,' Mr
Brown said.
Labour's submission to Mr Delors reiterates the party's support for a system
of fixed exchange rates leading to European monetary union.
However, it says progress towards EMU will depend on economic convergence
between member states and more flexible exchange rates.
'The imposition of a fixed-rate regime, as a prelude to monetary union,
without real convergence having first been achieved, and with inflexible
insistence on nominal targets, is a recipe for divergent economic
performance and a waste of people through unemployment on a grotesque scale.
'The community has seen more than enough of this; we don't want more,' it
says.
Labour also calls for a 'jobs initiative' to cut the numbers of long-term
unemployed through rebates of social insurance for employers; acceleration
of infrastructure projects; improved skills and qualifications for workers;
a shift away from the EC common agricultural policy; and spending on
environmental improvement projects.
Labour said the government had failed to take up the full EC training and
regional funds to which Britain is entitled. 'They have dragged their feet
on much needed investment measures,' said Mr Brown.
