FT  11 AUG 93 / Drugs groups express relief at pricing plans: Proposed
agreement leaves regulated profits intact
THE BRITISH government yesterday surprised the drugs industry by proposing a
conciliatory new five-year pricing agreement for pharmaceuticals which does
not involve a feared cut in companies' regulated profits.
The voluntary scheme, which must be agreed by the industry, includes a 2.5
per cent cut in prices for three years.
Most drugs groups greeted the proposals with relief. There had been fears of
a far larger reduction in prices - up to 7 per cent - following similar cuts
in Germany and Italy. The maximum return on capital employed - presently
controlled at between 17 per cent and 21 per cent after allowing for
research and development expenditure - was also expected to have been cut.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, said: 'This has been a lengthy
negotiation, with hard bargaining on both sides. I believe the agreement is
in the best interests of patients, the taxpayer and the industry itself. I
hope the pharmaceutical companies will support it.'
Glaxo, the UK's biggest pharmaceuticals company, said it found the new
scheme acceptable given the current economic difficulties in the UK.
However, it warned that in the long term the British industry had to be
supported to ensure continuing funding of research into new diseases. Swiss
and American companies, which have been more critical than their British
counterparts about the government's attitude, have yet to respond.
Drug groups have two weeks in which to study the complicated deal, known as
the pharmaceutical price regulation scheme. If they agree its terms, the
price reduction would take effect on October 1. The cuts would save the
Department of Health about Pounds 85m.
Last year the National Health Service drugs budget was about Pounds 3.4bn,
but was increasing at about 14 per cent. Mrs Bottomley said it was difficult
to ask NHS employees to accept a 1.5 per cent ceiling on pay rises while the
drugs bill grew at that rate.
The new scheme involves a number of complex elements. These include:
A reduction in the 'grey area' which allows companies to exceed their
maximum return on capital by 50 per cent if they have achieved higher sales
without excessive promotion or price increases. The 'grey area' would be cut
to 25 per cent.
Only allowing companies to ask for an increase in prices if they undershoot
their return on capital target by 25 per cent.
Exempting small companies with NHS drugs sales of under Pounds 20m from
providing full financial details to the Department of Health to enable it to
calculate their return on capital. The previous limit was Pounds 4m. This
will affect about 25 companies.
UK healthcare stocks were largely indifferent to the news. The UK is one of
the smaller European pharmaceutical markets and few companies are heavily
exposed to it. In a falling market Glaxo closed up 7 1/2 p at 524p,
SmithKline Beecham fell 7p at 431p, Wellcome rose 5p at 659p and Zeneca was
steady at 650p.
Spoonful of sugar for the drugs sector, Page 5
Editorial Comment, Page 13
See Lex
