FT  09 JUN 93 / Wellcome shares fall 25p as scientist urges curb on AZT
THE TOP scientist involved in the largest-ever trial of AZT, the Aids
treatment produced by Wellcome of the UK, yesterday urged that the drug
should not be used in HIV-positive patients who have yet to develop symptoms
of the disease.
The recommendation by Dr Maxime Seligmann, chairman of the co-ordinating
committee for the Anglo-French Concorde trial, comes as a further blow to
Wellcome. Shares in the company, which suffered badly in April when
preliminary results of the study were announced, fell 25p yesterday to close
at 728p.
AZT is Wellcome's second-biggest selling drug, and a significant number of
those for whom it is prescribed have tested positive for HIV antibodies but
remain outwardly healthy.
Setting out the findings of the study to the annual international Aids
conference in Berlin, Dr Seligmann said AZT did not slow the development of
the disease in such patients, did not extend life expectancy and failed to
improve quality of life.
'Given the side effects, the number of blood tests required and the drug's
cost, and given its limited and transient effect, it is better to save AZT
for later when the patient is developing Aids,' Dr Seligmann said.
Countering criticism of the methods used in the trial, he said that between
the drug and a placebo there was 'no difference in the speed of progression
to either disease or death'. The three-year trial, the longest ever
conducted, showed that 266 of the 887 patients on AZT either died or
developed Aids or Aids-related complex.
Among the 872 on the placebo, 283 died or developed the diseases. Previous
studies had suggested AZT slowed the development of the disease, but these
had not followed patients for as long as the Concorde trial.
Dr Seligmann said the Concorde trial had not tested the efficacy of AZT in
patients who had already developed Aids. It had also not tested the drug in
combination with other medicines.
Dr Paul Fidian, Wellcome's head of virology, questioned the conclusion that
it was not worth using drugs early. He said a joint European and Australian
study, to be published in the New England Journal of Medicine next month,
would show there was benefit the earlier the medicines were used. It was
also necessary to look at the dosing used in the Concorde study before
drawing strong conclusions, he added. The trial had used a dose of 1g,
whereas the most common dose was now 500mg in Europe and 600mg in the US.
Patients were better able to tolerate the lower dose, and the virus built up
resistance less quickly.
London stocks, Page 46
