FT  15 JUN 93 / Management (The Growing Business): A wider view for the
workforce - Lisa Wood examines a government standard which aims to improve
the training of employees
Every month or so for the past two years Christine and Malcolm Bolton have
closed their small Grimsby electroplating business on a Friday afternoon and
joined their six staff for a few hours at a local hotel.
It is not a social event. On the agenda might be a discussion on the latest
profits forecasts, a brainstorming session on how to tackle technical
problems arising from a new order and whether the premises meet health and
safety rules.
The meetings are part of wider changes at Riverside Electroplaters which
have helped the company become more efficient, produce a better-quality
service and increase turnover and maintain profits at a time when profit
margins in the sector are being squeezed.
The catalyst was the company becoming committed to, and then qualifying for,
a government standard called 'Investors In People'.
IIP was developed by the Department of Employment with help from human
resource development experts. It is administered in England and Wales by the
82 Training and Enterprise Councils, which this year will receive Pounds 10m
of government money to promote what is their main weapon for improving the
training of people in work. In Scotland the scheme is administered by the 14
Local Enterprise Companies.
IIP has had a big impact at Riverside - including savings on the bottom
line. A large order worth Pounds 40,000 was nearly rejected because
Riverside could not afford special processing equipment. An employee at a
monthly meeting suggested modifying existing equipment. It cost Pounds 200
and Riverside won the order. 'We have and are still having a tough time
because of the recession,' says Christine Bolton. 'If it had not been for
IIP we probably would not still be in business.'
Viewed by many small businesses as just another big government programme,
with all the attendant bureaucracy, the IIP standard has been slow to take
off. Yet experts agree it provides one of the most useful check lists, based
on best practice, of what companies should be doing on staff development.
The standard is not an award for spending large sums on training. Rather,
assessors acting for the Tecs will ask:
Have goals been set for a business?
Have these been explained to workers?
Have workers the right skills to meet those needs?
Has the investment been evaluated against the performance of the business?
Riverside, with six employees, is the smallest company to have achieved the
IIP standard and takes pride of place in Department of Employment publicity.
According to the department, more than half of the 253 companies that have
been awarded IIP status employ fewer than 200 people. It is unlikely that
IIP would be appropriate for a company any smaller than Riverside.
IIP's impact on recipient companies has yet to be formally evaluated. Case
examples provided by the department bring ringing endorsements. However,
Riverside did have some problems gaining the standard and other small
companies could encounter similar ones.
The biggest initial obstacle at Riverside was comprehension. 'We did not
really understand what it was all about at first,' says Christine Bolton,
who with her husband and several other local businesses was invited to
presentations by the Humberside Training and Enterprise Council nearly three
years ago when IIP was being piloted. 'It is very difficult for somebody to
get across what 'relating training to your business plan' really means.'
Some Tecs have been better than others at promoting the standard and
providing their staff with skills for going into a business and finding out
what it needs. Among the best Tecs is Gloucestershire Tec which has given
IIP top priority. London Tecs are among the worst.
There were teething problems at Humberside. Riverside was asked, for
example, to do an action plan at a time when it had only a very basic
business plan - the sort that is produced for a bank. 'We wrote things like
'We must work out a staff appraisal plan by such and such a date' but it
really did not mean much to us,' says Christine Bolton.
Humberside has refined its approach over the past two years and now an
applicant for IIP would immediately be offered diagnostic work to discover
its problems and whether or not it had the basics, such as a business plan.
Similarly, changes are being made nationally to the way the standard is
presented, with a new guide* for small businesses to be published this
month.
The next obstacle for the Boltons was time, and attendant costs. 'It took us
two years to get the standard and the time commitment was enormous,' says
Christine Bolton. 'First of all there were the meetings when the scheme was
explained. Then there was the detailed work, much of which we did at home,
and the half day every month that we spend with the employees. We do know
companies that have dropped out of trying to do IIP because they could not
afford the time.'
Riverside says it is difficult to assess the full costs. In common with many
of the early recipients of IIP, the company received a lot of help from its
local Tec, including a grant for a consultant who paid six two-hour visits.
Most Tecs provide grants or matching funds for consultancy and many provide
lists of approved consultants.
Humberside Tec estimates it would now cost about Pounds 2,000 for a company
of Riverside's size to achieve the standard. Riverside cost a bit more as it
was a pilot. Peter Fryer, chief executive of the Tec, says: 'We were
learning from them and vice versa.'
Costs include the formal assessment by a Tec representative. Fees average
around Pounds 300 a day, with small businesses probably requiring two to
three days' formal assessment time. In most cases Tecs, which are very keen
to get companies on board because they have targets to meet, will negotiate
fees.
The Boltons wrote their own business plan after taking advice from
Humberside Tec. 'Our basic plan had been a series of boxes with headings,'
says Christine Bolton. 'In our new plan we relate them to each other - like
productivity having a relationship to training.'
The plan she says was essential. 'It's when you are specific about a goal
that you are able to ask yourself whether you have the skills needed to get
there and, if not, how can you work towards that.' At Riverside this
resulted in some off-the-job training, such as everybody attending a
fork-lift truck course in order to provide a flexible workforce, to a
considerable amount of on-the-job coaching by senior staff.
Christine Bolton says improved communications with staff grew from this
process. 'How can you expect people to work towards a corporate objective if
they don't know what the plan is,' she says. One employee told the assessor:
'I've never known a place like this - they listen to you.' Another said:
'They don't just tell you what to do and how to do it but why.'
Riverside's ultimate problem was how to measure improvements. 'If you are a
big company, producing something like fish fingers, it is easier to measure
things than if you are a little one like ours doing jobbing work,' says
Christine Bolton.
She gives the example of the zinc barrel plating line where an aim was to
improve productivity. The consultant suggested they used the rejection rate
as a measure, something the Boltons had not thought of. Taking this idea
further they designed a new system whereby employees on the line measured
their own rejects and the information was made public every week. Previously
quality assurance was done separately. Rejection rates have dropped from 25
per cent to 2 per cent.
Christine Bolton says the setting of targets has brought benefits she had
never envisaged. 'The consultant suggested we measured debtor days and I had
targets to reduce them. We have very few bad debts now. Why? Because I get
to know the person responsible for the payments and build up a
relationship.'
The search for some magical system of cost-benefit analysis is a common
problem, according to Sue Webb, a national assessor. 'But evaluation can be
very simple,' she says. 'If you want somebody to improve their
report-writing skills and you send them on a course you just evaluate their
progress by whether they do fewer drafts. It can be as easy as that.'
*The Small Business Tool Kit is available from all Tecs.
