FT  06 FEB 93 / BNL HQ 'knew of Iraq scandal'
SIX separate intelligence reports that were widely distributed inside the
Bush administration suggested that the Rome headquarters of the Banca
Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL) knew of billions of dollars of militarily-useful
loans made to Iraq by BNL's Atlanta branch, according to a Senate report
published yesterday.
The 160-page study by the Senate Intelligence Committee says that among the
CIA reports - issued between August 1989 and February 1991 - one concluded
that 'managers at BNL headquarters in Rome were involved in the scandal'.
The Senate report also reveals that none of the relevant CIA information was
provided to Department of Justice officials involved in the BNL case, nor to
the local prosecutors in Atlanta.
The prosecution of Mr Christopher Drogoul, the former BNL Atlanta manager,
is based on the premise that Rome was the victim of the scandal and that no
one in BNL Rome had any knowledge of Dollars 5bn of clandestine Iraqi loans
from Atlanta. A new BNL trial is expected next autumn.
The Senate committee blames the failure on 'breakdowns in the relationship
between intelligence agencies and law enforcement, combined with serious
errors of judgment by government officials.' It says this resulted in a
'highly misleading' statement by the CIA last year about its information on
the BNL case.
Senator Howard Metzenbaum, an Ohio Democrat who is a senior member of the
Senate Intelligence Committee, said a special prosecutor was still needed to
investigate the BNL loans scandal, which has been dubbed 'Iraqgate' in the
US media. Mr Metzenbaum criticised the report as 'too narrow' because it was
confined to what the CIA did with intelligence information.
The report, which makes recommendations on how to improve the use of
intelligence information in law enforcement cases, also discloses that the
CIA became aware in December 1987 that Matrix-Churchill, the UK machine
tools company then owned by Iraqi interests, was acting as an Iraqi front
company. It was not until September 1989 that the CIA obtained information
linking BNL-Atlanta to the Iraqi procurement network and reported it, the
report says.
