FT  27 JAN 93 / Clinton faces fight on military gays: Opposition grows in
Congress
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton faces a possible battle with Congress over his
campaign promise to end discrimination against homosexuals in the armed
forces.
Mr Clinton, who already faces the hostility of his top military commanders,
has now run into opposition from many members of Congress, including one of
his staunchest allies, Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia.
White House officials insist that the president remains committed to ending
discrimination against gays in the armed forces solely on the basis of their
sexual preference, while at the same time maintaining military morale and
cohesion.
But fulfilling his campaign promise may now force Mr Clinton into a
gruelling congressional battle and require the expenditure of a good deal of
political capital.
Administration officials hope in a first stage simply to direct Mr Les
Aspin, the secretary of defence, to stop asking new recruits whether they
are homosexual, and to freeze proceedings to remove declared homosexuals
from the armed forces.
Mr Aspin wants to proceed much more slowly on drafting an executive order
formally lifting the ban on homosexuals in the services, and hopes to win
over the military commanders by involving them fully in discussions of how
such a move could be implemented.
But Senator Nunn warned the president that many of the actions needed to end
the ban - such as revisions to the military justice code - lay under the
aegis of Congress, not the executive branch.
Some Republican senators are also planning to introduce a motion supporting
the current policy. Democratic leaders have warned Mr Clinton that he could
count on no more than 30 votes against such a motion in the 100-member
Senate.
Senator Edward Kennedy, who supports Mr Clinton's efforts to end the ban,
acknowledged yesterday that it would take time to implement a new policy.
'It isn't a question of whether there will be gays in the military. There
already are. The question is whether they have to lie about it,' he said.
Congress moved swiftly yesterday to revive the family leave bill vetoed by
President Bush last year, Jurek Martin adds from Washington.
The measure would require companies with more than 50 employees to offer
unpaid leave of up to 12 weeks a year to meet family exigencies, such as
illness and childbirth. The Senate labour committee approved it easily, as
it did another bill to revitalise the National Institutes of Health bill,
also vetoed by Mr Bush.
Revival of the family leave bill was a Clinton campaign promise, similar to
the series of executive orders he issued last Friday lifting many of the
previous administration's restrictions on abortion. The NIH bill is most
noteworthy for provisions facilitating the use of aborted foetal tissue in
medical research.
Republicans will seek to offer alternative legislation on the family leave
issue, involving the use of tax credits.
