FT  22 JUN 93 / Peru plea for aid on poverty
A PERUVIAN delegation headed by Mr Jorge Camet, economy minister, hopes by
the end of today to have secured pledges totalling Dollars 100m to support
the government's stepped-up poverty alleviation programme.
Peruvian officials in Paris are lobbying representatives from 10
industrialised countries and multilateral organisations with the message
that the heaviest costs of the country's stabilisation and structural
adjustment programme, applied since 1990, have fallen upon Peru's poorest.
Over 12m Peruvians (53 per cent of the population) are now classified as in
'critical' poverty. In some rural areas, that percentage is higher.
The infant mortality rate, at 82 per 1,000 kive births, is the third highest
in Latin America, behind only Bolivia and Haiti; 49 per cent of Peruvian
children under the age of five are suffering malnutrition, and 9,000 a year
die of it. In many rural areas, only 20 per cent of houses have piped water
and sewage. All this has fuelled disease, particularly the recent cholera
epidemic.
Current poverty allev-iation efforts involve a social fund known as
Foncodes. It finances small infrastructure projects, mostly for drinking
water and sewage installations, and for building simple classrooms and
health posts in outlying communities.
With Peru's economy now on a more even keel, the government of President
Alberto Fujimori is budgeting between 1 and 1.5 per cent of annual gross
domestic product for poverty alleviation. Foncodes is planned to receive the
equivalent of Dollars 500m between now and 1995 - Dollars 200m from the
treasury, Dollars 200m in multilateral credits and Dollars 100m in
donations.
Peru moved a step nearer its target of a single, 15 per cent import tariff
last week with cuts in duties on a range of luxury goods from 25 per cent to
15 per cent. About 97 per cent of all imports now enter Peru at 15 per cent.
The move was largely aimed at curbing continued high levels of smuggling.
Once sales and luxury tax is added to the 15 per cent import duty, total tax
may reach 60 per cent, making smuggling attractive.
