FT  19 AUG 93 / World Bank move on plan to monitor projects
THE World Bank board will meet next week to discuss proposals for setting up
an inspection panel to review complaints about projects from executive
directors or outside groups.
But the draft paper circulated to directors before the meeting suggests a
modest unit with an annual budget of only Dollars 600,000 (Pounds 402,700)
and a single permanent, though not necessarily full-time, staff member.
The suggested annual budget is almost exactly half of that required for a
single independent commission set up under Mr Bradford Morse, former
administrator of the United Nations Development Project, to investigate the
World Bank-funded Narmada dam project in India.
The furore over Narmada was a driving force behind many World Bank
directors' desire to set up some form of inspection panel.
Criticism of the draft paper, especially from environmental groups which
have led the battle against projects such as Narmada, focuses on the limits
proposed on the panel's independence, on the restricted scope of complaints
it could investigate, and on the publication of the panel's verdict.
Complaints could be brought either by any four executive directors or by a
directly affected third party, but in the latter case the board would decide
whether to proceed with an investigation.
Environmentalist groups also complain that investigations would be limited
to violations of the World Bank's own policies, rules and procedures. They
would not be allowed for violations by a borrower country of its loan
agreements with the World Bank.
In most cases, critics of the paper argue, the bank follows procedures in
drawing up its loan agreements, insisting on very adequate environmental and
human rights safeguards; the problem arises when those safeguards are not
put into effect by the borrower.
A further criticism is the draft paper's proposal that the panel's judgement
should only be released to the complainant after the World Bank board had
already taken a decision on what to do about it, too late for the
complainant to have any input into the remedy.
A separate draft paper on expanding the disclosure of World Bank
information, is also due to be discussed but is at a more advanced stage,
and could be concluded that day. The inspection panel document is likely to
be reworked and concluded shortly before the bank's annual meeting at the
end of next month.
