FT  09 JAN 93 / Nature to the rescue: The resilience of the environment
Television pictures of dying birds covered in thick black oil, heads lolling
out of the gloved hands of rescue workers, are always shocking. But
according to studies of previous oil spills, predictions of permanent
environmental damage may be unfounded.
The short-term risk posed to wildlife from the wrecked Braer is nevertheless
considerable. The southern cliffs of the Shetland islands are some of the
UK's richest breeding grounds for birds, including puffins, guillemots,
kittiwakes, and eider. As many as 10,000 could eventually die from the oil
spillage according to the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds. The
Shetland waters also support seals, whales and about 800 sea otters, one of
the largest populations of these mammals in the UK.
Environmentalists fear that casualties will increase over the next two
months as migratory birds arrive to nest on Shetland - black guillemots are
flying in already. There is little hope that they will detect the oil and
move elsewhere. According to Dr Jeremy Leggett, scientific director of
Greenpeace, the campaign group: 'They're a bit stupid, they persist with
business as usual, poor things.'
The main effect of the oil is simply to smother wildlife, or to overwhelm
digestive systems. Dr Paul Johnston, toxicologist at Exeter University,
says: 'There are mechanisms in most animals for detoxifying themselves from
hydrocarbons (the main type of chemical in oil), but not in those
quantities.'
However, some of the most poisonous hydrocarbons, such as benzene, evaporate
rapidly, while many of the rest break down naturally into carbon dioxide and
water. Many scientists stress that oil kills a lot of wildlife immediately,
but is less ecologically damaging in the long term than other less visible
pollutants such as pesticides. Those do not break down naturally, cannot be
metabolised or excreted by organisms, and so build up in the foodchain.
A series of reports on the recovery of the Prince William Sound in Alaska
after the 1989 Exxon Valdez wreck, paid for by Exxon but commissioned from a
team of internationally respected scientists, concluded that recovery was
'well under way' a year after the spillage, and that most visible oil had
gone. Seals and birds had returned, although in lower numbers, and seaweed
and barnacles had colonised the rocks.
According to the team: 'Experience has shown that exposed, rocky shores
usually recover in two to three years. Others show substantial recovery in
one to five years, with the exception of sheltered shores such as salt
marshes which may take 10 years or more.'
They point out, too, that species which have adapted to live in harsh
climates such as Alaska - or the Shetlands - are unusually resilient.
However, scientists acknowledge that the taste of oil may be detectable in
fish for many years, with possible serious consequences for the Shetlands'
salmon industry.
Experience has given grounds for optimism about long-term ecological
recovery, but it has not produced a consensus on how to treat oil slicks.
Environmentalists have attacked the decision to spray the Braer slick with
detergents, arguing that they make the oil sink to the seabed where its
effects are prolonged. Other methods such as hosing the beach destroy
plantlife and small shellfish.
In the case of the Alaskan spill, workers from Exxon and US environmental
groups spent much time sitting on the shingle scrubbing boulders and pebbles
individually. But according to Mr Peter Taylor of the Oil Pollution Research
Unit, a leading environmental consultancy, 'the amount of oil recovered (by
people's efforts) is relatively small compared to the oil spilled'. He adds;
'studies have shown that the best cleaner is nature itself'.
