FT  03 APR 93 / How to Spend It: City welcomes a new breed of travelling
salesman - Lucia van der Post meets the entrpreneurs who take their goods to
the customer
BACK in the glory days of the 1980s, when Big Bang looked like being one of
the most exciting things ever to have happened to the City of London, I
reported on a host of enterprising (or opportunistic, depending on your
point of view) small businesses that were pouring into the Square Mile and
its environs hoping for pickings from the bonanza.
They were mainly very small but were run by intuitive entrepreneurs who had
seen the future and decided to go out and meet it rather than close their
eyes and hope it never came to pass.
They saw that senior partners and junior analysts, busy lawyers and
over-worked chaps in M &amp; A no longer had the the time to saunter down to the
West End to discuss the jib of a suit or the width of shirt collar.
Yet most of the established city shops had failed to adapt to changing
circumstances. Most still thought that Dickensian charm, a long history and
antiquated service would see them through. A few stayed open an hour or two
longer and some had started opening earlier, but by and large it was left to
an itinerant band of (mainly) youthful entrepreneurs to see that ideas of
service were changing - that what many a busy chap (or girl) with more money
than time really needed was somebody who would come to his home or his desk.
Many were tied to work through the hours when conventional shops opened:
what they needed above all was somebody who would visit them when it suited
them.
But times have changed. Today money is tighter but the hours are no less
long. Those with jobs are anxious to hang on to them, and that means working
at least as hard as in the workaholic '80s. So today the itinerant merchant
has not only to be prepared to to take his wares to wherever they are
wanted, at whatever time it is asked for, but he or she has to work hard to
keep quality up and prices competitive.
Today there is a growing band of thriving little businesses catering to the
specialised needs of those for whom time is money and shopping a chore.
Their overheads are minimal, their shop is a suitcase and their trump card
is their willingness to go wherever and whenever the customer wants. Here,
for those who live or work in the City and its environs, are just some of
the new breed of service-orientated, adaptable little companies which aim,
above all, to please.
Serena Kelsey, 14 Aldebert Terrace, London SW8 IBJ. Tel: 071-820-1616.
Serena Kelsey got a taste for tailoring in the heyday of the 1980s when, so
ran the popular myth, any executive worth his telephone-figure salary could
never knowingly be seen to leave his desk. Tiny, blonde and pretty, her
arrival - complete with measuring tape and choice of fabrics - in City
offices is said to create something of a happy diversion.
She now has about 2,000 clients and goes into City offices, into merchant
banks, to barristers' chambers, to doctors and dentists' consulting rooms -
in fact to anybody who is too busy to shop and who relishes the idea of a
made-to-measure suit.
She has a particularly colourful line in linings though she says now that
the flamboyant eighties are over her customers' tastes on the whole run
along more sober lines.
She now has a team of fitters (all female) who visit the potential customer
with piles of cloth - the made-to-measure suit is then made up in
Northumberland.
She has also recently started doing made-to-measure shirts (Pounds 49 each)
and now has a line of rather classic suits and jackets for women. Though she
is happy to make anything a customer wants, her strengths would seem to lie
in producing the kind of predictable, unremarkable but smart suits that a
certain sort of career woman needs to sport in her working life. Prices for
the made-to-measure women's suits also start at Pounds 350.
Charles Tyrwhitt, Freepost, Saddlers Court, Camberley GU17 7BR. Tel
0252-860940 for mail order brochure, 081-968-0319 for appointments to visit
offices.
Two young men, Nick Wheeler and Peter Higgins, who met at Bain &amp; Co, the
management consultants, decided to change tack and start selling shirts to
the City set or anybody else in need of a proper City shirt.
They quickly realised that the City was not exactly short of excellent
shirts and that the only way to persuade men to buy theirs, as opposed to
anybody else's, was first, to make the buying as effortless and painless as
possible, and second, to offer the best possible quality at the lowest
possible prices.
This they do by selling only through offices, which they will visit on
request with samples of their wares, or by mail order. Any orders placed
before 12 am are dispatched the same afternoon, after 12 and they are sent
out the next day.
Nick and Peter understand the need to dress for the job and they really know
what a proper shirt should look like. Their shirts all sport double cuffs,
are made from two-fold cotton poplin (anybody who knows anything will know
that any shirt aiming for the 'Jermyn Street' look-alike award has to made
from two-fold poplin), have pearl buttons, long tails and removable brass
collar stiffeners.
Most shirts cost Pounds 36.50 (hurry, hurry, they are going up to Pounds
37.50 in a couple of weeks) but if you buy four you get a fifth one free,
which effectively brings the price down to Pounds 29.20.
Norton &amp; Townsend, 71 Bondway, London SW8 ISQ. Tel: 071-735-4701 or No. 7
Milestone Court, Town Street, Stanningley, Leeds, LS28 6HE. Tel:
0532-360781.
Norton &amp; Townsend are itinerant tailors. Originally based in Yorkshire, the
headquarters are now in Vauxhall although their fitters will go almost
anywhere in the UK.
The single most outstanding thing about them, it seems to me, is the extreme
reasonableness of their prices - for between Pounds 275 and Pounds 350
(depending on the cloth) you get a made-to-measure suit without even having
to leave your office.
A fitter will come to your dealing screen or desk, take your measurements,
help you to choose a suitable cloth (there are some 300 different fabrics on
offer) and discuss design details with you. The suits are not entirely
hand-made - mostly they are made in factories in Yorkshire - but some are
hand-finished. For your money, though, you get good cloth, cuff buttonholes
that really unbutton, belt loops, button and tab adjusters and the finished
product delivered to your desk.
Styles veer towards the traditional but if you have a favourite suit the
company will do its best to copy it exactly. It makes sense to order a
second pair of trousers at the same time as it will only cost 30 per cent of
the price of the suit if ordered at the same time.
Also excellent value is the morning coat (one button link, peak lapels and
panel back for Pounds 225), the plus fours (Pounds 99) and the classic cut
blazer (Pounds 195), all of which can be made to measure but come at what
are more usually off-the-peg prices.
Georgiana Grimston, Tel: 071-736-9966.
Georgiana Grimston's suits are more expensive than Norton &amp; Townsend and
Serena Kelsey, but then she offers a full Savile Row bespoke tailoring
service - everything from the initial pattern (which is cut individually for
each customer) to the finished suit is done by hand.
Her partner is Leo Costanzo, a pukka Savile Row tailor who used to work at
Huntsman and Henry Poole where bespoke suits these days start at Pounds
1,750 and Pounds 1,300 respectively. As Georgiana's prices range from Pounds
650 to Pounds 900, depending on the cloth, customers are getting a bargain.
Leo, working long hours, can only make about four suits a week, but every
single part of the suit is made to Savile Row standards: hand-sewn,
hand-finished, hand-stitched throughout.
The process starts with Georgiana coming to home or office at times that
suit the customer ('very often this is after work - I have gone as late as
9.30 and 10pm'). She brings samples of cloth and finds out exactly what the
customer is looking for down to the most minute detail. Leo himself does the
cutting and the fittings.
She has a host of impressive clients - bankers at Lazards, Swiss Bank and
Barings Securities as well as dentists, lawyers, doctors (including one
orthopaedic surgeon who is not only very busy but is also 6 ft 6 in tall).
Most of the suits tend to be quite traditional but sometimes she gets asked
for something a little more dandyish - for instance, she has just done a
turn-of-the-century suit for a client. But she and Leo Costanzo will make
anything that needs tailoring, whether a city suit or a sports jacket.
Madeleine Hamilton Blouses. Tel: 071-278-3111.
Madeleine Hamilton used to be a busy lawyer but these days she sells a range
of hand-made blouses in Italian and English cottons and French silks. While
working as a lawyer she observed that while City Man seemed well-provided
for, sartorially speaking, women had a much harder time tracking down a
suitable professional wardrobe.
Now she not only designs but manufacturers her own range of shirts and
blouses which she sells either by taking the collection round to offices or
by mail order. She has 16 different designs, all distinctive and ranging
from classic silk shirts to crisply collared and cuffed tartan shirts as
well as highly fashionable numbers with frills down the front.
Prices start at Pounds 46 and mostly are around Pounds 50. Her new mail
order brochure will be out next week - telephone for a copy or to ask her to
bring her range to your office.
Cabouchon, 22 Howie Street, London SW11 4 AR Tel: 071-924-3939.
When you spend most of your working hours looking sober, serious and
responsible some good jewellery can do a lot for a girl's morale - and a
chap's, come to that. In offices all round the City the word has got round
that Cabouchon is a name to conjure with.
Started just two years ago by Petra Doring, a German-born entrepreneur, its
turnover in the first year was about Pounds 1m; in its second year it rose,
almost effortlessly, to Pounds 12m. No wonder - what Cabouchon offers is a
range of fashion jewellery and cufflinks that fits perfectly into the life
and working uniform of the serious career person, and all at amazingly low
prices. Many a newscaster and television personality has found that in a
business in which you need to ring the sartorial changes a clutch of
Cabouchon pieces works a treat.
Cabouchon has no shop: its sells entirely through what it decorously calls
'consultants' and these 'consultants' are only too happy - nay eager - to
bring their wares to any office, wherever it may be.
All the jewellery is hand-finished and either 18 carat gold-plated or
rhodium or silver-plated. Most of the range (everything except a few
brooches and cuff-links) is also nickel-free.
Emma Knight, one of Cabouchon's consultants (tel: 071-228-7105), finds that
when she goes into an office almost everybody buys at least two items 'after
all, for Pounds 20 to Pounds 25 you could easily have at least two items.'
On a recent visit to a mostly male-inhabited office a colleague sold Pounds
2,000 worth of cuff-links.
Much of the secret must lie in the pricing ('pearl' and 'sapphire' drop
ear-rings for Pounds 16.50, simple 'gold' ribbed hoops for Pounds 6.50, a
brilliant blue sun, moon and star-embellished brooch for Pounds 14.99, and
classic 'gold' bar cuff-links for Pounds 11.50) but the designs are very
cleverly pitched. Nothing too avant-garde or too quirky, just a selection of
jewellery that could see its wearer through from the school-run in the
morning to a client meeting and on to a drinks or dinner party in the
evening.
Besides the consultant who brings cases full of wares to the office or home
there is also a full-colour catalogue which shows actual-size photographs of
the jewellery.
