FT  16 JUL 93 / MPs 'were misled' by Foreign Office on Iraq arms
MPS AND the British public were consistently misled by the Foreign Office
about the government's policy on arms sales to Iraq, a former Foreign Office
official said yesterday.
Giving evidence to the Scott inquiry into defence sales to Iraq, Mr Mark
Higson, a former desk officer for Iraq at the Foreign Office, said that
before the end of 1988 the government started operating two different sets
of guidelines on arms sales to Iran and Iraq.
Foreign Office and trade ministers relaxed the strict guidelines towards
Iraq in order to win lucrative arms deals while insisting in public that the
guidelines were still being operated impartially.
'There would have been trouble from the public and MPs if we had announced
publicly that there had been a relaxation in favour of Iraq,' said Mr
Higson, who left the civil service, partly because of his disagreement with
the way that policy was being applied.
He said the sham policy was 'churned out' time and again for MPs and the
public, even on one occasion in a letter from Sir Geoffrey Howe, then
foreign secretary.
Mr Higson, who drafted the reply on the foreign secretary's behalf in June
1989, said the letter had not been a truthful answer to a query from Mr
Peter Shore, the Labour MP, because it did not reflect the policy being
applied at the time.
Miss Presiley Baxendale, counsel for Lord Justice Scott, said of the Howe
letter: 'It is misleading and not a truthful answer to Peter Shore's
letter?'
Mr Higson replied: 'Yes.'
His obligation had been 100 per cent to the Foreign Office, he said, and he
had maintained the sham policy regardless. 'It was my duty,' he said.
The government had considered Iraq 'the big prize' when the Iran-Iraq war
ended, he said. This was recognised by Mr William Waldegrave, then a junior
minister at the Foreign Office, in a note he wrote on a departmental memo in
October 1989.
He wrote: 'I doubt if there is any future market of such a scale anywhere
where the UK is potentially so well placed if we play our diplomatic hand
correctly . . . We must not allow it to go to the French, Germans, Japanese,
Koreans etc.'
In recommending that the foreign secretary visit Iraq at the earliest
opportunity, Mr Waldegrave added: 'A few more Bazofts and another bout of
internal repression will make things more difficult.'
The minister was referring to Mr Farzad Bazoft, an Observer newspaper
journalist who was executed after being arrested in Iraq on spying charges.
