FT  03 SEP 93 / Insurers' database targets illegal claimants
INSURERS ARE developing a market-wide database in a bid to track down
illegal claimants whose activities cost the industry about Pounds 400m a
year.
The Association of British Insurers said yesterday that the UK's leading
composite insurers had agreed to support the development of the database,
which will contain extensive details of both proposal forms and claims
submitted by policyholders.
It is intended to launch the scheme by collecting information on household
contents insurance next year, extending to motor insurance by the end of
1994 and subsequently to holiday and creditor policies.
'This is an enormous commitment by the industry,' the association said,
adding that the total cost of the new development could run into millions of
pounds. The ABI has contracted Equifax, a software specialist, to do the
work on the database.
The development will also help the industry answer its critics at the
Consumers' Association, who allege it is not doing enough to combat fraud
and is penalising its customers with steep rate increases to compensate for
past losses, partly because of its own mistakes.
Describing the criticisms as 'nonsense', the association said that insurers
did 'not calculate premiums on the basis of past mistakes'.
The association added that the rates at which claims from subsidence and
theft had increased since 1987, had outstripped the rate of premium
increases.
Figures released yesterday, however, show that the rate of claims incurred
by companies is beginning to tail off. Theft claims fell to Pounds 511.5m in
the first half of 1993, compared with Pounds 550.2m in the same period of
last year.
Mr Mark Boleat, director-general of the association, said policyholders
should benefit through 'greater stability of premiums' if the trend
continues in the second half of this year.
'The industry is gradually returning to profitability but rates of return on
capital remain low and there is need for reserves to build up again ready
for unforeseen and unexpected disasters,' said Mr Boleat.
Home theft claims amounted to Pounds 389m, up 10.2 per cent on the second
half of 1992, but down 1.9 per cent compared with the first half of 1992.
The average home burglary claim was for Pounds 900, a rise of 1.5 per cent
compared with the first half of 1992. Fire claims in homes totalled Pounds
114m, 7.5 per cent up on the second half of 1992 but 12.5 per cent down on
the first half of last year.
