FT  01 APR 93 / Labour moves to support change in voting system: Committee
opts for French-style elections
THE LABOUR party last night took a significant step towards backing
electoral reform for the Commons when its Plant committee on alternative
voting systems agreed to recommend a limited form of proportional
representation.
The move, after an inquiry lasting more that two years, could prove a
watershed for Labour and represented a victory for reformists within the
party.
The committee will also recommend a proportional election system for the
House of Lords and the European Parliament.
However, the narrowness of the voting highlighted the deep splits within the
Labour movement over electoral reform. These are expected to be reflected in
the committee's final report after Easter.
Moreover, the 'supplementary vote' election system proposed for the Commons
is seen as a compromise and unambitious by supporters of PR. Similar to the
French system, it would inject only a small measure of proportionality.
Mr John Smith, Labour's leader, will not set out his view until after the
final report is considered by Labour's National Executive Committee later
this month, but he is regarded as cautious about reform. A final decision
would have to be approved at the party's annual conference in October.
Mr John Prescott, shadow transport secretary and an opponent of PR, accused
the Plant committee of 'bouncing' the NEC, which met yesterday, by the
timing of its report.
'They know we cannot meet again for four or five weeks to receive their
report. What they have done by making the decision today is to guarantee the
maximum controversy,' he said.
Mr Smith recognises that radical change could lead to fierce internal rows.
The uncertain message from the Plant committee's vote last night could make
him to decide against any damaging confrontation - or to propose a national
referendum before a new system is implemented.
A New Statesman magazine survey yesterday showed a majority - 59 per cent -
of Labour MPs wanting electoral reform, but a substantial minority of 36 per
cent wanted to keep the 'first past the post' system.
Those who have opposed any move away from the existing system include Mrs
Margaret Beckett, Labour's deputy leader and a member of the Plant
committee.
The committee, chaired by Professor Raymond Plant of Southampton University,
had been split on electoral reform. But after meeting for three hours last
night it finally voted by 10 votes to six in favour of the principle of
reforming the electoral system.
The committee's members then went on to decide by 11 votes to four that any
new system had to be based on MPs representing individual constituencies,
rather than being elected in strict proportion to the number of votes a
party wins nationally.
In a final vote, the committee agreed by nine votes to seven to recommend
the 'supplementary vote' system - a method similar to that used in French
elections but avoiding two separate polling days. On calculations expected
to be included in the final Plant report, the 'supplementary system' would
have resulted in a hung parliament in last April's general election.
For the House of Lords and the European Parliament, the Plant committee will
recommend electing members from a series of regional lists in proportion to
political parties' voting strengths.
Mr Robert Maclennan, the Liberal Democrats' constitutional affairs
spokesman, said there should now be cross-party discussions on electoral
reform. But Liberal Democrat reaction last night fell short of suggesting
that the two main opposition parties are much closer to an electoral pact -
a move which would alarm Conservative party strategists.
