FT  07 SEP 93 / Ministers defend release of 6-year-old beef
MINISTERS YESTERDAY dismissed fears about the quality and safety of
six-year-old beef that has been sold from frozen storage on to the market,
saying it was 'perfectly fit for human consumption'.
The Labour party and the Consumers' Association have protested about the
fact that the beef, dating from 1986 and held in UK intervention stores as
part of the EC beef mountain, was released to shops without being
date-stamped.
A European Commission official in Brussels said yesterday that beef from
intervention stores was meant to be sold on a 'first in, first out' basis
and the batch of 25 tonnes of six-year-old beef 'should have been sold three
years ago'.
The official added, however, that inspectors from the Ministry of
Agriculture had found the beef to be in a perfect state.
Mr Stephen Briggs, spokesman for the intervention board which administers
the stocks in Britain, said there were no rules about the maximum time
intervention stocks could be stored.
Mr Briggs denied that agriculture officials had overlooked the date and
could not confirm the exact amount and source of the beef. He agreed,
however, that it was normal to sell the oldest meat first.
'The Commission is right that the aim is to sell the oldest stocks first,
but you can't force people to buy it if they don't want it and there's no
indication this was due to an oversight,' he said.
Mrs Gillian Shephard, agriculture minister, said intervention beef stocks
were stored in 'ideal' conditions and checked and monitored at regular
intervals.
Fears of contamination by bovine spongiform encephalopathy - 'mad cow
disease' - were unfounded since intervention stocks never contained the
animal tissue which has to be removed from beef under 1988 safety
regulations, ministry officials said.
Mr Nicholas Soames, food minister, said cold-store beef would continue to be
sold and there was no need for it to be labelled by age, although butchers
should warn consumers not to re-freeze it.
Britain has 144,000 tonnes of beef in 95 stores around the UK, out of total
EC stocks of about 860,000 tonnes. Mr Briggs said most of the British beef
dated from 1990 or later, although there was still about 100 tonnes from
1989. Six years was the longest beef had been held in the UK before being
sold, he added.
This older meat occasionally remained in intervention, either because the
cut was unpopular or because it was held in a store in a remote location
that beef traders found inconvenient, he said.
Mr Briggs said the beef was frozen and then stored at temperatures below
minus 18 degrees centigrade. This was the temperature used for frozen
produce in supermarkets.
