FT  04 SEP 93 / International Company News: BNP and Rhone-Poulenc line up
long-term investors
BANQUE Nationale de Paris and Rhone-Poulenc, the companies that will launch
France's privatisation programme this autumn, are lining up long term
investors to replace the government on their share registers.
The formation of core shareholding groups is being done in conjunction with
the privatisation commission, a body established by the government to value
the companies and which must also approve the participation of principal
shareholders.
Mr Jean-Rene Fourtou, chairman of Rhone-Poulenc, the chemicals concern, says
he is confident of securing a group of stable investors which will take
between 25 and 34 per cent of the company's shares after the state sells its
43 per cent stake.
This core shareholding, says Mr Fourtou, should include Assurances Generales
de France, the insurance group, and Credit Lyonnais, one of France's largest
banks. Both are state-controlled and already hold stakes in Rhone-Poulenc.
AGF has 7.7 per cent and Credit Lyonnais 8.6 per cent.
Other core investors could include foreign institutions and French
industrial companies. But Mr Fourtou admits that most French industrial
groups might find it difficult to raise the necessary capital to take a
significant stake.
BNP, which will be the first company to be privatised, has given fewer
indications about the size and composition it desires for a core
shareholding. Its task may also be more difficult since the state holds 73
per cent of its shares, a much larger proportion than it holds in
Rhone-Poulenc.
One of its principal shareholders, however, seems certain to be Union des
Assurances de Paris, the state-controlled insurance group which currently
holds a 10 per cent stake in BNP.
Les Echos, the French financial daily, reported yesterday that this stake
will be increased to 15 per cent at the time of privatisation. BNP declined
to comment on the report. But banking analysts in Paris said that such an
increase was possible given that BNP is itself due to increase its stake in
UAP from 10 to 20 per cent by buying the state's 49.9 per cent stake in
Financiere BNP.
Another potential core shareholder in BNP is Dresdner Bank. The French and
German banks have a joint agreement, which has led to an exchange of board
members, and have expressed their intention to exchange shareholdings of
about 10 per cent.
But official sources in Paris said that size of the cross-shareholding had
not been finalised and that Dresdner may wait until after privatisation
before taking a stake in BNP.
