FT  07 OCT 93 / UK Company News: CentreGold valued at Pounds 50m
CENTREGOLD, a leading UK-based publisher and distributor of video game and
computer entertainment software, will be valued at about Pounds 50m when it
comes to market through a placing and intermediaries offer later this month.
The Birmingham-based group, which was founded 10 years ago by Mr Geoff
Brown, a former teacher, issued its pathfinder prospectus yesterday and also
revealed sharply higher profits fuelled by booming sales of home
entertainment software for Sega and Nintendo video games machines and
personal computers.
Pre-tax profits increased by 60 per cent to Pounds 2.72m (Pounds 1.7m) in
the year to July 31 on turnover ahead 23 per cent to Pounds 68m (Pounds
55.1m).
Precise details of the issue, which is being brought to market by Smith New
Court, have yet to be fixed but it will be priced on October 19. The issue
is expected to raise about Pounds 20m, including Pounds 10m for the company
itself, and is likely to be priced at up to 125p a share.
Three quarters of the shares will be placed firm with the balance subject to
clawback under the intermediaries offer. That offer will close on October 22
and dealings are expected to begin on October 28.
Following the flotation the existing management, including Mr Brown who is
CentreGold's chief executive, will retain just under 50 per cent of the
enlarged share capital. Mr Brown is expected to emerge with a 35 per cent
stake valued at about Pounds 17.5m.
The Pounds 10m in proceeds from the new shares will mainly be used to
provide additional working capital to support ongoing development.
In particular, Mr Brown said, it would enable the group to take advantage of
its new distribution arrangements with Sega, a new publishing relationship
with Nintendo and the continued expansion of its US operations.
The market for home entertainment hardware and software has grown rapidly in
recent years.
The UK market, dominated by Sega and Nintendo, was worth approximately
Pounds 900m last year, against Pounds 190m in 1992.
CentreGold operates through two main subsidiaries - CentreSoft, which
distributes computer and video game entertainment software to 1,300
retailers in the UK, including the Boots and John Menzies chains, and US
Gold, which publishes PC software and video games for Sega and now Nintendo
games machines on both sides of the Atlantic.
