FT  30 JUN 93 / World Stock Markets: Foreigners frustrated as Seoul stocks
climb high - A lack of South Korean liquidity
These are frustrating times for foreign investors in the Seoul bourse.
Eighteen months after the stock market was opened to direct foreign
investment, the exchange's most attractive shares are no longer available
because they have reached the 10 per cent limit on foreign ownership.
Ninety-nine of the bourse's 693 listed issues have had their foreign
shareholding quota filled, with another 60 close to the ceiling. Most of the
remaining stocks are either too small in terms of capitalisation, or too
obscure to attract foreign institutional investors.
'If ten fund managers decided today that they each wanted to buy Dollars 2m
of a non-financial stock, they would have only 16 companies to choose from,'
explains Ms Joanna Newman, an analyst at WI Carr in Seoul. 'Within a few
months, we think that there will be nothing left to buy.'
Companies associated with Hyundai and Samsung, considered the strongest
industrial groups in South Korea, were the first to reach their foreign
ownership limit.
Overseas buyers have since turned their attention to other big
conglomerates, such as Daewoo and Lucky-Goldstar.
As the pool shrinks, 'foreigners are buying shares they otherwise would
never have bought,' notes Mr John Wadle with the Seoul office of BZW.
The troubled banking and petrochemical sectors offer the only large bloc of
shares still available to foreigners, together with Korea Electric Power
(Kepco), the state electricity monopoly.
The foreign ownership limit is particularly troublesome to US fund managers,
who did not enter the Seoul bourse in force until last autumn and found that
UK investors, who initially dominated foreign buying, had already captured
Korea's choicest companies.
It is one reason why Washington is pressuring Seoul to raise the the foreign
ownership ceiling. Mr Hong Jae-hyong, the finance minister, has promised to
do so eventually, but any increase is not likely to come until next year,
when most analysts believe it will be raised to 15 per cent.
The government argues that the foreign shareholding ceiling should be raised
in stages, fearing that excess funds from abroad could add inflationary
pressure by increasing the money supply. The net inflow of foreign funds for
stock purchases has so far reached Dollars 2.65bn this year.
'There is no reason to raise the foreign ownership ceiling now since there
are plenty of stocks still available to foreigners. They have bought only 47
per cent of the number of shares available to them,' says Mr Lim Chang-Yuel,
the assistant minister of finance.
But WI Carr estimates that only 40 per cent of the foreign quota remains
open on a market capitalisation basis, and the ratio falls to 32 per cent
once three large bank stocks (Commercial Bank of Korea, Cho Hung, and Bank
of Seoul) and Kepco are excluded.
Most foreign brokers complain that the real reason the government is
unwilling to raise the ceiling soon is that both officials and businessmen
are reluctant to see foreigners acquire a substantial stake in the country's
main industries. 'It's xenophobia, pure and simple,' says one.
One factor that could force the government to change its mind is that
foreign investment has been an important psychological factor behind the
bourse's recovery from a low of 459 last August to 745 yesterday. 'If
foreign buying tails off, as it is already starting to do, and the market
drops sharply, then the government may be tempted to raise the limit to
bolster share prices,' says Mr Stephen Marvin, head of research at Jardine
Fleming in Seoul.
In the meantime, foreign investors may consider several alternative measures
to obtain Korean shares. One is the unofficial over-the-counter market for
foreigners.
In spite of the absence of a computerised pricing system for OTC
transactions and the considerable short-term risks involved in such deals,
'fund managers are now willing to pay high premiums to acquire blue-chip
shares rather than settle for third-rate stock still on the open market,'
according to Mr Marvin.
Another option is the purchase of offshore paper issued by Korean companies,
such as global depositary receipts (GDRs), But the government is now trying
to restrict offerings because it is concerned that the funds repatriated
home will boost money supply and increase inflationary pressure.
