FT  01 APR 93 / Bitter pill from company doctors: Restructuring at
Volkswagen is a radical response to the 'emergency' at the group
An emergency team has moved into Volkswagen and is dishing out bitter
medicine in equal measure all round.
The group's employees, shareholders and top management have all been
subjected to a stiff dose in the three months since Mr Ferdinand Piech took
over as chairman. The aim is to find a cure and put group earnings back on
the path to growth by next year, according to Mr Piech.
Volkswagen, which encompasses the VW, Audi, Seat and Skoda marques, is
Europe's biggest car maker with annual turnover equivalent to about 3 per
cent of unified Germany's economic output. The symptoms of the group's
malaise, detectable in less acute forms elsewhere in German industry,
include concentrating on turnover and employing large numbers of workers at
the expense of costs and profitability.
Proclaming an 'emergency', Mr Piech yesterday revealed at the company's
annual press conference that Volkswagen had plunged into a DM1.25bn (Pounds
520m) loss in the first three months of this year. The share price reacted
sharply, closing DM8 down at DM304 1/2 . The underlying seriousness of the
situation had already been exposed two weeks ago when the group reported an
87 per cent collapse in after-tax profits last year to DM147m - all earned
on the supply of spares - and record turnover of DM85.4bn from peak sales of
3.5m vehicles.
Mr Piech drafted his restructuring programme within days of arrival. Some
36,000 jobs were earmarked to go by the end of 1997. His announcement
yesterday that 20,000 would be cut this year alone, mostly in Germany,
underlined his determination to curb spiralling wage costs. Capital
investments for this year have been throttled back by about half, to DM6bn.
The first victim of the spending cuts will be plans to expand capacity. 'I
believe a lot more can be squeezed out of existing plants without the need
for great investments,' Mr Piech said. The development of a new factory in
Mosel, eastern Germany, which observers consider superfluous in the
slow-growing European market, has already been delayed.
Guided by their charismatic company doctor, grandson of the legendary Mr
Ferdinand Porsche who developed the VW Beetle, the group's supervisory board
(which oversees policymaking and management) agreed to hack the 1992
dividend from DM11 to DM2 and remove three management board directors,
including the finance director, last month.
And now the therapy is to be shared more widely - among 1,500 suppliers -
following the hijacking of the idiosyncratic arch-motivator Mr Jose Ignacio
Lopez de Arriortua from General Motors in Detroit.
Mr Lopez, the group's new purchasing director, dubbed 'The Merciless', is
armed with a reputation worthy of his nickname and a mystique worthy of a
tribal medicine man. Within days of his recent appointment he was at work
searching for economies in the group's estimated DM50bn annual bill for
bought-in components and services.
In an attack on the over-engineering pinpointed by others as a prime failing
of German industry, he ordered that the present 16 rear-axle variants for
the VW Golf should be reduced to four. He proclaimed that in future the
company would concern itself with 'core' competences in engine blocks, gear
boxes, bodywork and painting. The rest would be left to outside suppliers,
which would be cut to fewer than 200. They would be required to supply
standardised modular components - complete brakes units comprising pedal,
discs and anti-lock electronics, for example - which could be installed in
the greatest possible number of models.
The arrival of Mr Lopez, seen as one of Volkswagen's greatest management
assets, has rattled the suppliers, which currently provide about 65 per cent
of components to the group worldwide and about half that level in Germany.
Mr Piech tried to soothe their fears yesterday, claiming that price cuts
would be made on a co-operative basis. 'If a supplier does not think he is
able to manage, our people will go in and help,' he promised. 'We can only
survive together in symbiosis.' While he would not say precisely how far
procurement costs must fall, the price cuts had to be as big as possible
'without causing our suppliers to go under'.
Confirming his reputation in the automotive industry as a leader, Mr Lopez
last week delivered six of his senior GM buying-team members - his
'warriors' as he calls them - to Mr Piech. One, Mr Jose Gutierrez,
immediately replaced the procurement director for the VW marque.
This move underlines Mr Piech's determination to shake up and rebuild the
cosy relationships between the company and its suppliers and at the same
time revitalise its congested hierarchy with outside senior managers.
Continuing the reshuffle on Tuesday, the director responsible for worldwide
distribution of the VW brand, and the president of Volkswagen of America,
were abruptly replaced.
'Within the group there are basically 200 to 300 people who are absolutely
indispensable for our survival,' Mr Piech said recently. There was a huge
mass of people in group administration who now had to ask themselves what
they did to earn their keep, he remarked.
'I have always paid more to those people who did not see it as their
business to build up hierarchies than to those who built up substructures in
order to push themselves one step higher.' Work is now under way to reduce
the current nine management levels to three, Mr Piech said yesterday.
The restorative action being undertaken has been widely welcomed. But while
investors have tended to view the dividend cut as their contribution to
overall belt-tightening, the loss announcement reinforced scepticism at the
management's claim that the group would break even by the end of the year.
Amid such apprehension it is easy to lose sight of the strengths
underpinning Mr Piech's faith that the 1990s would be a decade of profit.
Thanks to his grandfather, the Volkswagen name is one of the best-known car
marques in the world. Despite the domestic slump and slow sales in Europe
overall, its market share of close to 17 per cent still dominates its
rivals. Thanks to Mr Carl Hahn, who led the group's international expansion
during the 1980s, Volkswagen is also less dependent than most of its
European competitors on the west European market, where estimated long-term
growth of up to 3 per cent a year must increasingly be shared with the
encroaching Japanese.
Although the group's US market share has collapsed to about 1 per cent,
other overseas investments are performing strongly. Its plant in Mexico
helps supply a 32 per cent share of the local market, and forms the likely
launch-pad for a renewed assault on the US. China, where the group's first
factory increased output by 86 per cent to 65,000 units last year, is
forecast to become the group's third-biggest market after Germany and Italy
by 1996. Skoda, the Czech republic affiliate, reported an 18.5 per cent
increase in deliveries in January and February this year over the same 1992
period.
However, many underlying problems remain. As one industry observer notes:
'VW is a classic case of a company that has made too extreme a sacrifice in
short-term profitability for future growth.' The price is now being paid
mainly at home in Germany. By sharing the pain among all involved and
setting clear targets, Mr Piech has acted according to the international
book of good corporate housekeeping. But he has also launched a violent
assault on the stifling management and industrial practices common to German
industry. The restructuring programme, unprecedented in scope and vigour, is
at odds with German management's ingrained softly-softly approach to radical
change.
It is no accident that the front-line team picked to drive it through is
entirely foreign. Mr Lopez is a Basque, and Mr Daniel Goeudevert, main board
director responsible for the flagship VW brand, is French. Mr Piech is an
Austrian, although his old-fashioned sense of duty and commitment has earned
him the sobriquet of 'The Last Prussian'. By selecting outsiders to resolve
the crisis, the supervisory board has sent the clearest possible signal that
it believes traditional German management is not up to the job of steering
Volkswagen away from the brink of disaster.
