FT  21 MAY 93 / Window on the west reopens: St Petersburg could be Russia's
Milan
WESTERN tobacco companies are among the growing number of investors choosing
St Petersburg, Russia's former imperial capital, as the home base for their
operations in the former Soviet Union.
While most Moscow-based companies such as Coca-Cola, IBM and 3M have
representative offices in the city, other companies, including Procter &amp;
Gamble, Phillip Morris, RJR Reynolds and Gillette, have made St Petersburg
their CIS headquarters.
'St Petersburg could be to Moscow what Milan is to Rome,' says Mr Ruud
Wittkampf, St Petersburg manager of Ernst &amp; Young, one of six accounting,
auditing and consulting firms represented here. 'Rome may be Italy's
political locus, but Milan is its economic centre.'
Built by Peter the Great as 'a window on the west' nearly three centuries
ago, St Petersburg has long been Russia's most European city. With
geographic proximity to the west, a more co-operative bureaucracy,
architectural grandeur, a well educated population and military-industrial
enterprises ripe for conversion, the city has significant advantages over
Moscow.
Nearly half of about 6,000 foreign joint ventures in Russia are based in the
city. Gillette, which plans to build a factory to supplement its joint
venture partner Leninetz's existing factory, intends to make St Petersburg
one of the company's top three manufacturing points in the world.
Rothmans, which recently announced plans for a Dollars 90m factory, joins
tobacco concerns Phillip Morris and RJR Reynolds in establishing
manufacturing operations in St Petersburg.
Coca-Cola is also negotiating land agreements to build a bottling factory,
the first stage of a Dollars 34m project. Otis Elevator, which operated in
the city before the 1917 revolution, recently opened its manufacturing
facility and plans full production capacity and export to the rest of Europe
in 1996, while 3M is building a factory to make telecommunications products.
Western consumer-goods companies are marketing their products to an urban,
highly educated population in a city long considered the cultural and
intellectual capital of Russia.
St Petersburg's 5m population is the most highly educated in Russia; more
than half have university degrees; 60 per cent are of working age; one in
seven is an engineer working in military-industrial enterprises. The city
also provides a choice pool of highly qualified labour.
Mr Konstantin Karczmarczyk, director of Arctls, a Russian company involved
in the conversion of military industries, is less sanguine than those who
see the city as an east European hub. He says western companies looking for
manufacturing partners often find inefficient management and disastrous
balance sheets alongside high levels of quality and technology.
'Military enterprises have real visions of capitalism but the practices of
the old Soviet system,' he adds.
When joint ventures do materialise, they are not always happy marriages.
Gillette spent months in fraught negotiations with its partner Leninetz,
which promised to reconstruct an existing factory to produce 1bn razor
blades a year, but the project is believed to be long behind schedule.
Part of St Petersburg's appeal lies in its reputation as a city less
entangled in red tape than other Russian cities, and in the reputation of
its first elected mayor, Mr Anatoly Sobchak. He advocates tax incentives for
big business, private ownership of land, and banking reforms. He is the
architect of the Free Economic Zone project, in which tax breaks, abolition
of import/ export tariffs, and simplified joint venture registration
procedures would boost foreign trade and encourage manufacturing.
Popular opposition to Mr Sobchak is also growing. His critics say he pays
too much attention to western companies offering products few can afford
while neglecting housing, transport and other infrastructural problems and
failing to combat rising crime.
There are problems. Crime has risen significantly. Eight Marlboro kiosks
were firebombed recently for 'undercutting' the price of cigarettes sold in
stands controlled by racketeers, and Coca-Cola pays the taxi fare home for
its Russian employees, who are routinely harassed.
Businessmen also complain that property negotiations are hampered by
disputes over who owns what. Unlike Moscow, where gigantic Stalin-era
structures dominate the skyline, St Petersburg has endless rows of once
elegant 19th-century, Italianate buildings which will be prime investments
once the bureaucratic wrangling over property rights are overcome.
But despite the problems, life is starting to get easier. Satellite
telecommunication is now available, sales of centrally located privatised
apartments to executives are soaring, and the city's second five-star hotel,
the Nevskij Palace, is due to open soon.
