FT  18 SEP 93 / Letters to the Editor: Report acknowledges energy shortages,
despite efficiencies
Sir, A few words of clarification on Bronwen Maddox's thorough article on
our Renewable Energy Resources report and references to the World Energy
Council Commission Report, Energy for Tomorrow's World (Business and the
Environment: 'Answers in the wind', September 15):
The commission does point out that under a 'business as usual' evolution, or
even quite rapid improvements in energy efficiency, the world is likely to
run short of oil and natural gas around the middle of the next century
despite improved technology and rising real prices.
However, the commission also points out that an ecologically driven case
(though our case has extremely testing assumptions on energy efficiency for
policymakers and consumers), which expands 'new' renewables rapidly, would
avoid that - particularly if generally acceptable nuclear power were also to
be more widely available.
If, on running short of oil and gas, people think they can simply switch to
coal, they will find only temporary relief. If this is the only option taken
up, the world is likely to run short of coal around 2100 even if the
environmental impacts could be mitigated.
'Traditional biomass' was excluded because its main component, fuelwood, is
widely used in an unsustainable manner. Large hydro also raises problems.
Ms Maddox rightly states that the Renewables Report says too little on the
future costs of renewables - but this is because too little can reliably be
said. It is clear that costs in general have been coming down, and will
continue to do so.
Both the reports point out the serious local environmental impacts that
'new' renewables can have, and the need to ensure consistent, sensitive
environmental criteria are applied throughout the field of energy provision
and use.
Finally, the World Energy Council is delighted to have published the
Renewable Energy Resources Report, and its commission report has pointed out
the need for accelerated development of 'new' renewables if they are to play
a significant role in the future. Michael Jefferson,
World Energy Council,
34 St James's Street,
London SW1A 1HD
