FT  13 APR 93 / Leading Article: Patten's task
ALL GOOD education reforms are initially opposed by one group of teachers or
another. Few achieve the distinction of being condemned by the three largest
teaching unions, headmasters, many parents, and a strong contingent of
right-wing educational theorists. Yet just such an unlikely army has lined
up against the national curriculum and its associated system of national
tests. In consequence, the process started by the Education Reform Act of
1988 is likely to be set back by a summer of disruption.
It is difficult to see what the secretary for education, Mr John Patten, can
do next. He has not spent his first year in office well: he failed either to
refine the tests and curriculum in time to head off the opposition or to
persuade the educational community to work with the government. After 12
months of building a reputation for rigidity he finally agreed last week
that there should be a thorough review, while appealing for this year's
tests to go ahead. The response of the usually moderate Association of
Teachers and Lecturers was to ballot its members on a boycott of testing.
The National Union of Teachers followed suit on Saturday. A third union, the
NAS/UWT had already voted for a ballot.
Two weeks ago Wandsworth council asked the High Court for an injunction
against a proposed boycott by the NAS/UWT. This was refused. Wandsworth will
appeal. Mr Patten will presumably wait for the outcome. If the courts
declare boycotts of the tests illegal the government's hand will be
strengthened, although perhaps not sufficiently to restore order in all
classrooms. If not, the education secretary may be obliged to declare this
year's tests 'voluntary', which would mean that in many schools they would
not take place at all. The government would no longer control the pace of
its education reforms.
The damage would be limited if such a forced concession applied to the year
1993 alone. All political parties agree on the desirability of a national
curriculum and testing, both of which are necessary if the quality of
education in state schools is to be improved. There is almost universal
agreement on the need to revise the complicated 10-level assessment scale,
with its extensive examination of pupils at the ages of 7, 11, and 14.
Mr Patten must work to establish confidence in the new School Curriculum and
Assessment Authority (SCAA), which already has a chairman, Sir Ron Dearing,
who needs to demonstrate that his executive will be broadly based and
willing to consult interested parties. The SCAA should also declare that its
deliberations will not be conducted in secret; it should welcome public
debate. Such a demonstration of the government's good intentions is
necessary if Mr Patten is to start winning arguments and allies.
