FT  26 AUG 93 / VW may sacrifice Lopez
MR Klaus Liesen, chairman of Volkswagen's supervisory board, has for the
first time raised doubts about the group's ability to hold on to its
controversial production director, Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua.
In an interview to be published today, he hinted that the company could be
forced to sacrifice Mr Lopez.
It was legitimate to ask how long a company could put up with a continuous
barrage of unconfirmed suspicions, he told Die Zeit, the weekly newspaper.
Asked if VW was prepared to tolerate a long legal battle with GM and its
German subsidiary, Adam Opel, Mr Liesen said the supervisory board, which
has hiring and firing powers over executive directors, had to retain its
freedom of action.
This, he said, meant 'that within the limits of our authority we apply those
measures which are in the interests of the company'.
Mr Liesen repeated that he stood behind Mr Lopez, under investigation for
alleged industrial espionage and theft of secrets from Adam Opel. Internal
VW investigations contradicted media claims that Opel data had been stored
in VW computers.
He told Die Zeit that the supervisory board's vote of confidence in Mr Lopez
and the former GM employees who came to VW with him was based on their
statements, some in the form of sworn testimony.
'Can anyone expect a company to make personnel decisions damaging to itself
although allegations against it cannot be proved?' he asked.
The loss of the Spanish cost-cutter, who left GM last March, would be a
handicap for VW, particularly in its efforts to restructure production, he
said. Mr Liesen accepted that no manager was irreplaceable, although he
stressed he was not suggesting resignation.
The shift in Mr Liesen's position - he has hitherto been one of Mr Lopez's
stoutest defenders - suggests a reaction to the widespread conviction in the
German business community that Mr Lopez must go if damage to VW's reputation
is to be contained and its prospects of recovery protected.
Car parts results, Page 21
