FT  22 JUL 93 / Fears for image of German industry
PUBLIC confidence in the leadership of Volkswagen is ebbing as Germany's
most influential newspapers begin to consider that General Motors' claims of
industrial espionage might, after all, be more than a 'campaign' against its
main German rival.
Nothing had yet been proved and nothing had been decided, said the
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (FAZ) yesterday. However, it commented,
Tuesday's ruling by a Hamburg civil court that Der Spiegel, the news weekly,
could continue reporting on the most damaging allegations, had 'cast a clear
shadow' over VW. The suspicions were still only suspicions, but they were
gaining weight, according to the FAZ said.
The paper noted recent remarks by Mr Klaus Liesen, chairman of the VW
supervisory board, that the affair was a campaign by Adam Opel, GM's German
subsidiary, which damaged the whole automobile industry. However, it said:
'Above all it is damaging VW during a delicate restructuring phase.' The
need for explanations was increasing. 'If the suspicions harden, then the
situation will become especially tight for (VW) chairman Ferdinand Piech,
who is linked for better or worse with Lopez.' Tuesday's court ruling
indicated that the judge set more store on affidavits and testimony from GM
employees than on statements from Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua,
Volkswagen's new production director, and Mr Piech.
The weekly Die Zeit newspaper was more direct. It asked if Mr Lopez could be
taken seriously when he spoke with a 'forked tongue' over a mooted car
factory in his Basque homeland.
His accounts varied depending on whether he was speaking in Spain or
Germany, Die Zeit said.
If the allegations hardened that Mr Lopez had stolen secret GM documents,
the VW supervisory board would have no choice but to fire him immediately,
the paper added. If that did not take VW's name out of the headlines: 'Then
it will be a matter of the head of Piech, who is not good at acting as
though he knows nothing.'
Until yesterday the quality press, apart from Der Spiegel which has printed
dozens of allegations against Mr Lopez and his associates, had reported
developments in the affair in dead-pan fashion, in barest detail, and
virtually without comment, apart from the occasional use of the word
'unique'.
'The dimensions of the case are not conceivable to them (editors),'
explained one German observer. 'They cannot imagine that a company at the
top of German industry could be involved in such an affair.'
At the same time, there was a general feeling that Germany had enough
economic and unemployment problems without the press undermining or damaging
a company as important as Volkswagen, he added.
Yesterday even Bild Zeitung, the mass circulation daily, which has in the
past concentrated mainly on the curiosity value of Mr Lopez, his eating
habits and management methods, reflected the changed mood.
'Is Lopez on the way out?' asked the headline on its front-page report on
the Der Spiegel ruling.
