FT  11 SEP 93 / Motoring: Gloom outside the showroom - Frankfurt show
OUTSIDE Frankfurt's monster exhibition complex the skies are dark for
Germany's car makers. Inside, the sparkling, larger-than-life 55th
international motor show goes on.
Britain's car industry is currently enjoying a minor boom, making and
selling about 8 per cent more cars than this time last year.
It is a different story across the Channel though. In Germany, Europe's
largest new car market, sales are 21 per cent down. Spain (a 29 per cent
drop) and Italy (26 per cent) are worse off and France (17 per cent) not
much better.
German car makers are trimming their sails to reduce production costs.
Volkswagen has eliminated 20,000 jobs this year, with more still to go, and
is telling component suppliers to cut their prices. Mercedes-Benz is to cut
23,000 jobs next year to save Pounds 125m - its earnings fell 45 per cent in
1992.
Critics have said Mercedes cars - particularly the large and luxurious
S-Class - are out of tune with recessionary times. That may be so but the
S-Class is arguably the world's best big car. I drove a newly-introduced
budget version with a 2.8-litre engine to Frankfurt for the show. More of
this - and of the show itself - next week.
The only good thing about being first into a recession is that, with any
luck, you are first out of it. Britain's main worry is that some of the
steam has gone out of its exports to EC countries - Peugeots, Toyotas,
Hondas and Nissans as well as Fords, Vauxhalls and, of course, Rovers and
Land Rovers - because of the sharp fall in mainland European car sales.
But the gloom is forgotten inside the Frankfurt show. It remains the German
motor industry's shop window. Among the most interesting exhibits are two
German concept cars, the tiny Mercedes-Benz Vision A 93 and the Audi ASF.
Mercedes calls the Vision a serious design study for a new class of car it
intends to launch after 1995. Only 3.35m (11ft 2in) long, this high-roofed
five-door looks like a city centre car but is also meant for serious
driving. It is surprisingly roomy because the engine, a super-economical
3-cylinder direct-injection diesel, is tucked away under the floor. Audi's
ASF - for aluminium space frame - concept is a 10-year joint effort with
Alcoa (Aluminium Company of America). Aluminium has a lot going for it. An
aluminium space-frame body shell is 40 per cent lighter than one pressed
from steel sheet.
This is important because 70 per cent of total fuel consumption is reckoned
to be influenced directly by vehicle weight. All new models seem to be
heavier than those they have replaced because customers want greater safety
and more luxury equipment.
Making a car largely from aluminium would reverse this unwelcome trend. An
ASF car is also said to be safer to crash in, easier to repair and to have a
longer potential life because aluminium corrodes slowly. As a bonus,
aluminium can be melted down and used again almost indefinitely, saving
natural resources.
The power unit proposed for ASF, which is a four-door luxury saloon, is a
3.4-litre direct-injection diesel derived from the current Audi V8's engine.
The big ASF saloon will not go into production though Audi says it could.
But another ASF-bodied Audi car is due to go on sale next year after making
a debut at Geneva Show in March.
Ford, too, has an all-aluminium concept car, the Synthesis 2010, at
Frankfurt, but the lightweight aluminium family car in the Escort, Golf or
Astra class is still many years away. Chrysler has become so serious about
the European market, in which it sold nearly 29,000 cars from January-June,
that it broke its habits of a lifetime and chose a European show as launch
pad for its new Neon compact saloon. Neon, a graceful four-door, goes on
sale on mainland Europe next summer. Chrysler is not ruling out a right-hand
drive version for Britain, where its Jeeps have sold well this year.
Also making a debut at Frankfurt is the Chrysler Vision saloon, 3.5-litre V6
engined, with combined traction control and anti-lock brakes. It has had
rave reviews in the US and looks as if it might make some conquests as a
Ford Scorpio or Opel Senator alternative when it reaches European (not
British) dealers soon.
Mazda unveiled at Frankfurt the Xedos 9, a car it hopes will bring no joy to
BMW or Mercedes dealers when it arrives in Germany in the near future and
the rest of Europe, Britain included, early in 1944. Xedos is an upmarket
brand, Mazda's equivalent of Toyota's Lexus.
The new car has V6 engines of 2.0-litres or 2.5 litres capacity. Four-wheel
steering is an option and electronic traction control standard on the
2.5-litre model. Peugeot's pretty Pininfarina-styled 306 cabriolet makes a
Frankfurt world premiere; this rival for the new VW Golf cabriolet has a
power operated hood and, like the Golf, comes to Britain in early 1994.
Already on sale but making their first show appearances are the
Mercedes-Benz C-Class, a sleeker, roomier successor to the best-selling 190,
and the new Saab 900, in every way a better car than the old one. Frankfurt
is not just the largest and most important European motor show but the most
exhausting to visit.
In spite of its airy modern buildings and moving walkways, it demands
dedication, comfortable shoes and time. Do not even think of trying to see
it all in a single day. Just as a train from Euston or a tube to Earls Court
are the only cost-effective forms of transport to our own Birmingham and
London shows, a tram from the main station to the exhibition halls makes
best sense at Frankfurt. There has to be a moral somewhere.
