FT  14 JAN 93 / Leading Article: Gulf war revisited
AS AMERICAN, British and French warplanes went into action against Iraq last
night, nobody should have been less surprised than President Saddam Hussein.
In recent days the Iraqi leader has been doing more than testing the
patience of Washington and its allies. By repeatedly sending men into what
the United Nations now recognises as Kuwaiti territory, barring UN weapons
inspectors from his soil and violating the no-fly zones established in the
north and south of his country, he has been actively courting attack. The
west had no alternative but to mount a vigorous but measured response.
In embarking on this course, however, the allies can be under no illusions
as to their objectives and their chances of success.
The only satisfactory outcome, for the west, for Iraq's neighbours and for
the long-suffering Iraqi people, would be the result they hoped for after
the humiliating defeat they inflicted on Saddam two years ago: his speedy
removal from power and the emergence of a regime prepared to respect the
terms of the Gulf ceasefire and the will of the international community.
This week's onslaught thus needs to form part of a sustained campaign of
attrition, in which, without warning, every fresh Iraqi offence provokes
strikes against the military and political apparatus that sustains his rule.
Even so, there is no guarantee that Saddam's removal is within the allies'
grasp, any more than it proved after thousands of allied bombing sorties
crippled Iraq's infrastructure and killed or wounded tens of thousands of
Iraqis. On the contrary: such is the ruin that Saddam has brought on his
country in eight years of war with Iran and in his foolish adventure in
Kuwait that he now perversely needs confrontation with an external enemy to
preserve his rule.
Two and a half years of sanctions may have caused untold suffering among
ordinary Iraqis, but they have given Saddam a ready-made explanation for the
country's economic plight. He must likewise be calculating that a new
western onslaught will burnish his propaganda in Iraq and in the wider Arab
world.
It is going to be a long haul, and one fraught with political pitfalls for
the allies - not least in their dealings with other Arab governments. But
even if the result is only Saddam's containment, rather than removal, the
west is condemned to persevere.
