FT  09 SEP 93 / Survey of Northern Ireland (6): Facelift transforms Derry's
ancient walls - Optimism in Ulster's second city
SITUATED close to Northern Ireland's border with the Irish Republic, Derry
has historically been associated with the 'troubles'.
But a new mood of optimism has swept the city in recent years, as
politicians, businessmen and community leaders have succeeded in putting
their religious differences aside to rebuild what is now evolving into a new
provincial capital serving communities on both sides of the border.
A new, privately-financed Pounds 60m shopping and office complex is emerging
from the city's old dockside. Downstream, along the river Foyle, contractors
are putting the finishing touches to the city's new port.
Tourists are finding attractions in new museums, a craft village and the
facelift carried out on Derry's city's 17th century city walls, while locals
take encouragement from a new factory that is being built by Seagate, the US
computer disk drive manufacturer, which is investing Pounds 45m in a new
wafer fabrication plant in the city to supply the European market. The
Seagate plant will provide some 500 urgently-needed jobs for the 8,500
currently in Derry's dole queues.
It is a far cry from the darkest inward-looking days of the early 1970s,
when the civil rights movement was bludgeoned from the streets, Bloody
Sunday turned the Catholic community against the British army, and an IRA
bombing campaign laid waste to the city centre.
Northern Ireland's second city - Londonderry on the maps, but known as Derry
to most of its locals - has undergone a transformation as a result of a
concerted effort by the Northern Ireland Office to improve the city's roads
and infrastructure and to improve housing standards, and by the initiative
of locals such as Mr Paddy Doherty, the chairman of the Inner City Trust,
who has been a key figure behind the renovation of the city centre.
Equally important have been the efforts of Mr John Hume of the SDLP, the
local MP, who has rallied the local business community - Protestant and
Catholic - to go on trade delegations together to woo US investors and
bargain in Brussels for a share of EC structural funds.
Mr Michael Black, the president of the Derry Chamber of Commerce, says: 'The
city is on the up. There is tremendous confidence and optimism in the
business community here. People have stopped griping and are going out to
find business. Everybody is now working in the same direction'.
The city itself has a population of just 80,000, but its potential economic
catchment area embraces the population of the county of Donegal in the
Republic, and even parts of Sligo. This adds a further 150,000 people and
makes retail developments a particularly attractive proposition,
particularly since the removal of customs posts at the border since the
beginning of the year, under the new EC Single Market regime. Marks and
Spencer is to be the anchor tenant in the new Foyleside shopping complex.
once it is completed in early 1995.
Mr Damian McAteer, an executive at the EC-funded Business Innovation Centre
in the city, says: 'Retail-led development has to be welcomed for the jobs
and dynamism it creates, but we have to diversify into manufacturing to
create the wages that will sustain the retail sector. We have to look at
ourselves as North West plc, with a coherent development strategy for the
region.'
Mr Paddy Doherty of the Inner City Trust sees the new developments leading
to that goal. 'I don't think manufacturers are going to come into a rundown
place. It's got to have vitality. Our hope is that on the coat-tails of the
inner city regeneration and the commercial developments, we will attract
industry here.'
One significant development stimulating the existing local industry has been
a cross-border project linking the Derry and Letterkenny chambers of
commerce. Mr Don McSwiney, the project's chief executive, says:
'The people of Donegal look to Derry as their regional centre. The business
community is therefore beginning to structure itself on a regional basis. We
are bringing sectoral groups together from both sides of the border to
encourage them to work together in purchasing and marketing, to learn from
each other's experiences and to stop being inward-looking and to look to
Europe as a market.'
Working groups are already established in the clothing, textiles, food,
drink, information technology, telecommunications, crafts and legal services
sectors. Other initiatives are linking up local businessmen with the US
market.
Mr Ian Young, a board member of North West International (formerly
Boston-Derry Ventures) is a Protestant, owner of a local electrical
engineering firm. He said that the business community in Derry have found
they can do business better by putting aside their political and
confessional differences, and as a result have received good responses in
the US and in Brussels to their trade missions and lobbying.
Mr Black, who is also on the board, said 'We are selling the city as a place
for US investment'.
The results are beginning to show. Dupont has been in the city for the past
30 years, but Fruit of the Loom, the US clothing manufacturer, is completing
a yarn spinning plant in Derry to supply its garments plant across the
border at Buncrana, while Seagate began work on its new facility just six
months ago. Earlier this year Mr Michael Roarty, the president of the
US-Ireland chamber of commerce and vice-president of Anheuser Busch (brewer
of Budweiser lager) said the new investments were 'a powerful indicator of
the very bright horizons that lie ahead for the city'.
Bringing those horizons even closer are the Pounds 22m investment in the new
port for Derry, which will handle ships up to 30,000dwt and which has been
located alongside a zone earmarked for industrial expansion; and the Pounds
9m recently spent in upgrading the nearby Eglinton airport to accommodate
aircraft up to Boeing 737 size. New passenger services to Dublin and London
are expected to be opened in 1994.
Twenty years ago, it was Derry's historical and geographical problem to have
had the Irish border drawn so near to its city limits. Imagination,
foresight and political courage have since turned that problem to the city's
advantage. For many people in the north-west corner of the island, the
border is no longer the barrier it once was.
