FT  06 JAN 93 / Parliament and Politics: Move to change Labour's electoral
policy
A FRESH BID to persuade a sceptical Labour leadership to adopt a policy of
electoral reform for the House of Commons will be launched tomorrow.
But there are signs that the tide is turning against changing the
first-past-the-post system.
Mr Robin Cook, the shadow trade and industry secretary, who is a long-time
advocate of proportional representation, will tomorrow put the case for
reform in an article in New Statesman and Society.
He will argue, in words that are certain to revive the controversy, that PR
is essential to Labour's long-term future, especially its ability to win
votes in the south of England.
There is growing controversy over the pace of the party's internal and
policy reforms, but Labour officials insisted last night that it was still
far too early to predict the final conclusions of the Plant committee on
electoral systems.
They added that present plans meant that no conclusion or recommendation was
expected until, at the earliest, after the local government elections, which
would be held in May.
But the committee's crucial two-day session, which begins in London
tomorrow, is expected to be influenced by a growing mood within the
parliamentary Labour party against any change.
This has been fuelled by anger at the Liberal Democrats' failure to join
Labour in voting against the government in the Maastricht treaty 'paving'
debate in November.
Independent observers increasingly believe that widely diverging views
across the party mean that in order to avert a damaging internal schism the
staus quo is unlikely to be changed.
They have noted that Mr Tony Blair and Mr Gordon Brown, identified as
leading 'modernisers' within the shadow cabinet, have appeared less
enthusiastic about electoral reform in recent months.
Mr Jeff Rooker, the Birmngham Perry Barr MP, will take up the case for
proportional represention when he tables a compromise proposal to the Plant
committee aimed at introducing a modified version of the Additional Member
System, used in Germany.
Under Mr Rooker's scheme, about 500 seats would continue to be elected on
the present basis, but 150 more would be allocated to 'best losers' from
other parties under a formula weighted to reflect the party's electoral
performance at a regional level.
Any final decision on electoral systems will have to be approved by the
National Executive Committee before being put to the party conference in the
autumn.
