FT  23 JUN 93 / Threat to aid may complete Sierra Leone's misery
SIERRA LEONE, though rich in diamonds and other minerals, is ranked second
last by the United Nations in its latest human development index, with a
worse quality of life for its citizens than anywhere in the world except
neighbouring Guinea.
Endemic diamond smuggling, four military coups, a festering civil war and a
withdrawal of some western aid following human rights abuses have left the
populace dependent in large measure on non-governmental aid agencies.
Even this may be in jeopardy. The finance ministry has threatened to
introduce a levy on all imports, including relief aid. The Red Cross has
warned that it would be forced to withdraw from the country if aid was not
exempted.
As the number of refugees fleeing fighting in the eastern and southern
districts increases - it is put at 1m - huge camps have appeared, each
housing up to 20,000 people in makeshift huts and disused buildings across
the country. With the onset of the rainy season aid agencies fear the
temporary housing - usually constructed out of grass reeds - will be washed
away.
As Mr Joseph Quam, eastern co-ordinator for Unicef, which plays an integral
role in the distribution of food, medicine and clothing, explains, the
relief programme should be making way for the next phase of rehabilitation.
'We keep pushing back the relief phase. We thought that by now we would have
finished with relief and moved to rehabilitation, of which there is a lot to
be done.'
Consequently, the relief programme will have to continue at least until the
end of this year, and the relief agencies are concerned that they will not
be able to guarantee resources for the duration.
Sierra Leone, a former British colony of 4.7m in a country the size of
Scotland, has entered its second year under a new government following the
overthrow of President Joseph Momoh in a bloodless military coup in April
1992.
The National Provisional Ruling Council, led by 27-year-old Captain
Valentine Strasser - known as 'the Redeemer' - on seizing power vowed to
eradicate corruption and nepotism. But there is still little to cheer about.
Smuggling of diamonds remains commonplace, and recent incursions by rebel
forces into mining areas have also interrupted operations.
Last Christmas saw the summary executions of 26 alleged rebels. This
resulted in Britain suspending economic aid. The EC has also been reviewing
its position. The government says human rights abuses under the old regime
were ignored by the west.
