FT  23 JUL 93 / Castro looks to the dollar for help: Legalising foreign
exchange aimed at saving economy
FOR 30 years no Cuban has legally possessed a US dollar or any other foreign
currency because of a law as much an instrument of economic control as
defiant symbol of Cuban nationalism.
But with the economy in ruins and recent measures at resuscitating it having
failed, President Fidel Castro is looking for salvation from the former
enemy. His government is set to legalise the possession of all foreign
currency, perhaps his most significant market economic reform yet.
Mr Castro first aired the proposal at the end of last month before the Cuban
parliament. Last week Mr Carlos Lage, the reform-minded minister in charge
of the economy, made it official. He told visiting foreign businessmen that
new laws legalising possession and use of dollars would soon be presented to
parliament.
Currency convertibility is being proposed partly in the hope that it might
encourage the 1m Cuban-Americans to send hundreds of millions of dollars a
year to impoverished relatives in Cuba. Under US law, an American citizen
can send a relative in Cuba up to Dollars 300 (Pounds 200) a quarter.
But the political consequences would be far-reaching. While Cubans are
increasingly using dollars as the only currency of value, and buying goods
with it on the black market, the proposed reform would cause the government
to cede control over the distribution of wealth. A Communist party
apparatchik may find himself worse off than a dissident with generous donors
in Miami.
The details of the law have still to be made public. Still, Mr Lage told
foreign journalists that they would have an 'undeniable social impact,
giving certain persons independence and access to goods, and create
divisions that have not been customary since the revolution'.
Cuban officials accompanying the visiting businessmen earlier sketched out a
scheme where a Cuban would swap the donated dollars for dollar vouchers,
with which he could buy goods in 'dollar shops', while giving the government
much needed foreign currency. As long as such dollar shops offered fair
prices, the black market would lose much of its point.
Eventually the so-called parallel market in non-rationed goods, which closed
in 1991 because of the economic crisis, might open again with all
transactions carried out in dollars. The reforms, as one European diplomat
commented in Havana, would constitute a necessary step in creating market
prices for all non-rationed goods.
With prices pegged to dollars in the parallel (non-rationed) market, it is
likely the peso would be devalued from the official rate of one to one. Even
now, because of an informal 'dollarisation' of the economy, one dollar buys
60 pesos in the black market.
At this exchange rate, the typical monthly salary now buys between Dollars 2
and Dollars 4 - or two to four bottles of cooking oil on the black market.
With peso salaries worth so little, the government might come under pressure
to liberalise wages and allow workers, such as farmers, to sell some of
their goods freely. While Mr Lage said wages would not be set in dollars, he
pointedly did not exclude a return to the free market in some farm products
that existed for a while in the mid-1980s.
He said the latest economic opening 'was not part of a definite or final end
but part of an on-going process'.
The willingness to legalise the dollar and risk the political costs is a
measure of the dire state of the Cuban economy and of the failure so far of
a limited economic opening to improve conditions. The overtures to foreign
capital are believed to have brought in just Dollars 500m over the past
couple of years, according to Mr Andrew Zimbalist, a Cuba expert at Smith
College, Massachusetts. This is a fraction of the annual aid and subsidies
Cuba used to receive from the former Soviet bloc.
Since the collapse of the Soviet bloc in 1989, the Cuban economy is reckoned
to have shrunk by about half, while imports have fallen from Dollars 8.1bn
to Dollars 2.2bn last year. This year the economy is likely to be reduced by
another 10 per cent, says Mr Zimbalist, in part because of this year's
wretched sugar crop, which is forecast at 4.2m tonnes, 40 per cent down from
last year.
While the disintegrating economy has yet to provoke signs of overt and
organised opposition to Mr Castro, daily life is becoming increasingly
difficult. Electricity blackouts from anything up to eight hours are common,
Havana residents often wait three hours for a bus, and basic necessities
such as soap and cooking oil are unavailable in shops for weeks at a time.
The lack of spare parts and energy means most factories are closed, as
attested by thousands of people roaming Havana streets in working hours
apparently with nothing to do. A recent outbreak of more than 45,000 cases
of a neural disease that can cause blindness has been attributed in part to
malnutrition.
