FT  26 JUN 93 / Finance and the Family: Household and motor premiums to rise
again - Falling investment returns to blame
PREMIUMS for household and motor insurance are to rise for the third
straight year despite a fall in claims. Ian Rushton, outgoing chairman of
the Association of British Insurers, this week blamed declining investment
returns for the higher premiums which he said would be needed to reduce
underwriting losses.
Provisional figures from the ABI showed insurance companies virtually broke
even last year, with expenses and claims exceeding premium and investment
income by only 0.2 per cent compared with 12 per cent in 1991. The
improvement arose from reduced operating expenses, loss prevention
initiatives, lower claims and rating increases.
Rushton, releasing the ABI's annual report, said motor claims had fallen,
particularly for comprehensive policies, while there also had been a
reduction in the rate of increase of motor crime. The companies' income from
motor premiums rose by 12 per cent.
An increase in income from general insurance premiums helped to cut
underwriting losses, along with falls in commercial theft claims (13 per
cent), commercial fire claims (20 per cent) and subsidence claims (52 per
cent). Domestic mortgage indemnity losses, at around Pounds 750m, were down
by more than a third compared with 1991.
The report cited a number of initiatives which had helped to cut general
insurance claims. These included an arson prevention campaign in association
with the Home Office, and an anti-fraud drive aimed at preventing bogus
claims. Rushton said: 'These are all beginning to bear fruit, with reduced
claims in many of these areas. If this continues, we could see greater
stability in premiums.'
The ABI is talking to police and the Department of Transport about raising
fines on uninsured motorists. It says these are too low to discourage guilty
drivers.
On the life and pensions side, companies reported record premiums last year,
with total income from this source rising by 8.9 per cent to Pounds 43bn.
Explaining the need for higher household and car premiums, however, Rushton
said: 'Results did improve last year but we still lost money.
'Significant rate increases have been introduced and their full effect will
come through to companies over this year. Insurance companies have taken
action to put the industry back on the right track, but we still have some
way to go to return to full profitability.'
But unlike last year, when the ABI forecast rises across the board of 15-20
per cent, it refused to make predictions this time except to say that
further increases were expected to vary widely and would depend on the
position of individual companies.
Last month, the ABI estimated that home insurance premiums rose by an
average of 20-25 per cent over the past year, but many readers have reported
increases well above this.
Motor insurance premiums also have been rising, and the Consumers'
Association advises people to shop around for quotations. It says that
despite the ABI's words of warning there is nothing inevitable about
increased premiums.
