FT  20 APR 93 / Press groups launch own news agency
PRESS ASSOCIATION, the UK's national news agency, has suffered the first
serious split in its 125-year history.
Two regional newspaper groups, Westminster Press - part of Pearson, which
also owns the Financial Times - and Northcliffe Newspapers, have decided to
stop taking the PA service for their evening newspapers from May 12.
PA is the domestic news agency, owned by the regional and local press,
providing a service of news, information and pictures to regional and
national papers and broadcasters throughout the UK.
After trials since February with their own agency, UK News, which they
described as a 'runaway success', Westminster Press and Northcliffe have
apparently decided to make it permanent.
The groups intend to remain PA shareholders, however, and their morning
titles, such as the Northern Echo in Darlington and the Western Morning News
in Plymouth, will continue to take the PA service.
The move is embarrassing for Mr Frank Barlow, Pearson managing director, who
was due to be nominated PA chairman at the news agency's annual meeting on
May 13. It is expected that Mr Barlow, who stood down as a PA director
during the UK News experiment, will not let his name go forward for the
chairmanship.
Mr Barlow, who has been encouraging PA to become more commercial, said: 'I
don't think they will want me as a director, let alone chairman.'
The full PA service, including racing results and television listings, can
range from 400,000 to 500,000 words a day. There is also a select service of
40,000 to 50,000 words.
UK News, with a team of 20 journalists based in Leicester, has produced a
service of about 8,000 words a day and has been able to call on the
contributions of the 1,800 journalists who work for both regional groups.
Mr Richard Wooldridge, Westminster press editorial director, said in a
statement both groups needed 'a closely tailored and cost-effective service
for their evening papers'.
PA is, however, planning its own 'mini' service for smaller evening papers
of about 5,000 words a day. Senior PA executives are surprised that
Westminster Press and Northcliffe editors went ahead with UK News before the
launch of the new service.
One PA director said yesterday: 'The annual meeting is certainly going to be
interesting.'
