FT  05 MAY 93 / Arts: Bernice Bobs her Hair
Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940), the poet laureate of the party, knew that big
events were always more intimate than small soirees. His writing, like his
life, thrived on party scenes. Fitzgerald could never distinguish between
naivety and social climbing, so his stories had in-built innocence and
experience. Both are on show in his short story, Bernice Bobs Her Hair,
written in the spring of 1920. Now it has been made into a charming, light
musical at The Orange Tree Theatre in Richmond.
Bernice is all about coiffure. As one character says, 'This might sound
unfair but/ It's only a hair cut.' It is Fitzgerald's jazz age version of
the Berenice (c. 250 BC) who sacrificed her hair to Venus for the safe
return of her husband from the wars; Catullus wrote about it, and Ptolemy
III named a star 'Berenice's Curls'. Fitzgerald added elements of Samson and
The Rape of The Lock and saw the bobbing of Bernice as a rite of passage.
It is a story of East and West after all, of rich carelessness and poor
credulity. Country girl Bernice visits her rich society cousin Marjorie, who
first ridicules her gaucheries, then promises to make her into a society
vamp. So Bernice throws off her floral prints, climbs into slinky red, and
promises to cut off her hair. She does. Then she is doubly mocked, and
leaves town in shame, stopping to snip Marjorie's blonde tresses en route to
the station.
This makes thin matter for a musical. But composer Matthew Miller and
Lyricist John Gardyne take the Sondheim way out: a couple of good strong
numbers which resurface, modulated and intercut, throughout the show. They
succeed in making the songs constitute the action. Albeit short on jazz, the
evening amounts to a public party, with a cast of black-tied
cocktail-dressed young worrying about social niceties and growing old: 'If
you think you've troubles aplenty, Things could be worse, you could be
twenty.' The best number, apart from the opening chorus, 'Nights Like This'
is a love lament by Warren, a boy falling in love with Bernice. As he sings,
'She's not that kind of girl' he realises she is his kind of girl,
persuading himself into love while singing his way out of it.
The performances are steady, with highlights from Abigail Lee (Bernice),
Emma Parish (Marjorie) and Hugh Lee (Warren). The poor lighting diluted the
show's intimacy and energy; it should have been more focused.
The Orange Tree, Richmond (081-940-3633) until 29 May
