FT  18 MAR 93 / After the Budget: ACT ruling may hit sales of Peps
THE PERSONAL Equity Plan industry may be hit by changes to advance
corporation tax as returns on Peps will fall in relation to investments such
as building society deposits and gilts.
Income and capital gains within Peps are tax-free, so a Pep investor
receives the gross, and not the net, dividend yield on a share. The
difference between the net and the gross dividend yield is not paid by the
company, but reclaimed from the Inland Revenue in the form of a tax credit.
This credit was effectively cut by the chancellor in the Budget.
Under the present system a net dividend of 7.5p would become a gross
dividend of 10p to the Pep investor. After the Budget change the same net
dividend will translate into a gross dividend of only 9.375p.
Unless companies increase their dividends to compensate, the effect will be
to cut by 6.25 per cent the income payable to Pep investors. The yield on a
Pep currently paying 5 per cent would fall to 4.69 per cent.
The quirks of the tax system mean that this may make Peps particularly
unattractive to basic rate taxpayers. They will suffer a cut in income on
shares held within a Pep, but their income on shares held outside will be
unchanged.
Furthermore, many Pep managers impose charges which eat into the income from
the equities held in the fund. Mr Peter Smith of Equity &amp; Law pointed out
that basic rate taxpaying Pep holders might suffer a big percentage fall in
their income after charges. Many might find the charges outweighed the tax
benefits.
Higher rate taxpayers will be 6.25 per cent worse off whether they hold
their shares inside or outside a Pep. Since the tax benefits to them are
greater, however, the advantages of a Pep may still outweigh the charges.
Pep managers may offset part of this problem by offering combined
bond-equity funds. The chancellor's tax changes do not affect bond interest,
so the income on such funds will not be hit as hard as will the income on
pure equity funds.
Such combined funds will not, however, be able to have more than 49 per cent
of their portfolios in bonds. The chancellor did not, as some predicted,
allow 'gilt Peps' which could have invested solely in bonds.
Pep sales have rocketed in the last few months as base rates have fallen to
6 per cent, persuading investors to switch from deposits into equities.
However, even Pep managers were admitting yesterday that plans had, at the
margin, become less attractive.
