FT  27 MAY 93 / Leading Article: Europe's refugees
GERMANY'S MOVE to tighten restrictions on the flood of asylum-seekers is, in
its own terms, wholly understandable. Last year this flood amounted to
440,000 people, plus at least another 180,000 coming from Yugoslavia outside
the asylum category. Because of Germany's past, the revision of the very
liberal constitution in a more restrictive direction raises powerful popular
emotions, as testified by the demonstrations outside the Bundestag
yesterday. But no democratic country can be expected to accommodate an
unrestricted torrent of refugees, because it must create unbearable social
tensions as well as unacceptable budgetary costs.
But if Germany's constitutional reform is a perfectly understandable
emergency reaction to a crisis, it is not in itself a solution to the
problem. Under the new dispensation, the German authorities will be able to
expel most asylum-seekers who arrive across land frontiers, on the grounds
that their asylum requests should first have been dealt with by the
authorities of these 'safe' neighbouring countries.
This principle is an extension of the Dublin agreement between the 12 EC
countries. Wherever an asylum-seeker first sets foot in the Community, that
is the country which is responsible for examining, and either granting or
denying, his asylum request. The German government is now seeking to extend
this principle to other, non-Community countries; it has already concluded a
treaty with Poland to this effect, and is seeking a similar agreement with
the Czech and Slovak republics.
A restrictive reform of the German constitution is not by itself a solution,
however. First, asylum-seekers will be at least as serious a problem if they
are expelled to Poland or the Czech Republic. Second, many of those now in
Germany who fail to secure asylum status may secure the right to stay on
other, humanitarian grounds. Third, Germany's refugee crisis is only the
most acute aspect of a Europe-wide problem.
Most west European countries are now facing rising refugee pressure, and
many of them are seeking to tighten the rules to make their frontiers more
nearly watertight. Britain is in the process of passing a more restrictive
version of its asylum law. France is backing out of the Schengen
open-frontiers agreement, embarking on a systematic police search for
illegal foreigners, and restricting access to French nationality.
Exclusion is an understandable emergency reaction. It needs to be followed
by more constructive policies, on a Europe-wide basis, for dealing with the
reality of large numbers of people who will not disappear because they are
denied refugee status. Europe must afford reasonable humane protection for
those manifestly in need of it, whatever the definition. But it all
underscores the importance of Europe taking more energetic measures to help
stabilise countries from which the refugees come.
