FT  12 MAY 93 / Student loans repayment shift offers Pounds 4bn bonus
STUDENT LOANS should be repaid using a supplement to national insurance
contributions, a report by the London School of Economics says.
Dr Nick Barr and Professor Howard Glennerster of the LSE said this could
release more than Pounds 4bn a year for reinvestment in higher education and
attract investment from institutional investors.
They estimated that defaults in overseas schemes similar to the UK's new
system reached more than 10 per cent. Repayment in the UK was slowed by the
rule that former students did not have to start repaying the loan until
their earnings reached 85 per cent of the national average.
Linking to national insurance contributions would reduce defaults and would
mean that more students were obliged to make repayments, as the level of
national insurance non-payments was very low.
The LSE also suggests charging a real interest rate on the loans, which are
now linked to inflation, and a government guarantee of 15 per cent of the
borrowing. It thinks this would be sufficient to attract institutional
investors. It would also add a 'user charge' of 1 per cent of taxable
income, to be paid by employers of graduates.
Dr Barr said: 'If students could borrow from the private sector the public
expenditure savings would be immediate. Assuming full take-up, 1.5 per cent
real earnings growth, and the loan paying a 2 per cent real interest rate,
the combined annual yield from the loan scheme and the employer use charge
would be Pounds 4.2bn.'
English universities could save at least Pounds 30m a year by improving
their purchasing systems, the National Audit Office says in a report
published today.
It says more computerised purchasing systems and coding schemes should be
introduced, with better management controls.
The report says, however, that the savings could not be achieved 'by a
single-step change, but only through a continuous improvement as a
consequence of a deliberate migration towards more professional purchasing
and practice'.
Sir John Bourn, head of the audit office, said purchasing had improved in
recent years, although there was still room for improvement.
