FT  26 AUG 93 / UK Company News: RTZ will net some Pounds 900m from Pillar
disposals - Building a new MB-Caradon
RTZ CORPORATION, the world's biggest mining company, will have raised about
Pounds 1.2bn cash from disposals once it banks the money from the sale of
the Pillar businesses. But don't expect it to go on a buying spree.
Mr Bob Wilson, chief executive, said the cash - including Dollars 600m
(Pounds 403m) from the sale of oil, gas and gold assets from the Nerco US
coal company acquired for Dollars 1.1bn earlier this year - would not open
up any new opportunities for RTZ, which was continuously looking for mining
investments around the world.
But these opportunities came along only sporadically and RTZ had no deals
nearing completion in the next few months.
Sir Derek Birkin, RTZ's chairman, said the sale of Pillar 'is consistent
with RTZ's strategy of concentrating solely on our world-class mining assets
where we have strong competitive advantages.'
The deal with MB-Caradon was signed at 7.31am yesterday, after months of
negotiations. MB-Caradon said it first asked RTZ 18 months ago if Pillar
might be for sale and was told it could be at the right price. But
MB-Caradon could not move until it had sold its stake in CarnaudMetalbox, a
process it put in train early this year.
Mr Wilson said MB-Caradon made its approach six months ago, after which RTZ
discreetly canvassed other potential buyers and also considered breaking up
Pillar before deciding on the chosen route. 'We have satisfied ourselves we
got the best-possible deal.'
Earlier this year RTZ sold various smaller Pillar operations, principally
the Skipper vehicle distribution business in the UK, for Pounds 30m.
The remaining Pillar operations suffered 'modest' losses last year, Mr
Wilson said. These are to be disposed of 'as soon as practicable'.
RTZ said that including the earlier sale and on completion of all the Pillar
transactions, together with tax previously provided for, RTZ would realise
about Pounds 900m.
Last year, net earnings of the whole Pillar business were Pounds 20m after
charging Pounds 10m after tax in reorganisation costs.
Once all the Pillar assets are sold RTZ expects to face an exceptional loss
of about Pounds 165m after writing back goodwill - mainly arising from the
1988 acquisition of the minority interests of Indal in Canada - and other
accounting adjustments. RTZ said that, without the write-back of goodwill,
there would have been a profit of about Pounds 245m, representing a 40 per
cent premium on net asset value.
On completion of the sale to MB-Caradon, RTZ's gearing will fall from about
40 per cent to 14 per cent.
