FT  19 JAN 93 / Allies strike at Iraqi radar: Missile sites hit - Baghdad
says 21 dead / Russia wants Security Council meeting
ALLIED AIRCRAFT knocked out the remnants of Iraq's southern air defence
radar system during bombing raids yesterday, US officials said last night.
Iraq said 21 people were killed in the latest attacks in the country's two
'no fly' zones, but the US warned of further raids unless Iraq stopped
violating the terms of the Gulf war ceasefire.
In the first sign of a crack in United Nations solidarity, however, Russia
called for a Security Council meeting to consider the conflict.
The Pentagon in Washington said the daylight attacks by 69 US, British and
French aircraft were to 'finish the job' on radar sites and anti-aircraft
missile batteries missed in the air strike in the southern 'no-fly' zone
last Wednesday.
The latest raid left Iraq 'effectively' with 'no co-ordinated warning
system' for defences in the south, a Pentagon official said. Another
official added: 'The Iraqi air defence capability in southern Iraq is
neutralised.'
But three mobile anti-aircraft missile batteries in the south were not
attacked because they had been moved and the allies could not find them. US
officials said Iraqi missile batteries presented a constantly moving target.
'They set them up and take them down,' one officer said.
Defence officials said a US F-15 fighter apparently shot down an Iraqi
Mig-25 fighter over southern Iraq. If confirmed, it would be the third Iraqi
jet shot down by US aircraft for alleged violations of the no-fly zones
since December 27.
US aircraft also fired missiles at an Iraqi radar site in the northern
no-fly zone after the radar tried to 'lock on' to allied aircraft, and
allied jets bombed anti-aircraft gun sites.
The Pentagon claimed that Sunday's attack by about 45 ship-fired US cruise
missiles against a nuclear components factory near Baghdad was very
successful.
'We had certain key buildings in that complex that we wanted to hit,' a
Pentagon spokesman said. 'Some of those buildings are now standing only in
terms of external walls.'
But US military officials said one of their missiles was apparently knocked
off course by Iraqi anti-aircraft fire and struck the ground outside
Baghdad's Rashid hotel.
They said the 1,000-pound warhead on the Tomahawk missile did not explode,
but burnt, damaging the hotel. An emotional funeral took place yesterday of
two women receptionists who, the Iraqis said, died when the hotel lobby was
wrecked.
In calling for a new Security Council meeting on the crisis, Mr Andrei
Kozyrev, the Russian foreign minister, said in a note to his US opposite
number, Mr Lawrence Eagleburger, that action against Iraq had to be
'adequate' and 'flow from agreed decisions' of the council.
The note expressed concern for the deaths of Iraqi civilians and the safety
of about 100 Russians in Baghdad.
At the UN last night, Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the secretary general,
intensified efforts to guarantee the inviolability of Kuwait's newly
demarcated border with Iraq by proposing to deploy up to 3,000 international
troops there.
The move was in response to a Security Council request that Mr Boutros Ghali
explore restoring the UN Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (Unikom) to full
strength and, 'in an emergency such as this', rapidly reinforce the
operation.
It also follows deployment yesterday of a US battalion in Kuwait and a
Kuwaiti request for British and French troops.
The proposal may be discussed when the Security Council holds consultations
later today. However, the border issue appeared to be defused yesterday with
the removal of the last Iraqi police posts from the territory which has
reverted to Kuwait.
President George Bush, returning to Washington after a final weekend in Camp
David, said 'we did the right thing' in the latest round of attacks, the
third time in six days that coalition air forces have bombed Iraq. He
praised President-elect Bill Clinton, Mr John Major, the prime minister, and
President Francois Mitterrand of France for their support.
Mr Clinton, in the midst of the celebrations to mark his inauguration as the
42nd US president tomorrow, said he fully backed efforts to make Iraq comply
with the UN Security Council resolutions.
Addressing diplomats, he said: 'I ask each of you to emphasise this point to
your governments.'
Iraq continued to insist that the exclusion zones were illegal. Baghdad
radio quoted vice-president Taha Yassin Ramadan as saying the US, Britain
and France were trying to divide up Iraq, violating its sovereignty.
Iraqi retaliation has so far been minimal. Air raid sirens sounded in
Dhahran and Kuwait yesterday on rumours that Iraq had launched some of its
remaining Scud missiles, but the Defence Department in Washington said there
was no evidence of any firing.
Iraq's information minister, Mr Hamed Youssef Hummai, said Iraq was prepared
to enter talks but would not be terrorised by air strikes.
Raids designed to give clear message Page 4
Earlier target was nuclear facility, say experts Page 4
Clinton pledge Page 6
Joe Rogaly Page 16
Editorial Comment Page 17
