FT  30 MAR 93 / Milestone nears along road to political renewal: Italy's
voting system is among the constitutional reforms tackled in next month's
referendums
AS a gentle reminder to the Italian electorate of the complexity of
politics, the ministry of the interior is printing 600m voting slips for the
country's next appointment with the ballot box. On April 18, Italians are
being asked to vote for no fewer than 10 separate referendums.
All these referendums touch on reforms of the existing structure of state;
but by far the most important concerns changes in the existing system of
proportional representation that has been responsible for 51 unstable
post-war coalitions.
The outcome will determine not only the life of the present government of Mr
Giuliano Amato, the prime minister, but also the timing of early elections
and the shape of new political alliances. In short April 18 will be a
milestone in the path Italy is treading to renew its ossified political
system and come to terms with the extraordinary situation created by the
ever increasing series of corruption scandals.
The referendums themselves are a direct reflection of a fractious
parliament's inability to agree on the necessary constitutional reforms. The
initiative has been taken up by a mixture of civic pressure groups and
parliamentarians who have decided to force reform upon the legislature
through a popular vote. Their efforts have overtaken the slow-moving joint
parliamentary commission on constitutional reform which still has not agreed
on concrete proposals.
Most notable among those in the 'Referendum Movement' is Mr Mario Segni, the
son of a former Italian president who last night announced he was breaking
with the Christian Democrat party. In June 1991, he saw his first referendum
initiative overwhelmingly endorsed - the abolition of multi-preference
voting, and the establishment of a single preference vote which limited the
ability of the party bosses to manipulate support for their favoured
candidates in the election a year ago.
Mr Segni is proposing to introduce a first-past-the-post system for 238 of
the 315 seats in the Senate, with the proportional system retained for the
remainder. Although the more important chamber of deputies is excluded, by
implication the reform is likely to cover it. The constitutional reform
commission has accepted in principle the idea of a majority voting system,
and the main debate is whether to adopt a UK-style single round or a French
run-off. In this respect the defeat of the Socialists in France could force
a significant re-think on the idea of a second round - or indeed on having
up to 65 per cent of the lower house elected by a majority system. Mr Segni
remains ambiguous on this.
The two other important referendums are for the abolition of state funding
of political parties - illicit funding is a central issue in the current
corruption scandals - and direct election of mayors. Taken together these
three referendums would create greater political transparency,
accountability and individual voter choice at the expense of corrupt party
machines. Parliament is close to agreeing a law on direct election of mayors
and one on party finance is also under discussion.
Three weeks ago President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro refused to sign the latter in
the form of a decree because the legislation extended an effective amnesty
to those caught up in corruption probes.
One referendum abolishing the ministry of state shareholdings has been
overtaken by events: the ministry no longer exists. Another of the 10
referendums, abolishing special aid to the Mezzogiorno (the south), is set
to be headed off as the issue of regional assistance is being recast. Two
further referendums want to abolish the ministries of agriculture and
tourism, transferring their authority to the regions. Three more -
depenalising use of drugs, removing environmental matters from local health
authorities and ending political appointment of savings banks boards - would
have limited impact. A convincing mandate to implement these reforms means a
vote of more than 60 per cent in favour, although this cannot be taken for
granted.
