FT  09 OCT 93 / Fishing: Farewell to a legend
I HEARD some sad news in Ireland recently. I heard it in a suitable place,
beside the finest and most challenging trout river in the land, the Suir in
County Tipperary.
It was news of a man who had, in a quiet, unintentional way, made himself a
legend of that river. We had driven to Cahair from the Blackwater seeking
respite from a fishless hours after salmon (that evening as the angelus
sounded from the little chapelin Killavullen, I was to hook the only fish of
the trip, and after a minute or two lose it , and taste a despair which is
with me still).
We strode through the meadows downstream from Swiss Cottage, the pleasure
house built by the Charteris family to decorate their estate. Beside the
broad water was a tiny figure, that of a Frenchman, an old friend of my
friend Niall, and a man with a deep, sustaining love for the Suir and its
discriminating trout.
Jean Pierre embraced Niall, and shook my hand warmly. Then he told us that
Liamy Farrell was dead, and the early autumn afternoon at once seemed a
little greyer and more chill.
Liamy was a big man, with short-cropped white hair over a rubicund face.
Many years before any of us had known him, he had been employed (there was
doubt as to whether work was the right word) for the Post Office. He had had
an accident and been invalided out of the service with a disability pension
and a limp which did nothing to inhibit his sprightly progress up and down
the river.
The Post Office's loss was much to the benefit of the Suir and its
fishermen. Liamy gave to the river as he took from it, fiercely defending it
against those he identified as its enemies poachers, polluters, rough types
from Cork and for many years acting as a highly conscientious secretary for
the Cahir Angling Society (from which tickets to fish many miles of water
can be had absurdly cheaply).
Although Liamy occasionally strayed as far away as the Blackwater, the Suir
was his passion. He had a genius for water, to a degree I have only
encountered in one other fisherman; and he, too, was an Irishman.
Through his almost daily communion with the river, Liamy acquired an immense
knowledge of its weed-rich depths, blessedly abundant fly life, and its
teeming trout.
Even more remarkable than his watercraft was the way he chose to fish. I
have never seen anything to match the Liamy Farrell technique. The man had
only one rod, and it was not a thing of beauty: a severely functional glass
fibre spinning rod which looked as if it could have subdued a smallish
shark.
With it, Liamy spun for salmon and trout, and wormed for salmon and trout.
And with it he also contrived as quiet and elegant and efficient a
presentation of a dry fly as I have ever witnessed.
The trout of the Suir demand a finesse which is beyond such as me. Their
larder is well-stocked, and rarely do they do more than pick at the juicy
olives above their heads. Persuading such a well-fed canny creature to take
an artificial seems more like magic than skill.
It was beyond me again that afternoon, as on so many before. You must
present the right fly in the right size delicately, without drag, again and
again, as often as not in a fierce downstream wind ; and keep at them, until
a fish rises at last, and you miss him, or he breaks you.
It is testing stuff, and brings home to you in a way unimaginable with the
bloated, slow-witted stockies of the English chalkstreams wherein lies the
true art of the dry fly.
Day in, day out, Liamy limped tirelessly up and down that river, duping
those epicureans with the wispy little flies which he ran up in the shed at
the back of his council house. And as his fame spread, so did he gather a
band of disciples, youngsters who fished Liamy's way, employing their ten
foot spinning rods with the delicacy of a wand. It was as if a great golfer
had opened a coaching school, at which pupils were encouraged to use croquet
mallets rather than clubs.
And the disciples caught fish, although not so many nor as big as Liamy did.
He was a quiet, slightly secretive man, parsimonious with information about
the scenes of his triumphs; ever modest and self-deprecating in his soft,
murmuring Tipperary accent.
At the end of April, Liamy caught a wild brown trout of 6 3/4 lb on one of
the bends below Swiss Cottage. Within a month he was dead.
The mass of trees along the river were coming into leaf then, and when we
were there they were just turning, showing autumn's gold. Beneath, the Suir
ran as clear and bountiful as Liamy Farrell would have wished to remember it
with those damnably difficult trout still rising merrily away.
