FT  30 OCT 93 / The Financial Times Guide To Secondary Education (4): Do
grades suffer when girl meets boy?
'YOU WOULD think in these days that girls could perform as well in a
classroom where there are boys as in a classroom where there are none. I
don't know why that is not the case, but it's unfortunate.'
A statement like that, coming from a sixth-former at the girls-only North
London Collegiate, cannot go unchallenged.
Other sixth-formers, dressed casually as the school rules permit, take
issue: 'I don't think it's unfortunate. Once you are out of school it's
almost inevitable that the society you are going to be in will be mixed.
It's a question of taking the opportunity to be single sex.'
'School is for learning. You have got to have fun but I wouldn't want to go
to a school which was mixed. I think it would be a distraction.'
Now the protagonist is put on to the defensive. She suggests that a mixed
school is a more natural environment. But the enthusiasm the sixth-formers
feel for single-sex education is strong.
'It's very cosy. Girls can support each other. You don't have to play the
changes in the sexes off each other. I think it's important to have the
opportunity to make close friendships with just girls.'
Then one makes a point which many academics have already noticed. 'Boys
start to mature at 17 or 18. A 16-year-old boy can be the most painful
person in the entire world.'
League tables of performance in GCSE exams, usually taken when the
candidates are 16, bear this out. Girls' schools dominate the first 30
places, to an extent which suggests that girls at that age must be
academically superior to boys.
But that does not prove anything about the relative merits of single-sex and
mixed education. If girls at that age are academically more able than boys,
it might still be possible to make the advantage tell at mixed schools as
much as at girls' schools.
However, it is difficult to see many ways in which North London Collegiate
girls are missing out. The school, set in a broad campus at the edge of
Canons Park in North London, overtook its more famous rival, St Paul's
Girls' School in Hammersmith, to become the nation's top girls' school this
year.
Established by Miss Frances Mary Buss in 1850 to educate the girls of north
London, it has a less exclusive air than most independent schools.
Scholarships and assisted places are used to recruit as widely as possible
from the local community, and the girls include strong contingents of both
blacks and Asians.
This is very much part of the school's mission. While Cheltenham Ladies'
College was meant to train young ladies, North London Collegiate is 'for
girls' who intend to make their own way in the world.
Symbolically, the school no longer even offers cookery. Instead, the cookery
room has been converted and is now full of girls enthusiastically working at
craft, design and technology.
North London Collegiate also prepares its pupils for the hard-headed
commercial world outside via the Young Enterprise scheme, which gives
'companies' of youngsters starter capital of around Pounds 1,000 and then
gives them a year to make profits.
Whether girls truly feel freer to tackle the allegedly 'masculine' science
subjects in an all-female environment is more open to question. Mathematics
was the school's most successful A-level subject this year, with 31 of the
39 candidates winning A grades. But the most popular subject is the female
bastion of French (45 candidates, including 24 As), while Chemistry
attracted only 25 (14 As) and Physics 14 (8 As).
Elsewhere, the music centre is well-appointed and well used, while the
school puts on numerous drama productions, some in conjunction with Harrow,
the rather more exclusive boys' school just up the road.
