FT  25 MAY 93 / Mayhew denies trying to block disclosure of Supergun
evidence
SIR PATRICK Mayhew, the former attorney-general, yesterday denied that he
tried to prevent evidence about the Iraqi Supergun affair coming to court,
as stated earlier in the day by a former vice-chairman of the Conservative
party.
Sir Hal Miller, a former MP, told the Scott inquiry into the arms-for-Iraq
affair that Sir Patrick had tried to dissuade him from giving evidence in
support of a businessman accused of illegally exporting parts for the gun.
But Sir Patrick, now Northern Ireland secretary, last night issued a
statement of denial, saying he would be glad to give evidence to the
inquiry.
Sir Hal said he had approached Sir Patrick soon after Mr Peter Mitchell,
managing director of Walter Somers, a west Midlands company, had been
charged with export offences linked to the gun.
Sir Hal had been prepared to produce records of conversations with an
intelligence officer and government officials.
He said he had met Sir Patrick in the House of Commons lobby. 'I was
seriously concerned about these people (Walter Somers). They had done
nothing wrong and were going to jail.'
Sir Hal said that when he said he would defend Mr Mitchell in court if
necessary, Sir Patrick had said: 'You wouldn't do that, would you?' He had
replied: 'Just watch me.'
But Sir Patrick's statement said: 'I have never urged Sir Hal Miller or
anyone else to withhold evidence which would advantage a defendant.'
He added that in November 1990 he had advised Customs and Excise to drop a
prosecution in the Supergun case. 'This was a Customs prosecution for which
neither I nor anyone for whom I had ministerial responsibility had had any
part in its preparation.'
Charges against Mr Mitchell were dropped after government law officers
advised there was less than a 50 per cent chance of conviction.
Sir Hal also said yesterday that British intelligence had briefed witnesses,
including businessmen, on what they could tell a parliamentary Supergun
inquiry last year.
Later Mr Jim Cousins, a Labour MP and former trade and industry committee
member, attempted to raise Sir Hal's remarks on the floor of the Commons but
was interrupted by Miss Betty Boothroyd, the Speaker. She said the matter
might involve a contempt of the House.
Mr Cousins is expected to write to Miss Boothroyd arguing that, if Sir Hal
is correct, it would appear that government departments and at least one
minister deliberately deceived a Commons committee.
Sir Hal, speaking after giving his evidence yesterday, said he did not think
Lady Thatcher, the former prime minister, was linked to the Supergun affair.
'I'm a Conservative. I believe in the cock-up theory,' he added.
The Scott inquiry will resume public hearings on June 11.
