FT  27 FEB 93 / Minding Your Own Business: Insurer who entered a minefield -
David Spark meets a former Lloyd's broker who now clears mines for a living
IT IS quite a leap from years as a Lloyd's broker to heading a company
clearing mines in the semi-desert of northern Somalia. But that is the leap
Maurice Brackenreed Johnston has made and already it shows results.
Brackenreed Johnston lost his job in October 1989 when Jardine Insurance
Brokers, where he was deputy chairman, was reorganised.
'I had no idea what to do,' he recalls. 'I was 54, with children at school.
I knew I didn't want to work for anyone else again.'
Brackenreed Johnston heard that Sir David Stirling, founder of the Special
Air Services, was worried about his businesses, one in security, the other
fighting rural crime in Scotland. The businesses were beyond saving, says
Brackenreed Johnston, but 'rural crime sounded fun'. He and Sir David formed
Rimfire to combat poaching in Africa, but Sir David died from a stroke six
weeks later.
Rimfire's first sniff of work came in the Middle East, when it pitched for a
contract to train special forces in the United Arab Emirates. The timing was
bad. 'We put our bid in on the day the Gulf War started and that was the end
of it.'
Through the ill-fated UAE project, Brackenreed Johnston met a mine disposal
expert, Mick Fellows, who soon had a chance to prove his worth.
Aris Grammaticas, a Rimfire shareholder based in Nairobi, reported that two
German nurses had been injured by mines in northern Somalia. Both German
Emergency Doctors and the French Medecins sans Frontieres were keen for the
mines to be cleared. Could Rimfire help?
Northern Somalia has escaped the hunger besetting the south; but it was
fought over for 15 years. The war between Somalia and Ethiopia left
minefields along the frontier, and in the later civil war against President
Barre, mines were sown indiscriminately: under shade trees, by water holes,
in houses.
'The people working for me have never seen anything like it, anywhere in the
world,' says Brackenreed Johnston.
He undertook the Somali contract, he says, out of arrogance and ignorance.
He enlisted Fellows's help and did a survey. A professional clearing
operation would cost hundreds of millions of pounds. He proposed instead to
recruit British ex-service men to train and supervise local people.
Brackenreed Johnston went to see Abdul Rahman, president of the Somali
National Movement. 'We like the British,' said the president. 'But if you
train these local people you have to pay them.'
'But they'll be working for you,' said Brackenreed Johnston
'We haven't any money,' said Rahman.
Brackenreed Johnston went to the Overseas Development Administration in
London. 'I'd never even heard of ODA before,' he recalls.
He went to US Aid in Washington, to the European Community and to the UN
High Commission for Refugees in Geneva which was keen to move Somali
refugees from Ethiopian camps. He won a contract worth Pounds 1.75m with
UNHCR and from US Aid (Pounds 490,000), the European Community (Pounds
530,000), Medecins sans Frontieres backed by the Dutch government (Pounds
350,000) and the ODA (Pounds 400,000).
Rimfire usually has 12 red-overalled ex-navy and army engineers in Somalia,
who can earn over Pounds 40,000 a year. They work two months on, one month
off.' It's a pretty rotten and miserable job,' says Brackenreed Johnston.
They have trained 440 Somali pioneers who, wearing flakjackets and visored
helmets, dig with spikes into the ground ahead of them for mines or for hand
grenades, often with the pins missing. The ordnance came from Pakistan,
Egypt, Britain, Russia, Czechoslovakia, Italy. It includes SAM missiles,
35ft long, leaking toxic fumes.
One mine is like a vacuum flask top. Another, like a pencil box, is
attractive to children who make up many of the casualties. Brackenreed
Johnston says that for every soldier hurt in combat by a mine, 30 civilians
are hurt by mines later.
The initial idea was to clear the frontier mines so that refugees could go
home. However, this simply put them at risk in mined villages, so the policy
changed. Brackenreed Johnston says that to make the risk to life and limb
acceptable will take five more years.
Hargeisa is 200 miles of bad, hazardous road away from the port Djibouti.
Brackenreed Johnston has had to take money there himself, hitching a lift to
Hargeisa on relief agency aircraft. Hiring lorries is costly. Rimfire drove
its own vehicles to Hargeisa, only for them to be stolen or commandeered by
armed locals.
The pioneers, employees of the local government, grumble that their
allowances from Rimfire are small. Accidents raise the question of
insurance, for which the aid agencies allocated no money. Two pioneers have
been killed and 11 hurt in mine accidents and two Rimfire employees have had
amputations after explosions. Casualties in shooting incidents have been
higher: five dead and 17 injured. Two of the house staff working for Rimfire
have been shot and killed.
Brackenreed Johnston says he finds the Somalis difficult to help. From their
early teens many carry AK47s and take the drug qat, brought in by armed
convoys from Ethiopia. 'The only effective businesses are the drugs trade
and Rimfire. There is no work, and the only way to get money is by theft. We
are in the middle of this.'
Rimfire, apart from its Somali work, has surveyed the minefields of northern
Angola and is interested in clearing mines in the Falklands.
Brackenreed Johnston expects it to show a Pounds 100,000 profit on a Pounds
2.75m turnover in the year to May 1993. Rimfire made Pounds 35,000 last year
and lost Pounds 100,000 the year before when it was starting up. Brackenreed
Johnston has financed the business with an overdraft of Pounds 240,000 and
with Pounds 140,000 cash put up by himself and two fellow shareholders in
Spain and Kenya.
Rimfire International, 22 South Audley St, London W1Y 6ES. Tel:
071-499-9252.
