FT  08 JUN 93 / Arts: Post War expectations - William Packer reviews the
exhibition at the Tate
To the historian, of art or whatever, no subject could be more fascinating
in its tragic complexity than that of France and the French through the
1940s, the years of the Second World War and its immediate aftermath, of the
Nazi Occupation and the Vichy State, of collaboration, resistance and
liberation, and of the upheavals and horrors of the epuration, the
retribution and reconstruction that followed. In any Paris bookshop today,
50 years on, the flood of new material and analysis to be found demonstrates
that the collective national conscience is still mightily exercised, and is
only now coming to terms with those awful times.
The arts have their place in this process. Paris had been the natural
intellectual and creative centre of Europe since the Revolution. Here, to
the avant-garde, was where all that was new, in thought and practice alike,
found its true home. It was a symbolic and emotional position made all the
more poignant by physical isolation during the War. And after the War, it
seemed, here was the promised land, the Paris of Picasso and Leger, of
Giacometti and Dubuffet, of Sartre and Camus, of Cocteau and Malraux.
Living largely on its past it may have been, but so Paris continued at least
until the late 1950s in what it still saw as its natural and rightful
position, centre stage. Certainly Paris was central to any British
engagement with the avant-garde in those years. But such has been the
rewriting of art history since the 1960s that today we would hardly think
so. The emergent influence of America, and of New York especially, was
undeniable, but at least for a time yet the creative equivalence and mutual
exchange between the new world and the old were assumed. Indeed it was
magnificently acknowledged even so late as 1964, in the Gulbenkian survey at
the Tate of The Painting &amp; Sculpture of a Decade: 1954-64.
Today, leaving aside such individual reputations as Giacometti or Dubuffet,
the more general creative enterprise of those years is all but forgotten;
seen, if at all, in the light of subsequent American achievement, as poor,
minor, irrelevant stuff. Wols, Fautrier or Bram van Velde to set beside
Pollock or Rothko; Helion beside Warhol or Lichtenstein; Gruber beside
Fischl; Artaud beside Schnabel, Basquiat or Clemente? You must be joking.
In this respect, in bringing into the light the work of 11 artists active in
Paris in that period, Paris Post War at the Tate is only to be welcomed.
Each artist is given a distinct space and a clear showing in proper
strength. Picasso we may take as read, and indeed his presence here is more
token than substantial, and rightly so, for he could too easily have taken
over. His presence in Paris throughout the War remains ambiguous, largely
undocumented and unexplained. He emerges at the Liberation, declares himself
communist and takes on, if only nominally, the leading public role in the
purging of the community of artists. He was always a special case.
For the rest, the attentuated, distressed, existentialist figures of
Giacometti are familiar, as too is the art brut of Dubuffet, though his
dense grounds, scored and layered and inscribed, graffiti-like, with
mannikin idiograms of a knowing, primitive innocence, grow ever more
unshocking and seductive.
Antonin Artaud, who died in 1948 at 54, is the great rediscovery, with his
dessins-ecrits and, most especially, his portrait drawings, close,
desperate, expressionist images of the head alone. If history comes round
the second time as farce, so art comes round again as mere style and
decoration. Artaud's sophisticated psychological intensity only confirms the
essential triviality of the graffiti art of recent years, and the work of
such heroes as Basquiat, Schnabel, who made direct visual quotation of
Artaud, and Clemente.
Francis Gruber, too, more than deserves his revival. He died at 36 in 1948,
and the work here actually dates from the War itself, which he spent in
Paris. His is a bleak, uncompromising vision of the human condition, his
figures scrawny, the setting barely furnished, the realisation harsh and
awkward. But interesting as his work is for itself - and we may as well be
speaking of the assured abstraction of van Velde, or the stylised simplicity
of Helion's nudes - the lack of a fuller context is all too soon apparent.
In short we have an exhibition interesting enough in itself, but one in
which the sum is somewhat less than its parts. Here are eleven reputations
usefully re-examined, but where are the rest? If Picasso, why not Leger,
Braque, Matisse, Bonnard; if Gruber, why not Balthus and Buffet; if van
Velde, why not Manessier and Soulages? This is no plea for an exhaustive
review, after the fashion of the Barbican's excellent Aftermath of 1982, but
rather for something a little fuller and more comparative. The exhibition,
by its title, raises expectations that in the event it does not try to
fulfill. It is opportunity missed.
Paris Post War: Art and Existentialism 1945-55. The Tate Gallery, Millbank
SW1, until September 5: sponsored by The Independent, with support from the
Association Francaise d'Action Artistique, the Cultural Service of the
French Embassy and Visiting Arts
