FT  01 JUL 93 / International Company News: Grandeur abandoned in favour of
competition - Shareholder interest was high at two Italian meetings
yesterday
IN LESS than a month, the Ferruzzis, Ravenna's most famous family since the
Emperor Theodoric, have hit the headlines in a dynastic decline almost as
dramatic as that of their predecessors.
'There isn't a family in the world which is rich enough to feed the needs of
such an industrial heritage,' said Mr Carlo Sama, the outgoing managing
director of Ferruzzi Finanziaria (Ferfin), Italy's second-biggest private
company.
Speaking at the shareholders' meeting in Ravenna, the rich and staid former
capital of the western Roman empire, Mr Sama, husband of one of the three
daughters of Mr Serafino Ferruzzi, the group's founder, admitted mistakes
had been made in managing the group, which lost L1,667bn (Dollars 1.08bn)
last year.
However, indirectly shifting the blame for the troubles to his predecessor,
Mr Raul Gardini, he insisted Ferfin's spending in the past two years since
he took control had been 'not for grandeur, but to remain competitive on the
world scale'. The Ferruzzi family, which has been virtually excluded from
the group's management, 'will continue to give its support in a different
way,' he said.
However, yesterday's meeting was overshadowed by reports that Milan
magistrates, who are monitoring the Ferfin rescue on behalf of minority
shareholders, had discovered new irregularities in the group's accounts.
The magistrates' latest move follows Monday's surprise announcement by
Montedison, Ferfin's main industrial subsidiary, of additional losses of
L435bn following a write-down at a little-known Curacao unit.
Ferruzzi maintained that its officially-declared loss, adjusted in the light
of the revised Montedison figure, remained accurate.
Observers suggested the division between the company and the magistrates
stemmed partly from differences over L188bn of debts attributed to an
obscure Luxembourg-based Ferfin subsidiary. A company official said the
figure had been included in Ferfin's consolidated balance sheet, which
showed borrowings of L31,332bn, as a credit now deemed to be irrecoverable.
He said the magistrates were possibly investigating whether the money, which
Ferfin claims represents a credit to a foreign trading company, might have
been used for other purposes, such as payments to Italian politicians.
Mr Sama revealed that Ferfin's sales had risen by 29 per cent to L5,689bn in
the first quarter of 1993, while gross operating profits jumped 48 per cent
to L718bn. The sale earlier this year of the Erbamont pharmaceuticals
subsidiary would produce an extraordinary gain of about L80bn. Erbamont
would also contribute L43bn to group profits for the first months of this
year before the sale.
The disposal had helped to reduce Ferfin's net indebtedness by L1,008bn to
L14,115bn on March 31. The total effect on Ferfin's finances of the
two-stage disposal would be a L1,860bn boost through a mixture of additional
cash and reduced debts.
