FT  09 SEP 93 / World Trade News: Lopez preaches gospel of third industrial
revolution - Kevin Done in Frankfurt sees why so much fuss has been made of
VW's charismatic production director
THE gospel of the third industrial revolution was presented in Frankfurt
yesterday by Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, Volkswagen's beleaguered
but charismatic production and purchasing director.
His preaching has changed little since joining Volkswagen in Germany in
March from his post as global purchasing director of General Motors in the
US. Those that fail to grasp that the third industrial revolution is under
way are condemned to fall by the wayside as surely as those that ignored the
first two, namely the introduction of the steam-powered loom in Britain in
1750 and the production of cars on a moving assembly line in the US in 1913.
The only changes in the text of the sermon from GM to VW - the stumbling
giants of the car industry in North America and Europe respectively -
concern the location of the congregation.
In the US, when Inaki, as he is popularly known to colleagues old and new,
preached to the citizens of Saginaw or Flint in the heartland of the US
Midwest, it was America and the Americans that were in danger of becoming 'a
second-class economy and second class citizens,' if they did not heed the
message.
Now it is the citizens of Wolfsburg and Lower Saxony that could go the same
way. For America read Europe.
Mr Lopez was introduced to the Financial Times Motor Industry conference in
Frankfurt as 'the warrior from Volkswagen' by Professor Daniel Jones. Prof
Jones has also made a strong line in the past three years out of the gospel
of 'lean production,' a term he helped to coin in the book The Machine That
Changed The World.
But this was Mr Lopez's day - a day to show his audience of component
makers, rival car producers, bankers and financial analysts just why so much
fuss has been made about him and why both GM and VW were prepared to offer
contracts with telephone number salaries to secure his services.
The Lopez sermon calls for a few quick jumps through history from 1750 to
1913, and then to a breathless pause in 1964. That year is significant
because the Japanese industry produced only 600,000 cars then, Europe 7.28m
and North America 8.37m. Car exports were virtually nil. Leap 28 years and
what do we see? North America producing 7.46m cars with negligible exports,
Europe making 12.77m but selling most at home, Japan producing 9.38m and
exporting 1.83m to North America and 1.34m to Europe and emerging countries
producing 5.09m. Europe, last year America, beware]
Now we are in the midst of the third industrial revolution, says the prophet
Inaki, but it is more difficult to grasp than the first two.
It is a revolution of ideas, principles and values.
Continuous improvement - kaizen to the Japanese - is yesterday's text, today
it is the message of 'quantum leap' improvements to generate value for the
customers. Improvements of 5, 6 or 7 per cent are not enough, 'it is 30 to
40 to 50 per cent type improvements that must be made,' says Inaki with his
heavily accented English racing to keep up with the flow of ideas.
The complete value-added chain from raw materials to the customer must be
brought together and waste eliminated.
In the old world of dominant downwards values, manufacturers started with
costs, added a profit margin and arrived at a price. Now in the brave new
world of ascendant values, the customer dictates. You start with a market
price, work backwards to add in a profit and you are left with what can be
the cost. Now you must develop functions that can achieve that cost, says an
enraptured Inaki.
'Not to do this is like making clothes by hand or cars one by one. You will
not survive.' There are only two ways to go. Look for intelligent excuses -
and lose. Or put creativity into action - and win.
To questions from members of the audience he insists that more than 90 per
cent of German suppliers are behind him. The response from the German unions
has been 'fantastic'.
To those worrying about growing unemployment from his cost-cutting, he
replies: 'Improvements in productivity generate more working places. All
those that don't improve productivity will lose 100 per cent of their
workplaces.'
He doesn't like the term 'killing' jobs. 'Only those that don't realise they
are in a revolution will disappear.' The vision seems undented by the
investigations of public prosecutors and allegations of industrial espionage
by his former employers. But it is still to be seen whether the prophet has
reached the promised land or just another wilderness.
