FT  11 DEC 93 / Books: Innocence burnt at the stake - JDF Jones admires this
award winning historical novel / Fiction
THE CHIMERA by Sebastiano Vassalli Harvill Pounds 15.99, 315 pages
A chimera, says the dictionary, with acknowledgment to Greek mythology, is
'a fantastic or grotesque product of the imagination; a bogey'. Sebastiano
Vassalli has chosen this title for his novel about a young peasant girl of
early 17th-century Italy whose fate was to be selected by the
Counter-Reformation church as a witch and burnt at the stake. The Chimera
has won the Strega Prize (strega happens to mean 'witch') and now appears in
a fluent English translation by Patrick Creagh.
The historical novel, when ambitiously intended, is often framed in some
sort of modern-day device. Vassalli takes his perspective from the
Milan-Turin autostrada, where his village of Zardino on the misty plain near
Novara is 'slightly to the left and a little beyond the second flyover'
against the panorama of the Monte Rosa. He claims to have stumbled on the
story of Antonia, an episode that would otherwise have been lost for ever:
'Looking out over this landscape, the nothingness of it, it came to me that
in the present there is no story worth telling. The present is hubbub . . .
To find the key to the present, and to understand it, we have to withdraw
from the hubbub, to descend to . . . the depths of nothingness . . . to the
ghost-village of Zardino, to the story of Antonia . . .'
Having got this pretentious stuff off his chest in, thankfully, just a
couple of pages, Vassalli gives us a fascinating tale, a minutely-imagined
novel about the underside of history, by which I mean the parts that
historians never seem to reach.
Antonia is a foundling, adopted by kindly peasant farmers, whose adolescent
beauty in this pestilential landscape is so striking that it persuades both
the 'Village Gossips' and the fanatical post-Reformation clergy that she
must be the work of the Devil. The point is that 'witches' in most cases
were not hags or old women, on the contrary. Antonia, who is a simple and
innocent girl, notorious only for being used as model for the Madonna by the
painter Bertolino, is to be destroyed by the rumour-mongering, and in
consequence the hatred, of a primitive society.
The Counter-Reformation, and therefore the Inquisition, is in full flood. We
are shown the distinguished local bishop, a passionate follower of Borromeo,
whose radical presence in Novara provokes the Inquisitors to hurry through
the trial; Don Michele, the fake though not unbenevolent priest of the bad
old days; the 'new' priest, the rigorous and extortionate Don Teresio; the
nobleman-poet Caroelli; the bandit Il Caccetta; a kindly executioner; the
risaroli itinerant labourers of the paddy-fields; and, not least
interesting, Antonia's lover, the Stroller, one of those mysterious groups
of men 'who always remained on the shadowy side of history' (John Buchan has
a similar and convincing awareness of this shadow world in his best
historical novels such as Midwinter and The Blanket of the Dark).
No suspense is intended in this story of the five-month process which leads,
ineluctably, to Antonia's hideous torture and death at the age of 20. Her
ordeal is portrayed as 'part of an unconscious ritual by which for centuries
the Catholic Church (and the Protestant churches as well, come to that)
vented its sexual tribulation and anguish on those poor women - its terror
of womankind as 'Devil' and its need for a Devil'. The Inquisitor argues
that 'heresy can be suppressed, but it may also be forestalled'. Against
which the Antonias of that time - or any other - have no chance.
Vassalli is a good enough novelist not to labour his moral. The bishop comes
to understand that the true spirit of the Counter-Reformation had ground to
a halt within two decades and would remain 'a monument to worldly things and
worldly politics'. Antonia's execution is watched by crowds 'neither
bloodthirsty nor wicked . . . the same decent, hard-working people who in
our 20th-century cram the stadiums, watch the television, go to vote at
election time; and if need arises to wreak summary justice on anyone they do
not burn him but they none the less wreak it . . .'
These quotations are misleading. The quality, and the resonance, of this
remarkable book lie in its evocation of a distant society which would be
utterly lost to us were it not for the imagination of a gifted novelist.
