FT  13 NOV 93 / Hawks &amp; Handsaws: Tax to save us from smut
Normally I have no truck with Britain's tabloid newspapers. Life is too
short. But in the wake of the argy-bargy caused by Mirror Group Newspapers'
spy-in-the-ceiling photographs of Princess Diana working out in a private
gym, I called at my newsagent this week and bought the Smutty Four of daily
journalism: Mirror, Sun, Star and Sport.
The newsagent looked askance. In his eyes, my only flirtation with
insalubrity is an occasional purchase of the Racing Post - a tabloid,
admittedly, but one that is much superior to its broadsheet rival, the
dim-witted Sporting Life.
I told the newsagent: 'Don't look askance. If it wasn't for you newsagents,
the profession of journalism would not be under siege. If newsagents refused
to sell the Smutty Four, the rest of the press - honourable enterprises
attempting to do their jobs with dignity and integrity - would not be
splattered by the muck thrown up by the tabloids.'
I explained to the newsagent that because of the smutties, the rest of the
press was in danger of being tarred and feathered by two unwelcome
developments: further encroachment on press freedom via the introduction of
restrictive privacy laws; and the slapping of VAT on newspapers and books
when the chancellor of the exchequer, Kenneth Clarke Ha Ha Ha, introduces
his first Budget later this month.
I doubt whether Kenneth Clarke Ha Ha Ha is seriously considering levying VAT
on the printed word; but he might be. Nor do I think that the hooligans at
Mirror Group have necessarily guaranteed the introduction of legislation
that, to quote The Times, 'will do little to protect privacy and much to
hamper the press'; but they might have.
Yet I have a further objection to the Smutty Four: with their pandering and
sleaze and bigotry and hypocrisy they help entrap millions of readers in a
tar-pit of ignorance.
Every time I see a person reading one of the smutties, I say to them: 'Why
must you do that? They are taking you for a fool. All they give you is a few
cheap thrills. Pictures of naked ladies. A drip-feed of sensationalism.
Pandering to your prejudices. Confirming you in your ignorance. Pushing you
down and down. You really must snap out of it. Buy a decent newspaper. Even
The Independent. Of course it's wretchedly po-faced. Entirely the fault of
the editor. But at least it's got a brain. Do yourself a favour. Try and get
out of the gutter.'
I have never been properly thanked for tendering this advice. The person I
am trying to help emits a low Neanderthal growl and generally tries to club
me.
Initially, Lord McGregor, chairman of the Press Complaints Commission, urged
advertisers to boycott the Daily and Sunday Mirror, and two of them, the
Royal Automobile Club and Autoglass, were quick to pull out once the mud was
flying. Yet the morning after Princess Diana obtained a High Court
injunction preventing further publication of the eye-spy pictures, the
smutties were still full of adverts.
Prominent advertisers in the Mirror included Lloyds Bank Insurance Services,
Toyota, Sainsbury, Maxwell House, Tesco, General Accident, Coalite, Kitchens
Direct, Gateway - even the Newspaper Publishers Association, which had a
full-page ad. The Sport had only porno ads, but the Star, which is not much
better, was thick with General Accident, Daihatsu, BT, the RAC, Citroen,
Royal Insurance, Coalite, Reader's Digest, National Westminster Bank,
Gateway, Franklin Mint - and the Newspaper Publishers Association.
But advertisers should not be blamed for the activities of the media, and
the hapless McGregor later cancelled his call for a boycott. Advertisers
chase demographics: if BT and General Accident want business from perverts,
that is probably their affair.
Rather than hassling advertisers, I plan to harass Kenneth Clarke Ha Ha Ha.
I shall tell him that instead of imposing VAT on books and newspapers he
must introduce RAT - a Rather Awesome Tax on all smutty tabloids, Sundays
included. Proceeds from RAT will not go to the Treasury but will be donated
to the broadsheets to help them keep afloat.
RAT could be extended to books. Why should a hack like Jeffrey Archer salt
away millions while a true artist like Barry Unsworth, author of many
excellent novels, has to scrimp and scrape and live in Finland?
RAT has immense potential for cultural and social good. I believe it will be
the saving of us.
