FT  14 APR 93 / Survey of Leicestershire 5: Naturally at the centre -
Distribution and warehousing have developed fast
A look at a map of Britain shows why Leicestershire has become a centre for
distribution and warehousing.
It is geographically at the centre of the country, and the M1 motorway runs
through the county north/south.
Mr Alan Tuppen, economic development officer for Leicestershire county
council, says: 'We are like a lot of local authorities. We do not like the
idea of vast tracts of our countryside being covered in warehousing sheds.
Distribution does not provide many value added jobs, and takes up a lot of
space. On the other hand, we must be realistic and recognise that our
geographical position means we are a natural centre for distribution.'
Consents for business parks with varying degrees of B8 or warehousing
properties have been given without much fuss. Leicestershire has five main
business parks within its boundaries.
There is Meridian 21, of which Wilson Bowden is the developer. There is
Interlink (also under the aegis of Wilson Bowden). Bardon has Gallifords as
developer. There is Flagship 42 near Ashby-de-la-Zouche, which is being
developed by London and Devonshire. And there is Magna Park, which is being
developed by Gazeley, a subsidiary of Asda, in conjunction with the Church
Commissioners.
These parks cover several hundred acres and have several million sq ft of
property on them. They employ fewer than 5,000 people.
Meridian 21 is an industrial park with some manufacturers on its existing
110 acres. Magna Park has been built as a dedicated distribution centre.
Close to Lutterworth, in a triangle bordered by the M1, M6 and M69, Magna
Park was originally an RAF aerodrome.
Mr Andrew Griffiths, senior development surveyor of Gazeley, which has been
developing the centre, says Magna Park has been a great success. 75 per cent
of the 4.2m sq ft developed so far has been let. (Clients typically take the
properties on long leases; rents work out at about Pounds 4.50 a sq ft.)
Tenants include Nissan, Panasonic and Toyota. Phase two will provide a
further 3.5m sq ft, with a Pounds 9m Lutterworth by-pass linking the site to
the M1 (the developer will be paying for this).
One reason for the success of Magna Park is obviously the location. Mr
Griffiths estimates that over 90 per cent of destinations can be reached
within a day's drive. East coast ports such as Felixstowe and Harwich are
just over three hours away; Liverpool is a two hour drive. Heading south, it
is three hours to Portsmouth.
But the other factor is the sheer size of the warehouses. Mr Griffiths says
that the advance in information technology and the improvements in storage
and handling techniques have revolutionised the distribution industry.
With computers, shops, supermarkets and factories can know their needs down
to the last detail. This means that if a warehouse is big enough it can take
huge consignments from the ports and then distribute smaller loads by
shuttle.
Improvement in handling techniques - bigger fork lift trucks, mechanical
handling and the like - also means that distribution centres can store much
more, because goods can be piled higher. Mr Griffiths says: 'Better
technology has advanced distribution. A typical Asda supermarket would
receive 40 visits by lorries a day. Today, with computerised control and
bigger storage facilities, the number of visits is down to five. This cuts
down congestion and also costs.'
