FT  17 APR 93 / Books: Wild times in nature's global village
THE MOON BY WHALE LIGHT by Diane Ackerman Chapmans Pounds 15.99, 249 pages
'ALTARWISE BY owl light' was the line of Dylan Thomas which Robert Graves
castigated as utterly meaningless. The Moon by Whale Light is similarly
obscure, but we will allow it as a title. The author has poetry in her soul:
if, on a moonlit beach in Patagonia, she is more taken by the night-time
sighs and sneezes of the nearby whales than the source of their
illumination, it is forgivable. As so often in this book, the reader is
simply writhing with envy.
The New Yorker is, by tradition, a sponsor of good writing (and tolerant of
poetry, too). Diane Ackerman was commissioned by its editor to write the
quartet of essays which constitute this book, and the result is a curious
hybrid of proper reportage, poetic intelligence and wild-life documentary.
Bats in Texas and alligators in Florida, whales off Hawaii and Argentina,
penguins in California and the south Atlantic: these are the ultimate
subjects, but they are reached only via the means and the words - reproduced
verbatim, and at length - of those naturalists for whom they are a focus of
study. The author part tags along, part throws herself into the action.
The result is a success, on two counts. First, these naturalists are people
worth meeting and worth quoting. They come across as dedicated, sane,
non-rhetorical and gracious. They are not planet-saving bores. Second,
although the author has done some homework on the fauna, she has not
overdone it; and what impresses one most about her essays is not the
aggregation of scientific knowledge (although that is there) so much as the
almost child-like responses she records of her own encounters.
Pathos is inevitable in some of these eyeball-to-eyeball meetings (a bat
crawls around her head and gazes up at her 'with liquid eyes in which a
thousand truths of the rain forest were hidden'); but it is generally
tempered by good sense and, above all, by an ironic sort of respect.
It is ironic because human beings do not customarily expect to learn good
manners from animals. And yet, the tendency to anthropomorphise animal
behaviour imports injustice to some animals. This is most apparent with the
whales. Swimming alongside a serene mother and her calf, the author
registers that the disposition of the whale is, in fact, rather superior to
that of humankind. Mother whale keeps an eye on the vistor's movements, and
could blast her away with one whim of her flipper. But, again, eye contact
is made: 'I knew that if I showed her where I was and what I was and that I
meant her no harm, she would return the courtesy.'
The establishment of natural trust, which humans among themselves usually
relegate to Utopia, is also patent with the penguins. Since they have no
land predators, penguins are amiable to whoever comes to study them. In
fact, penguins seem to think that if you come to study them, it is an
opportunity for them to study you: check out how you feel, whether you might
be good for mating with - and so on.
The literary precedents for this sort of exercise are formidable, as the
author well knows. But it is saved from becoming some sort of cute bestiary
by a steadily understated sense of urgency. Most of the people Ackerman uses
as her agents for access to the animals are in the field because, if they
were not, there might be nothing there.
Green polemicising, as I say, is not dominant in the book. But, by
implication, it is a powerful contribution to the conservation case. Quite
unheard by us, bats are often shouting very loudly to each other. Whales
boom great submarine arias. Alligators have been chatting to each other for
230m years. Penguins give each other presents as part of their courtship.
All this is not a romance of nature: rather, a great advertisement for the
global village.
