FT  19 JAN 93 / Business and the Law: Marriages made in Brussels - Why EC
merger rules have found favour with industry
The endowment of Brussels two years ago with power to vet large-scale
Community mergers has been an unexpected success for European business. The
Merger Task Force, the European Commission's mergers watchdog, has shown
itself capable of meeting the tight procedural deadlines set by the merger
regulation and a willingness to reach an accommodation with businesses where
possible.
This flexibility is reflected in the statistics. Of the 136 notifications
dealt with by the task force during its first two years, 103 were cleared
within one month and only 10 went to a full-scale, four-month, phase two
investigation. Of those, two were cleared, one withdrawn, and seven cleared
after modification.
Only one merger - the bid by France's Aerospatiale and Italy's Alenia for
Canadian aircraft manufacturer De Havilland - has been blocked following a
phase two investigation, and that largely because of the fierce opposition
to it put up by Sir Leon Brittan, then competition commissioner.
It took 17 years of negotiation and much political compromise to get the
merger regulation adopted.
Deciding which cases should be dealt with by Brussels and which should be
left to the national competition authorities proved one of the bigger
sticking points. Finally, it was agreed jurisdiction should be determined by
reference to the turnover of the companies involved.
If the combined worldwide turnover of the companies was more than Ecu5bn and
the aggregate EC turnover of each of at least two companies was Ecu250m or
more, then the case would go to Brussels. Mergers below these thresholds
would remain the exclusive jurisdiction of national authorities.
This represented a victory for Germany and Britain, the two EC countries
with the strongest national competition bodies and the most reluctant to
cede power in this area to Brussels. Other member states argued the
thresholds should have been set lower, bringing more mergers under Brussels'
control.
As a compromise it was agreed thresholds would be reviewed by the end of
1993 with the expectation that they would come down if Brussels proved
itself capable of handling a predicted 50 to 60 mergers a year. This year
promises a fierce debate on the issue between the member states and the
Commission.
Has the regulation been a success? Mr Michael Reynolds, head of City
solicitors Allen &amp; Overy's Brussels' office, says it is possible to
criticise individual decisions and there has been some inconsistency, for
example, in defining relevant product and geographic markets.
There has also been some concern over lack of transparency. Why for example
was the De Havilland merger blocked while Nestle's bid for Perrier was
cleared subject to certain undertakings? There is no doubt, however, that
deadlines have been met and the regulation has been a procedural success, he
says.
So will the thresholds come down in 1993? It seems industry would like them
to. If a case is borderline it is now quite common for businesses to ask
their lawyers to structure the deal so as to bring it above the thresholds,
Mr Reynolds says.
What industry likes about the merger regulation is the certainty it affords
 -the opportunity to obtain clearance for a deal after the initial one month
appraisal period, he says. This certainty is not afforded by national
competition authorities.
Professor Barry Hawk, head of the Brussels office of US law firm Skadden
Arps Slate Meagher &amp; Flom says industry is also heartened by the task
force's relaxed approach, reflected in the statistics.
If Sir Leon had remained in charge of competition, a toughening of the
regime could have been expected particularly after the De Havilland case.
But with a new competition commissioner, Mr Karel van Miert, in charge and a
new director of the task force, Mr Philip Lowe, taking over in March,
neither of whom has any background in competition regulation, the regime is,
if anything, likely to become even more relaxed, he says.
Mr Van Miert has already stated that strict competition principles will not
be the sole guidelines for EC antitrust decisions over the next two years
and that he wants to model EC policy more on the Japanese approach taking
into account industrial, environmental, regional and social issues. If the
net result is a further relaxation of the Brussels merger regime, industry
may lobby even harder for lower thresholds.
Sir Sydney Lipworth, outgoing chairman of the UK's Monopolies and Mergers
Commission, counsels caution, however. What industry likes so much about the
Brussels regime is the possibility of quick clearance of a merger. But EC
mergers and acquisitions activity has been at a low ebb over the past two
years. If M&amp;A activity were to pick up and at the same time the thresholds
came down increasing the number of mergers dealt with by Brussels, deadlines
might begin to slip and the procedural certainty could be threatened, he
says.
Whether the thresholds come down will ultimately be determined by the
politicians. A year ago when Sir Leon was still in charge and the
subsidiarity debate had yet to come to the fore a lowering of the thresholds
looked on the cards. With Mr Van Miert at the helm and the political climate
shifting against the ceding of more power to the centre, a reduction in the
thresholds is less certain.
If the Commission is set on reducing the thresholds there will be a price to
pay, Professor Hawk says. Germany and Britain, and to a lesser extent
France, are likely to oppose any reduction. Germany's price for agreeing to
a change would be the establishment of an EC mergers watchdog independent of
the Commission or conceivably an independent EC cartel office based on its
own Bundeskartellamt.
It is not clear whether the UK would support Germany in this demand.
Although not purporting to speak for the UK government, Sir Sydney has made
it clear on a number of occasions that while he thinks the body responsible
for investigating mergers should be as independent as possible he would stop
short of the single all-pervading independent competition body sought by
Germany.
Member states might also be prepared to agree to the thresholds coming down
in return for a number of amendments to the regulation itself, Mr Reynolds
says.
A strengthening of the exception which allows mergers above the threshold to
be referred back to member states on the grounds that they affect a distinct
national or regional market would be welcomed by Germany and the UK. Three
requests from Germany in the Varta/Bosch; Mannesman/Hoesch; and Alcatel/AEG
Kabel cases were all turned down. Only one merger Steetley/Tarmac has been
referred back under this exception and that was largely because a related
bid by Redland was already being investigated by the UK's MMC.
Most member states would also welcome a change in the EC's policy on
negotiating settlements which would allow the Commission to accept
behavioural undertakings in addition to structural changes.
And if Mr Van Miert is determined to extend his policy of considering
factors other than pure competition, several member states would like to see
those factors written into the regulation. A significant amount of political
horse-trading lies ahead.
