FT  04 OCT 93 / Kenya sees early pact with IMF over reform: Finance minister
welcomes World Bank role
KENYA EXPECTS to reach agreement soon with the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) on a three-year economic reform programme which would form the basis
of an appeal for renewed aid at next month's meeting of donors, Mr Musalia
Mudavadi, Kenyan finance minister, said in London at the weekend.
An IMF mission is due in Nairobi this week to finalise terms of an extended
structural adjustment facility, the minister told the Financial Times. He
was passing through London after talks with IMF officials in Washington.
He described last week's announcement by the World Bank that it would chair
a consultative group meeting of donors in Paris as 'the critical step for
the restoration of normality in (Kenya's) donor relations.' Aid to Kenya has
been sharply reduced after the last official donor conference in Paris, in
November 1991. Donors sharply criticised the country's economic and
political record, and made further financial support conditional on reform.
The combination of multi-party elections last December and economic policy
measures over recent months seem to have been enough to meet donor
conditions. Donor officials estimate that aid 'sanctions' over the past two
years have cost the country well over Dollars 500m. As a result of the
shortfall in foreign exchange receipts, arrears on the country's Dollars 8bn
external debt now exceed Dollars 300m.
Government officials say they have yet to set a figure for the support they
will be seeking from donors at the Paris meeting, due to open on November
22. But Mr Mudavadi said Kenya would argue that its record showed the
government 'means business'.
'The exchange rate has been devalued three times, we have liberalised the
private sector's access to foreign exchange through the commercial banking
system, and we have moved against the weak financial institutions' - a
reference that includes action against a group of banks which made unsecured
loans to politicians.
The government also plans to reduce the size of the civil service by about
16,000 posts a year, 'over the next few years, giving a leaner, more
efficient administration'.
In March, President Daniel arap Moi, angered by a cautious donor response to
a spate of economic adjustments, accused the IMF and World Bank of forcing
'dictatorial and suicidal reforms' on Kenya, saying he would 'no longer
accept any form of economic arm-twisting from any quarter.'
As the aid squeeze took its toll, though, government and donors grew
alarmed. High inflation and fuel shortages threatened the security of the
government, and both sides became anxious to end the impasse.
Members of Kenya's opposition parties, however, remain sceptical about the
government's change of heart. They argue that Mr Moi has skilfully exploited
western concern, doing enough to lure back the donors and ease the foreign
exchange shortage, but without commitment to sustained reform.
