FT  19 AUG 93 / Hopes revived for Pounds 250m paper plan
THE PROBABILITY that a new Pounds 250m paper-making machine will be built in
Aylesford, Kent, rose yesterday. SCA Group, of Sweden, and Mondi Europe,
largely owned by South African interests, said they were in preliminary
talks over co-operating to build the machine.
The machine would be able to produce 280,000 tonnes of newsprint a year,
adding to capacity of 90,000 tonnes from an existing machine and providing
up to 100 new jobs.
A decision is expected this year so the machine could be commissioned by
mid-1995. It would use recycled fibre as raw material, and SCA plans to
increase its post-consumer waste collection system to provide 80 per cent of
the 400,000 tonnes of waste paper the mill would need each year.
SCA's Maybank subsidiary is already a large collector of pre-consumer waste
and has started 'paper banks' with local authorities.
The UK makes about 36 per cent of its annual requirement for newsprint -
close to 2m tonnes. Overcapacity in Europe and dumping from Canadian
producers have cut newsprint prices sharply in the past two years, leading
to losses for some European producers. Imports from Canada have begun to
recede, partly because demand in the US has picked up.
The new machine could increase UK production to nearer 50 per cent of
consumption. Its site is only 30 miles from London, the largest printing
centre in Europe. The project has already attracted a Pounds 20m government
grant.
SCA is one of the largest European paper groups. Mondi Europe, which has
invested in two Austrian paper companies, is owned by a consortium led by
Anglo American Corporation. The consortium also includes De Beers, Minorco
and Mondi Paper, a large newsprint producer in South Africa. The proportion
it could take from Aylesford is still under discussion. It would be likely
to pay for its share from funds it holds outside South Africa.
Mr Ulf Frolander, president of SCA Graphic Paper, said he expected some
recovery in the newsprint market by 1995, with capacity utilisation and
prices forecast to rise.
Plans for a new machine at the site, which is owned by SCA, were first
announced in 1989 when the mill was owned by Reedpack, the management
buy-out from Reed International. Reedpack was taken over by SCA in 1990. SCA
decided to bring in a partner to reduce its risk. Mr Frolander said that if
talks with Mondi did not succeed, SCA would seek another partner.
Lex, Page 16
