FT  20 SEP 93 / US Health Reform: Business begins to count the cost -
Executives fear increased state intrusion and bigger bills / A look at the
likely impact on American companies, both big and small
US companies know exactly who will foot the bill if the grand claims made of
the Clinton health reform plan fail to materialise. They will.
Mr John Extale, whose Syracuse-based Central New York Building Products
employs eight people, is typical of those who might be expected to applaud
the plan, but are not. His roofing products company has been hit by
escalating health insurance premiums and falling levels of cover in recent
years. Annual premiums will cost his company more than Dollars 25,000
(Pounds 16,230) this year.
By putting a ceiling on the healthcare costs of small companies and forcing
them to buy through large 'health alliances,' gaining advantages of scale,
the Clinton plan is meant to help people like Mr Extale. But he is not
impressed. 'They may put a cap on it for now. But politicians are
politicians - what's true now may not be in six months' time.'
For many large companies, extra costs would show through in other ways.
Individual states would be able to levy a payroll tax on companies that
opted out of the health alliances. Clinton officials have suggested that the
premium ceilings for small companies would last for nine or 10 years, and
that the payroll tax would not top 1 per cent. But if healthcare costs
cannot be reined in, businesses fear these promises would be worthless.
Meanwhile, based on two big assumptions - that the administration's
financial projections turn out to be correct and the plan is adopted in its
current form - the early draft of the reforms appears to throw up both
corporate winners and losers.
The winners would be those which have ageing workforces (generally more
expensive in healthcare terms) and many retired workers; the losers, those
with large numbers of part-time workers.
The draft proposals circulated so far suggest that big car companies, among
others, can look forward to a windfall from the reforms. The government
would pick up 80 per cent of the healthcare costs of people who choose, or
are forced, to retire early, greatly benefiting defence companies or those
like IBM which have had to restructure. Also, there would be a cap on
employee healthcare costs at 7.9 per cent of the payroll for all companies,
regardless of size.
It is difficult to predict the effect of this cap on companies like General
Motors. US healthcare, much of it for retired workers, cost the company
Dollars 5.6bn last year, adding Dollars 1,469 to the cost of every car it
produced. That is 19 per cent of its payroll.
With the cost of providing current employees with the basic package of
benefits capped, the company's total costs (once additional benefits and
retirees are added in) are difficult to predict. GM refuses to discuss the
Clinton plan, but other car companies are generally buoyant about the
prospects.
'It will have a positive impact on any businesses that have been around for
a long time, and those that have been through some sort of restructuring,'
says Mr Wallace Maher, director of federal government relations at Chrysler.
'The overall effect is going to be very beneficial.'
Many retailers, restaurateurs and others in service industries are likely to
see their healthcare costs rise. That is in part because these industries
support a large proportion of small businesses, many of which would be
forced to provide cover for their employees for the first time. Also, the
Clinton plan requires companies to provide cover for all part-timers who
work more than 10 hours a week.
Whatever the outcome on particular companies, there is a widespread fear
among big groups that the reforms will lead to greater state intrusion and
bureaucracy. Prompted by an escalation of costs in the 1980s, most big
companies have already made efforts to hold down the growth in their
healthcare bills.
One way of doing this has been to reduce the benefits paid for under company
plans and to increase the amount that employees have to pay themselves
towards their healthcare cover. Another change has been for companies to buy
services through managed care networks such as health maintenance
organisations, which hold down costs.
The Clinton plans could interfere with these developments. By forcing
companies to pay at least 80 per cent of employees' insurance costs and
laying down a minimum package of benefits, the plan would halt the trend for
big companies gradually to eat into their benefits packages.
Also, many fear they will be sucked into health alliances (only those
employing more than 5,000 would remain outside). And big companies would no
longer be exempt from state-level controls on healthcare provision, a
freedom conferred in 1974.
For the small companies that already provide insurance for their workers -
virtually all those which have more than 20 employees - the changes would in
theory reduce healthcare costs. The economies of scale and 'community
rating' benefits that would come from buying through alliances (insurance
companies would no longer be allowed to assess each company on its own
claims experience) could lead to lower premiums. Also, premiums would be
capped at between 3.5 per cent of payroll costs for low-wage companies and
7.9 per cent.
However, for those businesses which do not provide cover (around half of
those which employ fewer than 20 people) the obligation to do so will add to
the costs of employment.
Small business lobby groups and many individual businessmen claim this will
force companies to lay off workers or to close.
'I'll go out of business, there's nothing else to it,' says Mr Bob Hopkins,
who employs three people in his car repair business in Syracuse in upper New
York state. 'There's just not enough money in the business.'
