FT  26 JUN 93 / Baker sues Daily Mail on Nadir allegations
MR KENNETH BAKER, the former Tory party chairman and cabinet minister,
yesterday issued a writ against the Daily Mail in the first legal response
to allegations made by Mr Asil Nadir, the fugitive businessman.
His action represents an escalation of responses to Mr Nadir after Mr John
Major, the prime minister, and Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry
secretary, said he should 'put up or shut up'. Mr Philip Conway of Wright
Webb Syrett, Mr Baker's solicitors, confirmed the libel action against the
Mail's allegations that the MP sought funds from Mr Nadir during a visit to
Conservative Central Office while he was Conservative party chairman.
Mr Conway said Mr Baker had 'absolutely no recollection' of this discussion
on the one occasion he met Mr Nadir  - at a meeting which he said Mr Nadir
had requested.
Mr Ivor Cole, legal director of Associated Newspapers, which owns the Daily
Mail, said: 'We have only just received the writ. We have no comment at the
moment.'
Meanwhile, in interviews on BBC Radio yesterday, Mr Nadir stressed his
innocence while refusing to provide any new evidence to support any of his
allegations.
'I hope you understand that a person is innocent until he is proven guilty,'
he said. 'So everybody has to presume I am innocent until my guilt is
proven.'
Mr Nadir said he accepted it was wrong of him to skip bail last month, but
said: 'I had no other alternative whatsoever.' He said the gift of a watch
from Mr Michael Mates had kept him sane.
He said his donations to the Conservative party had been disclosed in the
accounts of a northern Cyprus subsidiary of the company, although the
administrators to Polly Peck International say some money came from PPI and
not the subsidiary, called Unipac.
It also emerged yesterday that investigators examining the circumstances in
which Mr Nadir broke his Pounds 3.5m bail and flew to northern Cyprus
believe that he himself masterminded his escape from justice and that there
was no big conspiracy involved.
His escape is believed to have been organised at short notice, within the
week leading up to his departure from a small airstrip at Compton Abbas in
Dorset.
Police are thought  - as a result of inquiries over the past two months  -
to have ruled out suspicions that there might be a 'Mr Big' other than Mr
Nadir behind the escape.
But investigations continue into the money to pay for Mr Nadir's escape and
into several individuals who are suspected of having acted as accomplices.
Police want to interview two businessmen, Mr David Hamilton and Mr Peter
Dimond, who accompanied Mr Nadir on the final stage of his flight to
northern Cyprus.
