FT  20 NOV 93 / Hyundai, Daewoo at odds over leadership of Korea TGV project
DISAGREEMENTS have erupted between GEC Alsthom's main Korean partners,
Hyundai and Daewoo, over which should lead the domestic consortium to make
the Train a Grande Vitesse (TGV) for the country's new high-speed rail
project.
The dispute comes as GEC Alsthom is trying to conclude negotiations with the
Korean government by the end of the year on a Dollars 2.4bn (Pounds 1.6bn)
contract for the supply of TGV trains and technology.
Hyundai Precision and Industry triggered the row this week when it said it
had been selected by GEC Alsthom to lead the Korean consortium building half
of the 46 TGV trains, which will run between Seoul and Pusan by 2001.
Daewoo Heavy Industries, another participant in the consortium, protested
against the decision, claiming that GEC Alsthom had promised it would be the
main subcontractor for the transfer of TGV technology.
'Daewoo and GEC Alsthom have a contract on the transfer of high-speed rail
technology, and GEC Alsthom named Daewoo the leading manufacturer in its
bidding offer,' said Mr Suk Jin-chul, president of Daewoo Heavy Industries.
'I cannot understand how GEC Alsthom can ignore such an agreement and select
Hyundai. We will take all necessary legal actions if Hyundai is named its
final choice.'
Daewoo had also expected to be chosen as consortium leader because it had
co-operated with GEC over the past decade in building rail carriages for
Seoul's underground system.
Daewoo suggested that GEC Alsthom selected Hyundai because Hyundai might be
more willing than Daewoo to establish a joint venture with GEC Alsthom to
produce conventional rail carriages for Korea's expanding rail and
underground networks.
Mr Ambroise Cariou, director of GEC Alsthom's Seoul office, yesterday
dismissed Daewoo's claim of exclusive rights to TGV technology as
'nonsense'.
He said all three main subcontractors, which include Hanjin Heavy
Industries, would have equal access to TGV technology. Hyundai Precision,
which makes transport equipment, was selected as the consortium leader on
the basis of its industrial and technical capability.
Hyundai is expected to receive 40 per cent of the Korean half of the TGV
contract, with Daewoo getting another 40 per cent and Hanjin 20 per cent.
The dispute is the second to hit the Korean TGV project since GEC Alsthom
won priority negotiating rights in August for the train contract. Siemens,
which competed against GEC Alsthom for the contract, lodged a protest at the
decision, claiming the Korean government's selection process was unfair and
biased.
