FT  22 DEC 93 / Greenspan put to the test: Pressures confronting the Fed
chief
The year is ending on a sour note for Mr Alan Greenspan, chairman of the US
Federal Reserve. Abroad, he is hailed as one of the most successful central
bankers of recent times; under his leadership the US defused an ominous
credit crunch and then became the only large economy to reduce its inflation
rate while enjoying a robust recovery.
At home, however, he is assailed on all sides. President Bill Clinton and Mr
Lloyd Bentsen, Treasury secretary, have taken to lecturing Mr Greenspan on
monetary policy.
It would be a 'mistake' to raise interest rates because inflation is clearly
under control, Mr Clinton said last week; the priority was jobs and higher
incomes. According to Mr Bentsen (who sounds increasingly like his
predecessor, Nicholas Brady) there is absolutely no reason for an increase
in rates 'this quarter or next'.
Other pressures on Mr Greenspan are mounting. The White House is planning a
sweeping rationalisation of bank regulation that would strip the Fed of its
powers as a regulator.
Mr Henry Gonzales, the powerful head of the House banking committee,
meanwhile, is stepping up his campaign for reforms that would reduce the
Fed's independence and force it to conduct monetary policy more openly.
Mr Greenspan also faces a change in the composition of the Fed's
seven-member board that will further increase the White House's leverage
over interest rate policy. Mr Clinton will shortly announce a replacement
for Mr Wayne Angell, an 'inflation hawk' whose term as governor is about to
expire. The appointee will probably become the Fed's vice-chairman when Mr
David Mullins's four-year term ends in 1995.
The Treasury's short-list of candidates includes Ms Alice Rivlin, the deputy
budget director, and several respected academics. There is no reason to
believe the new governor will be especially soft on inflation, but a Clinton
appointee is bound to feel a stronger obligation to toe the White House line
on interest rates than a long-serving Republican appointee.
The debate on rates is over the timing and size of an increase. Even the
White House does not expect the Fed to hold rates at 3 per cent
indefinitely, regardless of the strength of the economy or the inflation
outlook.
The White House sees no evidence of any increase in inflationary pressures.
The annual rate of consumer price inflation has drifted below 3 per cent.
Strong productivity gains are more than offsetting moderate wage increases,
causing a decline in unit labour costs. In the short term the fall in world
oil prices is putting further downward pressure on US inflation.
Administration economists concede the pace of economic growth has
accelerated markedly in the current quarter. But, given that similar spurts
proved temporary in previous years, they urge the Fed to wait until GDP
figures for the first quarter are available before adjusting monetary
policy.
If growth slips back to 3 per cent from the current estimated annual rate of
4-5 per cent, the case for higher rates will look less pressing.
Many private sector economists concur. Mr Charles Schultze, a senior fellow
at the Brookings Institution, believes the Fed should err on the side of
caution. But since 'we're not on an inflation hair-trigger', it need not act
'this month or next'.
The counter argument, popular on Wall Street, is that the Fed should tighten
policy well before inflationary pressures become evident. Indeed, far from
being content with inflation of about 3 per cent, the Fed should be aiming
for the 'price stability' long promised by Mr Greenspan.
The sooner the Fed begins to tighten policy, say inflation hawks, the lower
will be the eventual increase in rates during this business cycle. They
point out that a small in-crease in short-term rates could promote growth
because, by reinforcing the Fed's anti-inflation credentials, it would spark
a bond market rally that would reduce long-term rates.
Signals from senior Fed policymakers are ambiguous. Some probably favour an
early increase in rates; others favour waiting until the economy's strength
early next year can be gauged.
At the very least, most analysts believe the Fed's policy-making open market
committee will have shifted to a bias toward raising rates at this week's
meeting - if it did not do so in November. Such a bias would lay the ground
for tightening next year.
But the Fed's task is undoubtedly made harder by the growing political
pressure. So far Mr Clinton has refused to support congressional proposals
to reduce the Fed's independence. But if the central bank were to defy the
White House and raise rates, Mr Clinton's attitude might change.
Similar considerations apply on banking regulation: if the Fed co-operates
on interest rates, Mr Clinton is more likely to be sympathetic to Mr
Greenspan's plea (most recently expressed in a signed Wall Street Journal
editorial) for a continued 'hands on' role for the Fed as a reg-ulator.
It all adds up to a 'no win' situation for Mr Greenspan. If he raises rates,
he risks retaliation on several fronts. If he does nothing, out of genuine
conviction that action is not yet needed, he will be accused of bowing to
White House pressure.
