FT  08 MAY 93 / Books: Sex, power and money appeal - Fiction
AMERICAN STAR by Jackie Collins Heinemann Pounds 14.99, 568 pages
THE MAN WHO MADE HUSBANDS JEALOUS by Jilly Cooper Bantam Pounds 15.99, 590
pages
GAI-JIN by James Clavell Hodder Pounds 16.99, 1019 pages
SKYLARK'S SONG by Roy Hattersley Macmillan Pounds 14.99, 377 pages
QUESTION. In which of this summer's block-busting best sellers will you find
the following sentence: 'Cor, it's her, the smasher, Angel Tits, wot arrived
couple of weeks ago'? Is it from the latest epic by James Clavell? Jilly
Cooper? Or Jackie Collins?
Actually it could have come from any of them, because the sentiments and the
language are more or less interchangeable between all three, even though one
is set in England, another in America, and the third in Japan more than a
century ago. There is a strict formula for best sellerdom, a way of putting
the stuff across that guarantees a vast and hungry audience all over the
world. Authors depart from it at their peril.
As to which of the three can actually claim the sentence as their own, all
will be revealed. Suffice it for now that the best book of the three, best
by a long way, is the Jackie Collins, American Star. It is the story of a
young stud of humble origin who makes it big in Hollywood, and as such is
not noticeably different to any other novel Collins has ever written.
But people do not read Jackie Collins for something different. They read her
for something exactly the same, the same formula of sex, power and money
that has served them so well in the past and will doubtless continue to for
as long as Collins can keep churning out the words at the rate of 20 pages a
day. She is a brand name as much as anything, a marketing enterprise of
phenomenal proportions.
A good writer too, despite the undeniable trashiness of her material. For
pace and verve, for sheer exuberance on the page, there are few to beat her.
There is a wonderful moment in American Star when the stud's girlfriend is
about to be raped by another man and is at her wits' end how to prevent it.
The way Collins sets the scene up, it looks as if nothing on earth can save
the poor girl from her fate.
But then she glances out of the window and notices a passing tornado, which
opportunely picks up her trailer and flings it down again several hundred
yards away, flattening the rapist in the process. The heroine is saved,
several other extraneous characters are disposed of, and the tornado passes
on, all in fewer words than it takes to write this article. Say what you
like about Jackie Collins, but it takes chutzpah to write that kind of scene
and hope to get away with it. Yet get away with it she does, and who can
quarrel with that?
Jilly Cooper seems positively amateurish by comparison. Her latest novel,
The Man Who Made Husbands Jealous, is set in the heart of the English
countryside and is a continuation of all the other Cooper novels that have
gone before. The hero this time is 22-year-old Lysander Hawkley, an achingly
handsome toyboy who passes the time as a polo-playing estate agent when not
bonking other men's wives.
So good is he at it - the bonking - that he decides to set up as a stud for
hire in the Rutshire village of Paradise. Before long women are queueing at
his door, gasping for a service while their husbands are away neglecting
them in London. All would be well, if it was not for the sinister presence
in the village of the world-famous conductor Rannaldini . . .
And, er, that's it. Not much of a plot, not much of a book either. The
author writes like Enid Blyton, which is a compliment of sorts, but one
cannot help feeling that the manuscript would have been thrown back at her
if it had come in on the slush pile. And if she was looking for a snappier
title she could have called it Bonkers, since that is what the book is all
about.
James Clavell's Gai-Jin is another of his oriental sagas, Japan this time,
during the upheavals of the 1860s. Foreigners are crowding in, the power of
the Shogun is waning, a group of young Samurai is intriguing to restore the
prestige of the Emperor. Against this backdrop, young Malcolm Struan of Hong
Kong's Noble House (he has switched countries for this book) falls deeply in
love with French newcomer Angelique, she of the maternal attributes so much
admired in paragraph one.
No good comes of it, of course. Angelique has a racy past and is not a
suitable match for a tai-pan. The story rattles along at breakneck speed,
with duels, beheadings, brothel scenes and great dollops of history and
Japanese culture all thrown in together. Old Clavell hands know what to
expect, and will not be disappointed.
All of which leaves poor old Roy Hattersley to bring up the rear. A pity
really, because Skylark's Song is easily the most literate of the four,
albeit lacking somewhat in pace and drive. It is the third in his Yorkshire
trilogy about his own family, and more particularly about Father Rex
Hattersley, a Catholic priest in the pit village of Shirebrook.
Rex is in love with beautiful Enid, and is prepared to leave the ministry to
marry her. But though she reciprocates, Enid marries a handsome Irishman
instead, and by a cruel twist of fate it falls to Rex to do the honours.
Even worse, he is then forced to sit in the confessional a few months later
and listen to his rival admitting to all sorts of sexual complications
through the grille.
Promising material, yet never fully exploited by the author. He tells the
story well enough, but lacks any real gift for drama or narrative tension.
Too often he falls back on quiet understatement and long passages of
explication, when what is needed is a big scene and a fierce interplay of
emotions. These people are flesh and blood after all, not just portraits on
the Hattersley family wall. One wants to be right there with them, rather
than just reading about it in a book afterwards.
