FT  05 MAY 93 / Survey of Bulgaria (13): Nuclear power needed - The Energy
Market
BULGARIA has got through the winter without the power cuts which used to
make life a misery and disrupt the economy, writes Theodor Troev.
The improvement is partly due to three years of sharply falling energy
demand from the hard-hit heavy industrial sector. But lower demand has been
coupled with diversification away from near-total dependence on Soviet oil
and Ukrainian coal and safety improvements to the Kozloduy nuclear energy
complex.
Higher energy prices are also creating a more efficient and rational energy
market. Recently the government announced it would raise electricity prices
by 50 per cent for households and 10 per cent for industry from this month.
Coal and central heating prices are also to go up. In February, petrol
prices rose 50 per cent.
These were hard decisions, but there was little alternative after decades
when domestic consumers paid far below energy costs. 'With the price hikes,
subsidies will be kept to a minimum,' says Mr Nikita Shervashidze, deputy
chairman of the Committee of Energy.
Cuts in energy subsidies are part of the price for obtaining the help of the
international financial institutions such as the World Bank, which is
providing a Dollars 93m credit to complete the Chaira project.
Chaira, the biggest water pump storage dam in the Balkans, has been under
construction for more than a decade. It will use off-peak electricity to
pump water uphill and generate hydroelectric power during peak periods. Its
first 210MW generator starts operating this month and three similar units
are scheduled to come into operation by 1995.
Hydroelectricity, however, remains relatively unimportant, generating some 6
per cent of the country's energy, compared to 54 per cent generated by
thermo-electric power stations, and 40 per cent by the nuclear complex at
Kozloduy.
Bulgaria is now working on an 'energy charter' which focuses on two main
areas: the better use of indigenous lignite and nuclear power, according to
Mr Shervashidze. To reduce pollution and raise efficiency, locally mined
coal of low calorific value is being mixed with imported coal from Indonesia
and South Africa.
Under the charter plans several coalmines will be closed. Of 14 mines in
Bulgaria that employ 65,000, only four are now profitable. A holding company
will be set up to manage the mines and decide which should close.
Meanwhile, a continuing role is projected for nuclear power, which has
contributed an increasing proportion of Bulgaria's energy since the first
Soviet-made reactor started operating at Kozloduy on the Danube in the late
1960s.
After a damaging report by the Vienna-based International Atomic Energy
Agency in 1991, two of the plant's four 440MW pressurised water reactors
were shut down. One of these units has since been repaired with
international support, a long list of safety improvements have been made and
staff have been retrained. Last month a new, 1,000MW reactor, which
incorporates many western safety features, began operation.
On safety standards Mr Shervashidze says Kozloduy is no worse than some
western plants. Its two oldest reactors are due to be phased out within five
years. They are likely to be replaced, however, by a new nuclear plant,
either at Kozloduy itself or at another site.
Many western critics still regard Kozloduy as a nuclear time bomb. Mr
Jacques Attali, the EBRD president, recently called it 'especially
dangerous' and said that Kozloduy would be the first among eastern Europe's
outdated reactors to get financial aid from a nuclear safety fund, newly
established by the G-7 and managed by the bank.
But Mr Shervashidze argues that for Bulgaria, which imports some 70 per cent
of its primary energy, nuclear power provides the only independent energy
source. The unreliability of supplies from the former Soviet Union has
underlined the need for alternative sources, he adds.
Some relief may be at hand if western companies such as British Gas,
Enterprise Oil, Texaco, and OMV of Austria find oil and gas for which they
are prospecting. But these new sources of energy would be earmarked for
export to earn hard currency and the government is now considering building
a new plant on the Danube.
