FT  25 JUN 93 / 'Chance in life is falling through my fingers'
BETRAYAL was the word which hung in the air yesterday at Rosyth as a group
of the dockyard's apprentices crowded around a taxicab radio by the main
gate to hear the live Commons statement on the Trident refits.
Mr Malcolm Rifkind's promise of a substantial workload of surface vessel
refits for Rosyth was greeted with deep suspicion - the apprentices all
recalled that the government had promised Rosyth the Trident refits too.
'We were guaranteed the submarines before, and that didn't help,' said
17-year-old apprentice welder Gary McGrouther. He doubted that he had any
long-term future at Rosyth or even in his own country. 'After our
apprenticeships we'll probably have to look abroad for work - there's
nothing in Scotland,' he said. Another 17-year-old apprentice, Neil Smart,
said he did not believe Mr Rifkind. 'Scotland has been totally deceived,' he
said. 'I think we'll get to finish our apprenticeships, but after that it'll
be hard to find a job in Scotland.'
Also listening to the cabbie's radio was 65-year-old Mr Charles Logan, a
painter at Rosyth for more than 40 years before his recent retirement. 'I
feel sad, extremely sad,' he said as Mr Rifkind finished speaking. 'We feel
we've been sold down the river.'
'We have been stabbed in the back,' said 25-year-old labourer Mr Kevin
Collins as he posed for press photographers besides Rosyth's dock. Rosyth
was promised the work in 1984, he said, and the decision now to give the
Trident work to Devonport was political. 'There's a lot of Tory MP's down
there; they'd lose a lot of votes.'
The dockyard has around a score of female apprentices. One of them,
18-old-trainee mechanical engineer Ms Jennifer More was looking downhearted
as she summed up her feelings. 'I've been given a chance in life and it
seems to be falling through my fingers.'
There was widespread scepticism about whether the government's pledges to
Rosyth would give it a secure future and whether the new arrangements would
be acceptable to the Royal Navy.
Mr Colm McConnell, secretary of the Institution of Professional Managers and
Specialists at Rosyth, said: 'We will see the Navy having another mutiny and
demanding service work returned to the south.
'There is no way we can see the Navy accepting these vessels coming away
from their base ports, some of them for a year.'
Mr Allan Smith, managing director of Babcock Thorn, which runs Rosyth Royal
dockyard, condemned Mr Rifkind's announcement as the wrong decision. He
believed that Rosyth's last-minute proposal, in which it cut the cost of the
refitting by Pounds 70m, was the best way ahead.
'Quite clearly our bid was a better bid', Mr Smith said. But he insisted
there was not now a question mark over Rosyth's survival; the government's
surface warship commitment was more substantial than expected, he said,
thanks to two years of campaigning on behalf of Rosyth.
Rosyth now had to change from nuclear submarine refitting.
'We must accept the challenge,' he said. But he added: 'I still think it's
the upside-down solution. I don't think there's much logic in what they have
done.'
Mr Smith accepted that Devonport might try to close Rosyth by vigorous
competition, but he insisted that Rosyth would gain such expertise in
surface refits in the coming eight years that it would have the greater
expertise of the two yards. 'I accept we are going to have difficulty in the
long term maintaining our position against competitors', he said.
Mr John MacDougall, leader of Labour-controlled Fife Regional Council, said
the council had grave doubts that Rosyth could survive in the long term with
surface ship refitting alone.
'Rosyth is geared to submarine refitting. Devonport is geared to surface
work. Swapping roles could mean an immense cost to the taxpayer.'
The 450 job losses predicted by Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the defence secretary,
is much less than the thousands forecast by the management.
But the loss of submarine work will be a grave blow to the dockyard's
business, which work on surface ships may not offset fully. Submarine work
is much more valuable and labour intensive than other work.
At present, submarine work makes up about half of the Pounds 160m turnover
of the Babcock Thorn consortium, with the rest provided by surface ships and
work for the private sector, the latter alone making up 20 per cent of
sales.
Rosyth employs 3,700. Mr Smith said this could fall to 1,500 within two
years and could easily drop to 1,000, even if the submarines were replaced
by surface ship work.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
How the battle ebbed and flowed
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1980 UK opts for Trident system to replace Polaris
1981 Closure of Chatham dockyard announced
1985 Work begins at Trident operational base at Faslane on the Clyde
1986 Tenders invited for management of Rosyth and Devonport.
     Land reclamation starts for new Trident refitting dock project at
     Rosyth
1987 Management contracts awarded to Babcock Thorn and Devonport
     Management Limited
     Work begins on Rosyth Trident dock project
1990 Government's Options for Change plans foresee cutting submarine
     fleet from 31 to 20
1991 Devonport sends unsolicited bid to do Trident work in upgraded
     docks
     Rosyth sounds out Ministry of Defence on similar plan, but is
     encouraged to pursue original dock project
1992
Aug  MoD issues general invitation to companies to register possible
     interest in buying assets of one or both dockyards
Oct  Rosyth offers guaranteed price of Pounds 267m to complete
     simplified new dock scheme
Dec  Rosyth enters cheaper bid for upgraded docks.
     Government postpones decision
1993
Feb  MoD promises to keep two dockyards, although only one will do
     nuclear work. Postpones decision again
May-
June Rosyth and Devonport both cut estimates
June Rosyth submits half-price bid with new Pounds 60m scheme.
     Government refuses fresh postponement
June
 24  Government awards Trident contract to Devonport
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
