FT  30 JUL 93 / Survey of Japan (1): This crisis is different - Pervasive
problems in Japan's financial system have culminated in the worst economic
and political difficulties for 20 years. They coincide with a profound
rethink of Japan's world role after the end of the Cold War
JAPAN has been through a cathartic year of crisis. Consensus, stability and
long term planning are widely thought to be the hallmarks of Japanese
society, the cultural underpinnings of its economic success.
Yet the last year has shown with a vengeance that crisis and upheaval are
just powerful engines of change and innovation, forcing companies and
political parties, bureaucrats and middle managers to reassess traditional
methods and ways of thinking.
Japan has been through periods of upheaval and crisis before, largely
brought on by economic shocks delivered from the outside. In the early 1970s
the revaluation of the yen, followed by the oil shocks, forced painful
economic restructuring. In the 1980s the lowering of the US dollar placed
similar strains upon Japan's competitiveness.
There is something different about the present upheaval. Japan's economic
difficulties - it is in the midst of the most protracted downturn for 20
years - were in large part brought on by domestic factors, particularly the
weakness of the financial sectors, after the collapse of the speculative
bubble economy of soaring land and stock prices in the late 1980s. The
current downturn is not the result of a sharp shock to the international
competitiveness of Japanese manufacturing. It is the result of pervasive
problems with the country's financial system.
But it is not simply that the nature of Japan's economic difficulties differ
from past crises. The scale and scope of this upheaval differs, for its
stretches from finance and manufacturing to the political system and Japan's
foreign relations as well as reaching into Japan's social values.
The political upheavals which led to the Liberal Democratic Party losing its
overall majority in the July 18 general election for the first time in
almost 40 years - and the consequent decision of Prime Minister Miyazawa to
resign - are just the latest and the most dramatic example of changes which
are underway in almost every area of Japanese society.
If there is one explanation for this complex, uncertain process of change it
is that Japan is maturing. It is, in fits and starts, at times reluctantly,
shedding an image of itself as a society which has to be dedicated to
economic development as a priority and which could afford to do so because
it sheltered beneath the wing of US foreign policy.
It will in future focus less on quantitative goals for economic growth as
the guiding beacon for social and commercial life. Coalitions which held
together during the period of rapid growth after the second world war are
now becoming unglued. There is a growing recognition that Japan should play
a larger world role, in part because it cannot avoid doing so as a major
economic power in a post cold war world.
To European and US ears it may sound odd to say that Japan is in crisis.
Unemployment is still low, at 2.5 per cent. The economy has not slipped into
outright recession unlike the recent experience of the UK, Germany and the
US. Japan is running a record current account surplus with its trading
partners which could be worth Dollars 150bn this year.
Yet crisis is the right term, because old assumptions and certainties are
being overturned, and tried and tested precedents which have guided Japanese
policy are being found wanting. Myths are being exposed in five areas:
Finance. The Japanese financial system is facing probably its most serious
and protracted crisis since the 1930s. The country's main banks are carrying
a heavy burden of bad debts left behind by the excessive property lending in
the late 1980s.
In past recessions the financial system has been stable while manufacturing
companies have adjusted to threats to their international competitiveness.
Now the financial system itself is being forced to restructure and reform.
The worst of the crisis is probably over. But it will take several years
before the backlog of bad debts is fully cleared up.
Industry. Manufacturing companies are embarking on long term restructuring
plans to enhance their competitiveness. These will involve greater
investment abroad, especially into south east Asia. But most manufacturers
are determined to maintain a solid core of operations in Japan despite its
relatively high costs. To achieve this they are implementing far reaching
changes in the way they design and make products to improve efficiency.
In the car and electronics industries, which have been the engines of the
growth of the Japanese economy over the past two decades, the situation is
particularly troubling. Consumer electronics and computer companies say they
are facing a 'new product recession', because they are facing for the first
time in their lives very low growth in consumer demand and chronically
depressed prices.
Foreign relations. Japan's foreign policy is being reshaped by the end of
the cold war. Japan's old foreign policies - the right's adherence to US
leadership and the left's pacifist opposition to it - are being challenged
by a new realism, underpinned by a muted Japanese nationalism. The young new
realists want Japan to play a larger world role, commensurate with its
economic power. One of the first signs of this new assertiveness, especially
evident among younger bureaucrats and managers, was the stiff Japanese
opposition to US demands for numerical targets to open up the Japanese
market to foreign goods and to cut the trade surplus.
Over the next few years, with its sights on a seat as a permanent member of
the UN security council, Japan will be charting its way cautiously into a
more independent international role.
For 40 years since the second world war Japan has relied upon US leadership
to guide it diplomatically. In the next decade it will rely less on the US.
Social change. In the past two years the salarymen and women who make up
most of the Japanese workforce have seen some of their cherished myths
evaporate. For most of the post war era Japan's scarce land has been one of
its safest investments for Japanese savers. Yet in the past two years land
has fallen in value by about 30 per cent in the wake of the collapse of the
economic bubble.
This year there has been another shock as many large companies such as
Nissan, Matsushita and NTT have announced plans to cut their workforce,
throwing in doubt their commitment to a fully fledged lifetime employment
system which is widely thought to be one of the hallmarks of management of
large companies.
These cuts are modest compared with the restructuring underway in German
industry, yet for Japanese workers brought up on on a diet of security and
loyalty they have been a shock.
Politics. The precise outcome of Japan's political turmoil is far from
clear. Yet it is clear that a fundamental process of political change is
underway.
The socialist opposition has been deeply wounded and is unlikely to recover
from the setbacks it suffered in the general election. The LDP may face a
period in which it can only exert its influence through coalitions. Young
reformers in new conservative parties are setting the pace for Japanese
politics. As a result political reforms, probably including far-reaching
reforms to electoral system, are almost certain.
The centre of gravity of the entire political system is shifting, in a
belated response to the economic and social changes which have swept Japan
as it has become perhaps the strongest economy in the post-cold-war world.
The old dividing line between left and right is increasingly irrelevant. For
the foreseeable future the most important divide in Japanese politics, which
will cut across the main parties, will be between modernisers and
traditionalists.
Supporters of political reform are spread through all parties. Elderly
defenders of the status quo congregate in both the LDP and the SDP.
Reformers in different parties often have more in common with one another
than with their seniors within their own party.
The rise of the new conservative parties - the Japan Renewal Party, the
Japan New Party and the New Harbinger Party - is the most visible sign of
this shift. But across the political system the balance of power is swinging
in favour of modernisers.
The divide between young and old will be enduring and could provide fertile
soil in which the modernising conservative parties will take root.
It is too early to say what will emerge from this period of modernisation,
partly because it will wholeheartedly embrace large tracts of tradition.
Japan's financial and industrial sectors will probably emerge yet more
competitive in a few years time. Its political institutions and social life
may become more open and transparent. Japan may become gradually more
assertive and independent in the world, particularly as far as Asia is
concerned.
