FT  09 SEP 93 / Government Bonds: Long-dated US Treasury yields dip to
record lows
THE extraordinary rally in longer-dated US Treasury securities showed no
signs of faltering yesterday, with yields dropping to new historic lows as
traders continued to execute yield curve-flattening trades.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government bond was up  15/32 at 105
15/32 , yielding 5.858 per cent. At the short end of the market, the
two-year note was down  1/16 at 100 3/16 , to yield 3.759 per cent.
For the second consecutive day prices at opposite ends of the maturity
spectrum moved in different directions, primarily because dealers were
selling shorter-dated securities and buying bonds in a strategy aimed at
flattening the yield curve.
The short end was also undermined by Tuesday's comments from Federal Reserve
chairman Mr Alan Greenspan, who told a senior Congressman that real
short-term interest rates were lower than appropriate.
MOST European bond markets traded nervously in technical ranges as dealers
focused on today's meeting of the Bundesbank's central bank council.
Market participants appear evenly split over the likelihood of a cut in
Germany's 6.75 per cent discount rate.
A global bond market survey conducted by analysis firm IDEA shows that 38
per cent of respondents expect a discount-rate cut this week, 38 per cent
expect it at the next meeting on September 23, and 24 per cent forecast an
October cut. Some 80 per cent of those who see an easing expect a  1/2
 point rate cut.
AFTER a steady start, German bond futures weakened in the afternoon as
traders worried that a German rate cut could spark a sell-off after the
recent rally which has left bunds technically overbought.
In the past, rate cuts have often triggered profit-taking while unchanged
rates have supported prices as players shifted their easing hopes to the
following meeting. Now, traders worry a cut in rates today may put off the
next easing for a while. Also, they fear the Bundesbank may leave the repo
rate unchanged at 6.80 per cent, keeping the impact of a rate cut to the
bare minimum. The December bund future traded on Liffe ended 0.12 point
lower at 98.52.
However, strong demand for 10-year cash bonds pushed the 6 1/2 per cent
10-year benchmark some 0.10 point higher. The DM4.03bn tranche of these
bonds auctioned yesterday was snapped up by investors although the issue
price of an average 102.73 was deemed expensive. Retail demand was so strong
that it left many banks short, according to traders. 'Retail took everything
 -there's about a DM2bn shortage out there,' said a London dealer.
GILTS continued to firm early in the day on technical and retail buying but
shed most of their early gains in the afternoon to end only slightly firmer.
Prices remain underpinned by the same scenario that has been fuelling the US
bond rally: economic recovery accompanied by low inflation. Buying fizzled
out in the afternoon, however, after the December long gilt future failed to
break key technical resistance and closed at 114.03, up 0.01 point from
Tuesday.
IN THE French bond market, cash investors were sidelined ahead of the
Bundesbank Council meeting and ceded the stage to professional futures
players.
Traders tried to push the September notional bond future on the Matif
futures exchange to a new high. While the December contract did post a new
high at 123.72, the September future reached 123.94, four ticks short of its
historical peak. A breach of 123.98 would have triggered heavy buying,
according to dealers, but failure to do so caused profit-taking and the
contract slipped to close at 123.58, up 0.06 point.
WHILE the long end of the Belgian yield curve was steady the shorter
maturities were very volatile, buffeted by swings in the currency on the
foreign exchanges. Prices of short-to medium-dated bonds jumped nearly a
point in the morning, only to shed these gains in the afternoon on fears
that unchanged German rates today could put further pressure on the Belgian
franc.
JUST before the close of a range-bound trading day, the Japanese bond future
jumped. Traders tried to push the contract through 112.00. But the contract
peaked at 111.99 and slipped back on profit-taking, leaving it to close 0.18
point higher on the day at 111.84.
