FT  01 MAR 93 / Minister presses for the release of rainforest cash
BRAZIL'S environment minister, Mr Coutinho Jorge, arrived in London at the
weekend to lobby for release of long-promised funds from the G7 leading
industrialised nations for an ambitious plan to preserve the Amazon
rainforest.
The Amazon Pilot Project agreed at the G7 summit in London in 1990 was
heralded as the world's largest environment project and the first time that
first and third world nations had co-operated on a big environmental
programme.
Backed by the World Bank and European Community, the project envisaged
spending Dollars 1.5bn (Pounds 1.05bn) over five years to protect the
world's largest rainforest. But the Amazon has been pushed down the
international agenda by more pressing matters and, three years on, Brazil
still has not got a cent.
Mr Miguel Oliveira, spokesman for Mr Jorge, said: 'The first world has got
all the publicity for the initiative while avoiding giving anything. The
rest of the world may have forgotten the Amazon but Brazil has not.'
Last year, President Fernando Collor secured a pledge to liberate Dollars
50m before the Earth Summit hosted in Rio. But the matter was quickly buried
amid his unsuccessful struggle to survive impeachment, and according to the
Environment Ministry the money was never released.
The new government secured a promise that an initial Dollars 128m tranche
would be released in April. But this is threatened by intense lobbying from
environmental groups on the US and UK governments to block the funds in
retaliation for Brazil's failure to recapture the escaped killers of Chico
Mendes, the rubber-tapper who brought the rainforest plight to world
attention. Ecologists say the Brazilian government made no effort to keep
the assassins in jail despite repeated warnings an escape was planned.
Mr Jorge will meet this week with non-governmental organisations such as
Friends of the Earth, academics, MPs and government ministers including Mr
Michael Heseltine, Mr Michael Howard and Mr Tristan Garel-Jones to try to
prevent the blockage of funds.
Mr Oliveira said yesterday: 'The Pilot Project is to further the aims that
Chico Mendes died for. Blocking the money would harm these objectives, not
help them.'
