FT  06 JUL 93 / Kohl acts to fill the breach: Seiters resignation is severe
blow to Chancellor
THE resignation of Mr Rudolf Seiters, the German interior minister, over a
bungled anti-terrorist operation, is potentially the most damaging blow in
recent months to the political credibility of Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
The latter moved rapidly yesterday to appoint the relatively unknown Mr
Manfred Kanther, leader of his Christian Democratic Union in the state of
Hesse, to take over the portfolio. He then flew off to Tokyo to attend the
Group of Seven economic summit.
Back in Bonn, however, the impression remains that Mr Seiters' resignation
has robbed Mr Kohl of one of his closest associates in the coalition
government simply because he had lost the political will to fight for his
job.
'Mr Seiters is like a captain who leaves his ship before it has even begun
to sink,' said Mr Willi Steul, political commentator for Sudwestfunk, the
south-western broadcasting organisation. 'It is not even clear what went
wrong with the operation, and yet he has resigned.'
His decision to quit, against Mr Kohl's pleading, followed a series of
conflicting reports from different security agencies about a shoot-out with
suspected members of the Red Army Faction terrorist group a week ago. A
suspected terrorist and a policeman in the elite GSG-9 anti-terrorist group
were shot dead.
A new report from the federal crime office yesterday failed to cast any new
light on the death of Mr Wolfgang Grams, the suspected terrorist, to counter
allegations that he was executed in cold blood at the end of the shoot-out.
Mr Kanther, a long-time associate of Mr Kohl, but without any profile in
national politics, promised yesterday that clarification of the shooting
would be his top priority.
Yet the very fact that the anti-terrorist operation at Bad Kleinen, near
Schwerin in eastern Germany, is still shrouded in mystery, has caused more
speculation about Mr Seiters' decision to quit the government, and
strengthened suspicions of rough justice.
It has also reinforced demands for the resignation of Mr Alexander von
Stahl, the federal prosecutor, and for the GSG-9 unit to be disbanded.
'He simply did not have the stomach for a fight with the media,' according
to one senior government official yesterday. 'He is a very honourable, and a
very sensitive man.'
He is the ninth minister to leave the cabinet in a resignation or forced
retirement over the past 18 months, and the fifth to resign because of a
scandal. In this case, however, Mr Seiters made clear he was taking
political responsibility for possible mistakes committed by units under his
command.
Close political allies suggested yesterday that he was exhausted by the
in-fighting in the governing coalition, and by the prospect of a long
drawn-out inquiry into the operation.
The issues of law and order, and immigration, over which the Interior
Ministry presides, are also likely to be the most politically charged in
next year's election campaign. Some observers believe Mr Seiters was
concerned at the conservative drift of the policies of Mr Kohl and the
Christian Democratic Union.
