FT  14 AUG 93 / Despatches: Reporter who makes crime pay
IT IS ONE of those perfect Fridays when the sun beats down from a deep blue
sky and a light wind ruffles the tree tops. I am waiting to see Brazilian
television reporter Gil Gomes, along with what appears to be the dregs of
Sao Paulo society gathered together on a bench.
Suddenly, a man in a long beige mac appears, collar upturned and right hand
thrust deep in a pocket from which bulges what can only be a large revolver.
A vein on his pasty forehead throbbing, he paces in front of me so that I am
forced to stare at his yellow linen trousers and scuffed loafers.
Behind Mr Long Mac, I see the figure of Gomes' son beckoning me away to a
back entrance. 'That man has come to kill my father,' says Gomes Jnr, with
apparent calm.
Gil Gomes is a crime reporter. Not just an ordinary crime reporter but a
master of the dramatic pause who re-enacts crimes and acts of violence in
agonising detail, lingering over the goriest parts. While debate in some
countries rages over excess violence in films and television, Brazil has an
entire programme dedicated to showing nothing but the day's most grisly
crime and violence.
Every night at 6.30, around 30m Brazilians tune into SBT to watch Here and
Now - a 90-minute tabloid show which calls itself 'The programme that shows
life as it really is.' It is so popular that it now competes directly with
the country's main news bulletin.
An average night could start with a dramatic police chase over roof-tops in
the centre of Sao Paulo. The highlight of the programme is usually a
gruesome murder - which is the moment the viewers are waiting for. The
slightly hunch-backed figure and pock-marked face of Gomes appears, leering
into the camera, above a headline such as 'Trail of blood on the Andarilho
road.' The gravelly voice begins: 'This is the story of a young girl called
Ana Maria from Ceara, a story which revolted this community.'
As the camera follows him along a dirt track to a simple house, Gomes tells
how Ana Maria came south to Sao Paulo and found love and happiness. One day,
she was in the house, cooking tea happily for her husband and child. 'What
she didn't know,' says Gomes, 'was that an element with evil intent and
various run-ins with the police was looking for a place to rob.' (He always
refers to criminals as 'elements').
One of Gomes' specialities is interviewing murderers and close relatives of
their victims, sometimes even bringing them together; so, at this point, he
turns to Ana's grief-stricken husband. 'She was spectacular, special, a good
mother,' says Gomes as the new widower nods, tearfully.
Back on the dirt track, the suspense is building. To the sound of a rolling
drum, Gomes continues: 'The element began walking along the road looking for
a way in.' The camera closes in on his loafers as he enters the house. 'Ana
was in the kitchen . . . she cried out, the children began crying . . . when
neighbours came, it was too late . . . they found Ana with a knife stuck in
the back of her neck.'
His face close to the camera, Gomes growls: 'There can be no explanations,
not a single explanation for such a barbaric crime.'
The camera swings to a terrified suspect who is denying everything. 'You're
not a saint, are you,' snarls Gomes. The man is condemned - he is wearing
one shoe and one boot which fit footprints in the mud found by Gomes and the
police, and has blood on his shirt.
Back in his office in the leafy Jardins suburb of Sao Paulo, Gomes proves a
surprisingly gentle character, although unapologetic for his blood-chilling
performance. 'Unfortunately, here in Brazil, police take notice only when
crime has been committed against rich or influential people,' he says. 'In
common cases there is no investigation, nothing. Here and Now has introduced
a new philosophy that everyone is important, whatever their class.'
He refuses to accept that showing violence on the screen can induce more;
instead, he sees himself as a kind of anti-crime crusader. 'There is too
much violence in the world, but what we are showing is not gratuitous
violence but news. The idea is to show the stupidity and barbarity of crimes
and to show that crime doesn't pay. I always show cases being resolved,
assassins being imprisoned.'
Gomes believes he is boosting police morale in a country where the police
themselves often are the first suspects in crimes. He has, personally,
solved more than 600 murders in 20 years as a crime reporter.
Gomes has no shortage of material. Brazil is one of the world's most violent
countries and he has 22 murders a day from which to choose in Sao Paulo
alone. He says: 'I still get very shocked by what I see, particularly as
more than two-thirds of these crimes could have been avoided if we had a
better social structure and prison system.'
