FT  02 APR 93 / Kurds enjoy taste of freedom under dual embargo: But at
times it is bitter
UNDER the protection of Allied air cover, the 3.5m Kurds of northern Iraq
have built a functioning system of parliamentary government over a large
swathe of Iraqi territory. But after two winters of dual embargo from both
the United Nations and the Iraqi regime, they continue to face severe
economic problems.
Yellow and white narcissi, the symbol of spring, adorn tents, shacks and
houses. The Moslem festival of Eid was celebrated with traditional dancing,
song and open-air picnics in the bright sunshine.
But the Kurds are deeply apprehensive about the future. Around a million
live under Iraqi government control and a continuing stream of refugees from
government-held areas around Mosul and Kirkuk bring tales of continuing
harassment, arrests and beatings by Saddam's security forces.
Two weeks after Arab Lahib tribesmen and, survivors allege, Iraqi soldiers
massacred 15 Kurdish civilians on March 12 at the village of Awina - 20km
south west of Arbil and just outside the Kurdish-held zone - spent
Kalashnikov cartridges littered the ground outside deserted shelters, where
dried blood remained splattered on the walls.
The situation in the Kurdish-held cities of Arbil and Sulaymaniyah is tense.
Kurdish television clumsily paraded four captured terrorists last weekend in
an attempt to restore public confidence after a spate of bombings.
With an automatic rifle available on the black market for only 7,000 dinas
(Pounds 250) and a hand-grenade for only 30 dinas, a sizeable profit is
possible for anyone willing to accept substantial payment from Iraqi agents
to carry out terror missions against Kurdish civilians, UN staff or aid
workers.
In a move designed to place a stronger figure in charge of day-to-day
administration, former guerrilla commander Abdullah 'Koosrat' Rasoul will
soon replace the veteran Fua'd Ma'soum as the Kurds' 'prime minister' in the
cross-party government.
Mr Rasoul said: 'It is a change of faces, not of policy,' but admitted that
'everyone has his own style'.
Mr Rasoul will head a cabinet of 15 ministers responsible to a Kurdish
'parliament' elected in May 1992 and dominated by the two major parties -
Jalal Talabani's Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and Massoud Barzani's
Kurdistan Democratic Party, each of whom has 50 of the 105 seats.
The parliament acts as a legislative body for the 50,000sq km of northern
Iraq from which Iraqi president Saddam Hussein withdrew all administration
in November 1991 in response to the Allied creation of a 'security zone' to
protect the Kurdish population from attacks by Iraqi troops.
Iraqi laws passed before November 1991 continue in force, but those judged
by the Kurdish parliament to be 'against Kurdish interests' have been
frozen, and laws passed by since are not recognised.
Clan and party loyalties remain strong, but there is a general culture of
free debate and discussion. The parliament meets - in the former Arbil seat
of the Ba'athist regional legislative council - on alternate weeks, so
enabling representatives to spend half their time in the localities. A
number of Kurdish TV stations offer news, views and western cartoons, and a
wide range of newspapers, including the pro-Saddam Al-Iraq Al-Thaura, are on
sale.
Mr Rasoul identifies security as his top priority. Although a regular police
force has been established, the authorities have been only partly successful
in merging the guerrilla forces of the various Kurdish parties under a
single military command. Control of the borders with neighbouring states is
patchy, and a spate of bombings and attacks on UN staff are blamed on Iraqi
government agents.
Fully three quarters of government revenue is from 'customs levies', mainly
from trade passing through Kurdish-held territory between Turkey and the
Iraqi-controlled city of Mosul. The deficit on the 1993 budget is expected
to be between 25 and 30 per cent of total revenue.
The rebuilding of the 4,000 villages destroyed in Mr Saddam's 'Anfal'
operation or in the 1980-88 Iran-Iraq war is painfully slow. The Kurdish
leadership has exhorted the population to return to their farms and so ease
the dependence on western aid.
While more land is under cultivation than last spring - and more sheep and
goats graze on the hillside - productivity is diminished by a shortage of
fertiliser.
Inflation is around 35 per cent and the Iraqi dina has halved its value
against the dollar in one year. All spare parts are scarce. Power cuts occur
daily. Few people are gainfully employed and most factories are closed.
While bus services function between the bigger cities, only local telephone
calls are possible.
Some Kurdish leaders admit privately their fear of social unrest. But
although many ordinary Kurds raise complaints about unequal distribution of
aid and government benefits, they retain a belief that the Kurdish
government is 'doing its best'.
There is no appetite for accepting Mr Saddam's offer first made in November
1992 to lift the economic embargo in return for renewed negotiations over
Kurdish 'autonomy' from Baghdad.
