FT  25 FEB 93 / Leading Article: Airtours bid
THE GOVERNMENT'S competition policy has been badly dented by Mr Michael
Heseltine's decision not to refer the hostile bid by Airtours for Owners
Abroad to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
His motives in rejecting the recommendation of the director-general of fair
trading to refer the bid to the MMC are unclear. It is also the second time
in a month that Mr Heseltine has challenged the judgment of the independent
regulator that particular mergers raise competition issues which the MMC
should consider. This unwelcome return to political interference in
competition policy is bad for business and damaging to good government.
It is bad for business because it makes competition policy less predictable.
Companies involved in mergers or acquisitions are invited to seek
confidential advice in advance from the Office of Fair Trading on whether
competition issues will be raised. If the OFT's judgment is later overruled
by the politicians, predictability is weakened.
In this case, the secretary of state has set aside the director-general's
recommendation with only the briefest of standard press releases. This says
that Mr Heseltine 'considered on balance that the competition issues raised
by the merger were not sufficient to justify reference'.
Yet if the regulator feels that the competition issues justify referral,
then surely the bid should be referred. The Monopolies Commission, after
all, was created specifically to adjudicate on such matters. It would have
examined the arguments for and against in far greater depth than the
Department of Trade and Industry can. And it would have published a detailed
report setting out the reasons for its conclusions.
No such light is cast when the secretary of state overrides the advice of
the director-general as he did yesterday. And when politicians intervene in
this way, there is always the danger that they will be susceptible to
lobbying by sectional interests. The best protection against such covert
influence is to leave these controversial decisions to independent bodies
such as the OFT and the MMC.
Prima facie, there was a strong case for referral of the bid to the MMC. If
the bid succeeds, it will create a duopoly, with Thomson and Airtours
accounting for some two-thirds of package tour sales. It would also
exacerbate the trend towards vertical integration: the two biggest tour
operators would control three of the UK's charter airlines and almost a
third of package tour sales. There remains a risk that dominant groups will
discriminate against new entrants by, for example, denying them access to
charter capacity at peak times and refusing to sell their products when
demand is weak.
Now that the Airtours bid has been given the go-ahead, the monopolies
commission should be asked to examine the package tour business in depth.
