FT  14 AUG 93 / Books: Middle East strife
SLEEPING ON A WIRE by David Grossman Jonathan Cape Pounds 17.99, 326 pages
LEBANON, FIRE AND EMBERS by Dilip Hiro Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson Pounds 25, 274
pages
IN 1987 David Grossman's book The Yellow Wind, based on conversations with
Palestinians in the occupied territories, was published to considerable
acclaim. It gave Israelis some thought-provoking and painful reading.
Sleeping on a Wire, using a similar technique of interviews, will surely do
so even more, for it deals with a problem far closer to the bone - a
problem, moreover, which too many Israelis have contrived to ignore for too
long: their relations with their own Palestinian Arab minority.
After Israel's war of independence in 1948, about 160,000 Palestinian Arabs
remained within the borders of the Jewish state. Today they number close to
a million. More than 40 years of living as citizens of a state they never
felt was truly theirs has given them an unhappy identity, which became
increasingly ambiguous since 1967 when they came into direct contact with
their Palestinian brethren in the West Bank and Gaza. For the latter the
on-going revolt - the Intifada - has been a desperate act of defiance. For
the former it has given rise to self-questioning and revived memories.
Arabic is an official language in Israel, yet few Jews speak it and few if
any national institutes will correspond in Arabic. The Office for Arab
Affairs has been for years an unprestigious department within the Prime
Minister's Office. Compared with other Arab societies in the Middle East,
Israeli Arabs have fared well in terms of health, education and standard of
living - all of which has deepened their resentment at the discrimination
they have been subjected to in Israel, a discrimination which has been as
harsh as any that Jews have endured in Arab countries in modern times.
When the Intifada erupted in 1987 new challenges shook the Israeli
Palestinians, forcing them to re-examine their aspirations, their attitudes,
their destiny. These crucial dilemmas are at the core of Mr Grossman's
excellent and searching study.
If, as he seems to believe, many Israeli Jews now accept that the eventual
creation of a Palestinian state is on the cards, Israeli Palestinians have
no doubts about it. But what will their part in it be?
Given the choice, the vast majority of Israeli Palestinians would not want
to leave Israel for a newly-founded Palestinian state. The difficulty lies
not in identifying with Israel as their country but in a complex
constitutional peculiarity of Israel: its insistence on defining itself as a
Jewish State, thereby diminishing the status of its non-Jewish population.
It is over this problem that even the most moderate, peace-loving Arabs and
Jews fail to reach agreement.
Perhaps the historic memory of the two nations - of the Jews in particular -
prevents a compromise on this issue. So what is to be done? Two
possibilities are explored here: autonomy for the Israeli Palestinians in
their own canton (ironically, the idea was first mooted by Ze'ev Jabotinsky,
the spiritual leader of the right-wing Likud), which is unacceptable to the
Jews; or the 'transfer' of the Israeli Palestinians to the new Palestinian
state, which is what Palestinians fear might come to pass if the extreme
right in Israel ever gains ascendancy.
Mr Grossman offers no solutions of his own. Probably there are none for the
time being. But at least it seems that at many levels of Israeli society
there is now the readiness to discuss, even to understand.
Before it was torn apart by 15 years of civil war, Lebanon presented to the
outside world an image of peaceful oriental elegance; it was the Switzerland
of the Middle East. The image concealed a precarious reality which bubbled
like lava in a volcano.
Hiro, a perceptive Middle East writer, offers an assured guidance through
the intricacies of Lebanon's ethnic and political currents. It is a solid,
well-documented, comprehensive and comprehensible account.
