FT  12 JUN 93 / As They Say In Europe: Please drive Caerphilly - James
Morgan examines an attempt to measure quality of life in different parts of
Europe
A 'EUROPE of Regions' is one of those dreams that provides a useful standby
for all kinds of commentators on the Community scene. The attractions of
this dream derive from its evocation of cheery images of Burgundians and
Bavarians exchanging tales of heroic drinking and cholesterol cuisine.
The trouble is that some nations have regions and some do not as was amply
demonstrated by this week's publication Regional Trends from Britain's
Central Statistical Office. Britain contains four countries but no regions,
merely what someone in Whitehall would probably call 'Areas of
Administrative convenience'. Thus we English live in the east Midlands and
the north west. The Dutch live entirely in such AACs, but they probably
prefer it that way. The Portuguese, the Danes and the Irish have nothing but
Portugal, Denmark and Ireland.
The French have fabricated some nice bits of country but for the real thing
you have to go to Italy and above all Germany. Their regions inspire the
dullest mind - Lombardy and Rhineland-Palatinate, Abruzzi and Mecklenburg
and Western Pomerania. There one hears the heartbeat of history; Yorkshire
might achieve that, but in the hands of Whitehall it becomes Yorkshire and
Humberside.
If there is ever to be a Europe of regions, which are the most attractive?
This is where Regional Trends might be expected to provide an answer.
There is a general view in Britain that the place to live is anywhere but
Britain, but international statisticians disagree. This was revealed to me
while thumbing through a publication from the United Nations Development
Programme last month which put Britain at number 11 in the world in terms of
its quality of life. That was odd because it ranked 21 on the income scale;
no other industrial nation was able to sustain such a high quality lifestyle
on the basis of such relative poverty. Mind you, any survey which puts Japan
at number one must arouse considerable suspicion.
The niceness of Britain comes through in Regional Trends' European lifestyle
comparisons. Again the Brits may not be the richest, but they are not that
poor either. And they enjoy notable advantages: if you want to avoid being
run over, Britain is plainly the place to be. Wales in fact has the lowest
rate of road deaths of anywhere in the Community, which I find hard to
credit. If you want to be hit by a car Paris, unsurprisingly, is your
natural choice; it is three times more likely to happen there than in
London.
If one takes apparently similar regions there are more surprises in store.
South east England and North Rhine-Westphalia have about the same population
 -around 17m - in about the same area. Now if Regional Trends is right, the
south east English enjoy the higher standard of living. On the basis of the
purchasing power of their incomes they are 10 per cent better off than the
Rhenish Westphalians. Their babies are more likely to be born healthy and
each working person has fewer people to support. The Germans will suffer
(inevitably) far more car crashes, and will be nearly twice as likely to be
working in factories (those nasty, noisy places), something the English gave
up years ago. But North Rhiners and Westphalians are not as likely to be out
of work, not yet anyway.
The regions of Europe of which people dream are probably Provence, Tuscany
and the south of Spain. Well, the last of these is all right, judging by the
figures, but on no account look for work there for it has the worst
unemployment rate in the Community. Provence and central Italy are so
favoured as retirement locations that scarcely anybody but the over-65s
seems to live there. But all these Latin idylls suffer the disadvantage on
which Regional Trends puts such insistent emphasis - danger on the roads.
Even by local standards they seem unusually well stocked with wrecks and
corpses.
One is left wondering if the compilers of this fascinating volume
deliberately selected their international comparisons to create that image
of a 'nation at ease with itself' of which the prime minister, John Major,
spoke once, and only once. Come to Britain, enjoy its active, youthful
population, its fine babies and careful drivers.
But a Europe of regions is not to be fashioned from the demographer's
computer. At least not according to those Arcadians whose columns decorate
the more conservative weekly journals in Britain. Their vision has no time
for comparative unemployment figures, but emphasises the qualities of local
alcoholic beverages, specialites du pays, and vernacular architecture.
The curiosity is that this dream is so widespread among anti-Maastricht
nationalists who live in a country which has virtually eliminated the
possibility of achieving the regional vision. If you really care about
creating a healthy regionalism you should probably be a Euro-federalist.
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.
