FT  29 SEP 93 / Shares in MGN to be sold near 175p
THE STRIKE price on the sale of a majority of the shares in Mirror Group
Newspapers is expected to be announced today at only a small discount to the
market price, amid signs of considerable interest from institutions.
NM Rothschild and Cazenove, joint lead managers of the offering of the 54.8
per cent stake, which lies in the hands of administrators Arthur Andersen,
closed the formal bookbuilding in the shares last night.
The bookbuilding exercise began on Monday and administrator Mr John Talbot
said he intended to end the process on or before Friday.
Analysts suggested last night that the offer price was likely to be set at
around 175p, representing only a small discount to last night's closing
price of 177p.
Institutions were able to bid for blocks of shares at specific prices or at
the price to be determined as the offer price.
If the offer price does turn out to be around 175p, it will be seen as a
considerable achievement for Mr Talbot, the MGN management and the merchant
banks which handled the offer.
'It's placing power and talk of relative cheapness that has done the job,'
Mr Derek Terrington, media analyst at stockbrokers Kleinwort Benson said
last night.
Other analysts expect there to be a strong after-market in MGN shares and
suggest the price could go to 200p almost immediately. At one stage MGN
shares were worth only 50p.
The way was cleared for the offering by an unexpectedly large bounce in
profits, announced last month by the newspaper group. In the six months to
June 27, pre-tax profits shot up from Pounds 15.3m to Pounds 69.9m.
The successful completion of the offer should raise more than Pounds 350m
for secured and unsecured creditors of the Robert Maxwell Group, Robert
Maxwell's private company.
Most of the money will go to banks such as National Westminster, Goldman
Sachs, Midland and Lloyds who accepted MGN shares as security for Maxwell
loans.
The Daily Mirror has not been hurt so far by the decision of its rival The
Sun to cut its cover price to 20p. The Daily Mirror has stuck to its 27p
price.
The offering was led by NM Rothschild and Cazenove.
