FT  26 APR 93 / A dash of real Clintonomics
In the first 100 days of Mr Bill Clinton's presidency the nation has heard
little of the 'people-based' economics that figured so prominently in
campaign speeches. You will recall the argument. In tomorrow's competitive
global economy everything will be mobile except labour. The relative
performance of nations will thus depend mainly on the quality of their
workforces.
President Clinton did talk about investment in people when he unveiled his
economic plan in February, but the ensuing debate focused mainly on the
merits (or otherwise) of his deficit-cutting proposals. Attention then
switched to the short-term fiscal stimulus, finally defeated last week by
Senate Republicans. The social issue monopolising everybody's attention has
been healthcare. Mrs Hillary Rodham Clinton has a 500-strong army of
technicians working like slaves to produce a health plan sometime next
month; hardly anybody is steamed up about vocational training or science
teaching.
This crucial element of Clintonomics has been delegated to Messrs Richard
Riley and Robert Reich, respectively education and labour secretaries. Stiff
and somewhat inarticulate in public, Mr Riley hardly conveys a dynamic
image. But the tenacity with which he pursued educational reforms while
governor of South Carolina has apparently earned Mr Clinton's lasting
respect. Mr Reich, one of the original FOBs (Friends of Bill) and former
professor at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government, does have the capacity
to sell new ideas. But whether either man will actually have much impact
remains uncertain.
In a newspaper column a couple of years ago, Mr Reich attacked fellow
Democrats for proposing only 'tiny, symbolic shifts' in Republican spending
priorities. Preparing the workforce for the 21st century, he claimed, was a
mammoth task requiring an additional public investment of Dollars 200bn a
year. It could be carried through only by 'the political equivalent of a
warrior like General Norman Schwarzkopf,' the Gulf war hero. Well, General
Reich is now in command, but unfortunately his president is proposing only a
tiny, symbolic increase in spending - about Dollars 10bn a year for all
educational and training reforms.
This is fortunate because correcting flaws in US education and training
mainly requires a change of attitudes and behaviour rather than masses of
extra cash. In real terms per capita spending on schools has risen more than
a third in the past decade. US companies spend about as much on training as
their counterparts abroad. So what do Riley and Reich hope to achieve with
the limited sums?
They set out their philosophy last week in a joint press conference. For a
British journalist there was a strong sense of deja vu. In effect, the
administration is adopting large chunks of the Thatcher reforms of the late
1980s. Building on the work of the Bush administration, Mr Riley is creating
a national council to oversee the introduction of new curriculum standards
and assessment techniques. As in the UK, the aim is to establish greater
central control over what is taught in schools and to devise tests that
effectively monitor the performance of both students and schools.
Mr Reich, meanwhile, is creating a national council (composed of
businessmen, educators and trade unionists) to oversee a new system of
vocational qualifications along European lines. Nearly a decade after
Britain, the US is waking up to the fact that its educational system is
geared almost exclusively to the needs of the minority who gain university
degrees. As in the UK, each stage of education is essentially a preparation
for more advanced education, rather than for life or work. Little or nothing
is done to ease the transition from school to work for non-academic
youngsters; there is no system of nationally-recognised credentials for
non-graduates.
Both moves could provide substantial long-run benefits. But the Clinton
reforms differ from Britain's in crucial ways. In the first place everything
is voluntary. On the school side, this was unavoidable because the US
constitution gives states primary responsibility for education. With federal
spending accounting for only about 6 per cent of school budgets, Washington
is like a flea trying to discipline an elephant. At best it can hope to
influence states by cleverly deploying the small carrots and sticks at its
disposal. The success of new vocational qualifications, meanwhile, will
largely depend on support from private business - which is by no means
assured.
The other big difference is that the administration is putting no emphasis
on increased competition between schools. Many reform-minded Democrats
believe that schools should be able to opt out of the often stifling
bureaucracy of local school districts (the US equivalent of local education
authorities) and receive funding directly from state governments. Mr Clinton
is not throwing his weight behind the idea partly because of opposition from
the teachers' unions, big contributors to the Democratic party.
Whether more 'choice' would greatly improve educational quality is as hotly
debated in the US as in Britain. But it is plausible to argue that a
freeing-up of any long-established system will offer potential benefits. At
the moment, the 'people-based' economics that supposedly lies at the heart
of Mr Clinton's strategy is looking decidedly tame.
