FT  02 JUN 93 / LWT staff ask for part of share scheme profits
STAFF AT London Weekend Television are organising a petition asking for a
slice of the more than Pounds 55m likely to go to the London ITV company's
management from a controversial share scheme.
The petition is critical of the management share scheme, which it says will
see unprecedented rewards going to management, leaving the rest of the
company with nothing 'except longer hours, lower take-home pay and reduced
conditions of employment'.
The petition, being organised by LWT officials of Bectu, the broadcasting
union, asks for 'a significant proportion' of the scheme's profits to be
redistributed in the form of shares to all staff.
As part of a company restructuring 44 LWT managers were able to subscribe
for unlisted management shares at 83.2p. If the share price averages 278p or
more during the month following this September's announcement of LWT's
half-year results, each management share converts into 4.08 ordinary shares.
At 385p the shares would be worth Pounds 55.54m and create 15 LWT
millionaires.
The shares held by LWT chairman Sir Christopher Bland would be worth more
than Pounds 7m and Mr Greg Dyke, chief executive, Mr Brian Tesler, former
managing director and Mr Ron Miller, advertising director, would all get
more than Pounds 5m.
LWT shares yesterday closed unchanged at 377p.
One of the petition organisers said yesterday: 'The atmosphere at LWT is
explosive. Staff are hurt, humiliated and angry. Everywhere you go there is
only one topic of conversation.'
Staff are angry because they had no special payments for their contribution
to regaining LWT's franchise although they did receive a Pounds 50 Marks &amp;
Spencer voucher.
There is also anger that the company has decided this year to reduce the
percentage of profit going to profits related pay from 8 per cent to 7 per
cent.
At a recent meeting with staff Mr Dyke said LWT was still the highest paying
ITV company.
He said: 'Clearly I don't think anyone ever believed that our share price
would be nearly Pounds 4 at this stage.'
Mr Dyke also conceded that those staff chosen for inclusion in the
management share scheme had been 'an arbitrary number of people at an
arbitrary level'.
He has also indicated privately he would be prepared to do something for
staff from the share scheme's profit but he did not know whether he could
persuade the rest of the management.
