FT  10 JUN 93 / UK Company News: Electrocomponents at Pounds 52m after
disposal
ELECTROCOMPONENTS, the UK-based electronic, electrical and mechanical
components distribution group, yesterday reported sharply higher full-year
profits despite a decline in sales which reflected December's disposal of
the loss-making Misco businesses.
Under the new FRS 3 accounting rules, pre-tax profits in the year to March
31 jumped to Pounds 51.9m from a substantially restated Pounds 25.2m.
The year-on-year comparison was flattered by Pounds 24.7m of exceptional
items under FRS 3 in 1992 - including Pounds 18.1m of provisions for Misco -
compared to Pounds 7m in the latest period, again mainly related to the
disposal of the remaining Misco businesses.
Earnings per share under FRS 3 increased to 14.9p (3.5p) out of which the
group is paying an increased final dividend of 5.9p (5.1p) making a total up
13 per cent to 7.9p (7p). Sir Keith Bright, chairman, said the increase
reflected the group's strong trading performance and cash resources. Group
turnover fell by 4 per cent to Pounds 387.5m (403.7m) mainly reflecting
disposals. Continuing operations' sales increased by 9.6 per cent to Pounds
346.6m and their operating profits grew by 4.5 per cent to Pounds 60.1m.
The core RS business increased its sales by 12 per cent to Pounds 308.4m,
including Pounds 59.2m from international operations, and posted operating
profits of Pounds 59.8m (Pounds 56.9m). The gains reflecting the success of
marketing initiatives - including the division of the RS catalogue - as well
as the gradual improvement in the UK economy during the year.
The group's push into continental Europe continued last year with the launch
of new subsidiaries in Denmark and Italy. Sir Keith said this strategic
expansion meant that all the important European countries were now served by
wholly-owned subsidiaries. He said the task now was to bring the new ones,
including the two-year-old German operation, into profit within three years
of the start of trading.
COMMENT
Electrocomponents' underlying performance continues to impress. Following
the sale of Misco, the refocusing back to the core activity of delivering a
high quality fast distribution service to engineers is now complete and the
benefits are beginning to show. Meanwhile the expansion into continental
Europe is gathering steam. Although the new international operations set up
over the past two years are still losing money, they are all on target to
break even within three years of start-up. The balance sheet remains strong,
with net cash of Pounds 31m. This will be used mainly to fund organic growth
including a hefty Pounds 15m capital investment programme this year. The
shares gained 7p to close at 393p yesterday. With pre-tax profits of about
Pounds 66m expected this year and earnings of about 20.3p, the stock is
trading on a lofty but deserved prospective p/e of 19.3.
