FT  13 NOV 93 / The suicide cult of Kiev: Jill Barshay investigates the
panic caused in Ukraine by the White Brotherhood
THE CAPTURE of the mysterious leaders of the White Brotherhood cult this
week may have ended one of the more bizarre episodes in Ukraine's
post-Soviet history.
Ukraine has hyperinflation, hazardous nuclear weapons and energy shortages,
but over the past two weeks the authorities have been preoccupied with
reports of thousands of young cult followers flocking to Kiev to join their
'living god on this earth' in a mass suicide. Fearing the worst and
inexperienced in dealing with fringe religious groups, police detained more
than 800 cult members while the authorities launched an aggressive
propaganda campaign.
The White Brotherhood, which claims 150,000 members from all over the former
Soviet Union, chose the St Sophia Cathedral Square in Kiev as its gathering
place to await the end of the world and to witness the crucifixion and
resurrection of its leader, Maria Devi Khristos, a self-proclaimed messiah.
In city streets as far away as Moscow there are posters of the Maria Devi
Khristos - whose real name is Maria Tsvygun - a young dark-eyed woman clad
in a white priestly robe with gold trim and turban. She comes from eastern
Ukraine and was formerly a member Komsomol, the communist youth league, and
a journalist.
Last week the cult said the apocalypse and their mass suicide would take
place on November 24. But later they re-scheduled doomsday to November 14
and modified their mass suicide plan to a re-enactment of the Christ story,
in which their leader is the next coming of Jesus Christ and President
Leonid Kravchuk is Pontius Pilate.
Maria Devi Khristos and the cult's reputed mastermind, Yuri Krivonogov, came
out of hiding last Wednesday, when police arrested them in the 11th century
St Sophia Cathedral, the oldest house of worship in the Slavic Orthodox
faiths. Even from jail, the cult leaders insist the end of the world is
imminent and say they have fulfilled their promise to their followers by
reaching the cathedral. Their followers keep coming to Kiev.
Ukrainian authorities are baffled. Their instinctive reaction has been to
lock the cult followers in jails, throw them into psychiatric wards or
deport them. Dozens of police patrol St Sophia Square. But it has been calm
since the arrests with only reporters standing by and parents of runaway
children hoping to spot their loved ones.
Wednesday's arrests took place after cult members, disguised as tourists,
gained entry to the church and started chanting. Museum attendants called
the police. As policemen tried to seize the cult members, a scuffle broke
out. One policeman suffered a fractured skull and about Dollars 1,600 in
damage was caused to the cathedral.
Almost 400 of the detained cult members are on hunger strike. Rather than
release the prisoners, the Ministry of Internal Affairs has decided to wait
until 'they fall unconscious from hunger' so that they can be 'force-fed.'
The authorities' anti-White Brotherhood propaganda campaign, has stirred up
hysteria among Ukraine's 52m people. Radio broadcasts warn parents to keep
their children off the streets and out of the cult's hypnotic grasp.
State-controlled television airs Interior Ministry reports, showing tearful
parents who have lost their loved ones to the cult and angry citizens who
urge that the Brotherhood be 'liquidated.' The Brotherhood is accused of
inciting fear, hatred and suicide.
Some Kiev schools have shortened their day to make sure students get home
before sundown. A rock station called upon those with extra-sensory powers
to help cult members 'rejoin society.' The Ukrainian Orthodox Church
Filaret, one of the church's highest officials, has denounced the White
Brotherhood as the 'anti-Christ.'
The propaganda campaign has drawn relatives of runaways and missing people
from all over Ukraine, Russia and Byelorussia to prisons in Ukraine to find
lost children and spouses.
Vera Sobuleva and her young daughter Anya were among about 30 relatives
knocking on the doors of the Kiev Detention Centre prison last week. Her 17
year old son, Kolya, disappeared a month ago on a trip from his
polytechnical institute to his home Lipetsk.
Mrs Sobuleva did not know for certain if her son, with whom she has had a
'difficult relationship', was in Kiev but she immediately packed her bags
and made the three-day trip after watching television reports. 'On
television they said that the White Brotherhood is taking, kidnapping
children. They said to come to the detention centre to take our children
back,' she said.
Mrs Sobuleva did not find Kolya in the prison, but other parents have found
their children.
In the prison, the cult members are calm and spend most of their time
chanting Maria Devi Khristos' name. Most refuse to reveal their names or
ages or talk about their lives before they joined the cult, explaining: 'All
this is unimportant and meaningless.'
'We are honest before god,' said one young bearded man, 'we were singing on
the streets and they've illegally arrested us. All we want is to meet our
Maria Devi Khristos. She's supposed to reveal herself.'
A young woman, clutching a pink rose and crocheted white shawl over her
face, explained how they were 'carted off St Sophia's Square in trucks like
animals. We are people first of all and we have the right to our faith.'
When asked about their faith, they referred reporters to the literature. And
literature, there is aplenty. Already the Interior Ministry has confiscated
over four tons of pamphlets and posters in apartments around Kiev.
In its 'Godly-Cosmic-Programme,' the White Brotherhood offers love and
salvation for those who have complete faith in Marina Devi Khristos and
condemns those who do not to hell.
Tamara Yustinovskaya, whose son joined the brotherhood, has formed a
parents' support group called Relief. Relief has taken issue with the
authorities' tactics and argues that the children 'need help, not
punishment.' She said the children are 'zombie-like robots . . . programmed
for death.'
But the Soviet-style psychiatric regime in Ukraine is ill-prepared to deal
with the cult. At a round table, sponsored by the Internal Ministry, one
psychiatrist asked, 'What can we do? They won't take food or talk to us.'
