FT  26 FEB 93 / Technology: On target with a single shot - Paul Abrahams
continues a series on drug discoveries by examining the latest advances in
vaccines
In the remote south of Zambia, not far from the banks of the Zambezi river,
about 50 women sit under the shade of an immense tree. All carry infants,
most less than a year old. Some mothers have travelled nearly 50 miles on
foot, carrying children on their backs for up to two days.
The mothers' trek allows them to participate in the worldwide battle between
disease and man-made vaccines. The event is part of the Expanded Programme
of Immunisation, run by the World Health Organisation. Its aim is to
vaccinate children against six childhood diseases: polio, measles,
tuberculosis, diphtheria, whooping cough and tetanus. By the end of 1990,
the programme had helped inoculate 80 per cent of the world's children
against these diseases. The target is 90 per cent by 2000.
The vaccines involved in the programme are well-established products that
have considerable drawbacks. The main problem is although those for
diphtheria, tetanus and whooping cough can be injected together, other
vaccines cannot be used simultaneously because they interact with each
other. Others have to be boosted by further doses to create immunity. This
means the Zambian mothers will have to repeat their journey if their child
is to be fully immunised. The logistics involved mean not all children
complete the vaccination course.
In addition, many vaccines are heat-sensitive. In tropical countries with
little primary health care, a special transport infrastructure must be built
up specially to ensure the vaccines have been kept cold and are still
potent.
However, the application of biotechnology and, in particular, recombinant
DNA technology, is leading to a second generation of vaccines. These are
more resistant to heat and less likely to interact with each other. They are
also safer than first-generation products, with fewer side-effects. These
new technologies are also opening up the possibility of inoculation against
a far wider range of diseases, ranging from herpes and hepatitis to Aids and
even certain forms of cancer.
The creation of vaccines for diseases against which it was previously
impossible to inoculate is driving the growth of the world vaccine market.
Previously, vaccines were low-priced, high-volume commodity products. The
sector was dominated by demography - how many new-born children required
vaccination.
However, the market, valued at about Dollars 1.5bn (Pounds 1bn), is
expanding at 15 to 18 per cent by value, faster than the traditional
pharmaceuticals market, according to Institut Merieux, the French group. The
new products, for the most part generated through biotechnology, can be
patented and therefore command higher prices than their traditional
commodity counterparts.
The market growth has been helped by a reduction in the level of litigation
associated with vaccination. Some vaccines create side effects in a small
number of patients. In the US, vaccine companies found themselves involved
in product liability claims.
First-generation vaccines come in three forms.
Live vaccines are based on weakened strains of the micro-organism causing
the disease. These provoke an immune response from the body without
generating the full-blown disease. When an inoculated patient is later
infected naturally, the body's immune system is ready to react against the
disease.
Inactivated vaccines involve creating immunity by injecting micro-organisms
that have had the dangerous elements within them inactivated or have been
completely killed. The obvious risk associated with these killed vaccines
remains the danger of injecting patients with only partially inactivated
organisms. Outbreaks of tuberculosis and polio have occurred because of
poorly prepared vaccines. On the other hand, if the inactivation is too
effective, then poor immunisation occurs - sometimes even leading to
patients being more sensitive to later infection.
The third type of first-generation vaccine involves inactivated toxins -
such as tetanus.
The second-generation products are mostly based on recombinant DNA
technology. This allows the previously hazardous attenuation process to be
carried out more effectively. The genes within an organism that lead to the
disease can be identified, and then inactivated or cut out. The weakened
organism can then be bred by using something as simple as yeast. When
injected into the body it creates an immune response.
The rapid growth of the market is driven by new products for previously
untreatable diseases. Ignace Goethals, senior vice-president of SmithKline
Beecham's vaccine business, believes 40 per cent of the world market is made
up of hepatitis vaccines. Eight years ago, none existed. Sales of SB's
Engerix-B, a hepatitis product, grew from Pounds 103m in 1991 to Pounds 267m
last year.
The next generation of products to drive the market will be multi-dose
products, combining a number of vaccines in the same dose, says Michel
Greco, European director at Institut Merieux. The eventual aim, set out in a
WHO programme called the Children's Vaccine Initiative, is to create a
super-vaccine. This should require only one or two doses, be given orally,
be heat stable, have a low rate of side effects and be affordable.
However, while a laudable target, the super-vaccine is technically a long
way off, says Greco. In the medium term, any vaccine is likely to remain
injectable rather than oral. Institut Merieux is registering a product which
covers diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough, HIB (against meningitis) and
polio in a single injection. The next aim is to add hepatitis B, which
should be developed by 1997.
In the long term, one technology that should prove useful in creating
multidose vaccines is microspheres, says Greco. This would involve covering
the different vaccines with retardant coatings that dissolve at different
speeds. These should allow the vaccines to be released into the body at
different times, preventing interaction. But this technology could take 20
years to develop.
The rapid expansion of the vaccine industry has led to changes in its
structure. In the past, the industry has been dominated by a few competitors
with international sales structures, notably Institut Merieux and SmithKline
Beecham in Europe and Merck and Lederle in the US.
Although the market is growing fast, the barriers to entry remain immense,
says Greco. They include:
Large development costs. A long-term Swedish clinical trial designed to test
the safety of a whooping cough vaccine involves 50,000 children.
Significant manufacturing costs. Each product needs to have its separate
production line and often a separate building to prevent contamination.
Ensuring that vaccines are potent but not dangerous requires considerable
expertise.
Marketing reach. To keep down production costs, companies must be
international, supplying large volumes around the globe.
Products. Groups must be able to supply customers with the range of products
they need. Moreover, as multi-dose vaccines become more important, companies
must have access to the range of vaccines necessary to put them together.
In spite of these entry barriers, the emerging technologies allow small
companies to enter the industry. They are typically biotechnology companies
that create a vaccine but do not have the means to develop and market it.
Their products are instead licensed to the larger groups.
Although growth in the vaccines market has been rapid, the sector remains
concerned that pricing could hold it back. This month US President Bill
Clinton attacked the industry, claiming low US vaccination rates were due to
the high prices of vaccines. SB's Goethals denies this, pointing out that 90
per cent of vaccination costs are related to the healthcare infrastructure
and only 10 per cent to the vaccine.
Paradoxically, the single-shot vaccine programmes originally aimed at
reducing the burden on those mothers by the Zambezi may also boost the
health of America's inner cities.
The series continues next month with a look at drugs for the treatment of
high blood pressure.
