FT  06 AUG 93 / VW looks for a smoother ride
AS Mr Ferdinand Piech is growing to appreciate, foot-in-mouth disease is a
painful affliction. The Volkswagen chairman and self-proclaimed
saviour-to-be of the European car industry may yet discover that it is also
difficult and costly to cure, writes Christopher Parkes in Frankfurt.
The ailment is in its early stages, but the symptoms are severe. Following
repeated manifestations over the past few weeks, Mr Piech's case will be
subjected to a close examination at an extraordinary meeting of VW's
supervisory board in Wolfsburg tonight.
The sitting was called by Mr Klaus Liesen, chairman of Essen-based Ruhrgas
and head of the VW supervisory board, and Mr Piech himself, to discuss the
state of the business and the 'matter' between Volkswagen and General Motors
of the US and its German subsidiary, Adam Opel.
The summons followed signs of wavering in the board after a series of public
relations catastrophes which thickened rather than dispersed the clouds of
suspicion circling Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, production director
and linchpin of Mr Piech's recovery programme.
Mr Klaus Volkert, senior representative of the workforce on the supervisory
board, on which union, employee and Social Democrat party officials hold 11
of the 20 seats, said if spying charges against Mr Lopez seemed likely, he
would withdraw his support. Until then, the board had agreed to stand fast,
even if Mr Lopez, former head of GM's global procurement, was charged with
industrial espionage, until the charges were proven.
Mr Volkert's resolve appeared to wobble after a miscued offensive last week
in which Mr Piech said the public prosecutor's office was biased and accused
GM of 'shady manoeuvrings' and a personal vendetta against Mr Lopez, with
the aim of destroying VW.
Indirectly, he named Opel as US agent provocateur in an economic war against
the European motor industry.
Mr Piech, apparently unawares, had selected a boomerang for his attack. It
brought in its wake a storm of outrage from all sides of German industry and
politics. There were calls for Mr Lopez to be either fired or suspended
pending charges or a court verdict. But the main message was that Mr Piech
and his 'nationalist' tones were damaging Germany's reputation.
His offensive, designed to offset damage done in a recent court case when VW
failed to prevent Der Spiegel, a news weekly, from reporting detailed
suspicions of spying against Mr Lopez, had backfired.
The irony is that the investment community whole-heartedly accepts that his
and Mr Lopez's vigorous restructuring efforts are already having a
substantial effect, and profits will start to grow next year. But even among
such cool heads there is bewilderment at constant claims that the group will
be out of the red by the end of this year.
According to analysts' calculations, a loss of around DM700m (Pounds 270m)
is unavoidable. 'I can't think they have been trying to mislead us, but if
they are, why?' one asks.
The question is symptomatic. The charitable answer is that Mr Piech,
blinkered by his zeal for saving VW and believing the results would speak
for themselves, may have scope for improvement as a public relations man.
Similar questions may arise at tonight's meeting, at which Mr Piech is
expected to concede that his cost-cutting drive has left gaping holes in his
PR defences which need to be filled, possibly with a new management board
director.
But at the end of the night, supervisors will almost certainly close ranks
with managers. Mr Liesen, Mr Volkert and his colleagues, executives of
Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank, the premier of Lower Saxony and other
worthies are the men who chose the managers they believed best able to save
Europe's biggest car maker. Mr Piech has staked his reputation on his belief
in Mr Lopez. If anyone hangs, then all will hang together.
