FT  18 AUG 93 / Bosnia talks at impasse on carve-up
BOSNIA'S President Alija Izetbegovic yesterday remained at loggerheads with
his Serb adversaries over the division of Serb-held eastern Bosnia, which
was mostly Moslem before the outbreak of war 17 months ago.
The deadlock highlighted the apparently irreconcilable differences between
the two sides over eastern Bosnia. Bosnian Serbs claim most of the region,
which borders on Serbia.
After 10 hours of talks, Mr Izetbegovic said bluntly: 'No progress was made
all day'.
Mr Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, said it was 'absolutely
impossible' for eastern Bosnia to belong to the Moslems. 'The only thing
which can be done at all is to give the safe areas to the Moslem republic.
There is proof for everywhere else that the Serbs comprised a majority in
this century.' Mr Karadzic rejected the official census reports of 1991 as
'rewarding genocide against the Serbs in the second world war'.
Mr Mohamed Filipovic, a Moslem, said the two sides 'were operating on
completely different principles', one based on military gains and the other
on ethnic composition of areas before the fighting.
The impasse came a day after the announcement that the leaders of Bosnia's
three warring parties had agreed 'in principle' to demilitarise Sarajevo and
place it under temporary UN administration.
But after the first meeting of the three-man committee set up to make
recommendations on the future status of Sarajevo, Mr Filipovic, one of its
members, said: 'The only thing we agreed on is that we disagree.'
He added that the US was trying to exert pressure on the Serbian side in the
Geneva talks, while Lord Owen was trying to soften that pressure, as the
international mediators pressed forward with negotiations on maps.
Mr John Zametica, the Bosnian Serb spokesman, said Serbs were willing to
make some compromises over the eastern enclaves of Zepa, Gorazde and
Srebrenica. Serb forces have confined many Moslems into these three
enclaves, proclaimed 'safe areas' by the UN.
Bosnia's UN envoy yesterday attacked the British chief of staff of UN troops
in Bosnia, Brigadier Vere Hayes, Reuter reports from New York. The
brigadier's comments had been 'insensitive, sometimes total falsehoods, and
insulting,' he said.
Ambassador Muhamed Sacirbey said the brigadier had suggested that the Serbs
had shown good faith by withdrawing from two mountain strongholds, that
Sarajevo was no longer under siege, and that Moslems were responsible for
blocking the humanitarian relief to Sarajevo because of fighting in central
Bosnia.
Dole attacks Bosnia moves, Page 6
