FT  24 MAY 93 / Employers to gain more rights on unions
THE GOVERNMENT is to press ahead today with moves to strengthen employers'
rights to derecognise trade unions and introduce personal contracts, in
spite of opposition from some Conservative MPs and peers.
An amendment to be introduced during the House of Lords' third reading of
the Trade Union Reform and Employment Rights Bill today will make it clear
that employers have the right to deny pay increases to staff who refuse to
sign personal contracts.
The Department of Employment said yesterday the amendment was necessary to
clarify the law in the wake of a Court of Appeal ruling last month that it
is unlawful for employees to be offered financial inducements to sign
personal contracts.
The court upheld appeals by employees of Associated British Ports and
Associated Newspapers, publishers of the Daily Mail, who had refused to sign
personal contracts. The two companies offered pay increases to those
employees who agreed to sign personal contracts but not to those who wanted
to remain union members. The employees refused pay increases were members of
the RMT transport union and the National Union of Journalists.
The department said the court rulings had resulted in a different
interpretation being placed on existing employment law from that which the
government had originally intended.
In the Court of Appeal ruling Lord Justice Dillon said offering inducements
to staff to sign personal contracts was in breach of the Employment
Protection Act 1978, which protects employees' right to belong to a union.
He rejected the employers' argument that staff were not penalised when they
were offered a choice between signing personal contracts or remaining in the
union.
The Associated British Ports case involved a group of dockers who refused to
sign personal contracts. In the case against Associated Newspapers Mr David
Wilson, a Daily Mail journalist, had been denied a 4.5 per cent salary
increase for refusing to sign a personal contract.
Mr Peter Bottomley, a Conservative MP and former minister, yesterday sharply
criticised the amendment, saying it was an attack on freedom of association.
He said the government had acted with undue haste, announcing its intention
to introduce the amendment within days of the court's ruling.
Mr Bottomley added: 'If the government wants people to be able to be
penalised for being in a trade union, they ought to say so openly. Unless
there's some explanation I haven't been given, this is an open attack on
freedom of association.'
Lord Gilmour, the Conservative peer, said yesterday he was concerned that
the amendment was being introduced at such a late stage of the legislative
process.
