FT  14 JAN 93 / UK Company News: First Leisure shows modest gain to Pounds
31.1m - Growth record maintained despite 'increasingly adverse trading
conditions'
FIRST LEISURE, the 10-pin bowling, discotheque and tourist attractions
group, maintained its 10-year record of profits growth in spite of what it
described as 'increasingly adverse trading conditions'.
The company, which was bought from Trusthouse Forte for Pounds 37.5m in 1983
and floated the following year, increased its pre-tax profits by 2.3 per
cent to Pounds 31.1m in the year to October 31. Turnover rose 2 per cent to
Pounds 108.5m.
The profits figure was flattered by a Pounds 1.3m credit, arising from
unclaimed capital allowances. The company hopes to negotiate a further
credit of Pounds 700,000 for the current year, but said its tax rate was
likely to increase from last year's low of 20 per cent to an underlying rate
in the high 20s.
Mr John Conlan, chief executive, said the modest improvement in profits had
been achieved even although six of the group's largest discotheques had been
closed for refurbishment during periods of the year. Overall capital
expenditure rose from Pounds 29m to Pounds 34m, about Pounds 8m of which was
spent on the discos.
The group invested heavily in its Blackpool Tower and Winter Garden complex,
but most of its expansion is now geared towards expanding its spread of
10-pin bowling alleys and discos. Mr Conlan said the fall in property values
in the south-east of England gave the group an opportunity to expand there,
particularly around and within the M25.
In spite of the heavy capital expenditure, net borrowings remain flat at
Pounds 33m and gearing fell slightly, from 13 to 12 per cent.
Although First Leisure dipped its toe into European waters by buying a large
disco in Amsterdam two years ago, Mr Conlan said the priority would be to
expand in the UK. As well as participating in large edge-of-town leisure
complexes, the group is looking at challenging the grip of Bass and Rank
Organisation on the bingo market. It is also looking at opportunities in the
health and sports field.
Lord Rayne, chairman, said that as the group expanded it would be
increasingly able to benefit from benefits of scale in its buying of drinks,
goods and equipment such as amusement machines. It is investing Pounds 3m in
electronic point of sale technology and hopes to use it to emulate large
retailers by improving margins and stock control.
Mr Conlan said that while he was planning that 1993 would be a year of
recession, as 1992 had been, the group would continue to invest heavily from
cashflow and would benefit quickly from any recovery in consumer confidence.
Earnings per share rose to 15.83p (15.67p). A final dividend of 4.26p gives
a total of 6.14p (5.695p), an increase of 7.8 per cent.
See Lex
