FT  11 JUN 93 / International Company News: NY Times in bid to take over
Boston Globe
THE New York Times was understood yesterday to have bid around Dollars 1bn
for Affiliated Publications, the parent company of the Boston Globe, in a
takeover that would bring under its management one of the US's best-known
newspapers, and further expand its reach in the north-east of the US.
While a similar bid was turned down in January, and may be rejected again,
some assurances for editorial independence were given this time, making
acceptance more likely, said a former Globe executive familiar with the
situation.
Affiliated Publications has a current stock market value of around Dollars
960m. Neither the New York Times nor the Boston Globe would comment on the
transaction, which has long been rumoured.
The Boston Globe has a daily circulation of more than 500,000, making it New
England's largest newspaper, and the 13th biggest in the US. Last year it
posted revenues of Dollars 409m, and profits of Dollars 30m.
The takeover 'would constitute an important vote of confidence in the
newspaper market,' said Mr Eric Philo, an analyst at Goldman Sachs. He said
the bid looks to value the Boston Globe at around 12 1/2 times cash flow. It
could act as a benchmark for further deals, as the newspaper industry
recovers from its recession and profits rise.
In 1996 two of Affiliated's family trusts expire, making the company
vulnerable to a hostile takeover, possibly to one of the large US newspaper
chains.
'If they want to settle the future of the paper, this is a great deal. I
would just as soon hook up with the New York Times than USA Today,' said the
former Globe executive.
The New York Times is keen to diversify geographically, and reduce its
dependence on New York's sluggish economy. The acquisition would give the
New York Times huge marketing power in the north-east of the US, enable it
to cut costs as it combines distribution with the Globe, and perhaps as
importantly, keep the Boston Globe out of potential rivals' hands.
However, the takeover would further expose the New York Times to the
fortunes of the newspaper industry, and in the short term dilute earnings.
It is expected to pay for Affiliated Publications mostly with its shares.
