FT  30 OCT 93 / Leaders in new drive for Ulster peace plan
THE British and Irish governments last night responded to the escalating
violence in Northern Ireland with a new drive towards a political
settlement.
Mr John Major and Mr Albert Reynolds agreed during talks in Brussels to
speed up work towards a framework agreement to persuade Ulster's
constitutional parties to return to the negotiating table.
They rejected as a basis for peace the conclusions of recent talks between
Mr John Hume of the SDLP and Mr Gerry Adams of Sinn Fein. There could be 'no
question' of the two governments adopting or endorsing Mr Hume's report of
the dialogue. That report was passed yesterday for the first time to Mr
Major by Mr Reynolds.
A joint communique, however, released by the British and Irish prime
ministers after their meeting, left open the possibility of Sinn Fein being
brought into the peace process if and when 'a renunciation of violence had
been made and sufficiently demonstrated'. In those circumstances 'new doors
could open'.
At the end of a week of the worst sectarian violence for two decades, the
two leaders condemned the tit-for-tat killings by terrorists from the
Catholic and Protestant communities. Their communique attacked the
'murderous and premeditated acts which could serve no end other than to
deepen the bloodshed in Northern Ireland'.
Mr Major and Mr Reynolds reaffirmed their determination to restart the
stalled negotiating process designed to bring a permanent political
settlement to the province.
Their cautiously upbeat tone followed the Dublin government's
acknowledgement earlier this week of the right of the Unionist community to
exercise a permanent veto on changes in Ulster's constitutional status.
Both sides confirmed that the essence of any agreement would be a move by
the Republic to replace its constitutional claim to the province with the
aspiration of a united Ireland. Britain in return would offer a significant
extension of cross-border administration.
But the communique glossed over significant differences on the extent to
which elements of the Hume-Adams peace initiative could be incorporated into
their own negotiations.
Mr Reynolds told Mr Major that the two sides could not ignore the potential
for a cessation of violence by the IRA in return for a place at the
negotiating table for Sinn Fein.
But, speaking after their talks, Mr Major told journalists that there could
be 'no talks or negotiations between democratic governments and those who
use, threaten or support violence'. Nor could there be any secret agreements
or understandings with Sinn Fein or the IRA.
Despite their new determination to fill the political vacuum in which the
terrorists have flourished, the two leaders also acknowledged that an
intergovernmental agreement would not be enough in itself to bring peace.
