FT  01 NOV 93 / Dublin puts pressure on Ulster Unionists
THE IRISH government yesterday tried to add to the momentum behind the
Northern Ireland peace process by stepping up pressure on Unionist leaders
to join round table talks on the province's future, in the wake of
Saturday's murder of seven people by the Loyalist Ulster Freedom Fighters.
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, said he was determined not to
allow the process to be derailed by the killings in a bar in Greysteel, Co
Derry.
The initiative was rejected by Mr Peter Robinson, deputy leader of the
hardline Democratic Unionist party, who warned that Northern Ireland was
close to civil war.
Terrorists from both sides have killed 23 people in the last two weeks in a
cycle of violence triggered by last weekend's bombing of a shop in Belfast
which killed 10 people. The violence continued yesterday when an RUC officer
was wounded in Newry.
Mr Reynolds said Unionists had 'nothing to fear' from the initiative
launched by the British and Irish governments in Brussels on Friday.
He said: 'As long as a majority of the people of Northern Ireland wish the
present status to remain, that's the way it will be.'
Mr Dick Spring, the Irish foreign minister, said he hoped to set up a series
of meetings with Unionist leaders, probably lasting up to 12 months.
But Mr Robinson said the joint statement issued by the two prime ministers
was 'an endorsement of the six-point plan for a united Ireland laid out last
week by Dick Spring.
'Whoever it was aimed at, it was not aimed at Unionists because it is
adopting a nationalist agenda.'
However, ministers were heartened by the restrained reaction of Mr James
Molyneaux, leader of the official Ulster Unionist party (UUP), who has made
no public comment.
The British government believes that constitutional guarantees and changes
to parliamnetary procedures for Northern Ireland legislation may persuade Mr
Molyneaux to take part in the talks.
The government is moving to set up a Commons committee on Ulster, and may
also scrap the use of non-amendable orders in council for Northern Ireland
legislation.
However, other UUP leaders remained wary. Mr David Trimble, the party's home
affairs spokesman, said Mr Spring was guilty of 'self-deception.'
Mr John Major is expected to make a statement on the peace initiative in the
Commons today, probably as part of a wider report on the EC summit in
Brussels.
The prime minister is expected to distance the Anglo-Irish initiative from
the peace proposals produced by Mr John Hume, leader of the nationalist
SDLP, and Mr Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the
IRA.
Mr Hume said in a series of interviews that the SDLP/Sinn Fein proposals
remained the best prospect for peace in Northern Ireland. He said it was
'difficult to accept' that the Hume-Adams proposals had been dismissed by
the British and Irish governments.
Mr Hume accused Mr Major of being unwilling to discuss the proposals.
However, he said he would drop the proposals if he was convinced that he had
become an obstacle to peace.
'If the prime minister tells me that he has a peace process with the Irish
government that is going to produce a total cessation of violence, and he
convinces me that my dialogue is stopping that, then obviously I am not
going to be an obstacle to that,' he said.
Downing Street said Mr Hume had not requested a meeting with Mr Major.
However, the prime minister is willing to meet party leaders, including Mr
Hume, at any time. The British government is determined not to be seen to be
talking to the IRA through Mr Hume.
Background, Page 7
