FT  14 SEP 93 / Commodities and Agriculture: Lean times for EC pig farmers -
Farmer's Viewpoint / Most producers are losing at least Pounds 7 on every
bacon pig they rear
PIGS, say traditionalists, were always copper or gold. At present, they are
hardly copper. I do not know the metallic equivalent of a deficit, but that
is what most of us in the pig production business are currently
experiencing.
To produce, say, a bacon pig these days, costs the equivalent of 105p to
110p a kilogram, deadweight, depending on efficiency of production. Last
week, the UK average all pigs price, calculated by the Meat and Livestock
Commission on the basis of weighted averages of a range of markets, fell to
96.61p a kilogram, so most pig farmers are be losing about 10p a kilogram,
or at least Pounds 7 for every 70kg bacon pig they produce.
Within the next few days, the MLC will publish its forecast of the supply,
demand and price for pig meat for the next six months. It is already clear
that this is likely to be a gloomy document; and the commission will need to
explain why its previous forecast, in June, which suggested the AAPP would
stay above 100p a kilogram through the autumn, turned out to be too
optimistic.
One reason may be that there are more pigs in the production pipeline than
it expected. A recent Scottish survey showed that total pig numbers north of
the border had risen between June 1992 and June 1993 by 4.9 per cent. Even
more significantly there was an increase in the Scottish pig breeding herd
of 11.7 per cent. If this is a guide for the rest of the UK, and given that
it takes up to 10 months for a pig to be conceived, reared and slaughtered,
the problem of over-supply and therefore low prices could continue for some
time.
Pig farmers' difficulties will be made worse, moreover, by feed costs, which
have not fallen as much as they usually do in the post-harvest period and
are set to begin to rise again as early as October. Feed represents 75 to 80
per cent of the total cost of producing a bacon pig.
So prospects for coming months are not at all rosy and it is difficult to
see what could change that prediction. The lamb market, which boomed through
the summer and on the back of which the AAPP peaked at 117.76p per kg in
June, has now slumped. Supplies of pigs in most European Community countries
are also up on last year. Only the traditional Christmas trade for roasting
joints and hams, for which the meat trade will shortly be stocking-up,
provides a faint glimmer of hope.
But it is unlikely to restore the AAPP to profitable levels before
Christmas, and after the New Year there is, in any case, usually a seasonal
decline in the demand for and prices of pig meat.
Once again, therefore, virtually unsupported EC pig farmers must bear the
brunt of free market pressures until enough of them cut or get out of
production. Those of us who stick it out could well be losing money on every
pig we sell for many months to come.
But not all pig producers are so unfortunate. One slaughter-house and bacon
factory has introduced a contract to purchase pigs which evens out the peaks
and troughs of the open market and creates some stability. This is the
Malton Bacon Factory in north Yorkshire, which, according to its management,
has a culture committed to pig farmers.
It must, presumably, also be committed to its parent company, Unigate, which
has provided the capital for the factory to expand from killing 6,000 pigs a
week eight years ago to over 30,000. This has made it the biggest bacon and
processed pig meat business in Britain and one of the top half dozen in
Europe. The 1.5m pigs slaughtered at the factory each year represents about
12 per cent of the total UK kill.
The contract Malton has with its pig suppliers requires them to answer
questions about the breeding of the pigs they produce, the housing provided
for them, the welfare standards observed, the feed used, together with its
ingredients, and so on.
Pig farmers must also assure the factory that they are observing government
and EC regulations on such matters. And to monitor production methods
independently they are encouraged to join the Ministry of Agriculture's pig
health scheme.
In return for disclosing these details, which do not of themselves amount to
quality assurance but could clearly be tightened and modified in the future
to become just that, pig producers are offered contracts that can give them
a sizeable premium over the AAPP. To qualify for this, pig carcasses must,
of course, also have the required quality and leanness. But that is a
requirement of all pig slaughterers these days.
Last week, for instance, when the AAPP was 97.87p a kilogram, Malton was
paying 110p per kg for top grade carcasses. For lowest grade pigs, the
factory paid only 87p a kilogram last week, amounting to a penalty on
producers who failed to provide the quality required.
When pig prices rise, as they surely will again one day, Malton skims some
of the benefit to help pay for the premium during periods of low price. But
most producers are happy with that. They much prefer stability and
predictability.
Malton Bacon Factory also appears to have got the right approach to
retailers. It regularly supplies the supermarkets of Tesco, Safeway, Asda,
Iceland, Gateway and William Lowe, all of which are concerned to reassure
consumers of the quality standards and the safety of the food they supply.
Sales by the company now total some Pounds 250m a year, of which Pounds 40m
comes from exports. Malton is even exporting pig products to Denmark.
There can be little doubt that this kind of combination of quality assurance
for consumers, efficiency of production and processing and concern for
suppliers, is what is needed to help cut the UK's food trade gap, now
running at about Pounds 6bn a year. Sadly, there are too few such companies
bridging the gaps between farmers, the retail trade and the consuming
public.
