FT  23 OCT 93 / Clywd attacks shadow cabinet vote stitch-up
MS ANN CLWYD, who lost her job as Labour's national heritage spokeswoman
when she was voted out of the shadow cabinet, yesterday described the
election as a 'stitch-up'.
Her outburst over the vote, which resulted in the election of fewer female
members to Labour's frontbench team, came as the government sought to
exploit Labour's divisions.
Sir Norman Fowler, Conservative party chairman, accused the Labour leader of
'bungling' the changes to his team.
Mrs Clwyd narrowly missed being re-elected to the shadow cabinet but unlike
Ms Harriet Harman, who scored fewer votes, failed to keep her job.
She warned she would 'take the lid off the manoeuvres and macho-machinations
within the parliamentary Labour party, the press and the lobby which robs
women of their proper representation in parliament'.
Sir Norman said: 'This week's game of musical chairs in the shadow cabinet
has left Labour looking more unelectable than ever. John Smith has shown
very clearly why he would be wholly unsuited to the office of prime
minister.' Mr Smith's cautious reshuffle has been greeted with dismay by
some shadow cabinet members, who had expected a more wide-ranging shake-up.
Sir Norman described the rule changes for electing the shadow cabinet, which
obliged MPs to choose at least four women with their 18 votes, as 'a
monument to political correctness'.
Mr William Waldegrave, science minister, said Mr Smith had botched the
reshuffle by keeping Ms Harriet Harman as shadow chief Treasury secretary in
spite of her failure in the election.
'His shadow chief secretary has kept her job - despite losing the confidence
of her colleagues,' said Mr Waldegrave.
The Labour front bench yesterday ignored the continuing row over the
election, preferring to renew its attack on government plans to impose value
added tax on fuel.
Mr Gordon Brown, shadow chancellor, pledged a national crusade against the
tax move.
He also attacked the possibility of VAT being imposed on newspapers and
books in next month's Budget - 'the first attacks on the Bible' - and said
Mr Kenneth Clarke would be the first chancellor to tax his own words.
