FT  02 JAN 93 / Finance and the Family: News in brief
FRAMLINGTON is marking the new year by launching four unit trusts. All are
initially aimed at the institutional market, but only one (the Exempt
Balanced fund) is exclusively so. The three other trusts - American Growth,
UK Growth and Emerging Markets - all have minimum investments of Pounds 500,
so are easily available to small investors.
The American Growth fund will invest in large and medium companies in the
US, Canada and Mexico, and will complement the group's existing American
Smaller Companies trust. The UK growth fund will invest in large and medium
sized UK stocks.
All the trusts, except Exempt Balanced, will have an initial charge of 5 per
cent; American Growth and Emerging Markets will have annual charges of 1.25
per cent and UK growth 1 per cent.
*****
Building Societies have noticed that nervous borrowers are opting for fixed
rate mortgages in higher numbers. However, the rates on offer are not as
good as they were two months ago. Chelsea building society is today
launching three fixed mortgages. One is fixed until June 30, 1995 at 7.95
per cent (for loans up to 90 per cent of valuation). The other two are fixed
until June 30, 1997.
For loans up to 60 per cent of valuation the rate is 8.50 per cent, and for
those up to 90 per cent of valuation, it is 8.75 per cent. Borrowers are
required to take out Chelsea's own house and contents insurance, and the
administration fee is Pounds 195. interest only and repayment mortgages, as
well as pension and endowment deals, are available.
*****
Britannia building society has launched an 8.75 per cent mortgage fixed for
five years. The arrangement fee is Pounds 225, and early redemption attracts
a penalty of 180 days' interest. Interest only and repayment mortgages are
available but you are required to buy Britannia's own house and contents
insurance.
*****
Societies are also waking up to the outflow of savers' funds into other
products following the autumn base rate cuts. National &amp; Provincial is
offering a one percentage point of extra interest for a month on its Instant
Reserve, Private Reserve and Investment Reserve accounts. Money must stay in
the accounts until the end of February, when the extra interest will be paid
for 31 days, based on the balance growth during January.
*****
Life Association of Scotland is one of the many companies trying to tempt
funds away from the building societies. It is promoting its 'Generator'
plan, a five-year temporary annuity linked to a personal equity plan. The
scheme is very similar to Scottish Widow's plan, marketing for which has
been sharply criticised by some advisers.
Part of the investment goes into the annuity, which pays out an income,
while the Pep aims to grow enough to restore the capital at the end of the
five years.
It needs to grow by at least 13 per cent per annum if the capital is to be
replaced in full, so investors have a real chance of capital loss.
LAS is hoping to attract funds from building societies, but admits that the
exposure to equities means a higher level of risk. If capital is returned,
then income should total above 9 per cent annually, depending on the age and
sex of the annuitant.
*****
Falling interest rates do seem to mean some relief for those whose debts
were out of control. TSB has cuts the monthly interest rate on TSB Trustcard
and TSB MasterCard from 1.89 per cent to 1.79 per cent, with effect from
January 25.
The APR for purchases will be 23.7 per cent, and 24.1 per cent for cash
advances.
TSB still does not charge an annual fee for its credit cards, unlike any of
the big four clearers, and claims the latest move makes its credit cards
'among the most competitively priced available'.
