FT  09 JUL 93 / Arts: Students rise to a Queen - Opera
The London Royal Schools' Vocal Faculty is marking the Tchaikovsky centenary
with Queen of Spades. The choice raised a doubt or two prior to performance:
the colleges seemed to be neglecting an opportunity to explore among the
composer's rarer operas. But at Monday's performance almost all misgivings
were dispelled (except over the Faculty's decision to give the opera in
often unidiomatic Russian): for what emerged was one of the most
consistently strong student stagings of recent years.
The Tchaikovsky brothers' adaptation of Pushkin - Modest served as
librettist - is far from faithful to the original; and in the Royal College
of Music's Britten Theatre Malcolm Fraser's production removes it even
further. Taking as a starting point the story's final lines, which tell of
Herman's insanity, he stages the opera as Herman's recollection of the
events that led to his undoing. Tchaikovsky's music may suggest something
different, but Fraser's staging is carefully thought through and brilliantly
executed.
Herman is on stage for much of the evening - the opening boy-soldiers'
chorus is enacted as a childhood memory - but most of the dramaturgy remains
unchanged. Fraser's coup de theatre is the masked ball and pastorale of Act
2, staged as a nightmarish memory of the Countess's funeral, the Master of
Ceremonies now a heavily bearded Russian Orthodox priest, the top-hatted
guests dressed in black and wearing deathly masks. Fay Conway's lavish
costumes are of the composer's time, with Prince Yeletsky a Tsar Nicholas
look-alike.
The opera, performed in Roger Butlin's single set, gains from the intimacy
of the Britten Theatre. Outstanding in Monday's cast (the first of two
alternating sets) was the Lisa of Susannah Glanville, a gleaming soprano who
sang in well-projected Russian. James Barrett, a dramatically strong Herman,
tended to force his tenor; this production downplay's the character's
heartlessness in favour of wild-eyed insanity, expressions which Barrett
adeptly conveyed. James Lawrence was a mellifluous but restrained Yeletsky,
Paul McNamara a debonair Tomsky. The Bulgarian Violetka Ivanova was a
vocally healthy Countess; another Bulgarian, the bass Tihomir Androlov,
stood out as an idiomatic Surin.
The chorus was strong. Michael Rosewell drew excellent playing from the
orchestra, passionate but not always dark enough. That element was
abundantly provided in the staging.
Britten Theatre, Royal College of Music, London SW7: last performance
tonight.
