FT  19 NOV 93 / Survey of UK Property (16): Fearless in dockland - Why the
principality has received such healthy inward investment / Wales
THE CLUTCH of analysts looked slightly bemused. Why were they here, gulping
lungfuls of sea air, rather than tucked up in a comfortable, air-conditioned
ivory tower?
In fact, why was anybody here on this vast building site out on the western
frontier? It was a dockland - so often a synonym for the kiss of commercial
death.
Harry Groen seemed happy enough, however. The chairman of NCM Credit
Insurance, who had drawn the City-slickers across the Severn Bridge to hear
about his new 450-job UK headquarters, could have chosen a multitude of more
conventional locations closer to London. Yet here he was, proudly boasting
about the delights of settling in Cardiff.
The dockland location carries no fears: 'In fact, he sees it as a positive
advantage to the image of the company,' says Duncan Syme, development
director for Cardiff Bay Development Corporation (CBDC). 'It shows customers
how thrusting and go-ahead they are to choose such an exciting scheme.'
That must be a relief to Grosvenor Waterside, a development subsidiary of
Associated British Ports and the real source of the analysts' interest that
day. But it fits neatly into a changing perception of life beyond the
bridge. A host of Japanese and Americans have also visited Wales, giving it
the lion's share of British inward investment over the past few years.
Money helps overcome prejudice, of course. CBDC has spent around Pounds 150m
preparing sites and building roads to turn the docks into the biggest urban
regeneration scheme in Europe - and there is plenty more to come. Meanwhile,
fireworks over the freewheeling financial regime which led to a clear-out of
top executives at the Welsh Development Agency cannot obscure the fact that
more than a decade of heavy investment has saved the region from economic
disaster, as the coal and steel industries have collapsed. This year more
than Pounds 50m will go into some 700,000 sq ft of joint ventures and
385,000 sq ft of commercial development.
But has this all produced a false market? 'There is a danger that the loss
of Cardiff's assisted-area status, combined with a more general review of
government spending, may prematurely withdraw an important underpinning of
the local economy,' says Mike Rees, of Chesterton.
Doubts over the domination by quangos in consumption of commercial space
also haunt Ben Gabbitass, of Applied Property Research. The Welsh Health
Common Services Authority, for instance, is the other major letting on which
CBDC has built its case for success. Like NCM, it is also an internal move
within the city, whereas original plans for the Bay anticipated a relocation
from outside every two years.
'I would like to know where the net additional demand is coming from to fill
all the new space being planned,' says Mr Gabbitass. 'There seems to be a
lot of shuffling around by people who leave as much space empty as they
take.'
Duncan Syme will have none of this. NCM could have gone anywhere, and had to
convince its funders that this was a viable commercial move, he says. Others
would follow, now that the bill allowing construction of a barrage across
Cardiff Bay had received parliamentary approval. 'We could have got by
without the barrage, but this will make us a first rather than a second
division location,' he says. Just as important, the final road link with the
M4 will be completed within a year, making it as accessible as the city
centre.
The ultimate aim is to merge the Bay and the city centre. British Rail has
ambitious plans to help close the gap with an 850,000 sq ft office scheme
behind Central station, aptly called The Bridge; while Mr Syme has ideas for
a processional boulevard linking the two areas. Like every other part of
Wales - and the UK - however, little will happen without pre-lets, and that
depends on other major businesses following NCM.
Local politicians hope to draw in outsiders by turning Cardiff into a major
European city, doubling its size with the help of more than 2bn of
investment in the Bay over the next 20 years. A more immediate influence,
however, is coming from improvements in accessibility. Mr Rees says the
second Severn Bridge, due for completion in 1996, is boosting a wide section
of east Wales by attracting developers to strategic sites around the new
motorway link.
Meanwhile, elimination of the final M4 bottleneck east of Swansea will break
another psychological barrier, opening up Wales' second city. It has already
beaten Cardiff to the punch by completing its own tidal barrage, and is
aiming to stay ahead of the game by drawing in Pounds 200m of private
investment over the next decade, pump-primed through a Pounds 27m joint
venture with the WDA on four development sites.
Fund managers have already overcome their fear of venturing into Wales, says
Peter Kelly, of DTZ Debenham Thorpe: 'In the last two or three years we have
moved on to the agenda for every prime investor's portfolio.' This is
because the regional economy is so strong since the replacement of heavy
industry with new business.
Property values have risen by more than 10 per cent in the past 12 months,
and yields are below 9 per cent for well-let property. The WDA has sold
Pounds 50m of property this year, and was innundated with offers for the
Treforest Estate, which was offered for Pounds 18.5m and sold for Pounds 26m
to Morgan Grenfell Asset Management.
But there is still not much of an office market, because hardly anything is
being built in which sellers could re-invest. Institutions would like to get
the two major schemes in Cardiff Bay, but ABP is not giving up its jewels.
The next round of development is not as far away as some might think,
according to Mr Kelly. An average 300,000 sq ft annual take-up has left
Cardiff with a vacancy rate of only 10 per cent. A couple of large lettings,
and the wraps might come off city centre schemes mothballed during the
recession.
Meanwhile, local demand will support pre-lets of 75,000 sq ft a year in
smaller units around the Inner Harbour, he says. These would almost
certainly fetch 14 to 15 a sq ft, confirming that the Bay is matching
city-centre values.
