FT  26 AUG 93 / The Bundesbank and its mimics: France, Denmark and Belgium
are shadowing German monetary policy. Can they keep it up
THE exchange rate mechanism has been relaxed and most of the system's
currencies can fluctuate in much wider bands. Now Europe's bankers are
asking the next logical question: should we care any longer what the
Bundesbank does to German interest rates?
In recent years European governments have anxiously awaited each fortnightly
meeting of the Bundesbank's policy-making council. Many of the alterations
in German interest rates announced at the regular Thursday session have been
followed by changes in domestic monetary policy to ensure that a country's
currency did not fall close to its ERM floor against the D-Mark.
But the recent widening of the ERM fluctuation bands allows currencies to
drift over wide margins. And, in theory, ERM member states need no longer
ensure that their short-term interest rates are above Germany's.
The reality is different, however. The Bundesbank's decisions will affect
European monetary policy. The results of today's meeting are keenly awaited
across Europe, with strong expectations that the discount rate will be cut
by at least half a percentage point.
Bundesbank policy matters on a European level because France, Denmark and
Belgium are determined to keep their currencies as close to their former ERM
bands as possible.
The French government is politically committed to a franc fort policy and
might be embarrassed by a clear devaluation of the franc; Belgium and
Denmark fear that a decoupling of monetary policy from Germany would lift
the veil on fundamental economic problems that could be ignored when the
European monetary union project was at its strongest.
None of these countries has repeated the UK government's policy of sharply
cutting interest rates in the weeks after sterling quit the ERM last
September.
France has trimmed its overnight lending rate five times in the last two
weeks but has not cut official interest rates. Earlier this week Denmark cut
the cost of short lending to 10 per cent, a level that may be too high given
its heavy unemployment.
Belgium has been toughest of all, leaving its main official interest rate at
9.5 per cent, and reaffirming yesterday that it will adhere strictly to this
policy.
However, economists do not believe that these countries can maintain strong
currencies through high interest rates for much longer.
'These currencies came under pressure because high interest rates were seen
as incompatible with high unemployment,' said Mr Paul Chertkow, global
currency strategist at UBS in London. 'If their rates are not brought down,
the currencies will come under pressure anyway.'
This is a strongly-held view in currency markets and has led economists to
put forward two main scenarios for European interest rates between now and
the end of the year:
The Bundesbank could cut interest rates more quickly than is currently
expected - allowing other countries to cut rates without an adverse effect
on their currencies.
Yesterday's inflation figure for the German state of North Rhine Westphalia,
at an annualised 4 per cent, was better than expected - and this may
encourage the central bank to ease policy.
The more likely scenario is that the Bundesbank will keep policy tight, amid
fears that money supply growth has shot well beyond its target range of 4.5
per cent to 6.5 per cent.
France, Denmark and Belgium could mimic this policy for a while to keep
their currencies strong. But they would be forced to cut interest rates as
dealers took the view that the policy was unsustainable. Fixed-income
investors, who bought long-dated government bonds of these countries in
anticipation of rate cuts, might threaten to sell them and take profits if
short-term rates are not cut quickly.
