FT  24 FEB 93 / Manchester wins right to stage chess championship
MANCHESTER yesterday won its battle to stage the next world chess
championship between Gary Kasparov, the reigning champion, and Nigel Short,
the British challenger, with a bid placed just seven minutes before the
deadline.
The city's final offer of SFr2.538m (Pounds 1.16m) beat two rival British
bids, and one from the Spanish city of Santiago de Compostela. The bookish
Short, Britain's first world championship contender, will meet Kasparov, the
world's highest-ever ranked player, in the Royal Exchange Theatre in August.
Manchester, bidding to host the 2000 Olympic Games, will hope to rekindle
the excitement generated by the highly publicised 1972 match between Russian
Boris Spassky and American Bobby Fischer in Reykjavik in Iceland.
The personalities in the Short-Kasparov clash are likely to match
Spassky-Fischer in terms of animosity at least. Short has said the Georgian
world champion is overbearing. Kasparov, when asked about the match,
replied: 'It will be Short and it will be short.'
Although Iceland paid just Dollars 125,000 (Pounds 88,000) in 1972, it
believes it reaped a rich reward from the Spassky-Fischer tournament through
increased tourism, and is still enjoying the spinoffs.
'It got us total attention in the media at that time - that is something
that was very helpful for us or for any city,' said Mr Magnus Oddson,
marketing director of the Icelandic tourist board.
Although not the highest, Manchester's was the only British bid to conform
to the complex sponsorship rules of Fide, the world chess governing body,
which stipulate that bids must be unconditional, in Swiss francs and backed
by a bank guarantee.
International Management Group, a sports management agency, and Channel 4
television offered SFr2.616m but failed to provide a bank guarantor and
demanded conditions attached to world TV rights, exclusive daily interviews
with the players and the right to stage matches anywhere.
The other British bid - from the London Chess Group, a coalition of
London-based companies co-ordinated by a public relations group - was for
Dollars 1.5m (Pounds 1.05m), but also failed to meet Fide's conditions.
Manchester Airport will be the sole sponsor of the eight-week championship.
Although Mr Short lives in London, he was born and brought up in Greater
Manchester, so will be on home ground.
