FT  27 AUG 93 / VW and the Lopez espionage affair: Peace plea fails to catch
the mood - Rexrodt is caught up in an inter-family squabble he believes has
gone too far / The Minister
The raids yesterday by German police and prosecutors on Volkswagen's
headquarters and other facilities in Wolfsburg marked an extraordinary
day in the history of the German car industry. Officials in Bonn did not
hide their concern over the potential political and economic damage
which could ensue from the battle 'between two great German car
companies'.
Christopher Parkes examines the personalities and issues in what one
German judge said could be 'potentially the biggest-ever case of
industrial espionage'.
MR Gunter Rexrodt, the German economics minister, was due to have a parental
chat with Mr David Herman, Opel chairman, at Frankfurt airport last night.
At the end of a day of extraordinary events at Volkswagen headquarters, he
was seeking, as he has for the past week, to defuse the clash between Mr
Herman and Mr Ferdinand Piech, VW chairman.
'We say it is unique for two great German motor companies to be fighting
like this in public,' the minister's spokesman said yesterday. 'He concluded
we must do something because it seems in this case that there is such human
friction, we must bring people to more reason.'
It was the minister's job to try to prevent damage to political and business
relations between the US and Germany, his spokesman added.
It has been suggested for some weeks by lowlier politicians and business
leaders that the clash over the alleged theft of Opel data and suspected
industrial espionage could well cause the sort of damage Mr Rexrodt now
fears.
But it was only a week ago, after a call from Mr Piech, that the minister
acted. His attitude appears to be that there is a inter-family squabble
going on, and his job is to shut the quarrelsome children in separate rooms
and try quietly to talk some sense into the parents.
Opel has said it will be prepared to exchange letters with VW provided
public apologies are forthcoming from the other side. It wants a withdrawal
of remarks suggesting that the US-owned company is spearheading an American
campaign to undermine the German motor industry and that it planted evidence
prejudicial to criminal investigations.
But while the probe continues at its heated pace, tempers are hardly likely
to be cool enough for a reasonable, let alone a useful exchange between the
two sides. Nor is Opel, which appears so far to have the best hand, likely
to want to be seen talking publicly. Any rapprochement could be interpreted
as a sign of weakness. The three-way contacts, supposed to be held in
secret, have been routinely followed by heartening press releases from Mr
Otto Wachs, a Volkswagen spokesman.
Nor has Opel been pleased by statements attributed to Mr Rexrodt to the
effect that he wanted the case settled in the civil courts.
While the minister probably appreciates that the criminal case is entirely
out of Opel's, VW's and political hands, his initiative came late in the
day. That it followed Mr Piech's widely criticised insinuations against
Opel, which were in turn followed by an abortive attempt by the VW chief to
open peace talks, could leave Mr Rexrodt open to suggestions that he may not
be acting altogether with the common good in mind. Opel, which has stuck
rigorously to its claim that it has reasonable grounds for suspicion -
confirmed by public prosecutors - might reasonably ask why no political
initiatives or support were forthcoming when it first declared itself the
injured party. The substance of its suspicions is that former employees
decamped to VW in possession of virtually all its business strategy for the
next 10 years.
'A way must be found for them to work together sensibly . . . their Asian
competitors must be rubbing their hands,' said Mr Rexrodt's spokesman. 'US
and European companies should co-operate to resist Asian dumping.'
That seems more an issue for Mr Rexrodt. There is already common ground
between Mr Herman and Mr Piech. Neither needs reminding of the Japanese
threat, and both know that at some stage the bridges between their two
groups must be rebuilt. But the best time is probably when the full extent
of the local damage has been assessed, and last night seemed hardly
suitable.
