FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Argentina (7): An ability to flout the rules -
Political priorities have not interfered with economic orthodoxy
THIS IS a political year in Argentina. Mid-term congressional elections are
due in October. Constitutional reform and President Carlos Menem's
re-election bid overshadow the political scene.
But for the first time in many years, political uncertainties have not led
to economic uncertainty. It is to Mr Menem's credit that he has not allowed
his political priorities to sweep him too far from the path of economic
orthodoxy.
He has agreed to potentially unpopular and vote-losing measures, such as
spending cuts or closing down loss-making rail services. Mr Rosendo Fraga, a
political commentator, explains that 'Menem's most important electoral and
political asset is the economy'.
Opinion polls show steady support for government economic policy, with a 41
per cent approval rating. And the rating of Mr Domingo Cavallo, the economy
minister, is 50 per cent - significantly higher than Mr Menem's 38 per cent.
The message is that voters will vote for economic stability.
The free market consensus that emerged from the chaos of hyperinflation in
1990 shows no signs of weakening. And it is the government alone that stands
to benefit politically from this. Even Mr Naldo Brunelli, general secretary
of the CGT labour confederation that is fighting a rearguard action against
liberalisation, says: 'We think the changes are irreversible.'
Paradoxically, there are signs that the government's formerly unassailable
political strength is waning. Mr Menem's control over the Peronist party and
Congress is weakening. He can no longer count on a submissive rubber stamp
to keep laws unchanged. Congress has substantially altered laws privatising
the oil company YPF and introducing a private pension system.
The Peronists, Congress and even the government are even more deeply split
over the controversial question of labour reform. Reforming the labour
market is potentially explosive because it attacks the very origins of
Peronism.
The emergence of challengers for nomination as the Peronist party's
presidential candidate in the 1995 elections has further undermined Mr
Menem's authority. This has made the presidential succession an unavoidable
issue, even though Mr Menem's term does not end until 1995.
The challenges are all the more damaging, because Mr Menem still appears as
committed as ever to changing the constitution to allow him to stand for
re-election. Asked if he wished to continue in power, Mr Menem said: 'It is
hard to answer this. General Roca, (elected president in 1880) when asked
what he wanted to be after being president, said 'to be president again.'
And that is what my answer is.'
Senator Jose Octavio Bordon, a former governor of Mendoza province in the
west, is the first Peronist to openly toss his hat into the ring. Sen Bordon
promises 'a more profound transformation of the state: more efficient public
spending, more decentralisation, more public participation, a more efficient
judiciary'.
Mr Eduardo Duhalde, Mr Menem's former vice president until he was elected
governor of Buenos Aires province in 1991, is another strong - but still
undeclared - Peronist candidate. Other candidates include two of Mr Menem's
proteges - Mr Ramon Ortega, a former pop singer, and Mr Carlos Reutemann, a
former Formula 1 champion. These two politicians were elected provincial
governors in 1991 with Mr Menem's backing.
The opposition Radical party's front runner is Senator Fernando de la Rua.
His rival is Mr Eduardo Angeloz, the Radical governor of Cordoba province
and Mr Menem's challenger in the 1989 presidential election. Both men stress
that they too will maintain Mr Menem's economic policies.
Like Senator Bordon, the Radical candidates say they will rebuild
Argentina's institutions like the judiciary and Congress, and place a
greater emphasis on social and educational policy. They are responding to a
shift in voters' priorities.
Mr Luis Moreno Ocampo, an influential former federal prosecutor, points out
that Mr Menem's great virtue as an unorthodox politician is his ability to
flout rules. This enabled him to break up the corporate state.
But this ability is also his great shortcoming: he has not reconstructed the
state's ability to administer justice, provide decent education and health
services or establish an efficient and honest civil service.
However, Mr Menem has made some progress. He has introduced oral trials,
abolishing traditional written trials which were both slow and vulnerable to
corruption. He has also proposed long overdue reforms to the shadowy funding
of political campaigns and has even suggested regular, perhaps annual,
referenda on principal issues.
Corruption remains a top political issue. Although deregulation and
privatisation have removed much of the scope for bribery, businessmen and
ordinary people still complain about corruption. The government has been
rocked by 20 serious cases of corruption since taking office in July 1989,
yet not one has been satisfactorily investigated.
