FT  19 JAN 93 / Survey of The European Single Market (13): A free trade area
but . . . - David Dodwell gauges the Community's protectionist leanings
THE creation of the single market has for several years aroused fears that
the world is poised to collapse into competing trade blocks. Fears have been
inflamed by the recent progress towards a North American Free Trade Area.
With apologies to Mark Twain, reports of the death of free trade have been
greatly exaggerated.
However, the dangers of Europe turning inward should not be dismissed out of
hand, although these have been linked more with the wider evolution of the
EC than with the creation of the single market as such.
There is inside the EC a north-south divide which separates northern members
who are keener to encourage free trade from southern member states with
strong protectionist tendencies. For example, the large number of French
companies with state investments inhibits free trade within that market for
a number of products. So do policies in Italy favouring local manufacturers.
State supports for strategic industries, or 'national champions', and
government procurement rules that keep foreign competitors at bay are also
born out of protectionist reflexes.
These reflexes have been stiffened towards countries outside the wider
European region as EC member states have realised that, for reasons of
political as much as economic security, countries in eastern and central
Europe must be given improved access to the EC market. So far, offers of
improved market access to the former Comecon countries have been derisory,
and even these have been eroded by dumping actions against some of the more
successful exporters from Poland and Czechoslovakia. But in due course they
are likely to be improved.
The high level of trade conducted within the community - it averages about
60 per cent, and peaks at 75 per cent with Portugal - makes trade with other
parts of the world less significant than for countries in other regions. By
comparison, the US relies on the north and south American region for just 35
per cent of its exports, while Japan sells 36 per cent of its exports in the
Asia-Pacific area.
However, this does not mean a 'Fortress Europe' is a particularly attractive
option to most EC industries. Unlike countries elsewhere, those in Europe
are unusually dependent on international trade. Germany's exports account
for 26 per cent of its GDP - not far from the EC average - while Ireland's
exports account for 56 per cent of GDP. This compares with just 7.4 per cent
for the US, and 9.4 per cent for Japan.
For countries so heavily dependent on international trade, EC member states
have as much to fear from competing trade blocks as any. The emergence of
the North American Free Trade Area - embracing the US, Canada and Mexico -
and of a wider western hemispheric trading region given form by President
Bush's Enterprise for the Americas initiative, has given EC exporters clear
warning of the price that could be paid for raising protectionist walls
around Europe. At present, neither the single market nor Nafta need take a
protectionist form. But they provide the institutional means for this to
happen if the mood should change.
For these reasons, it is not surprising that Europe's trading partners have
refused to dismiss the danger of emergent protectionism around the creation
of the single market. Japanese foreign investment in Europe surged during
the second half of the 1980s as companies pre-emptively established a
production capability inside the EC.
Some of this was doubtless triggered by the new opportunities arising out of
the chance the single market provides to serve so large an integrated market
from just one or two locations. But some was also 'just in case' investment,
to avert the danger of losing access to important markets if the single
market raised effective protection around the EC.
A perverse consequence of this flood of inward investment has been to divert
investment from European countries outside the EC, in particular the Efta
countries. It is this - coupled with the fact that the Efta group relies on
the EC for two thirds of its exports - that has encouraged countries such as
Sweden to press so urgently for full EC membership.
However, obsession with the protectionist dangers of the single market have
clouded the trade-liberalising consequences of the change. Companies in each
EC member state that have in the past been hampered by national barriers to
trade are set to see almost all institutional obstacles fall to free trade
across the whole community.
Exporters to Europe which currently have to deal with 12 different sets of
export documentation, negotiating market access, and distribution
arrangements country by country, will from January have to jump just one set
of hurdles. Once goods land in one EC country, they can be moved freely
across a market of 344m people, without border controls, or other checks,
providing a marvellous opportunity to rationalise and improve distribution.
In due course, standards of all kinds will be harmonised, whether for
regulations for electricity sockets, safety standards or food additives,
giving exporters and domestic manufacturers the same considerable scope to
simplify production and packaging arrangements.
But whether or not the single market will raise or lower effective
protection will also depend heavily on the outcome of the long-delayed
Uruguay Round of talks aimed at reduction of barriers to international
trade.
The outcome of these talks, which have crept inconclusively forward for six
years, remains uncertain.
But in so far as the draft agreement published a year ago, and negotiations
up to the end of 1992, provide a guide, the Uruguay Round would reduce
protection in farm trade, cut tariffs in a number of industrial sectors to
zero, set a 10 year timetable for dismantling protection in textiles and
garments, and open up a number of service industries - including banking and
insurance, audio-visual services and shipping.
The Uruguay Round would set stricter rules for deciding whether or not an
exporter to the EC is dumping. This will be of particular importance to
Japan, the Asian 'tigers', and the liberalising countries of central Europe,
since the EC, with the US, is quick to take anti-dumping actions to protect
domestic industries that are inefficient, vulnerable, or simply powerful.
But neither the Uruguay Round, nor the establishment of the single market,
will overnight remove all inconsistencies in trade policy between EC member
states. It will take at least six months for national quota arrangements for
banana imports to be harmonised. Rationalisation of textiles quotas, quotas
on shoes and bicycles, and of 'voluntary restraint agreements' on imported
cars may take longer still to sort out.
