FT  01 DEC 93 / Business and the Environment: Oil groups and troubled waters
 -Green issues versus commercial realities
Imagine you are the chairman of one of the world's largest oil companies. In
the middle of October, a letter arrived, demanding, among other things, that
you immediately stop all exploration and drilling of oil and gas reserves.
The letter's author is Paul Gilding, the Amsterdam-based executive director
of Greenpeace International, one of the world's largest environmental
pressure groups.
Reasons why it might be unwise to dispose of the letter spring to mind. You
worry that environmental lobbying may influence planning applications and
lead to tighter regulation. You also want to head off any chance of the
'direct action' which has made Greenpeace's reputation; for example recently
four inflatable dinghies launched from Greenpeace's boat Solo hung a banner
from an exploration rig operated by Shell in the Barents Sea. So how should
you respond?
'With interest but with some dismay', British Petroleum told Gilding.
'Unrealistic and not a helpful contribution to the debate', Shell
International Petroleum said in a response which stressed the company's care
for the environment.
However Greenpeace is adamant that its demands, fired off to more than 20
companies and industry groups, are not unreasonable. The threat of global
warming, its letter says, 'is too great for any of us to continue the
massive burning of fossil fuels'. At last year's Rio Earth Summit,
governments pledged to find ways of curbing carbon dioxide emissions from
burning fossil fuels, following warnings from the United Nations
intergovernmental panel on climate change (IPCC).
Greenpeace's international oil campaigner, Paul Horsman, argues the oil
companies are 'worse villains' than governments. In his view, 'they have
been involved in amazing lobbying against the Rio commitments and proposals
such as energy taxes'. He wants them to divert some of their research and
development budget to 'renewable' energy sources such as solar, wind and
wave power.
To oil companies, many of whom conduct research into renewables, these
demands ignore commercial realities. Michael Herbert, head of external
affairs at Shell International Petroleum, says that 'the cost of renewables
is still colossal - rapidly phasing out fossil fuels is not credible if we
are to meet the world's rising demand for energy, including that of
developing countries'. However nuclear power, one of the available
alternatives to fossil fuels, is anathema to Greenpeace.
Some oil companies also feel that Greenpeace misrepresents the available
scientific evidence on global warming and assumes, in BP's words, 'that
scientific consensus is far greater than it actually is'. While the IPCC is
scrupulous about not being drawn into this kind of dispute, it does
emphasise the uncertainties of its projections.
David Bennetts, research co-ordinator of the Hadley Centre in Berkshire,
England, which co-ordinates the IPCC's scientific assessments, says: 'It is
certainly true (as Greenpeace claims) that you cannot burn the world's
proven reserves of oil without the world warming. But what I cannot tell you
is whether that rate of warming would be fast enough to be dangerous'.
Outside observers might see this as a predictable standoff between natural
opponents. But the Greenpeace letter also carries a curiously dated air.
Some environmentalists and businessmen feel that as pollution regulation has
been tightened over the past decade - much of it due to the efforts of
environmental pressure groups - the venom has been taken out of the
traditional battle between greenery and smokestacks.
It is hard not to have some sympathy with Shell's view that 'Rio spelled out
the dilemmas facing the world', particularly the hard choices between the
environment and economic development. 'It is these dilemmas we should be
worrying about - it is unhelpful to go back to confrontation'.
