FT  09 SEP 93 / International Company News: Moody's returns Chrysler debt to
investment grade
CHRYSLER, the US carmaker, reached a significant milestone on its path back
to financial health when Moody's Investors Service, the credit information
agency, restored its debt to investment grade status after 31 months in the
speculative category.
The upgrading concerns some Dollars 13bn of borrowings.
Moody's is one of the two leading credit rating agencies. Its upgrade should
allow Chrysler Financial, the group's financial services business, to raise
money on somewhat finer terms, although the debt market is already pricing
the subsidiary's borrowings at close to investment status.
However, Chrysler also needs an investment grade rating from Standard &amp;
Poor's, the other leading agency, to achieve a significant reduction in
interest costs on some of its other borrowings.
S&amp;P announced in June it was reviewing the company for a possible upgrade to
investment status. However, Mr Scott Sprinzen, an S&amp;P analyst, said
yesterday the agency would not finish its review until Chrysler had
completed this autumn's negotiations with the United Auto Workers on a new
labour contract.
Chrysler fell to junk bond status early in 1991 when it was entering a
severe industry recession with a weak product line-up and strained balance
sheet. Many analysts questioned whether it could survive as an independent
company.
Over the past 18 months it has clawed its way back to financial health,
thanks to asset sales, cost-cutting and a range of hot-selling new products.
Moody's, which raised Chrysler's senior debt two notches to Baa3 from Ba2,
said the ratings remained under review for a further upgrade. This would
depend partly on the outcome of the labour negotiations.
It said yesterday's action 'recognised the improving trends in Chrysler's
operating performance' and the potential for 'further earnings and cashflow
advances which will strengthen the company's balance sheet and
debt-protection measurements'.
