FT  03 MAR 93 / International Capital Markets: Nomura chief attacks banking
plan
PLANS to liberalise Japan's financial markets by allowing banks to compete
in securities markets are seriously inadequate, Mr Yukio Aida, the chairman
of Nomura Securities, said yesterday.
Mr Aida warned that Japan was missing an opportunity for a thorough review
of how to reform its financial markets in the wake of the speculative
economy of the late 1980s by introducing an unsatisfactory compromise
designed to support the banks
His comments are public confirmation of the ferocity of the struggle between
banks and securities companies which are attempting to influence the
government's policy on financial liberalisation. Securities companies allege
the banks are being given favourable treatment to support them while they
deal with their bad loans.
Under the plans the commercial banks will be allowed to set up subsidiaries
to deal in parts of the securities markets. The plans were drawn up in the
late 1980s when the Tokyo stock market was booming. Since then trading
volumes have fallen dramatically and most of Japan's stockbrokers expect to
make large losses this year.
Mr Aida was speaking at a seminar on co-operation between British and
Japanese financial institutions organised by British Invisibles, a trade
group which promotes UK financial and other services abroad.
He said: 'I am sceptical of such a reform when the securities industry is in
such a dire predicament.'
As an example of the alleged unfairness of the reforms Mr Aida pointed out
that the banks will be allowed to lead manage bond issues by Japanese
companies in foreign markets, while securities companies will not be allowed
into foreign exchange markets in Tokyo. Mr Aida criticised the banks'
substantial shareholdings in industrial compan-ies.
He said these cross shareholdings gave the banks great influence over their
industrial clients which they could use to attract business.
Japanese bankers speaking at the seminar dismissed Mr Aida's warnings. Mr
Yoh Kurosawa, president of the Industrial Bank of Japan, said the reforms
would revive the pre-second world war system in which banks had securities'
businesses.
Mr Kurosawa, in a thinly veiled comment on the securities scandals which
rocked the Tokyo stock market two years ago, said: 'We are aware the Tokyo
stock market has its particular practices. We are anxious to learn from Mr
Aida about those practices.'
Mr Tasuki Takagaki, Bank of Tokyo president, said commercial banks initially
would not compete intensely in the securities market because of the extent
of their problems with bad debts.
Mr Takagaki said the non-performing loans would probably provoke management
crises at some smaller institutions which would be taken over by larger
groups.
However he said this would not threaten the banking system as a whole.
