FT  10 JUL 93 / Diary of a Private Investor: Reality - or just wishful
thinking?
MANY IN the financial world believe that share prices are based partly on
perceptions of companies' future performance. If so, then a number of City
people must be expecting a major turnaround in the property market.
Shares in several property companies have soared this year. Shaftesbury is
up from 39p to 94p, Clayform from 10p to 38p and Anglo St James from 8p to
15p. Even Dares Estates has risen from 1.25p to 2.5p.
I missed out on all these rises. Why? Because, from walking around city
centres, I could not believe the property market was about to stage a
dramatic recovery.
I continue to see lots of empty office blocks. Many of them have been unlet
since they were built several years ago. High streets and a number of
shopping centres still have many vacant and boarded-up shops.
Several million people live in homes worth less than their purchase price.
With negative equity, fewer people can afford to trade up to larger
properties.
According to the spring/summer issue of Savills' magazine, a very good
five-bedroom freehold house in Fulham, west London, which could have cost
upwards of Pounds 500,000 in 1989, can now be found at a price starting from
Pounds 350,000. In Hampshire, a three-bedroomed detached cottage which might
have fetched Pounds 115,000 as recently as September 1992 could be bought in
April this year for Pounds 97,000. I am sure the market for large country
homes will become even more depressed because of the financial problems
facing many members of Lloyd's.
Even reading the company reports of non-property companies shows how far
some prices have fallen. My personal pension scheme has a small shareholding
in Zetters, the football pools operator. In his August 1992 statement to
shareholders, chairman Paul Zetter pointed out that two essential London
properties owned by the company had been re-valued in December 1988 at
Pounds 5.5m 'when UK property values were at their peak.'
He went on: 'However, since then, current rentals have halved.' And he
revealed that the market value at March 31 1992 had been estimated at Pounds
1.425m by the company's agent, Chestertons.
For me, one of the attractions of Zetters has been its cautious accounting
approach. Having commissioned the re-valuation, the company incorporated it
into its accounts, even though it meant a drop in value of more than Pounds
4m.
With writedowns like these, why do purely property companies, with no other
sources of income apart from rents and property sales, show such a surge in
their share prices? Are we about to see a repeat of 1973-74? Are the sharp
rises based on reality or wishful thinking?
A local newspaper where I live in Poole, Dorset, revealed recently that
Bournemouth-based McCarthy &amp; Stone had paid doctors and solicitors to
provide 'leads' to people who would buy its purpose-built retirement flats.
The company said it wished to extend this incentive to milkmen and others in
contact with likely purchasers.
Many other developers have introduced a variety of incentives to people to
rent or buy their properties. But I still feel that, in a large number of
cases, prices remain too high.
A recent report by McKinsey &amp; Co showed that prime retail selling space cost
two-thirds more in the UK than in the US. True, there are only a limited
number of sites available in Britain for massive superstores, but why should
average high street properties cost so much?
Why are so many properties still empty? Is it partly because some landlords
continue to ask unrealistic rents? Are they doing this to satisfy banks
which lent them money based on a multiple of the anticipated rent roll, and
are unwilling to admit that the property is worth less than the sums secured
against it?
Of course, I am disappointed I missed out on the excellent profits I could
have made had I bought property shares in January. But I sold my last
property share in 1989 and have not been tempted back into the sector.
I will continue to avoid such shares in the short term for fear of a
collapse. I feel property shares have risen too high, too fast, and that
there could be a sharp correction. But I will continue to seek out those
non-property companies which run profitable manufacturing and other
businesses but have real estate worth more than the value incorporated in
their accounts.
A good example is Treatt, in which my personal pension scheme bought shares
for 113p in January 1992. The balance sheet for the year to September 1992
showed the market value of the company's freehold property to be Pounds
227,179, but the statement with the accounts said the directors considered
the real figure to be 'in excess of this value.'
Treatt shares are now 163p, due to their excellent trading performance in
supplying and manufacturing essential oils and aromatic chemicals for the
flavour and fragrance industries. I prefer a company like Treatt, with a
sound business - plus lowly-valued property - to a purely property-based
company.
