FT  20 OCT 93 / Court backs Canary package
THE High Court yesterday approved the Pounds 1.1bn restructuring package
proposed for Canary Wharf, allowing the development to come out of
administration and operate again as a solvent group of companies.
The decision is a crucial one for those trying to resurrect the troubled
London Docklands project, which collapsed in May last year.
The government's commitment to fund the extension of the Jubilee Underground
line to Canary Wharf depended on yesterday's ruling.
It also means that Canary Wharf can finally sign contracts with two large
new tenants - Mirror Group Newspapers and London Underground - which will
take the occupancy level of the development up to about 50 per cent.
Giving his judgment, Sir Donald Nicholls, the vice-chancellor, rejected the
argument mounted by advertising group WPP and its subsidiary Ogilvy &amp; Mather
that too little information had been provided about the restructuring
package for anyone to be certain about the outcome of allowing the companies
to resume normal trading. Ogilvy &amp; Mather is a Canary Wharf tenant, and had
maintained that the package did not secure sufficient cashflow to safeguard
tenants' interests.
The court was in effect being asked to buy 'a pig in a poke', lawyers for
WPP had alleged.
Sir Donald dismissed the claim, describing the restructuring package as
'impressive' and saying he had no doubts about discharging Canary Wharf's
administrators Ernst &amp; Young.
He said: 'The success of this scheme is far from assured - the
administrators do not claim otherwise. However, I can see no reason to doubt
that the scheme stands a fair chance of success and provides the best hope
for the companies and their creditors. It deserves to be given a chance.'
The companies will not finally emerge from administration until October 29,
when the period for objections to the company voluntary arrangements, agreed
as part of the package, has elapsed.
A further court hearing will be held that day to discharge the
administrators formally. Mr John MacGregor, the transport secretary, will
then immediately authorise the extension of the Jubilee line.
Speaking after the court's ruling, Mr Stephen Adamson, one of the three
Ernst &amp; Young accountants who have acted as administrators, welcomed the
decision.
He said: 'The project is extremely well-placed to benefit over the next 10
to 15 years.'
