FT  06 MAR 93 / Books: Sex tangled with history - Fiction
MEMORIES OF THE FORD ADMINISTRATION
by John Updike
Hamish Hamilton Pounds 15.99, 384 pages
ALFRED Clayton is a historian and the latest in the line of middle-aged New
Englanders to occupy centre stage in John Updike's slow fictional sweep
across the desperate lives of his American contemporaries. Asked by the
Northern New England Association of American Historians to contribute to a
survey of the Gerald Ford presidency, Clayton can only respond with a
chronicle of his disintegrating marriage, framed by Nixon's resignation and
Carter's inauguration.
He sifts painstakingly through his 20-year-old memories of his estrangement
from his wife Norma, the 'Queen of Disorder', and affair with Genevieve, the
'Perfect Wife', as well as detailing the other temporary liaisons that
littered that era. 'In his two years and five months of presidency', Clayton
observes, 'Ford presided over a multitude - dare we say millions? - of
so-called one-night stands.'
Alf is all too obviously left over from the the generation that had spread
its sexual wings in the 1960s; now in the AIDS-dominated 1990s he regards
those years with disguised nostalgia: 'Even the late Sixties had an
innocence, an oh-boy Barbarella forced cheer, counting off orgasms like the
petals of a daisy, which the thoroughly experienced Ford epoch lacked.'
If Alf's proper study is his own tangled sexual life, the topic of his
professional research is the presidency of James Buchanan whose place in US
history, just before the Civil War, seems as slender and inconsequential as
Gerald Ford's. As Clayton's memories unfold, however, they become entwined
with fragments of his unfinished biography of Buchanan; fact and invention
collide, giving the shape and purpose to Updike's novel.
Predictably it is Buchanan's personal life that fascinates Clayton, and
where the historical sources finally fail him he allows imagination to take
over. The parallels in the narratives are drawn ever closer as each makes a
fatal mistake: Buchanan dallies too long at a tea party and forfeits the
woman he loves; Clayton sleeps with the mother of one of his students, and
so destroys his relationship with Genevieve.
Memories of the Ford Administration is not great Updike, nor, one senses,
does it aspire to greatness. Twenty years ago he wrote a play around James
Buchanan's life, and the reworking of the material now in fictional form,
linking it into an exploration of the limits of history and the sanctity of
historical truth seems an uneasy one. In the roster of Updike's novels it
stands roughly midway; set against its 1980s predecessors, though, Rabbit at
Rest and particularly the wise and richly complex Roger's Version, it seems
thin on thematic detail and short on the transcendental moments, the sheer
bravura flourishes, that light up his finest prose.
Yet Clayton's regretful tone, his sharp awareness of spiritual loss and of
opportunities unfilled is undeniably poignant; like so many of Updike's
creations, he is a flawed man who has live long enough to become
unsatisfied. There is no consolation to be found here, any more than there
ever is in Updike. The mirror he holds up to the society he has tracked so
faithfully and for so long, has never been a perfecting one; Alf's world,
the author's world, is littered with loose ends and mistakes. History may
strive for perfection in the way that it packages the past, but real life
gave all that up long ago.
