FT  28 AUG 93 / Sport: The virtues of straight bat and twisting ball -
Cricket
MORTIFIED by my small son's return from a cricket coaching course stiff with
straight bat instructions, I watched the Oval Test with renewed admiration
for the Australian batting. Not that the Oval displayed this at its best; no
less than three of the tourists gave their second innings wickets away with
ill-judged hooks or pulls. But there were still many examples of the
correctness that has distinguished and strengthened Australian batting this
summer.
'Play forward and play straight with bat and pad together.' This principle
of safety is obviously as central in Australian first class coaching as it
is in the coaching my son received. So much the better for Australia.
When they attacked, accomplished batsmen such as Mark Waugh and David Boon
sometimes branched out into a repertoire of more individualistic shots. But
most of the time the middle and lower order played straight and did well out
of it.
Never one to miss fame as a wild and swinging exception, Merv Hughes got
himself out for 12 runs with a wayward hook in his second innings at the
Oval, making a total of 999 runs in his Test career. Most likely he could
not resist having a go at the English bowling. It had little of the ferocity
with which Curtly Ambrose's seven for 25 and Ian Bishop's six for 40
devastated the Australians at Perth and won the West Indies v Australia
series last winter.
England at the Oval were a milder proposition. They were slow, as they have
been all summer long, to remove the Australian tail. Even with the match
well in England's favour, they could not prevent bowlers Paul Reiffel and
Shane Warne putting on a ninth wicket partnership of 74, before Angus Fraser
finally took both wickets.
That is why Devon Malcolm is at once a healthy and a difficult transfusion.
He failed to blast out any tail-enders at the Oval, probably because he
concentrated on pace at the expense of length and accuracy. He bowled a fair
bit of rubbish, some exotic, some just misguided, all fast. Openers Michael
Slater and Mark Taylor both looked distinctly alarmed by Malcolm's bowling,
which Atherton used rightly, in short, erratic, frightening bursts.
I doubt if destiny meant Malcolm to be England's perfectly controlled modern
answer to the West Indies' Whispering Death, Michael Holding, but his
aggression did sharpen England's bowling attack. Pity the Ashes were already
lost. Australia too lacked real pace this summer.
Hughes bowled tirelessly, cleverly, with variation and quite but not really
fast. With an unfit Craig McDermott flown home early in the tour to
convalesce in the shade of the Queensland gum trees, Hughes was left to
spearhead a bowling attack consisting only of himself, Reiffel and relief
bowler Steve Waugh, punctuated now and then by apprentices Brendon Julian
and Wayne Holdsworth.
Australia's bowling strength was their spin, especially Warne's leg-spin. On
different occasions his corkscrew spinners removed old hands Mike Gatting
and Graham Gooch with balls that twisted across behind their legs to hit the
stumps. For Robin Smith, spin is bad news; leg-spin is disaster. He never
had a chance to play his shots because he could never follow the ball.
With Ian Salisbury not playing, England had no leg-spin reply. A sad feature
of English bowling in this series was its lack of occasional bowling, which
can be a useful hidden weapon. Atherton used to bowl a few leg-spinners, as
did another English opening batsman, Bob Barber, a generation before him, to
good effect. Occasional bowling often serves to break up long partnerships.
Gooch always seemed to distrust it. He did not like trying out his own
offerings of slow medium pace, even while Steve Waugh was claiming English
victims with his.
I was glad to see Atherton try Graham Hick's off-breaks against Australia.
They are full length, slow and floating, aggressive because they are
tempting, and add an element of the unexpected to the bowling. England's
main off-spinner this summer, Peter Such, bowled efficiently and
economically, but in the later games it looked as if he saw his job as
containing rather than trapping and he gave the ball little air or flight.
A partner in spin at the other end would have helped him develop his
bowling, as Warne helped off-spinner Tim May in the Australian team. The
more May played, the more he tossed the ball up and the more tricks he
tried, his wicket-keeper poised to profit.
Slow bowlers and quick keepers are mutually flattering. I do not think Ian
Healy is a great keeper, but he is one whose close work with his spinners is
building up confidence all round. A keeper who can bat well, as Healy did,
to England's cost, generates more initiative in a team than a batsman who
can keep wicket if necessary, like Alec Stewart.
Stewart was good-humoured about his failure to take over the captaincy from
Gooch. His light-footed batting was a pleasure to watch and with a steady
batting position, preferably as opener, his defiant shots might demoralise
some of the West Indian fast bowlers.
Stewart is a superb fielder and I would like to see him freed from behind
the stumps. Then he would perform fewer of the premature celebrations and
histrionic appeals at which he excelled this summer.
Both England and Australia used these tactics constantly to try and persuade
umpires to raise the dismissal finger. Though I doubt if they were
responsible for producing what seemed to me to be an unusually high number
of questionable and mistaken decisions, they must have unsettled both
umpires and players.
I regard false appeals as a lower form of sporting life, unworthy of
cricket. Caught behind is one of a modern umpire's nightmares. With so much
medium pace bowling relying on swing and bounce for its wickets, no-one
knows for certain whether the ball touched the bat, re-plays are often no
help and only the umpire can decide, to the inevitable disapproval of either
bowler or batsman.
In his second innings at the Oval, Michael Slater suffered a caught behind
decision where the fatal touch was right up on his elbow and, in sporty mood
with the Ashes safely secured, said: 'It's just one of those things.'
Next time England want good relations but from a differently tilted balance
of success. Their Oval victory, though not crucial and slightly false in a
way, was good for their crushed morale. A touch of pace, a turn of spin and
a thoughtful captain . . .
