FT  27 MAY 93 / Survey of Argentina (2): Breakneck pace / Review of the
economy
ARGENTINA is the latest blue-eyed boy of the Washington international
financial institutions. Economic reform has been at breakneck pace and is
delivering growth - nearly 9 per cent annually over the last two years. The
government's fiscal house has been put in order: tax revenues have increased
threefold since 1989 and the government is running a surplus helped in part
by Latin America's most radical privatisation programme.
This has happened not under a government where opposition is repressed or
muted by the political system, as in Chile during the 1980s and in Mexico,
but in a relatively democratic context. Indeed, some people inside and
outside the country are beginning to talk of an Argentine economic miracle.
On the face of it, the figures on the accompanying chart suggest Argentina
is doing well even when compared with the region's other commonly-cited
economic 'success stories'.
The main threat to the miracle, many people believe, is the lack of
sustainability of the policy that has fixed the exchange rate to the dollar
since April 1991. Argentine inflation is coming down rapidly - consumer
prices rose 17.5 per cent in the year to December and 11.7 per cent in the
year to April - but prices are still rising at a rate which puts Argentine
industry under severe competitive pressure.
Evidence is said to be visible in a current account deficit which widened
rapidly last year to just under 4 per cent of gross domestic product,
increasing the economy's dependency on capital inflows from abroad.
Mr Domingo Cavallo, the economy minister who tied the peso to the dollar
(and secured a law which prevented the central bank from printing money
except when backed by foreign currency inflows), says devaluing the peso
would be 'madness'. The competitive advantages of doing so would evaporate
as inflationary expectations, which are highly sensitive to the exchange
rate in Argentina, rose.
He argues that if foreign owners of capital are worried about Argentina's
exchange rate, they are not showing it. Capital continued to flow into the
country during the first four months of 1993.
Furthermore, the effect of the exchange rate on the competitive position of
Argentine industry is being exaggerated. Lower tariffs on imports have
helped to contain the cost of industry inputs - wholesale prices rose only
3.2 per cent last year.
Mr Cavallo's mind is on other things besides the exchange rate. At the start
of the month his ministry issued its plans for further reform and economic
projections until the end of the current administration's term of office in
1995.
They project 43 per cent growth in GDP for the six years of the Menem term,
by the end of which inflation - as measured by the mean of consumer and
wholesale prices - will have fallen to less than 4 per cent and 1.6m new
jobs will have been created. The economy, Mr Cavallo says, has grown by 18
per cent in the past two years and 670,000 jobs have been created. Inflation
when Mr Menem took office was 200 per cent a month.
His objectives for the future will lay 'a strong emphasis on savings,
investment and jobs', he said in an interview:
Savings: Huge tax evasion used to mean the incentives for savings were
ineffective. The government's fight against evasion of its value added tax
has proved successful and 600,000 companies have been brought into the net.
Now, the government plans to turn its attention to fighting evasion of
income taxes, attempting to bring 2m people, including professionals and
self-employed, into the income tax net and to ensure they pay social
security. This would help raise the domestic savings rate to 20 per cent by
1995 from about 17 per cent now, reducing reliance on foreign savings.
According to the government's projections, the dependence on external
capital peaked last year and will decline steadily until 2000 when it will
fall to zero.
Investment: The government has already provided help for buyers of capital
goods, exempting them from a 10 per cent import tax on imports and provides
domestic producers of capital goods with tax rebates on what they sell.
Employment: There are plans to cut labour taxes. These cuts would deepen
with increasing distance from Buenos Aires, to encourage companies to move
into areas which have so far seen little economic growth. Incentives would
be given to provincial governments to follow central government in
simplifying its tax structure. The government is also encouraging the
state-owned Banco de la Nacion to provide cheaper credit for small
businesses, farmers and fishermen to encourage restructuring in these areas.
Mr Cavallo denies that what is taking shape is an industrial policy. He has
no bureaucrat in his office working on these issues. 'We still have no
industrial policy that helps specific sectors. It's not that we think it's
good or bad. It's because the government doesn't have the ability to do
this.'
The aim is to lay down a programme for the remaining two years of the
government and invite the opposition to come up with its own. The minister
says he wants to increase transparency of economic policy and reduce
uncertainty about a political transition.
In a recent magazine interview, Mr Cavallo not only underlined that the
convertibility plan would be maintained without either him or Mr Menem. He
further said that leading economists of the opposition Radical Party  - such
as Mr Adolfo Sturzenegger and Mr Ricardo Lopez Murphy - would be capable of
running the economy very well.
There are those who believe Mr Cavallo is taking some risks this year, by
pursuing a policy which will avoid recession but heighten the risk of
inflation. Mr Miguel Broda, who runs aneconomic analysis company, says Mr
Cavallo has taken a number of measures over the last half year apparently
intended to avoid a slowing of growth and raise both demand and supply.
Since September 1992 the government has increased social security payments,
given value added tax rebates to exporters and reduced taxes on diesel,
announced increased government expenditures, cut bank reserve requirements
and given tax incentives to producers and buyers of capital goods.
Furthermore, it has promised to use the proceeds from the sale of the state
oil company to clear the government's debts to pensioners. This latter move
will have a strong impact on consumption, Mr Broda predicts.
This could mean that growth, instead of slowing down to 2-3 per cent this
year, will stay above 5 per cent, making realistic the government projection
of 6.5 per cent. The gamble is on inflation: many Argentine companies are
already running at full capacity. Industrial production has increased 34 per
cent since the convertibility plan was introduced and is already running,
says Mr Broda, at the highest level in Argentine history.
Mr Broda suggests that Mr Cavallo is seeking strong economic growth this
year in order to boost tax revenues. This will allow him to reduce taxes on
labour.
He says Mr Cavallo is doing this because 1992 was a lost year for the
government in terms of advancing labour and social security reforms, both of
which are meant to improve flexibility of the labour market and lower the
non-wage costs of hiring labour. Mr Cavallo says both reforms will be in
place by the end of the year.
The social security and pensions reform is with the senate, having passed
the house of deputies with some modifications. These allow, for example, for
people to stay within a state system if they want. The fact that private
pensions will not be compulsory has worried some of the reform's supporters
who see it diluting the reforms's beneficial impact. Mr Cavallo says he is
satisfied: 'We wanted a perfect law. Now it's not 100 per cent but it's a
very good law even with the modifications.'
Meanwhile, although the labour law might not be introduced to Congress
before the October congressional elections, it would be in place by next
year. While there is evidence that some Argentine industry is responding to
low inflation and a strong exchange rate by restructuring, the question is
whether it will be enough; rises in wages have been eroding some of the
productivity gains. At his economic analysis company, Mr Broda wonders aloud
whether Mr Cavallo is betting too high: he now says there is a 50 per cent
chance that the current parity between the dollar and the peso will still be
in place by the end of 1994. But if Mr Cavallo wins his bet, the gains could
be dramatic.
The government is projecting 54 per cent growth between now and the end of
the century. It is too early yet to talk of an Argentine economic miracle,
though one cannot be ruled out.
At worst, it may settle into moderate inflation and moderate growth: no
miracle, perhaps, but a huge improvement on the 1980s.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                        MAIN ECONOMIC INDICATORS
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   Mexico      Argentina     Chile
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Inflation (Apr-Apr) (cpi)           10.7          11.7       12.0
Growth 1992                          2.6           9.0       10.4
GDP 1992 (Dollars bn)              283.0         220.0       36.0
Trade balance (Dollars bn)         -20.5          -2.8       +0.8
Current account % GDP               -6.0          -3.2       -3.0
Reserves end 92 (Dollars bn)*       19.2          11.0        9.7
Public external debt (bn)           70.0          62.5       18.4
Investment (% GDP)                  20.7          16.7       21.3
Domestic savings (% GDP)            13.8          15.2       19.6
Fiscal balance (% GDP)**            +0.5             0       -0.5
Int rate (90-day depos)%            22.0          12.0       18.0
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
* Including Gold;
** Excluding privatisations; + surplus; - deficit
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: CEAL cited by Ambito Financiero May 12 1993
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
