FT  18 MAR 93 / Arts: Flawed 'Chatsky' - Theatre
There is a particular excitement in encountering a little-known classic; and
there is an extra buzz when it has been re-translated by Anthony Burgess.
Though the playwright, Alexander Griboyedov (1795-1829), is hardly a
household name, Gore ot Uma (or Woe for Wit) is his best-known play; Burgess
has re-named it after its protagonist, Chatsky, and has given it a Wildean
subtitle: The Importance of Being Stupid. Everything about it is
interesting, and I am glad to have made its acquaintance. But I find its
performance flawed and was often irritated by the intrusive cleverness of
Burgess's translation.
Chatsky, returning from years of travel and surveying petty Russian society,
has much about him of Pushkin's Eugene Onegin - Byronic glamour, polish,
disdain. He is a doomed Romantic in his liberal ideals, his devotion to
literature, and his love for Sophie. Doomed, because petty Russian society
cannot be doing with such loftiness, and because Sophie has committed
herself in his absence to the perfidious Molchalin (an ambitious creep who,
behind her back, pursues her maid Liza). Funnily, then bitterly, the play
depicts the brand of philistinism, known in Russian as poshlust (triviality,
vulgarity), that would later be pilloried by authors from Gogol to Nabokov.
What the textbooks praise as 'the naturalism and pithiness of Griboyedov's
dialogue' is sometimes present in Burgess's version - as when Chatsky,
reproaching Sophie, says: 'But the past doesn't die. Alive in me, I thought
it was alive in you.' Or when a minor character bleakly remarks to nobody in
particular: 'I'm getting bored with this same old pantomime, acting the
happy husband.'
But when Chatsky talks of someone's 'debilitous intellection' and says 'His
brain is just an etiolated grub in an inedible apple,' though we chortle, he
becomes as remote from us as from everyone else onstage. And then there is
Burgess's clever-clogs use of rhyming pentameters. When a word like
'fractions' suddenly looms out for no good reason, you know you have to wait
until, at the end of the next line, you get clobbered by 'actions'. Sophie
says '-ish' (very 20th-century Brit) so that 'dish' can come chiming in.
Behind this kind of flashy parlance, Chatsky and 19th-century Russia grow
dim.
Colin Firth, dressed as if he had stepped straight out of Gericault, is a
pale, sardonic, unaffected Chatsky, and he circumnavigates the rhymes to
marvellously natural effect. All he lacks is the heroic blaze of Romantic
isolation. When he describes Sophie as having 'no sense of humour', I did
not recognise Jemma Redgrave. Her Sophie, played with numerous tiny actorly
effects of the eyes and voice, is awfully reasonable. She has no cruelty, no
perfidy. Just a nice girl in a tricky situation, she is so fake-earnest that
even her beauty becomes dull.
As her father Famusov, the play's most blatant philistine and hypocrite,
Dinsdale Landen gives a performance exactly in tune with Burgess's
translation: robust, rosy, ranting, roaring, rasping. He rattles off three
sentences in a single breath, then draws out a single syllable to
extortionate lengths. His eyes gleam, he is all provincial force and energy.
Here is busy Character Acting with a vengeance. (A pity so many of his
consonants are muzzy.) Jane Freeman, Rosalind Knight, and Murray Melvin give
less obtrusive performances that do more to bring this petty, snobbish world
to life.
In short, several different acting styles are at work here, and the
director, Jonathan Kent, has not fused them into a single convincing stage
world. Tim Hatley's several sets, claustrophobic and surreal, exaggerate the
bizarrerie of Griboyedov's satire. This production has turned Woe for Wit
into Chatsky without making it live as a play.
At the Almeida Theatre until April 24; then on a six week National Tour.
Sponsored by AT&amp;T; OnStage
