FT  09 AUG 93 / Opel hits back at VW claim
VOLKSWAGEN'S 'belated admission' that its employees had had confidential
General Motors documents in their possession, and had destroyed them, would
be of special interest to criminal investigators, Adam Opel, GM's German
subsidiary, said yesterday.
VW's admission, it added, put paid to claims that Opel had been engaged in a
campaign to defame the Wolfsburg concern and Germany by alleging industrial
espionage by Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, VW's new production
director.
The potentially damaging admissions are believed to be contained in a
written statement sent by Mr Lopez to public prosecutors investigating
industrial espionage suspicions against him and three VW colleagues, also
former GM employees.
'Based on the present status of the investigation, it is apparent that in a
concerted action thousands of pages of highly sensitive data concerning cost
structures, manufacturing and future planning were stolen,' Opel claimed.
The US-owned company was responding to a statement published after a crisis
meeting of the VW supervisory board in Wolfsburg on Friday, which restated
its 'unaltered support' for Mr Lopez, former global purchasing director at
GM.
The 20 board members, who appoint and oversee the work of group executives,
declared that a thorough examination of evidence from Mr Lopez had shown
nothing to warrant charges of industrial espionage.
However, the statement said possibly sensitive information had been
destroyed by former GM employees, working for VW since March.
The documents had been destroyed to avoid any danger of their circulating
inside VW, it said. 'No possibly secret documents left the possession of
former GM employees and came into the possession of VW.'
Opel retorted yesterday that the information was technically and legally in
VW hands. The attempt to suggest it was shredded in the interests of Opel
was an untenable attempt to conceal the possession of a competitor's
secrets, the company added.
Spying controversy, Page 2
VW versus old school, Page 26
