FT  27 AUG 93 / Leading Article: Big trouble at Volkswagen
AS GERMANS yesterday witnessed the astonishing sight of police officers
swooping upon the premises of Volkswagen and the homes of VW executives,
they must be reflecting that nothing the German car-maker has done this year
has been in character.
Witness the decision to bring in as chairman the hard-driving Austrian, Mr
Ferdinand Piech, with a remit to jolt VW from its losses and lethargy; the
recruitment from General Motors of the flamboyant Basque, Mr Jose Ignacio
Lopez de Arriortua, as VW's production director; and finally, the mix of
scorn, bluster and diplomacy with which VW responded to charges that Mr
Lopez's value to his new employer had been augmented by an unspecified
quantity of information and material stolen from GM. It is as if a portly
middle-aged man, after a lifetime of grey suits and regular habits, had
taken to designer sports-wear and dark glasses.
Such changes in regime are always dangerous; indeed they sometimes lead to
heart attacks. That does not mean they can be avoided; it means they must be
properly planned and carefully supervised.
The case for ambitious change at VW was and is beyond argument. Its costs
are too high and its speed of reaction too slow. When those weaknesses were
tested by a recession in the company's domestic market, the result was a
collapse in profits. Mr Piech seemed like the man to meet the challenge. He
has vision and a track record in managing change.
Serious mistakes
It is time, however, for him to acknowledge that he has made serious
mistakes. Whatever the basis of the allegations against Mr Lopez, he was
unwise to place such heavy reliance upon the talents of a single individual
to effect a cultural transformation in the way VW makes cars and deals with
suppliers. Mr Lopez may be a star, or a 'change agent' in the business
school jargon, but change on this scale requires consent, which cannot be
produced only by force. It also goes without saying that in demanding
painful change, the proponents have to be unimpeachable in terms of their
own integrity. If not, they will be exposed, quite possibly by those whose
interests are threatened.
Mr Piech's other big error has been the way he has dealt with GM's
allegations. The right thing for companies to do in these circumstances is
to remain calm and to announce that such grave charges will be fully
investigated. Instead, Mr Piech responded first with counter-allegation
(that GM had planted documents on VW), with intemperate words and finally
with an attempt to mend fences, using the good offices of Mr Gunter Rexrodt,
the economics minister. VW's public relations, veering wildly between surly
silence and noisy expostulation, has been a disaster.
Deep gloom
Mr Rexrodt himself cannot survey the affair with anything but the deepest
gloom. His mediation has had no effect and should not have been attempted in
the first place. His motive, to prevent further damage to the image of
German industry, and especially to VW, which is in part a state-owned
company, is understandable, but it is not the job of government ministers to
intervene when a serious criminal investigation is in prospect. The
modernisation of German industry, which must include increased transparency
in the way that companies are governed, requires that ministers play a more
restrained role.
Probably the most encouraging aspect of yesterday's events is that they show
the state prosecution system, initially sluggish in its response to GM's
allegations, to be somewhat zestful in its determination to get to the
bottom of the Lopez affair. It is now in the interests of VW, German
industry and Germany itself that this process be completed as speedily and
effectively as possible.
It cannot yet be predicted what that means for Mr Lopez or for Mr Piech; the
VW board will have to judge where the best interest of the shareholders
lies. For the company's suppliers, whose excessively high costs were to be
the target of the Piech-Lopez onslaught, it is a time to marvel at the chaos
and to remember that when this particular battle is over, someone from
Wolfsburg will be back, with a demand that they cut their prices, or else.
