FT  30 MAR 93 / UK Company News: Right people, right plan but at the wrong
time - Why Argos closed its furniture arm
ARGOS' recent decision to close its pilot Chesterman furniture was an
unfortunate, if not unexpected, blow for the catalogue retailer, which has
many admirers among the UK's shoppers and in the City of London.
On top of the Pounds 18.9m closure costs and losses last year, which pushed
Argos' pre-tax profit down 15 per cent to Pounds 52.9m, Chesterman's demise
was the more unfortunate because it was the retailer's first diversification
away from catalogue showrooms since its demerger in 1990 from BAT
Industries.
The Chesterman concept seemed very attractive when it was first researched
at the tail end of the consumer spending boom in 1989. It involved
out-of-town superstores of 30,000 to 40,000 sq ft, selling quality furniture
to 'empty nesters', parents aged 35 to 55 whose children were leaving home.
The project was also well-executed. Visitors to the four stores in Mill Hill
in London, Chatham in Kent, Fareham in Hampshire and in Bristol, liked what
they found, according to the company's research.
However, the timing was all wrong. After initial research, the project had
to be put on hold when Sir James Goldsmith's Hoylake consortium made its
Pounds 13.3bn bid for BAT Industries, then Argos's parent company, in 1989.
By the time BAT had demerged Argos as part of its bid defence, and the
company was able to launch Chesterman, the UK retailing climate had
undergone what Mr Mike Smith, Argos' chief executive, called a 'fundamental
sea change'.
'I can't fault the management or staff involved in Chesterman,' said Mr Bob
Stewart, finance director. 'The problems were in building up customer
awareness, and that this area of up-market furniture has been one of the
worst affected in the recession.'
Timing has perhaps not been Argos' strong point. It emerged from what was
the Green Shield trading stamp company in 1973 - just as the oil crisis,
raging inflation and a downturn in consumer spending was making life very
difficult for retailers.
But the instincts of Mr Richard Tompkins, founder of the Green Shield
empire, proved correct. Argos began expanding rapidly from 1975 and by 1979,
when ill health forced Mr Tompkins to sell the chain to BAT for Pounds 35m,
it had 91 showrooms and a turnover of Pounds 113m.
Eleven years later, when Argos regained independence - now with 250
showrooms and Pounds 900m turnover - the UK was once more sliding into
recession. Profits fell from Pounds 75.1m in 1990 to Pounds 62.1m last year.
This week's results, however, give grounds for optimism. Stripping out the
Chesterman costs, pre-tax profits rose to Pounds 71.8m, compared with a
restated Pounds 63.8m last year. Turnover topped Pounds 1bn for the first
time.
It is not widely appreciated that Argos is the UK's leading retailer of
small electrical appliances, as well as sofa beds, telephones and keep fit
equipment. It occupies second place in jewellery and DIY tools.
Retailing analysts view the business as one with considerable underlying
strength - thanks to its success in keeping costs down and introducing new
systems, as well as its pre-eminent position in its market - and feel it is
well-placed to benefit from any upturn in consumer spending.
Moreover, the business is far from mature. At present it has 302 stores, but
has a 'pragmatic' target of more than 500 stores in the UK, having
identified 600 potential sites. At a rate of 20 or 25 new openings a year,
the chain should be expanding well into the next decade.
Mr John Richards, stores analyst at NatWest Securities, believes an annual
growth rate of 12 per cent at operating profits level is possible over the
next five years.
But, however competent Argos is at running, and growing its core business,
sooner or later it will need to diversify.
Mr Smith says important lessons have been learnt from Chesterman - that the
gap between research and launching a new format has to be shortened, project
fundamentals have to be constantly re-examined, and future diversifications
will have to be closer to Argos' core areas of competence and involve lower
overheads.
Continental Europe is unlikely to see Argos catalogue showrooms opening in
the near future, as, says Mr Smith, 'The rules of the game there are
difficult to understand, let alone execute.' He also sees overseas
acquisitions as highly risky, so the UK remains the likely area for
diversification.
After the unhappy experience with Chesterman, however, it may be a year or
two before Argos is prepared to put its head above the parapet again.
