FT  20 JAN 93 / BA shareholders concerned at combined top jobs: Doubts on
Sir Colin Marshall holding roles of chairman and chief executive
LARGE shareholders in British Airways have told the company they have strong
doubts about the wisdom of appointing Sir Colin Marshall to the posts of
both chairman and chief executive when the present chairman, Lord King,
retires in July.
Lord King, who is a non-executive chairman, has said that Sir Colin, now
deputy chairman and chief executive, will replace him when he retires.
However, it has not been made clear that he will hold both posts.
The shareholders said they were particularly disturbed at press reports over
the weekend that discussed whether senior management had known of the 'dirty
tricks' campaign against Virgin Atlantic which led to BA paying its
competitor Pounds 610,000 and making a public apology.
The shareholders said they expressed their views in very frank terms to Mr
Derek Stevens, BA finance director and board member, who phoned them earlier
this week to hear their views about the affair. 'I had the distinct
impression it was not what he wanted to hear,' one shareholder said. Mr
Stevens made no commitments during the conversation, they said.
Several shareholders said they are drafting letters to the board expressing
concern about appointing Sir Colin to the dual posts and about the adverse
commercial impact which further revelations could have.
'This is the sort of thing which points up the need for checks and balances
on the board,' said one.
One shareholder said the allegations of dirty tricks against Virgin had been
broached at a meeting with Sir Colin and Mr Stevens last July. At the time,
Sir Colin gave assurances that the matter had been investigated and that
there was nothing in the allegations.
The shareholder said Sir Colin had also responded to concerns about the
combination of the chairman and chief executive roles by offering assurances
about the independence of the non-executive directors.
Shareholders said they told Mr Stevens they expected the board to order a
thorough and independent review of the 'dirty tricks' events.
'I told them that not only must they act but that they must be seen to be
acting,' one shareholder said.
While shareholders are not demanding any resignations, they are seeking a
full investigation into the matter. 'My big worry is that there are
allegations that have not yet come out,' said one shareholder.
Institutions fear that Virgin Atlantic's chairman, Mr Richard Branson, may
exploit information not yet public to demand commercial concessions from BA.
However, shareholders said that while they were concerned about whether the
matter raised questions about the ability of BA management, they said that
so far, they have been pleased with the board's performance.
Lex, Page 20
