FT  26 NOV 93 / Hitler believed invasion would be unnecessary: Second world
war files released
Adolf Hitler believed late in 1941 that Britain suffered such severe
internal divisions that it could be defeated without an invasion, according
to previously unpublished documents from the Public Record Office.
The material, released as part of the open government initiative led by Mr
William Waldegrave, the public service minister, involves 1,273 files which
additionally appear to confirm that as early as 1942 the British government
knew about deaths in the Auschwitz concentration camp.
The documents itemise a report from the Japanese ambassador in Berlin on
German war plans as told to him by Joachim von Ribbentrop, Hitler's foreign
minister, and give insights into novel code-breaking initiatives in Britain
which reveal that the Fuhrer believed that conditions in Britain were bad
and thought that as a result of Germany's future operations Britain might be
beaten without an invasion.
He cited the split in the Conservative party, the lack of confidence in
Winston Churchill, and the revolutionary ideas of the Labour party as making
internal conditions quite difficult.
Hitler's ambitious plans for world domination in 1941 are set out in the
files with details of an intended German attack on Crete in March 1941. The
report also says Churchill received disturbing reports on deaths in German
prison camps in August 1942, which revealed that 6,829 men and 1,525 women
had died at Auschwitz. One report said: 'It appears that although typhus is
still rife at Auschwitz, new arrivals continue to come in.'
The class of records published contains actual intelligence documents, with
their cover notes, passed to Churchill, or in his absence to the Lord Privy
Seal or deputy prime minister, complete with annotations and minuting.
Information was passed to the prime minister by the Government Code and
Cypher School, established in 1919 to study the methods of cypher
communications used by foreign powers.
The documents are available at the Public Record Office in Kew, London, from
today.
