FT  08 OCT 93 / Ruhe call for partnership with Moscow
A CALL for the Nato alliance to develop a 'new strategic partnership' with
Russia to meet Moscow's security interests came yesterday from Mr Volker
Ruhe, the German defence minister.
In a speech reflecting growing western concern at the pressure on Mr Boris
Yeltsin, the Russian president, from his own military establishment, Mr Ruhe
told senior officers of the armed forces: 'We will only achieve stability
with Russia, not against it.'
His statement amounts to a retreat from his earlier position, in which he
stressed the need for rapid enlargement of Nato membership to include Poland
and other central European countries - to the obvious anger of the Russian
military. Mr Ruhe repeated his call for a 'transfer of stability' by the
Nato alliance to the east, linked to extension of the European integration
process to include east European countries.
'Preventive crisis management means for us Germans above all extending the
zone of stability in the west as far as possible to the east,' he told an
officers' annual meeting in Mainz. 'Germany has no interest in remaining the
eastern frontier state of the western zone of prosperity. We are the ones
who feel the effects of instability in the east most immediately.'
This time, however, Mr Ruhe stressed the need to take account of Russia's
security interests. 'Russia will not and must not be excluded from the
European (integration) process,' he said.
'It is striving for a new strategic partnership with Nato and a
political-economic partnership with the European Community.
'We must take into account the extremely difficult situation of the forces
for reform in Russia.'
His stance reflects western analysis that Mr Yeltsin has been forced to bow
to Russian military pressure on several occasions recently, twice in letters
to Nato allies, in order to ensure military support in his confrontation
with the Russian parliament.
The Russian leader sent a personal letter to government leaders in the US,
Britain, France and Germany warning against an expansion of Nato to the
east, without taking account of Russian security concerns. He has also
sought to raise the ceilings on its forces in the Caucasus region and breach
the terms of the conventional forces disarmament treaty with the west.
Mr Ruhe has run into sharp criticism in Germany and Poland over earlier
calls for rapid Nato membership, and also for joint Polish-German exercises.
The more careful tone in his latest policy statement appears to indicate
that concern about the military influence in Moscow has now reached the
planning staff of the armed forces.
