FT  12 JUN 93 / Travel Books: Two views of the Highlands - Chloe Chard
enjoys a volume which reunites Johnson and Boswell in Scotland
JOHNSON AND BOSWELL IN SCOTLAND: A JOURNEY TO THE HEBRIDES edited by Pat
Rogers Yale Pounds 25, 330 pages
TRAVELLERS, however jaded, usually see the need to enliven their accounts of
unfamiliar places with a sense of curiosity and excitement; their attitude
is the opposite of that affected by the Matabele emissaries, in Stanlake
Samkange's Zimbabwean novel On Trial For My Country, who have been told not
to 'keep on saying au] au] au] in amazement'. On seeing the sea for the
first time at Cape Town, one of them remarks simply: 'Ah] Today the river is
in flood'.
Dr Johnson, in remote regions, has no hesitation in exclaiming at
'mountains, waterfalls, peculiar manners; in short, things which he had not
seen before'. Johnson and Boswell in Scotland accentuates the drama of
travel by supplying two narratives to read alongside each other: Johnson's
Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland (1775) and Boswell's Journal of a
Tour to the Hebrides (1785). While Johnson is busy observing 'peculiar
manners' and the like, Boswell is entertained and elated at being able to
view his thoroughly urbanised friend and mentor in an unaccustomed setting.
The pleasures of this double narrative are evident when the travellers come
across their first Highland hut. Johnson is full of investigatory fervour.
Luckily, 'to enter a habitation without leave, seems to be not considered
here as rudeness or intrusion'. 'True pastoral hospitality' prompts the
peasant woman inside the hut to invite them to drink whisky.
As Johnson gathers information, Boswell is sharply aware of the social
comedy generated by the situation. His companion's interest in primitive
architecture prompts him to ask where the woman sleeps, and she answers
'with a tone of emotion, saying she was afraid we wanted to go to bed to
her'. Rather cruelly, they derive great amusement from 'this coquetry of so
wretched a being'; each claims banteringly that it is the other who has
'alarmed the poor woman's virtue'.
Some of the narrative tension of the book is, of course, derived from the
close - but intermittently combative - relationship between the two men.
Returning from the Western Isles, Boswell is overcome with apprehension, as
he anticipates the meeting between his father, Lord Auchinleck, and Johnson,
his surrogate father: 'I was very anxious that all should be well; and
begged of my friend to avoid three topics; Whiggism, Presbyterianism, and -
Sir John Pringle.'
Johnson periodically annoys Boswell (a lowland Scot) by his rudeness about
Scotland. At one point, he declares that, until the Union with England, the
tables of the Scots 'were coarse as the feasts of Esquimeaux, and their
houses filthy as the cottages of Hottentots'.
Such analogies with far-flung regions are frequent, and not always
disparaging: once the two men reach the Highlands, they both excitedly
compare the scenes before them to the wilds of America. Boswell finds their
visit to one village 'much the same as being with a tribe of Indians', to
which Johnson replies: 'Yes, sir; but not so terrifying.'
The desire to leave dull familiarity behind is never expressed here quite as
strongly as it is in EM Forster's A Room with a View, when the heroine, in a
Florentine pensione, laments: 'It might be London'. Nonetheless, Johnson
seems gratified when his experience of feudal hospitality convinces him that
'the fictions of the Gothic romances were not so remote from credibility as
they are now thought'.
His pleasure in new and surprising sights is tempered by a vehement
repudiation of fantastic travel literature - the tales of monstrous beings
that proliferate in medieval travel narratives, and survive, in the 18th
century, in wild speculations about Patagonian giants and other curious
phenomena. Johnson opposes all such 'credulity', and is resolutely sceptical
about the poems of Ossian - works published by James Macpherson in the
1760s, in the guise of translations from a Gaelic epic.
Delight in novelty, moreover, cannot entirely deaden the awareness that 'to
live in perpetual want of little things, is a state not indeed of torture,
but of constant vexation'. Many contemporary travellers to the third world -
or to the English countryside on a Sunday - will sympathise with this
measured response to the absence of a shop on Skye.
In some other ways, Johnson's narrative may seem alien to late
twentieth-century readers: he feels none of the constraints of tourism,
which began to trouble travellers to Italy a few decades later, and his
Journey lacks any concept of a Byronic urge to move ever onwards, or to
place one's self-identity at risk. (Revealingly, he describes with approval
how, in ancient Gaul, Caesar came along and 'put a stop to' the engagingly
feckless plans of the Helvetians to wander off 'they knew not whither'.)
Boswell's narrative has more in common with contemporary travel writing,
simply because it often focuses on the personal feelings of the traveller
himself: he describes his fits of gloom, made worse by the experience of
being trapped on islands by bad weather.
Johnson, however, in his resolute pursuit of knowledge, touches on many
questions relevant to current debates about cultural difference. He is
scornful of the moral relativism that justifies any form of human behaviour
by showing it to be acceptable in some exotic region.
Montesquieu, for example, 'to support polygamy' tells you of the island of
Formosa, where there are ten women born for one man. The trouble with this
argument, Johnson cheerfully points out, is that 'he had but to suppose
another island, where there are ten men born for one woman, and so make a
marriage between them'.
Johnson and Boswell in Scotland provides immensely pleasurable reading; its
delights are increased by the thoughtful choice of illustrations, and only
slightly marred by the decision to cut Boswell's text, and supply the barest
minimum of explanatory notes.
Within the domains of literary criticism and of history, travel writing is
usually appropriated either by old-fashioned anecdotalists, snobbishly
preoccupied with the antics of aristocrats, or by proponents of the new
critical orthodoxy of colonial studies - which, as it becomes absorbed into
established systems of academic deference, is in danger of losing its
initial intellectual energy. Accessible and attractive editions of travel
writings, such as this, throw open the field to a wider readership, and
encourage a more diverse range of approaches.
