FT  22 NOV 93 / Leading Article: Decision time for Thorp
Within weeks, or even perhaps days, the government is likely to tell British
Nuclear Fuels whether it can press the start button at Thorp, its nuclear
reprocessing plant at Sellafield. The decision, one of the most
controversial facing the government, seems almost certain to be yes:
ministers have already said they are 'minded' to grant a licence. Once Thorp
starts to re-process fuel, there will be no turning back. The plant will be
radioactive, and subject to hefty decommissioning costs.
The alternative to approval is a further public inquiry, which could last
more than a year. But BNF claims this would be tantamount to abandoning
Thorp, as foreign customers would walk away to French rivals. Continuing
uncertainty over Thorp would also complicate and perhaps even endanger the
government's planned review of nuclear power.
So far as the government is concerned, the only outstanding issue is Thorp's
financial viability. A public consultation early this year concluded that
its radioactive emissions would not pose a significant threat to health or
the environment. But in going through a further round of consultations, the
government has acknowledged the concern that pressing ahead with Thorp could
land the UK taxpayer with a larger bill than stopping the project now.
Dry storage
Since the government approved Thorp's construction in 1977, the arguments
for reprocessing used nuclear fuel rods have diminished. The alternative of
'dry storage' - containing the waste without further treatment - may now be
cheaper. Scottish Nuclear, one of Thorp's UK customers, wants to switch to
dry storage for part of its waste, arguing that it could save millions of
pounds a year. Thorp's critics have questioned whether BNF's overseas
customers, notably the Japanese and German utilities, might make the same
choice.
BNF says not. At the start of the second consultation, it published
projections claiming that the UK would lose at least Pounds 900m by
abandoning Thorp and switching to dry storage. Foreign customers were not
only keen for Thorp to start, but were locked in with tight penalty clauses,
it argued.
BNF's case is plausible. However, it assumes that customers abide by the
letter of their contracts with BNF throughout the plant's life. The real
risk, Thorp's critics say, is that some foreign customers might pull out and
contest their obligation to pay compensation, leaving the plant running
below capacity.
Shortcoming
The consultation's most serious shortcoming is that the government has not
commissioned any independent audit of BNF's projections. Nor has it produced
its own estimates of the costs of dry storage, or a clear assessment of the
implications of the Thorp decision for UK electricity bills.
Those sums might well come out in Thorp's favour - but if they have been
done, they have not been made public. It is known that the Treasury has
examined the figures, but given its record in projecting nuclear costs - it
has consistently underestimated the costs of building and decommissioning
nuclear reactors - that is insufficiently comforting.
Before any announcement on Thorp, it is essential that government reflects
carefully upon these points. Ministers will be right to weigh carefully the
difficulties of abandoning a plant on which Pounds 2.8bn has already been
spent, particularly since to do so would involve breaking commitments to
Japan and Germany and would weaken, perhaps fatally, BNF, which is a British
high technology company with some potential. Moreover, to concede a further
public inquiry would play into the hands of protestors like Greenpeace,
whose aim is not just to stop Thorp, but to obliterate the UK nuclear power
industry.
If the government remains minded to let Thorp start work, it is essential
that ministers provide a full and rigorous validation of the economic case
for doing so. The history of nuclear power in the UK contains some of the
government's most expensive industrial mistakes, all of them based upon
inadequate analysis of costs. As Britain's nuclear industry looks forward to
its next, important stage of development, possibly to include another
attempt at privatisation, the last thing it needs is an inadequately
verified decision in favour of Thorp.
