FT  14 SEP 93 / Technology: Doubts about digital television - Technically
Speaking
MOST people see the word 'digital' and assume it represents an improvement
over an existing analogue technology. So the interested - but non-technical
 -observer might applaud the Independent Television Commission's (ITC)
strong expressions of interest in the digital transmission of broadcast TV
signals.
In the case of the BBC, ITV and Channel 4, however, the general view would
probably be wrong.
Before we pursue the digital route, we need to ask some questions about what
such a radically new transmission system will do for viewers and
broadcasters.
The existing analogue technology is very good at transmitting the signal
accurately; modern TV receivers deliver very high-quality sound and
pictures. They are also highly reliable. Digital TV would improve these
qualities very little, if at all.
In the long run, digital transmission would allow broadcasters to cram many
more channels into the frequencies currently allocated to terrestrial
broadcasters. But getting these extra channels will require a costly and
complicated migration from the current transmission system to the new one.
The cost of digital sets will probably always be higher than analogue
receivers, which have simpler electronics and almost half a century of
manufacturing experience behind them.
There is an even greater problem caused by the extraordinary difficulty of
making the changeover. All the TV sets in the UK are incompatible with a
digital transmission technology. Until they have been replaced, or
supplemented by digital equipment, broadcasters will have to simulcast both
digital and analogue signals, using more radio spectrum capacity, not less.
Moreover, to simulcast all four terrestrial channels, broadcasters will
probably have to use channels reserved for video cassette recorders. Large
number of VCRs will have to be retuned. Thames Television, in its failed bid
for the fifth television channel, estimated the cost of this across the UK
would exceed Pounds 75m. Who will pay?
The ITC admits the only incentive is the prospect of more channels. But for
less money, consumers can already receive large numbers of extra channels
via satellite. If many more channels are wanted - and the evidence is that
no more than 40-50 per cent of households do - the best way to supply them
is via satellite services.
Digital satellite services, offering large numbers of new channels to dish
owners and to cable subscribers, will be available much sooner than digital
channels from ground-based transmitters. Similarly, new cable technologies,
which allow the carriage of 150 or more channels on cable systems already in
use in the US, will provide choice that will never be available via
over-the-air TV.
The ITC should explain why it feels able to contemplate the use of new
channels for simulcasting, when it insists that the proposed fifth
terrestrial channel is allocated to the frequencies reserved for VCRs.
A new channel, available to everybody in 1994-95, is a much better
proposition than the vague prospect of digital services in the first decade
of the next century requiring every home to buy a new TV set at a cost of
about Pounds 800.
The ITC's document on digital transmission is a measured and cautious piece
of advocacy, but it still falls into the trap of thinking that advances in
feasible technology translate rapidly into opportunities for commercial
enterprises. The last time the ITC tried to push a new technology, it
licensed the technically advanced British Satellite Broadcasting, only to
see it fail within a few years.
Before the ITC makes any decision on digital transmission, it should ask the
leading electronic retailers how many Pounds 800 TV sets they would sell if
the TVs had essentially the same features as those selling at Pounds 400.
The author manages projects in setting up new television channels.
