FT  02 NOV 93 / Survey of The Slovak Republic (5): Odd man out with a will
of steel / Profile of Vladimir Meciar Pioneered Slovak statehood - now he
must make it work
VLADIMIR MECIAR will take his place in the history books as the man who led
Slovaks to independent statehood.
But 11 months after jubilant crowds ushered in the Slovak republic the
stocky 51 year old Prime Minister's opinion poll rating is languishing as
doubts accumulate over his ability to lead this nation of 5.3m towards a
prosperous, secure and democratic future.
Last month, in an ornate, gilded room in the former Archbishop's palace
which now functions as the seat of government, Mr Meciar parried questions
about his ability to retain loyal support and political allies, his attitude
to ethnic minorities and more powerful neighbours, his prospects for the
economy and his vision of Slovakia's future.
On the hustings he jabs the air with his finger, cracks jokes and extracts
belly laughs from the crowd. In private he is extraordinarily immobile, big
but not tall, with a strong handshake and expressionless face in which only
his eyes seem to move. During 90 minutes of conversation there were no
flashes of inspiration, no vivid phrases, no clear vision of the future
Slovakia. Just flat words.
'We have four priorities; to establish a democratic system and democratic
institutions; introduce market mechanisms; guarantee the security of the
state and ensure integration with the European Community.' Slovakia, he
adds, is in transition from one system to another 'in the midst of a
dangerous river and moving from one bank to another'. It might take five
years to get to the other side, he adds.
Buoyed up by the strong showing of the former communist-era parties in the
recent Polish elections, the Party of the Democratic Left (SDL), led by the
youthful Mr Peter Weiss, is pressing for early general elections and hoping
to administer the coup de grace to the current prime minister and his
demoralised HZDS.
Is Mr Meciar worried by the left-wing threat? Would he be prepared to
become, say, Minister of Transport, in a future coalition government led by
the former communists in which the HZDS was relegated to a junior role?
He is not amused by the question. 'All this talk of elections is premature.
If there are to be elections I will decide the timing, and the results will
not turn out as my opponents think. The HZDS is a pragmatic, non-ideological
party of the centre. It is true we are under attack from left and right, but
we are a stabilising factor in Slovak politics.
'At the last election my opponents accused me of being an StB and a KGB
agent and a rapist of small children, but my party went on to become the
largest party with 38 per cent of the vote and we formed the government, not
them.'
His reply revealed the kind of steely will to power which his various
political opponents have underestimated at their peril before. Mr Meciar has
shown in the past that he is never more dangerous than when his back is
against the wall. A former close political aide describes him as ' a genius
at outmanoeuvering his rivals, a player without rules who cannot tolerate
peers and is driven by his complex personality into a confrontational
approach both at home and abroad.'
Appointed as premier of the Slovak part of the Czech and Slovak Federal
Republic after the June 1990 elections, he was deposed nine months later
when he lost a vote of confidence in the Slovak parliament. Behind the vote
lay dislike of his authoritarian ways among the liberal and Christian
Democratic members of Slovakia's People against Violence, the anti-communist
equivalent to the Czech Civic Forum, and disquiet in Prague at the
increasingly separatist tone of his pronouncements.
Deprived of power, Mr Meciar became an implacable foe of the new government
led by Mr Jan Carnogursky, and whipped up growing popular resentment against
both the 'morally superior' attitudes displayed by the federal President, Mr
Vaclav Havel, and the Bratislava government which he portrayed as unable to
stand up for Slovak economic and political interests.
As unemployment in the Slovak arms factories and other big plants dependent
on Comecon trade soared to four times the Czech level, the tireless Meciar
barnstormed the country, whipping up nationalist fervour and promising to
raise Slovakia's status in the world, complete the controversial Gabcikovo
dam project on the River Danube and improve the economic and moral wellbeing
of its people.
Portraying himself as a martyr sacrificed on the altar of Czech arrogance
and Slovak government weakness, the one-time boxer and largely self-educated
enterprise lawyer, reached a peak of popularity at the general elections of
June 1992 after addressing packed crowds in pre-electoral meetings.
After his first post-election meeting with Mr Vaclav Klaus, the victor in
the Czech elections of the same date, it became clear that the self-assured,
fanatically pro-market Czech leader preferred a quick divorce from Slovakia
to endless recriminations and a loose confederal arrangement which would
have left the Czech republic footing much of the bill for Slovakia's greater
internal autonomy and higher profile abroad.
Both men had a unique opportunity to appraise the other. Whatever his
private thoughts Mr Klaus has taken care never to criticise his Slovak
counterpart in personal terms, and makes it understood that, whatever his
reservations, he fears that whoever comes after Mr Meciar could well be
worse.
Mr Klaus, who has a Slovak wife and campaigned for Slovak votes during the
1992 election campaign, recognised that Mr Meciar faced a harder task, with
far fewer resources, in building his new state.
The Slovak leader acknowledges that 'founding the new state brought many
problems. The Czechs started preparing the technical basis for the divorce
in January 1991 but Slovakia only began from July 1992, While the Czechs
inherited the federal institutions there were no equivalents to these Prague
based institutions in Slovakia.' At the same time the divorce left the new
Slovak state with a legacy of over-sized arms, heavy engineering and
consumer goods factories orientated towards the defunct Comecon market.
Since January, he points out, the government has gained international
recognition, joined a raft of international institutions, including the IMF,
World Bank and EBRD, set up a new independent central bank, created a
separate national currency, and forged a national army.
But, after recounting the achievements of the last few months, Mr Meciar
complained that all this had been done against the background of what he
described as 'a campaign of hatred against Slovakia and a wave of hostile
propaganda which assaulted Slovakia and its official representatives'. When
questioned about Slovakia's image, however, Slovak diplomats ruefully
concede that in many cases the problem has been created by Mr Meciar's own
abrasive style. The issues which have provoked most international criticism
include the unilateral decision to go ahead with completion of the Gabcikovo
dam despite Hungarian objections, and insensitivity to the human and other
rights of ethnic Hungarian and gypsy minorities. These are all complex
issues with no easy solution. They cry out for quiet diplomacy and a search
for reasonable compromise.
But subtle diplomacy and a desire for compromise are not easily associated
with Mr Meciar's confrontational approach to political problems. Like most
of the grey men in his cabinet and Mrs Anna Nagyova, his blonde special
adviser on international as well as domestic issues, Mr Meciar speaks no
foreign languages, apart from the closely related Czech and a smattering of
Russian. But he insists on representing Slovakia abroad whenever possible.
In an international setting he always looks the odd one out, even among a
gathering of fellow leaders from post-communist Europe. At this year's
annual international get-together in Davos, Slovak diplomats watched in
despair as the Mr Meciar and his group sat talking among themselves in
Slovak as other leaders split into ever-changing informal groups exchanging
gossip and building informal ties.
At a recent summit meeting in Budapest of the Central European Initiative,
the 10 nation grouping which includes Italy and Austria as well as eight
central European states, the Slovak leader fiddled constantly with a
recalcitrant translation machine as Mr Klaus, the Czech leader, replied to
questions in fluentGerman and English.
On his return from Budapest Mr Meciar announced his intention to obtain new
fighter aircraft from Russia to counter-balance similar purchases by
Hungary, raising the prospect of a mini arms race between states with ethnic
minorities on both sides of the border.
Mr Meciar does not compare well with the founders of the original
Czechoslovak state. Having led the move to independence he seems to lack the
human and political skills needed to inspire Slovak citizens of all ethnic
groups to make the best of their difficult inheritance. What is more, having
won independence, he seems to underate the importance of building bridges in
this potentially dangerous region for a small country with suspicious
neighbours.
