FT  27 JAN 93 / International Equity Issues: Growing foreign, domestic
demand for French equity
THE success of last week's sale of shares in Rhone-Poulenc, the French
state-controlled chemicals company, is good news for whoever wins the
country's legislative elections in March, since privatisation is an
increasingly attractive way for both the left and the right to fund the
public debt.
Although the Rhone-Poulenc offer was relatively small and
attractively-priced - 6m shares at FFr500 (Dollars 93) apiece - the healthy
oversubscription of the domestic, international and US tranches indicate
there is demand at home and abroad for French equity. There is a possibility
that a further 405,000 Rhone-Poulenc shares will be made available to
satisfy demand from US and international investors.
Further sales are unlikely before the elections. However, if the opinion
polls are right and a conservative alliance of the RPR and UDF parties
headed by the ex-finance minister Mr Edouard Balladur takes power, investors
can expect a marked acceleration. If the incumbent socialist government
clings to power, investors should still expect further offerings in
state-owned companies, albeit at a slower pace.
A deterioration in the economy and a growing budget deficit have forced the
present government to abandon its 'ni-ni' (neither privatisation nor
nationalisation) policy. The main impact of weak economic growth has been on
fiscal revenue. According to official estimates, there has been a revenue
shortfall of FFr180bn (Dollars 33.9bn) over the past two years and it is set
to worsen. Economists at UBS Phillips &amp; Drew believe the government's budget
deficit forecast of FFr165bn for 1993 is too optimistic. They estimate a
deficit of FFr300bn.
At 4 per cent of GDP, the deficit is small in an international context, but
nevertheless it was an overriding factor in the government's decision to
sell shares in the oil companies, Total and Elf, the local lender Credit
Local, the aluminium and packaging group Pechiney, and most recently,
Rhone-Poulenc.
Mr Balladur has unfinished business on the privatisation front. As finance
minister in the late 1980s, he was only 40 per cent through his FFr300bn
privatisation programme when he was blown off course by the global stock
market crash of October 1987.
Mr Balladur has said he would want to raise around FFr30bn from
privatisations in 1993 and up to FFr60bn next year. But analysts say that to
ensure a warm reception, especially from domestic individual investors, he
would have to increase the incentives for investing in equities.
One way would be to lighten the tax burden on the Plans d'Epargne en
Actions, the French equivalent of personal equity plans, but at the cost of
penalising the more popular money-market Sicavs or investment funds. Plans
to reform the French pension system by setting up private pension funds
would also help.
Observers say any delay in implementing such measures could mean Mr Balladur
would only be able to raise about FFr15bn this year. He would also have to
read correctly the mood of the stock market, something the current
government has been successful at, if he wants to achieve his targets.
Mr Balladur is likely to resume his privatisation programme with the big
insurance companies, UAP and Gan for example. The banks would also be given
priority if the Bundesbank kicks off a round of interest rate cuts across
Europe, which would increase investors' appetite for interest rate-sensitive
stocks.
Elf Aquitaine is also a likely target, and its chairman, Mr Loik Le
Floch-Prigent, has been reported as saying it is no longer necessary for the
state to have 50 per cent in Elf in order to retain control.
