FT  09 JUN 93 / Money Markets: Euromarks strengthen
INTEREST rate futures in both France and Germany were slightly stronger
yesterday, although most dealers assumed that the Bundesbank's repo rate
would be, at best, barely changed in today's money market operation, writes
James Blitz.
Bundesbank council members have raised concern about the potential weakness
of the D-Mark and the growth in M3 money supply - and an aggressive easing
of monetary policy is therefore unlikely in the near term.
The German central bank announced yesterday that it would be holding a
variable rate repo for both the 14-day and 28-day maturities.
Conditions in the cash market were also a little easier. German call money
was a few basis points lower in a quiet market which was supplied with ample
liquidity. Call money traded at around 7.87 per cent from 7.90 per cent
earlier in the day.
With slightly easier money market conditions, D-Mark interest rate futures
were stronger. The June Euromark contract was up 2 basis points on the day
at 92.48. The September contract, which is more heavily traded, was 7 basis
points higher at 93.30. At this level it is pricing three-month D-Marks in
the autumn at 6.70 per cent, some 85 basis points lower than yesterday's
cash level.
French franc interest rate futures were also stronger on the day, partly
helped by the firmer performance of the French franc on the currency
markets.
The June Pibor contract finished 3 basis points higher than its opening
level, at 92.60, while the September contract showed a rise of 5 basis
points from the day's opening level, at 93.39.
Sterling markets were fairly quiet as speculation about another near-term
base rate cut in the UK continued to subside.
In the cash market a Pounds 900m daily shortage forecast from the Bank of
England was fairly easily removed, with what one dealer described as a good
stock of bills. There was late assistance of Pounds 85m, and the overnight
lending rate hovered between 5 1/2 per cent and 6 per cent.
Three-month money closed unchanged at around 5 15/16 per cent. In the
futures market the June short sterling contract ended 2 basis points firmer
on the day at 94.04, while the September contract finished 3 basis points
higher at 94.22.
