FT  17 APR 93 / World Bank, IMF wage bills to rise by 6%: Institutions
defend pay increases against opposition of rich member countries
DIRECTORS of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank have voted
for a pay increase that will increase wage bills at the two Washington-based
institutions next year by more than 6 per cent.
Despite opposition from the US, UK, Canada and Australia, which together
represent a third of the voting capital of the IMF and World Bank, the two
boards this week approved a pay increase of 4.6 per cent with effect from
May 1.
This will result, because of additional recruitment and pension costs, in a
rise of 6.9 per cent in the IMF's total personnel bill, budgeted at Dollars
273m (Pounds 180.7m) for the year ending April 30.
At the World Bank, staff costs will rise by 6.2 per cent from Dollars 804m
budgeted for year ending June 30.
Bank and Fund officials said the pay rises were based on comparisons of
public and private sector salaries in the US, France and Germany, collected
by Hay Associates, a consulting company. The move, at a time when the US
plans to freeze federal workers' pay and other countries are actually
rolling back civil service salaries, was attacked by outside critics of the
two institutions as well as by some inside the two institutions.
'Considering that the donor countries are financing an institution that is
not performing well, to pat themselves on the back and give themselves a
raise is not the thing to do,' said Ms Peggy Hallward of Probe
International, an environmental group that has criticised many World Bank
projects in the developing world.
'We can't restrain our appetites,' added one Bank official.
The World Bank and IMF pay rise also follows a week of intense criticism of
lavish spending at the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, a
similar multilateral financial institution. Mr Norman Lamont, the UK
chancellor of the exchequer, and Mr Theo Waigel, the German finance
minister, have raised questions about EBRD salaries, travel and office
expenses.
Opponents of the pay rise believe it is particularly unfortunate because it
could increase hostility in the US Congress towards funding the US
commitment to give Dollars 3.75bn for the 10th replenishment of the
International Development Association, a World Bank offshoot which provides
loans at concessional rates to the poorest developing countries.
The administration has included Dollars 1.25bn for the first tranche of this
commitment in its budget for 1994.
Officials from the Bank and the Fund said this year's pay rise reflected
historical data. The US pay freeze would show up in next year's
calculations.
They also noted that they had to pay competitive salaries to ensure their
ability to recruit internationally, adding that staff who moved to
Washington often came with spouses who had to give up jobs in their home
countries.
Both the Bank and the Fund have often been criticised in the past for adding
subsidies, perquisites and substantial travel expenses to already generous
salaries.
Neither institution would provide salary figures, but independent guesses
estimate the average for the World Bank group's 7,000 employees at over
Dollars 70,000 a year, and for the 2,200 IMF staff at around Dollars 80,000
a year. Since non-US citizens are not subject to tax, equivalent taxable
salaries would be much higher.
Mr Lewis Preston, president of the World Bank, and Mr Michel Camdessus,
managing director of the IMF, earn Dollars 190,000 a year plus a
representational allowance of Dollars 95,000 - salaries which were
substantially increased in 1991, at Mr Camdessus's insistence, to retain
parity with Mr Jacques Attali, president of the EBRD.
Criticism of the World Bank has been particularly barbed because of its role
in helping poor, developing nations.
