FT  15 JUL 93 / A voice for the oppressed: The strength and appeal of
Islamic fundamentalist movements throughout the Middle East
Moslems in turmoil: terror sheikh surrenders after Brooklyn mosque drama.'
The recent headline in a British Sunday newspaper articulates a widespread
western view of Islamic fundamentalism and its association with terrorism.
'West anxious to refuse Moslem peace force', the headline in one of
yesterday's papers, emphasises just how uncomfortably that perception sits
alongside the west's failure to ease the worsening plight of the Bosnian
people, and the mounting frustration of Islamic leaders at being blocked
from coming to the aid of their co-religionists.
The offer by seven members of the Islamic Conference Organisation to provide
17,000 troops, including 10,000 Iranians, for peacekeeping duties in Bosnia
poses an acute dilemma for the west, precisely because it feeds the fear of
Islamic extremism getting a foothold in Europe.
Foremost among those international leaders who endorse that interpretation
is Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the prime minister of Israel. 'They (the
fundamentalists) are starting to build an infrastructure of terror all over
the world,' he told a Paris audience last week. 'They will not tolerate the
presence of any foreign, non-Islamic entity in the Middle East. They will
fight all the moderate Arab regimes.'
After the arrest in New York of eight men, accused of plotting explosions
and identified instantly by police as Islamic fundamentalists, the American
public was similarly left in little doubt by some of its politicians that
the US was itself under threat. It is an assumption already reflected in US
Middle East policy, where the containment of Iran, described by Washington
as the world's foremost sponsor of terrorism, has been given top priority.
Senior officials in Washington emphasise that the US has nothing against
Islamic regimes as such. The Saudi Arabian government, for example, is more
fundamentalist than most. It is also authoritarian, denies any movement
towards political pluralism, refuses women the right to drive cars, beheaded
66 miscreants in public last year, and is spending billions of dollars on
building up its military machine. The US views Saudi Arabia as a close
friend and its staunchest ally in the Gulf.
On the other hand, Iran, which also defines itself as an Islamic state and,
according to Amnesty International, executed 330 people last year, has
elections of a sort and a functioning parliament, allows women to drive
cars, and is spending a fraction of the Saudi Arabian outlay on new
weaponry. Together with President Saddam Hussein's Iraq, it is described by
the US as a grave threat to world stability.
The basic difference between Iran and Saudi Arabia, at least when viewed
from Washington, is that one sees the US as the Great Satan while the other
sees it as the Great Saviour. Put another way, Washington has much less of a
problem with the domestic policies of Islamic governments than it does with
their external posturing.
In part this is because Islamic fundamentalism has, for the past 15 years,
been primarily a rallying point and a focus for dissent against regimes
which permitted no alternative political voice and were sometimes allied to
the US. The Iranian leadership under Ayatollah Khomeini saw America as the
root of all evil and its presence in the Middle East a provocation to all
Moslems. Iran still sees its role as coming to the aid of oppressed Moslems
anywhere in the world, but especially in the Middle East.
After 14 years of Islamic government, Iran cannot claim much success abroad,
or at home. Despite all the talk of exporting revolution, there is not a lot
to show. Equally, the sorry state of the Iranian economy leaves little to
crow about. But what Iran has been able to do, to a modest extent, is
capitalise on the political and economic failures of others. In the process
its capacity for trouble-making has been purposely exaggerated, not least by
some Middle Eastern leaders such as President Hosni Mubarak, who for months
has been crediting Iran with the prime responsibility for terrorist attacks
in Egypt.
Outside Iran, fundamentalist or radical Islamic movements have thrived most
where there has also been the partial collapse of the state (Lebanon and
Sudan), where economic deprivation and disparities have been particularly
marked (Algeria and Egypt), and as a consequence of occupation (the West
Bank, Gaza and Lebanon). They have been additionally aided by the more
general perception among Arab populations that their governments have failed
them.
The movements which inspired millions in the post-colonial era - Nasserism,
Arab socialism, Arab nationalism, Arab unity in all its different guises -
have collapsed. The depth of the region's political malaise was never better
illustrated than by the often contradictory Arab reactions to Iraq's
invasion of Kuwait. Against this background, slogans such as 'Islam Is The
Solution' are destined to rally support. But there is no structure or
uniformity to the response. No populist Islamic army is forming under green
banners and curved scimitars to drive out the corrupt and morally bankrupt
before moving on to deal with the infidels. Instead, there is a multiplicity
of Islamic organisations, even within a single country, a wide range of
objectives, and little articulation of what Islam thinks is The Solution.
Where there is a degree of international co-ordination it stems primarily
from Iran. Even then it is difficult to identify who is responsible when
power is shared between spiritual leader, president, parliament, ministers,
senior ayatollahs, religious institutions and religious foundations.
Contradictions are inevitable. The country's economic reconstruction
programme needs to attract western capital and technology, but its foreign
policy, especially on the Middle East peace process, is diametrically
opposed to US and European efforts.
Iran's successes have been greatest where Israel has blundered out of the
frying pan into the fire, most notably in its efforts to smash opposition to
its military occupation in the West Bank, Gaza and Lebanon. The harsh
response to the five-year Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories
has given Hamas, the radical group supported by Iran, the chance to draw
popular support away from the more moderate Fatah, the dominant component in
the Palestine Liberation Organisation headed by Mr Yassir Arafat.
In south Lebanon, the formerly quiescent Shia population was politicised by
Israel's invasions in 1978 and 1982. The invasions succeeded in ending the
Palestinian military threat to Israel's northern border but contributed to
the birth of Hizbollah, which is also backed by Iran and was responsible for
seizing western hostages in Beirut. Hizbollah not only continues to inflict
more casualties on Israeli troops than the Palestinian guerrillas, but has
become an important element in determining Lebanon's political stability.
Conversations with officials in Tehran leave little doubt that Iran sees its
allies in the occupied territories and its co-religionists in Lebanon as
offering direct leverage on the peace process and on wider American-Israeli
plans. Just how extensive Iranian ambitions are is difficult to assess, but
it would seem obvious that Iran will seek to exploit the weaknesses in the
pro-American Arab alliance that Washington is seeking to maintain.
One of the keys to that alliance is Egypt, among the most immediate targets
of Islamic extremists. The activities of a handful of terrorists during the
past year have unnerved the regime, especially as they have aimed
principally at the tourist industry, the country's biggest single source of
foreign revenue. But while there is plentiful evidence of dissent in Cairo's
poorest suburbs, there is no sign of the explosive discontent which led to
the country's mass riots in January 1977.
Egyptians are famously slow to rouse and, as the 1977 riots showed, it was
government blundering rather than opposition agitation which triggered
public anger. The Moslem Brotherhood, for decades Egypt's main
standard-bearer of political Islam, is winning greater public support, but
it seems to be more by default that by any specific policies it has to
offer. An hour spent seeking to draw out a party spokesman elicited only the
repeated assertion that all the answers to Egypt's myriad problems are
contained in the Koran.
But if Islamic groups are reticent about precise policies, they are learning
fast how to operate at the grassroots. Islamic groups in several countries
have understood the effectiveness of social welfare schemes and have taken
full advantage of any opportunities to become part of the political
establishment. Leading the way are Hizbollah in Lebanon, the Islamic
Salvation Front in Algeria, and the Moslem Brotherhood in Egypt and to a
lesser extent in Jordan.
In Lebanon, devastated by 17 years of civil war, Hizbollah runs schools,
hospitals and clinics, provides housing, and administers shops which sell
subsidised food. It put up candidates for last year's general elections, and
its eight members of parliament set an example by the enthusiasm with which
they participate in debates and sub-committees. Hizbollah is also the only
faction not to have been disarmed, on the basis that it is fighting to eject
Israel from the south in order to restore national sovereignty. In short,
Hizbollah has covered all the options.
Allowing Hizbollah into the democratic process posed relatively few risks in
Lebanon where representation is regulated according to the size of the
country's religious minorities. But in Algeria - where there was no such
limitation and the ruling party had little popular support - a sudden plunge
into democracy by a desperate government allowed the protest vote to swing
massively to the Islamic Salvation Front. It was only stopped from taking
power by the regime halting the electoral process, pushing the country
towards worsening political violence.
President Mubarak says he warned Algeria's leaders of precisely that danger.
He has no intention of legalising the Moslem Brotherhood in Egypt and
permitting it to fight an election against the officially sponsored National
Democratic party. However, there seems equally little prospect of the NDP as
constituted ever winning mass support, a vacuum which the Islamic groups are
in part trying to fill with welfare programmes similar to those adopted by
Hizbollah.
Groups of Egyptian liberal intellectuals have warned Mr Mubarak of the risks
if the government continues with its confrontational 'them or us' policy.
Harsh police measures to crush the Islamic challenge is not an answer, they
argue, except perhaps for Syria, where the brutal suppression of the 1982
revolt in the town of Hama has broken the back of opposition to the regime
for more than a decade.
But it has not provided the answer to what or who follows President Hafez
al-Assad, any more than other Arab regimes have managed to create
institutions which will provide for orderly and popular transfers of power.
Such failures have allowed the perception to gain ground in the Middle East
that it is only the Islamic movements which truly care for the poor and
oppressed, an impression heightened by the collapse of communism and the
Soviet Union and what are seen as hostile American attitudes.
In the slums of Cairo, among the squatters in the wreckage of downtown
Beirut, in Baghdad or Khartoum, the assertion that the US is at war with
Islam falls on receptive ears. However justified the Gulf war was by
international law, the further missile attacks on Baghdad and the continued
sanctions which bear most heavily on ordinary Iraq people can be all too
easily arranged to fit a specific message.
The west's failure to save the Moslems of Bosnia adds substantially to that
message and will be further reinforced if it refuses the offer of an Islamic
peacekeeping contribution. And, of course, there is Israel. Despite 20
months of American-sponsored peace talks it shows little sign of withdrawing
from the occupied territories or relinquishing east Jerusalem.
Such issues bear far more heavily on the lives of most Moslems in the Middle
East than the prominently headlined activities of a few extremists in New
York. If the wider concerns of Moslems are not accorded more equal
prominence, the US and its allies may be unable to check the growing
suspicion that Islam is being elected to succeed communism as the primary
threat to western values and political order.
