FT  20 MAR 93 / Finance &amp; The Family: Revenue's threat on non-approved plans
 -CGT Relief / The Budget and You
THE PROSPECT of significant tax shelters for executives acquiring shares in
unquoted companies is offered by the Budget. But companies granting share
options without Inland Revenue approval face a new fiscal threat.
There is a long-established 'retirement' relief from capital gains tax for
directors who sell shares in their family trading companies after the age of
55. The first Pounds 150,000 of any gain is exempt, as is half the next
Pounds 450,000, although the exemption is restricted if the shares have been
held for under 10 years.
Until now, the only people eligible have been full-time company directors
owning at least 25 per cent of their company's shares, or owning 5 per cent
where other family members control the company. The chancellor proposes to
replace this by a single individual 5 per cent test, and to allow employees
as well as directors to qualify. Those fortunate enough to have such a
significant stake will now have the chance to supplement their retirement
package by cashing in their shares with little or no tax to pay.
Young turks with no thoughts of retirement were not forgotten. Although
Lamont said his new CGT roll-over relief related 'specifically to
entrepreneurs who have built up successful businesses,' it has a wider
scope. As with retirement relief, a 5 per cent interest will suffice, and
non-directors will qualify if they have been employed in a managerial or
technical capacity.
The relief will be available to any employee satisfying these conditions who
sells shares in an unquoted trading company and, within three years, invests
the proceeds in a stake of at least 5 per cent in another unquoted trading
company. Any CGT liability will be deferred until the taxpayer no longer has
a qualifying holding. An acrobatic employee could, therefore, aspire to a
series of roll-overs culminating in an ultimate sale with the benefit of
retirement relief.
This virtuoso tax-saving performance will be ruined, however, if the
employee acquires his shares via a non-approved share scheme; the exercise
of a non-approved option triggers an income tax liability. The new reliefs
provide protection only against CGT. An executive who is promised a 5 per
cent option should urge his employer to set up a Revenue-approved scheme
which will be the only way of keeping his gain within the CGT regime.
Those companies who may yet be tempted by the flexibility of an unregulated
scheme had another warning shot fired across their bows on Tuesday. The
Revenue issued a statement on the arcane subject of whether the grant of
options should create a tax liability for the granting company.
Any analysis of an option grant focuses typically on the tax implications
for the grantee. In strict theory, it is clear that granting the option is a
CGT disposal and the company could be taxable not on the price actually paid
by the employees - usually a nominal Pounds 1 - but on the true value of the
option.
Until now, the Revenue has tended to turn a blind eye to this issue. Its
Budget-day announcement looks like good news in that it restricts the tax
charge to the amount received. The snag is that this will only apply to
approved schemes. This is a strong hint that, from now on, the taxman will
adopt a tougher stance towards non-approved arrangements.
David Cohen is a partner in the City law firm of Paisner &amp; Co.
