FT  20 MAY 93 / Squatters see EC as capitalist conspiracy
FINANCIAL journalists were not very welcome at the 'youth house' in
Copenhagen's Norrebro district yesterday morning, after the violent clashes
sparked by Denmark's Yes vote in the Maastricht referendum on Tuesday left
11 young demonstrators with gunshot wounds and 26 policemen injured by
bricks.
'You and your businessmen, you are the ones that are pushing us down,'
snarled a bearded man sitting on the doorstep of the collective meeting
place, drinking from a bottle of beer. 'You are just like the police,' added
an angry young woman seated close by.
The typically black-clad, unkempt and unemployed youths that make up the
loose movement known in Denmark as BZers, or squatters, were said by the
police to have instigated the post-referendum riot.
No longer simply homeless occupiers of empty inner-city buildings, they are
better defined these days by their anti-business, anti-fascist and
anti-establishment views that see the European Community at the pinnacle of
a capitalist conspiracy to deny democracy to the masses.
The main target of the rioters - apart from the police - were a number of
bank branches in Norrebro which had their windows smashed.
Hard-core BZers probably number no more than a few hundred, though they may
have the sympathy of several thousand more disaffected youngsters in the
capital. Between 300 and 500 demonstrators were said to have been involved
in Tuesday night's disturbances.
The BZers have been a feature of life in inner city Copenhagen for the past
15 years. They periodically clash with police, sometimes smashing windows in
commercial premises in the city centre, but had not previously been involved
in violence on the scale of that which erupted on Tuesday.
Last winter they caused serious problems for Swedish police in Malmo, just
across the Oresund from Copenhagen, when they staged a counter-protest
against Swedish anti-immigrant demonstrators.
The government, led by the Social Democratic party, was appalled that its
success in getting Maastricht approved at the second attempt on Tuesday was
marred by what were for Denmark extremely rare scenes of vicious street
violence. It said the rioters were an isolated fringe who deliberately set
out to cause trouble.
'That is pure bullshit,' scoffed a third BZer, speaking inside the dingy
'youth house' under a huge mural saying 'Smash Racism and Fascism'. In
common with his colleagues, he refused to give his name - and spoke fluent
and richly profane English.
His friend insisted the riot was spontaneous. 'Everyone who voted No was
very depressed and angry. We wanted to do something. We wanted to go crazy.'
The other inhabitants of Norrebro, a relatively poor but far from deprived
area, tended to confirm the government's view that the BZers were a small
group who do not represent a wide band of opinion.
An apartment block caretaker said: 'There used to be sympathy around here
for them because they have no hope of jobs or homes. But when we helped
them, with collections of money, they just screwed things up. We have no
problems with the local police here. We respect them. I think the people
last night came from outside.'
