FT  07 JUN 93 / Survey of Uruguay (2): Time bomb of dependents / Assessing
the prospects for the economy
THERE IS little doubt that the Uruguayan economy looks in significantly
better shape than when the government of President Luis Alberto Lacalle took
office in March 1991. Real growth rose to about 7 per cent last year from
just under 2 per cent in 1991 and less than 1 per cent in 1990.
Inflation has been more than halved from 1990's 129 per cent - though it has
not fallen as fast as the International Monetary Fund would have liked. The
government's fiscal deficit has also been cut dramatically from 7.4 per cent
of gross domestic product in 1989 to less than 1 per cent last year. This
has been helped mainly by higher tax revenues, thanks in part to tax
measures agreed soon after the government took office, and a reduction in
servicing charges on foreign debt - because of lower US interest rates and a
negotiated debt reduction deal completed by the government in 1991.
The question is whether the improving trend can last. According to the New
York bank JP Morgan, the economic achievements of bringing down the budget
deficit, reducing inflation and spurring growth 'have owed much to policies
of doubtful sustainability along with external events of fortuitous and
transitory benefit'.
Morgan argues that growth will slow as the boom in neighbouring Argentina
peters out, while the government's fiscal position will be hurt as tax
increases - including a 1990 increase in value-added tax - are scaled back
at the end of this year.
The government's ability to find a long-term balance in its accounts
received a setback with its failure - in a referendum in December - to
secure important parts of its privatisation programme. This not only
deprived it of revenues from the sale of, for example, the telephone company
 -but also of wage savings and future tax revenues.
Furthermore, a policy of suppressing wage increases in the public sector -
which has seen its standard of living fall compared with the private sector
 -may not be durable.
On top of that, the strong exchange rate - an appreciation of the real
exchange rate has helped to bring down inflation - is hitting the country's
trade position and beginning to cause strains in industry. Uruguay's first
quarter trade deficit of Dollars 181m this year was close to half that for
the whole of 1992 as consumer goods imports appeared to be continuing to
rise.
Yet the government - like many others in Latin America - is having to deal
with significant inflows of capital. If it allowed the exchange rate to
float, it would be higher than it is now. Currency market intervention to
reduce the appreciation has led reserves to increase - at around Dollars 1bn
they cover seven to eight months of imports - but has added to the money
supply, keeping inflationary pressures high.
Mr Ignacio de Posadas, Uruguay's finance minister, sees a cup at least half
full. Growth this year is going to be above expectations, though perhaps
down on last year; both investment and consumption is up, while unemployment
has fallen. Inflation is also down - wholesale prices are rising at around 1
per cent a month, the lowest level for many years.
This has been achieved amid the poor external environment for some of
Uruguay's main agricultural exports - the country suffers both from Europe's
relatively closed market and the effect on third markets of the dumping of
European produce - and the drought three years ago which severely depleted
stocks of beef cattle. The economy is no longer dependent on agriculture as
it was half-a-century ago and is much more reliant on services, including
tourism which has benefited from Argentina's growth and its strong currency.
There is evidence that growth in Argentina may this year be stronger than
most forecasts have been suggesting, while Brazil - whose economy contracted
1 per cent last year - is likely to enjoy positive, if modest, growth this
year.
Nonetheless, Mr de Posadas implicitly acknowledges the economy may be
overheating. 'The government's policy hasn't been as strongly
counter-cyclical as it needed to be,' he said in an interview. The
government in March pushed through a series of cost-cutting measures that
did not require congressional approval.
Whatever the short-term outlook, however, there is little doubt that the
fundamental challenges facing the Uruguayan economy have not been
successfully addressed by the Lacalle government, in part because it has
been unable to secure the necessary support in Congress for reform.
The key to the problem is the high dependency of many people on the state:
social security - pensions, health subsidies and unemployment payments -
gobble up 17 per cent of gross domestic product and more than half of the
government's budget - a massive burden for a relatively poor country.
Long-term, government and opposition politicians admit that this time bomb -
the growing burden on the social security system - will have to be
addressed. Yet it is a problem that - because of the voting power of
pensioners - is one that politicians are unwilling to raise.
With perhaps 450,000 people claiming 600,000 pensions - and a further
260,000 people working for the state out of a total workforce of 1.1m, the
dependence on the government is high. 'We have a ratio of passive to active
population of 1.4 or 1.5. No social security system in the world can work on
a ratio of below three,' says Mr de Posadas.
