FT  26 AUG 93 / The temptations of forbidden fruit: The UK's blooming
informal economy poses a taxing dilemma for the government
As the UK's fruit-picking season gets under way, the pretty apple orchards
of Kent and Sussex are teaming with what the Inland Revenue calls the
'ghosts' and 'moonlighters' who make up Britain's blooming hidden economy.
These phantom employees, for whom the Revenue has no records, work not just
in agriculture, but as waiters, cleaners, salesmen, mini-cab drivers and
decorators. They have one thing in common: not a penny of their earnings
finds its way to the exchequer. Their combined efforts make up the UK's
informal or hidden economy - legitimate economic activity that is not
declared for tax.
For a government that is looking at all areas of public spending to find
possible cuts or extra revenue, the informal sector would appear to provide
rich pickings. Mr Peter Lilley, social security secretary, has raised his
cabinet profile with a summer campaign aimed at saving Pounds 1bn by
stopping the 'selfish crimes' of social security fraudsters. Stepping up
efforts to crack down on tax evasion would seem the logical corollary.
But the absence of accurate figures on the size of the black economy - by
definition the transactions involved are not declared - makes it impossible
for the government to judge the tax losses involved. Moreover, the sums
involved in each case of tax evasion are usually petty. And so, although it
would not want to give the impression that it is lax in combatting tax
evasion, the Revenue sometimes turns a blind eye, focusing on those areas
where the returns are potentially greatest.
'There comes a point where it is not worth our while to chase evaders,' said
an Inland Revenue spokesman. 'We don't go for totally stupid amounts of
money. If somebody makes a Pounds 50 profit out of renting their drive to
people with cars during the Wimbledon championship, we are not interested.'
The Revenue cannot afford to be too complacent, however, because the number
of people making up the hidden economy has almost certainly grown in the
past few years.
Several factors might explain an expansion:
An unemployment rate of 10.4 per cent which has forced people to be more
enterprising in the ways that they earn money.
'There are clearly people who cannot get jobs in the formal economy but who
are interested in supplementing what they can get through social security,'
says Mr Stephen Smith at the Institute for Fiscal Studies. In the last
financial year, Department of Employment inspectors carried out more than
260,000 investigations into people who were claiming unemployment benefit
while also working.
The pressures on companies during a recession to collude with employees and
encourage them to sign on as unemployed while paying a low wage to top-up
state benefits. The Revenue believes such behaviour is more common among
smaller companies. 'Some companies might find it easier to survive by
slipping over the boundary of legitimacy,' says Mr Madsen Pirie, president
of the Adam Smith institute, the free market think tank. He adds: 'During a
recession you would expect the percentage of informal activity to increase
as a proportion of the total as some marginal legitimate businesses go by
the board.'
Changes to the structure of the labour market, including a move towards more
part-time, low-wage, service sector jobs. More flexible working practices
mean it is easier for employers to take on workers on an informal basis.
Caterers, for instance, could be paid in cash, but employing a car
production-line worker in a large factory would entail an employer filling
in official paperwork.
In spite of these factors, however, tax compliance remains relatively high
in the UK, compared with other European countries such as Italy and Greece.
The Revenue says the widespread use of the Pay As You Earn system, which is
administered by companies on behalf of the Revenue, makes it difficult for
most people to influence their tax bill. Out of 24.5m taxpayers in 1992-93,
about 21m were on PAYE. Economists and tax collectors say the simplification
of the tax system and the reduction of tax rates over the past 10 years may
have made it harder and less worthwhile to evade tax.
At the same time, while the number of people involved in the hidden economy
has probably grown, the value of the sector has been constrained as much by
the recession as legitimate activity. 'There may be more people offering to
tarmac drives, but there will be fewer people accepting,' says a Central
Statistical Office statistician.
Estimates of the size of the informal economy must take account of this
confusing picture. Some European countries make explicit adjustments to
their national accounts to reflect the value of informal activities. In
Italy, for example, the official estimate of the informal economy is about
16 per cent of GDP.
In the UK, the only indicator the CSO can offer is its so-called 'evasion'
adjustment, the difference between GDP measured by expenditure and GDP
measured by income and used to balance the national accounts. But the CSO
does not pretend that it gives an accurate picture of the size of the hidden
economy. 'We have enough trouble trying to get the formal structures of the
economy to add up, without having to worry about the hazy parts,' a
spokesman said.
Currently, the 'evasion adjustment' is equivalent to about 1 1/4 per cent of
total GDP, amounting to some Pounds 7.4bn in 1992. Government statisticians
consider that figure an understatement of the extent of informal activity.
Estimates by independent economists are probably more accurate but are still
open to doubt. Mr Smith, of the IFS, puts the value of the black economy at
between 3 per cent and 5 per cent of GDP, based on research into consumer
spending in areas where such activity is prevalent, for instance painting,
decorating, cleaning and gardening.
He says that even if as much as half of all consumer spending on such
services goes into the pockets of those failing to pay tax, the size of the
hidden economy would amount to no more than 5 per cent of national output.
The Revenue, however, thinks that figure is too low. It attributes a value
of between 6-8 per cent of GDP to the black economy, or up to about Pounds
50bn. 'This is the best estimate that we have been able to come up with,'
said a spokeswoman. 'It is a wishy-washy guesstimate.'
If the revenue's figures are broadly correct, it is recouping only a
fraction of the sums lost to the hidden economy. The special investigations
unit of the Inland Revenue responsible for targeting the 'ghosts' and
'moonlighters' that make up the informal sector collected Pounds 85.7m in
1992-93 compared with Pounds 71.3m in 1990-91.
In comparison Pounds 5bn, equivalent to between 2p and 3p on the basic rate
of income tax, was collected in 1991-92 from three other areas of the
revenue's efforts to ensure compliance with tax rules: investigations into
business accounts, wrong declarations in personal tax returns and the
enforcement of PAYE requirements. Much of that would have been the result of
mistakes or misunderstandings as well as some deliberate under-declarations.
Should the government be doing more? There is a case for making an example
of some defrauders on the grounds that tax evasion is a crime and that all
who are liable for tax should be treated equally. But there is also an
argument that the Revenue need not be more aggressive, because the returns
would be tiny in proportion to the time expended.
Many people failing to disclose their full income would still not be liable
to tax if their earnings fell below personal allowances - Pounds 3,445 for a
single person. At the same time, there are probably few people operating in
the hidden economy who are earning substantial amounts each year - and so
would be liable for significant sums of tax.
Another reason for the Revenue to hold off pursuing tax evaders is that a
bustling informal sector could be a sign of a healthy, enterprising economy.
Certainly, ministers are more vociferous about the need to tackle clearer
cases of social security fraud than in clamping down on tax evasion in the
hidden economy.
For this year's harvest anyway, it would appear that the 'ghosts' carting
apples, pears and plums around farms in south-east England are safe from the
probings of the tax inspectors. They will probably continue to be until the
money they earn amounts to the sort of sums in which the Revenue is
interested.
