FT  08 JAN 93 / Virgin Atlantic victory expected: BA likely to pay
substantial damages to rival airline in libel settlement
VIRGIN ATLANTIC, the independent British airline run by Mr Richard Branson,
is expected to emerge next week as the victor in its 'dirty tricks' libel
battle with British Airways.
High Court action is due to begin on Monday but it is understood that, under
the terms of an agreement between the two airlines, to be announced in
court, BA will pay substantial damages and several million pounds in costs
to Virgin Atlantic and Mr Branson.
The settlement is likely to be among the highest yet agreed in a libel case
in Britain. BA is also expected to apologise for any harm inflicted on the
reputation of Virgin Atlantic and Mr Branson.
Virgin decided to start legal action last March against BA and Lord King,
its chairman, following allegations that BA had run a commercially damaging
campaign against it. It was alleged to involve the poaching of customers and
unfounded rumours about the airline's financial health.
BA dismissed the allegations as totally without foundation and Lord King
accused Mr Branson of seeking publicity for himself and his airline.
Both airlines yesterday refused to comment on the proceedings, beyond saying
they would both be represented in court on Monday before Mr Justice Drake.
BA executives are believed to have negotiated a settlement to avoid a
potentially long, expensive court case and to limit any damage to its
reputation at a time when it is seeking to become a global airline.
The airline is renewing negotiations in an attempt to resurrect its plans to
take a stake in USAir, the American carrier, which collapsed last month.
One BA executive yesterday emphasised that BA management had not been aware
of any unacceptable tactics against Virgin. He added: 'We underestimated Mr
Branson.'
BA is not expected to make any statement on Monday beyond that read out in
court but Mr Branson is planning to elaborate on details of alleged BA
abuses.
He may also seek assurances from BA that similar action is not repeated and
might consider pursuing fresh action against BA to compensate for any
commercial damage arising from BA's alleged activities.
Virgin is also hoping the outcome will help in its negotiations to secure
additional flights to and from Heathrow.
The airline has claimed that the campaign against it was being led by Mr
Brian Basham, a public relations consultant retained by BA, who compiled a
dossier on Virgin's activities.
Yesterday, Mr Basham said he conducted 'a perfectly decent and
straightforward campaign'. He wanted to ensure that any BA apology did not
defame him and he had appealed to the judge to make sure this did not
happen.
