FT  22 OCT 93 / International Company News: ATT and MCI show sharp growth
AMERICAN Telephone &amp; Telegraph (AT&amp;T) and MCI Communications, the two
leading US long-distance telecommunications companies, yesterday reported
double-digit growth in third-quarter earnings.
AT&amp;T reported net income up 11.4 per cent to Dollars 1.073bn, or 79 cents a
share, compared with Dollars 963m, or 72 cents, in the same period of last
year. Revenue rose 3 per cent to Dollars 16.66bn.
MCI reported earnings of Dollars 174m, or 30 cents a share, against Dollars
154m, or 29 cents, in the same period of last year. Excluding a one-time
charge of Dollars 18m because of tax law changes, earnings per share rose by
nearly 14 per cent.
Both sets of figures were broadly in line with market expectations.
AT&amp;T said revenues from the long-distance market, where it is fighting to
maintain its 60 per cent market share, were little changed on a year ago, as
customers switched to lower priced services.
Calling volumes were up 5.5 per cent from a year earlier and long-distance
profitability continued to be strong, showing a 2 percentage point increase
in gross margins to 38.8 per cent.
The company's revenue growth was helped by an 8 per cent increase in sales
of telecommunications products to Dollars 317m, with strong growth outside
the US.
However, NCR, the computer company acquired by AT&amp;T two years ago, which has
been undergoing a senior management shake-up, continued to report poor
results. Sales of products and systems rose 4 per cent, but it had an
operating loss of Dollars 49m, attributed to competitive pricing,
particularly for personal computers, and a Dollars 23m restructuring charge.
MCI reported 14.7 per cent growth in traffic, well above the industry
average, which it attributed to a raft of innovative long-distance services
for business and consumer markets.
It added that a global joint venture with British Telecom, which agreed
earlier this year to take a large stake in MCI, was moving ahead, though it
still requires regulatory and shareholder approval.
For the nine months, AT&amp;T reported net income of Dollars 3.1bn, or Dollars
2.30, on revenues of Dollars 48.7bn, excluding accounting changes, compared
with net income of Dollars 2.81bn, or Dollars 2.11 a share, on sales of
Dollars 47.4bn last year.
