FT  22 DEC 93 / Chief executive hails gamble that paid off
The consensus at the London headquarters of British Gas yesterday was that
the gamble of placing the company's future in the hands of the Monopolies
and Mergers Commission and the government had paid off.
Mr Cedric Brown, chief executive officer, said he 'felt totally vindicated
in having sought a broader MMC review' than proposed by the government.
He said the decisions by Mr Michael Heseltine not to break up the company
and to remove the company's mainly residential monopoly by 1998 would 'move
us forward towards longer-term regulatory stability and a balance of
interests between consumers, shareholders and employees'.
Fears of a competitive free-for-all in which British Gas would be left as a
supplier of last resort to unprofitable customers were swept away by Mr
Heseltine's insistence that all gas suppliers take on social obligations to
groups such as the disabled and elderly.
The seasonal display of goodwill at British Gas even extended to Ofgas, the
industry regulator. British Gas's senior management had engaged in a war of
words for much of the past 18 months with Mr James McKinnon, the previous
Ofgas director.
Relations with his successor, Ms Clare Spottiswoode, have clearly improved.
Both sides said yesterday they would work closely to iron out details of
British Gas's corporate restructuring and preparations for greater
competition.
Unresolved issues which will impinge heavily on British Gas's profitability
include the question of whether the formula for the maximum price rise
allowed should be relaxed. It is set at the retail prices index minus 5
percentage points, a level which British Gas says was appropriate for an
integrated company with a secure monopoly, not one facing a big
restructuring and early competition.
Changes in British Gas's corporate culture clearly influenced the thinking
of Ofgas and the government. Ms Spottiswoode said the rejection of the MMC's
recommendation of divestment was due in large part to 'rapid changes' in the
company's culture.
In his statement Mr Heseltine welcomed the corporate restructuring announced
last week. It will result in British Gas abandoning its traditional regional
structure in favour of five business units. These will focus on:
Gas transportation and storage.
Public gas supply to mainly residential customers.
Contract trading with large commercial users.
Installation and servicing of gas central heating.
Retailing.
The recent appointment as chairman of Mr Richard Giordano, the highly
regarded former chairman and chief executive of British Oxygen, also sent a
signal to the government and the City that British Gas was moving quickly
towards a more commercial culture.
The speed and enthusiasm with which that culture permeates the company will
be a big factor in preparing the company for future competition. It is
likely to be complicated by the company's need for a cost-cutting programme.
The DTI decision to opt for early competition puts additional pressure on
British Gas to develop non-regulated businesses, including its worldwide oil
and gas exploration and production division and Global Gas, which oversees
international distribution and power-generation projects.
