FT  20 DEC 93 / The 'new' frontier in economics: America
'Neoclassical theory is simply an inappropriate tool to analyse and
prescribe policies that will induce development. It is concerned with the
operation of markets not with how markets develop. How can one prescribe
policies when one doesn't understand how economies develop?'
I quote from the provocative Nobel prize lecture delivered in Stockholm this
month by Professor Douglass North of Washington University in St Louis.
North's sceptical remarks deserve attention given the turmoil in Russia, and
to a lesser extent, eastern Europe. Most of the advice these countries are
getting from western institutions such as the International Monetary Fund is
based on the 'neoclassical' theory (orthodox market economics) that North
denigrates.
North, originally an economic historian, is a champion of the so-called 'new
institutional economics'. In his view, neoclassical theory begs all the
important questions.
The crucial neoclassical assumption is that individuals seek to maximise
their income or satisfaction in a world where resources are scarce. They
thus make 'optimising' choices. For example, people work up to the point
where the income from their last hour of labour just equals the value of the
leisure foregone. With some important caveats, such assumptions lead to
laisser faire prescriptions: governments should sit back and leave
production to competitive markets and free enterprise.
The problem, according to North, is that this assumes a frictionless, static
world in which 'transactions costs' (the cost of specifying what is being
exchanged and of enforcing agreements over time and space) are zero. Such a
world never has and never will exist. In reality, the impersonal exchange
between millions of participants required in a dynamic market economy
imposes formidable transactions costs. People, for example, need to be
certain that contracts will be honoured years into the future.
As a result, economic performance depends crucially on the setting in which
market exchange occurs - on complex institutional arrangements that
neoclassical theory takes for granted. By institutions, he means 'rules of
the game'. These include formal rules (such as legal property rights) and,
importantly, informal 'norms' of behaviour - for example a reluctance to
shirk or cheat even when there is little risk of discovery. The institutions
that happen to exist depend on inherited ideologies - the 'mental models'
that people use both to explain the world and to prescribe how it ought to
be. Too often these are inimical to progress.
Formal rules can be changed overnight. But informal codes of conduct and
ideologies change slowly. It is these that prevent rapid economic
improvement in formerly communist countries and much of the third world.
This, then, is the new 'institutional frontier' with which economists must
grapple.
North's arguments are impressive and irritating in almost equal measure. The
notion that institutional economics is new is faintly absurd if one
considers classics such as Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations (1776). Smith
certainly understood the importance of institutions and ideology; indeed he
set out to change the rules of the game. And politicians such as Pitt the
Younger soon began to put his ideas into practice, creating the conditions
for Britain's commercial efflorescence in the 19th century. 'What an
extraordinary man Pitt is; he understands my ideas better than I do myself,'
Smith remarked at a London dinner party.
Nor could Karl Marx be charged with indifference to institutions and
ideologies. The problems of the former communist countries seem intractable
precisely because Marxian concepts such as 'exploitation' became so deeply
entrenched. In our own century, several distinguished economists struggled
valiantly to change people's mental models and hence bring about
institutional reform. This was the raison d'etre of Austrian critics of
socialism such as von Mises and Hayek.
North, however, has emerged from the Anglo-American neoclassical tradition
of recent decades. His criticism of his peers - be they at Harvard, Chicago
or the London School of Economics - is justified. Many leading academics
have a narrow intellectual outlook. They have become too absorbed with the
mathematical properties of ideal (and implausible) economic models. If
North's Nobel prize brings them to their senses - and makes them focus on
the real world - it will have performed a singular service.
My other cavil about North is that he seems to have few concrete policy
proposals. It is helpful to emphasise that the success of policies will
often depend on prior changes in attitudes and institutions. But I doubt
this comes as a surprise to the hard-pressed officials struggling with
reforms in formerly communist countries. What they need are practical
suggestions. North is quick to criticise neoclassical ideas. In a recent
paper for the Cato Institute, a Washington think tank, he dismissed
privatisation as a 'simple-minded notion' and a 'travesty of institutional
reasoning'. All right, so what does he recommend?
The answers are presumably to be found in North's first love: history.
Against the odds, some countries have effected stunning transformations of
their institutions and ideologies. The best examples are Japan's Meiji
Restoration and the recent rise of the Asian 'tigers'. These countries
successfully transplanted a version of western capitalism into quite
unpromising soil. This is where the new institutional economists should dig
if they hope to produce relevant policy prescriptions. In the meantime, the
soundest guide is the proven wisdom of thinkers such as Adam Smith.
