FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (5): Key role for Treuhand's man in
Tallinn - Dr Herbert Schmidt advocates a 'third way' to privatisation
As a nation that spent many centuries under the tutelage of Teutonic land
owners, the Estonians tend to be admirers of most things German.
And the government, faced with the task of parcelling out Estonia's state
industries efficiently but fairly, has looked for advice to Berlin - in the
shape of Treuhandanstalt, the German privatisation agency.
This makes Dr Herbert Schmidt, Treuhand's man in Tallinn, one of the most
influential figures in Estonian public life.
Since taking up his job in autumn 1992, his experience and above all his
contacts in the banking and corporate worlds have been of invaluable help in
enabling Estonia to sell itself to the world - even at a time of instability
in neighbouring Russia.
'We have kept investor confidence, despite Zhirinovksy' is Dr Schmidt's  -
so far - justifiable claim.
He has brought from Treuhand a 'philosophy' of privatisation - 'in some
countries,' he says, 'the main purpose is the political one of dismantling
the state as rapidly as possible; in others, the exercise is mainly fiscal,
aimed at boosting state revenues without looking too closely at the buyers.'
Dr Schmidt advocates a 'third way' to privatisation: seeing the process not
as a sale of assets but a purchase of management skills, technology and
capital. For 'political' privatisation, a Czech or Russian-style voucher
system is appropriate; for fiscally-minded privatisers the obvious road is
straight auctions. But the 'purchase' of external help can only be done by
using an elaborate range of criteria to evaluate each potential buyer.
Dr Schmidt has encouraged his Estonian colleagues to look not simply at the
direct fiscal benefits from each bid, but at the more broadly defined
'transaction value,' which takes into account promises of long-term
investment and employment.
He is frank about Estonia's possible drawbacks, which makes him more
plausible than when he talks about the country's undoubted assets.
While Estonians are by instinct a law-abiding, even legalistic nation, the
Soviet takeover of 1940 interrupted the parliament's adoption of a
fully-fledged civil war code.
So the only legal tradition on which Estonia can draw is the fragile one
that was instituted by Russia's Tsar Alexander II in the 1860s. That makes
it harder, though certainly not impossible, to draw up contracts.
He likes to compare Estonia with 'Hong Kong of twenty years ago' - a
strategically located 'entrepot' and outpost of capitalism, with a deep,
efficiently-managed port. These assets, he reckons, should make up for the
tiny size of the local market.
On the future of Estonian industry, he is sure that those businesses which
'grew up naturally' in the pre-war period out of the region's own resources
can restructure and flourish. But some of the manufacturing that was
artificially planted in the republic by the Soviet occupiers, particularly
in the defence sector, may now wither away.
