FT  14 OCT 94 / International Bonds: Belgium completes borrowing programme
with Y75bn offer
The eurobond market saw a large number of differently structured deals in a
variety of currencies yesterday, with a particularly heavy concentration in
the yen sector.
The Kingdom of Belgium's Y75bn of 10-year bonds was the market's main focus
of attention. The bonds were priced to yield 15 basis points over Japanese
government paper, and lead manager Nikko Europe reported strong demand from
central banks and institutional investors in Europe. However, it still
expects 75 to 80 per cent of the issue to be placed with Japanese investors.
The offering, which will be used to refinance the kingdom's existing yen
debt, completes Belgium's public borrowing programme for this year, an
official at the ministry of finance in Brussels said. However, the kingdom
will be looking to make a SFr200m private placement in the Swiss market
before the year-end, he added.
Nikko said that the 15 basis point spread represented a semi-annual yield of
4.9 per cent, the same as the Japanese long-term prime rate and the level at
which many Japanese institutional investors are prepared to commit funds to
the market.
'That has ensured the popularity of the deal in Japan,' a Nikko syndicate
official said. 'Japanese life insurance companies, still nervous about
buying foreign currency bonds, are indicating that they are going to be
strong buyers of euroyen,' he said.
Another syndicate manager said: 'The yen sector is one of the few markets
around the world where borrowers can successfully do a 10-year transaction.
Demand in the dollar and D-Mark sectors is limited to the five-year area or
less.'
In a highly-structured deal, Roche Financial Management, a subsidiary of
Roche, the Swiss health products group, launched Y100bn of equity-linked
bonds due May 2002. Proceeds will replace part of the Dollars 5bn short-term
funding used for the recent acquisition of Syntex, the US pharmaceuticals
company, Roche said.
Lead manager Swiss Bank Corporation said this was the first equity-linked
eurobond denominated in yen issued for a corporate borrower.
In the floating-rate sterling sector, Birmingham Midshires, a UK building
society, launched Pounds 150m of five-year bonds with a coupon of 12 basis
points over three-month Libor. It is believed the proceeds were not swapped.
Joint lead manager UBS reported 'an encouraging trend in demand' away from
the traditional buyers of this type of paper, usually other banks and
building societies, towards offshore UK and other investment funds.
