FT  19 APR 94 / Australian coal miners to strike over export prices
Australian coal miners are to stage a 48-hour strike from today in protest
at the contract prices for steaming coal agreed between the country's coal
companies and Japanese power industry buyers.
In March, mineworkers staged similar industrial action, that time in protest
at the coking coal price cuts which coal companies had accepted in the
annual negotiations with the Japanese steel mills. The government has
instigated a six-month review of the nation's export coal industry as a
result.
The latest bout of industrial action will start with the first shift today
and work will resume with the first shift on Thursday. Over 20,000
mineworkers will be involved, and the action is expected to close production
in Queensland and New South Wales. Coal is Australia's largest single
export.
The outcome of the steaming coal contract negotiations, announced at the end
of March, was closely watched because of the political furore which had
followed an unexpectedly large cut in coking coal prices agreed earlier in
the year. In the event, the steaming coal price was reduced by 5.8 per cent,
while the coking coal reduction was around 8 to 9 per cent.
However, it had always been felt the underlying market conditions for
thermal coal were better. While the coking coal market has been severely
affected by the Japanese steel mills' problems and by changes in
steel-making technology, steaming coal demand stands to benefit from the
growth in Asian power station users.
The Queensland Mining Council said the strike would cost up to ADollars 52m
(Pounds 25.5m) in lost production. Mr David Beddall, federal resources
minister, also condemned the strike.
News of the mineworkers' action came as Mr Lee Kuan Yew, former Singapore
prime minister, blasted Australian work ethic problems. At a business lunch
in Sydney, he warned that, if the country wanted to compete in Asia,
'Australians must be weaned from welfare dependency and become self-reliant
and competitive'.
