FT  10 AUG 94 / Senators detect CIA's concealed spy centre: Perry orders
investigation into agency's Dollars 310m secret office
The Central Intelligence Agency, ever adept at the art of disguise, appears
to have surpassed itself by concealing an entire office complex  - duping
the residents of suburban Washington, Congress, and perhaps even President
Bill Clinton.
The undercover building, disguised as a corporate centre for Rockwell
International, the Los Angeles-based defence contractor, was this week
unmasked as the new headquarters of the secretive National Reconnaissance
Office, which operates all US spy satellites and is run by the Pentagon and
the CIA.
Mr James Woolsey, director of the CIA, will go before the Senate
intelligence committee today to explain to furious senators how details of
the Dollars 310m (Pounds 200m) complex - almost one fifth the size of the
Pentagon - were slipped under their noses.
The committee wants to know why it was not informed about the cost, scope
and even location of the four-building compound, being constructed on a
68-acre site at Chantilly, Virginia, 30 miles outside Washington.
Mr William Perry, defence secretary, said he had ordered the Pentagon to
investigate construction of the building. President Clinton declassified its
existence on Monday after prodding from angry senators, who discovered the
project during a congressional audit of intelligence facilities.
Dissatisfied with the information the Pentagon and CIA were providing them,
the legislators requested a review of NRO financing and went public with
their findings.
Mr Clinton himself may have been unaware of the project, now dubbed the
'Stealth' building, according to Senator Dennis DeConcini, chairman of the
intelligence committee. Mr DeConcini told Mr Clinton about the project last
week. The intelligence community, Mr DeConcini said, 'faced the question:
how do you hide an elephant on a football field? That's what they did, and
with great pride.'
Rockwell was listed as the official purchaser of the site in 1990 and
obtained special permits to build a high-security fence around the facility.
A Rockwell spokeswoman said yesterday it was 'constructing a facility in
northern Virginia to support certain government contract facilities of our
defence electronic businesses'. Construction 'was being performed by Collins
International Service Corp, a Rockwell subsidiary. All details are
classified,' she said.
The senators' public announcement forced the CIA to release a brief
statement that Mr Woolsey and Mr John Deutch, deputy defence secretary, will
be reviewing the project's history and how Congress was updated on its
progress. The release stated that 'no other information about the NRO or
this project has been declassified'.
For Mr Woolsey, the emergence of the grandiose over-budget project, aimed at
accommodating 3,000 NRO employees, is another embarrassment. He has been
trying to rebuild the CIA's public image, badly tarnished recently by the
Aldrich Ames spy case and critics' claims that the agency is obsolete.
