FT  31 DEC 94 / How To Spend It: Hmm, very tricky subject, taste . . . - War
and Peace (Chintz versus Zen) / Lucia van der Post on a subject which causes
more dinner party angst than when to serve the cheese
Taste, as some of us know, is as tricky a subject as class and money. It can
break up marriages and friendships more quickly than disputes over children.
Lob it in as a dinner-party subject and the opposing sides line up with rare
ferocity.
What most of us can usually agree on is that we are imbued with impeccable
taste . . .it is other people who are prone, unfortunately, to dubious
lapses.
When it comes to houses, and the way we live today, there are two
instinctively different and opposing aesthetics. There are those who feel
comfortable with the old and familiar, with established patterns of living,
with time-honoured ideas and the reassurance of tradition. They tend to
choose chintz and capacious sofas, the familiarity of much-loved objects
that appear timeless and mellow.
Then there are those who just as instinctively feel a psychological need for
a new broom, for a look that breaks with the tired patterns of the past,
that reaches out into the future. They need air and space, the aesthetic
shock of the new, a sense that first principles have been re-addressed, that
modern needs have been redefined.
Andree Putman perhaps puts their point of view best when she says 'physical
comfort is never the first thing. I prefer spiritual comfort, by which I
mean space, light (natural as well as artificial), contrasts of textures and
pure lines. I never look for literal comfort, but for something that allows
my mind to rest.'
What both sides do agree is that there is more to style and taste and ways
of living than mere function: our houses and the things we surround
ourselves with resonate with emotion.
They matter to our psychological comfort. In a world where the home is ever
more important, they are a refuge from the increasingly hostile world, a
place for self-expression, a setting for the most intimate and important
part of our lives, how we furnish, how we live in our homes touches us at a
deep level.
That we all do it in different ways proves that beauty is indeed in the eye
of the beholder. As Christopher Alexander, mathematician, architect,
contractor and craftsman, put it: 'What does 'beautiful' mean? It means that
the thing makes me feel joyous, more rooted in the world, more whole as a
person.'
And, perhaps even more pertinently, as Frank Lloyd Wright put it: 'There
should be as many kinds of houses as there are kinds of people and as many
differentiations as there are different individuals. A man who has
individuality (and what man lacks it?) has a right to its expression in his
own environment.'
So, in celebration of man's diversity, of the happy fact that not all of us
think alike, that there are as many ways of living well as there are people,
How to Spend It interviews the leading exponents of the two main aesthetic
trends.
