FT  21 FEB 94 / World Bond Markets: Moves to develop 'structured' bonds -
International
Mr Kenneth Lay, the director of financial operations at the World Bank, just
cannot sit still. Now that his efforts to develop a truly international
capital market through his global bond concept have paid off, he is using
his formidable energy and influence to improve the secondary market
liquidity in derivative-linked or 'structured' bonds.
An increasing number of borrowers are issuing structured bonds because the
derivative element embedded in the bonds enables them to achieve a cheaper
cost of funds than if they launched a straightforward Eurobond or global
bond offering. Structured bonds are equally popular with investors who want
to back their views about the direction of anything from interest rates to
an individual company's share price.
But since these transactions are frequently driven by fleeting arbitrage
opportunities and tailored to specific investors, they tend to be relatively
small in relation to Eurobond or global bond market offerings. Syndicate
managers say the average size of structured bond offerings is about Dollars
100m.
As a result, investors often run into difficulty when they come to sell the
bonds. Main complaints are the lack of price transparency and liquidity in
the secondary market, which means holders often receive less than the
inherent value of the bonds.
World Bank officials have discussed with about 200 investors how to reduce
the deficiencies in the structured bond market. They believe the innovative
facilities of the World Bank's imminent Dollars 5bn global multi-currency
note programme should help to address these concerns. The programme offers
the following advantages:
Price transparency: the seven sponsoring dealers will regularly publish
indicative bid prices for World Bank structured bonds issued under the
programme on dedicated screens distributed by widely available services. The
World Bank expects that competitive pressures among dealers will lead them
to improve secondary market prices.
Secondary market liquidity: by offering to exchange outstanding structured
notes for new floating-rate or structured notes, the World Bank hopes to be
more supportive of sponsoring dealers' secondary market activities than
other issuers.
Issuance, trading and custody: global documentation (bonds issued under the
programme may be governed by New York, English or German law) will allow for
timely and streamlined issuance of structured bonds in a wide range of
markets, currencies and maturities. The programme also provides for a choice
of clearing systems and cross-market clearing and settlement in major
markets.
Mr Bim Hundal, head of medium-term note (MTN) programmes at Goldman Sachs,
one of the sponsoring dealers of the World Bank's programme, says the World
Bank's decision to formalise the role of dealers is an important step in the
development of the structured bond market.
The increased competition and the knowledge that the World Bank is measuring
their performance should encourage dealers to make realistic prices in the
bonds. The increased price transparency will benefit investors whenever they
value their holdings either for regulatory or trading purposes.
The World Bank hopes its measures will widen the investor appeal of
structured bonds since it plans to raise at least Dollars 2bn of its annual
borrowing programme of between Dollars 10bn and Dollars 12bn through
structured products. These products will be linked only to interest rates
and exchange rates.
Although structured bonds tend to have relatively short maturities - the
result of investor worries about the lack of liquidity - the World Bank
hopes its liquidity facility will enable it to achieve maturities of between
four and 10 years.
The global platform built into the World Bank's programme is likely to be
imitated by other issuers who want to have one MTN programme which allows
them access to all the world's major markets.
The volume of MTN programmes has grown rapidly over the past few years as
issuers seek to lower their documentation costs and cut the time involved in
launching a bond offering.
Mr Juan Costain, head of capital markets at Kidder Peabody, another
sponsoring dealer of the World Bank's programme, estimates that the volume
of MTNs grew by 2 1/2 times last year to Dollars 127bn. Of this, about
Dollars 60bn was in structured bonds and this year the volume could reach
Dollars 75bn.
According to Mr Costain, the documentation costs for a Euro-MTN programme,
under which an issuer can make numerous Eurobond offerings, are about
Dollars 100,000, the same as for an individual Eurobond offering. Although
the documentation cost of a global programme is closer to Dollars 300,000,
the issuer is likely to achieve even lower costs of funding because of the
immediate access to a far wider range of markets and currencies.
