FT  08 APR 94 / Survey of East Kent (9): Foundation for confidence -
Improved road/rail links
Transport improvements are the single most important reason why investors
have taken a new interest in Kent, according to a poll by the property
consultants, Cluttons. That fact might appear self-evident when so much
money has gone into creation of the Channel Tunnel, yet it is not this
massive development which has raised the area's reputation. New roads are
the foundation on which business confidence is being built, writes David
Lawson.
While new roads are unlikely to make companies suddenly decide to move into
regions like east Kent, better access is undoubtedly welcome.
In some eyes, it could not have been much worse.
Much has changed in the last few years - but much had to change, according
to the 1991 review by PA Cambridge Economic Consultants. The tunnel is
expected to increase traffic loads for several reasons. Firstly, the fast
rail link will not be built until the next century, so waggons will continue
to thunder through the region. In fact the tunnel will increase this load as
hauliers switch from other channel ports to both Dover and the tunnel as
fare cuts increase their competitiveness.
Money for roads has poured into the region since the tunnel was announced -
Kent has topped the national spending list for three years in a row. Much
has been reserved for areas outside east Kent, such as the Pounds 160m
Medway towns relief road. But resources are also going towards the important
Thanet Way, which will carry the advantages of the M2 eastwards to Ramsgate.
Not quite a motorway, but Pounds 140m on a continuous dual carriageway comes
close.
Further improvements are in the pipeline for a bypass on the A28 at Sturry
and upgrading of the A2. European Union grants will also go into new roads
in Thanet.
None of this implies special treatment, according to the Department of
Transport, which insisted to PA Cambridge Economic Consultants that east
Kent had to stand in the same queue as all 108 local authorities in England.
The tide of money flowing in this direction appears to tell a different
story, however.
Jon Barrett, Kent's director of inward investment, must feel hopeful that
such largesse will extend to further bottlenecks. He picks out remaining
problems with north-south access along the A28. Local links off main routes
also need strengthening if smaller towns are to benefit rather than see
waggons - and eventually trains - racing through from London to the tunnel,
leaving nothing but cracked ceilings and a dose of pollution.
A stop rather than an faster route could have the biggest local impact,
however. The Ashford International Terminal is likely to be the biggest
single factor in transforming the area apart from the tunnel, although the
network of access roads to the undersea link will be a useful bonus for
Folkestone and Dover.
The very success of the region will also bring new problems. Canterbury is
already working out an intensive traffic management scheme to ease
congestion. Towns like Ashford will face the same problem as economic
development blossoms.
