FT  12 AUG 94 / Children neither seen nor heard: A steep fall in the birth
rate means demographic worries for east Germany
The British author, PD James, recently wrote a novel called The Children of
Men. It is set in England in 2021 and describes how infertility has spread
like a plague. The human race faces extinction as scientists try to reverse
the trend. At the end of the book, a woman gives birth, but whether this is
enough to save the human race is left open.
German demographers and doctors could identity with this work of fiction:
five years since the collapse of the Berlin Wall, the birth rate in east
Germany continues to plummet.
Mr Horst Halle, head of the maternity department at the Charite, east
Berlin's largest hospital, first noticed the trend in early 1990. 'You just
had to look at the statistics,' he explained. 'Before 1989, there were about
16,000 babies born each year in east Berlin. Today, that figure has slumped
to 6,800, a decline of about 60 per cent.
'In the Charite itself, we used to record about 2,200 births a year. Today,
we have fewer than 1,800, and we are doing better than most maternity
hospitals in east Berlin.'
Such an unprecedented fall in the birth rate would have shocked the former
communist regime in East Germany. It prided itself on its wide range of
social services aimed at providing women with excellent childcare facilities
to encourage them to have children.
Then, day-care centres were free. Women could take a year's paid maternity
leave and return to a guaranteed job, or take off three years with generous
state support and still have the same job to go back to. Indeed, more than
90 per cent of the female working population were employed, compared with 49
per cent in west Germany. By the age of 21, east German women started having
children, unlike their west German counterparts, who generally started a
family in their mid-to-late 20s.
Despite these incentives, however, the birth rate in east Germany was
relatively low compared with most other east European countries under the
communists. Mr Jurgen Dorbritz, a demographer at the Federal Statistics
Office, says: 'What we are now seeing in eastern Germany is a birth rate
which is falling from a low base. That is the worrying aspect. That's what
makes the statistics so extraordinary.'
In 1989, there were 198,922 live births in east Germany, the equivalent of
12 births per 1,000, or about 1.6 children per family. This was the same as
in west Germany. By 1993, the number of east German births had fallen to
79,926 - or about 60 per cent of the 1989 rate - the equivalent of 0.8
children per family, or only half the west German level.
'We just don't know how long this trend will continue. One thing is certain.
There will be very few children born between the years 2015 and 2020 because
of the lack of women of child-bearing age. Can you imagine how difficult it
is going to be to pay for the number of old people in our country?' said Mr
Dorbritz.
According to the latest statistics from the German Association for Pension
Insurance, the number of people under the age of 20 in east Germany will
fall from 3.84m in 1993 to 2.6m in 2020; the number of people aged between
20 and 60 will fall from 8.7m to 7.6m; and those over 60 will rise from 3m
to 4.13m. The percentage of pensioners per 100 contributors to the state
pension insurance system will rise from 26 per cent in 1993 to more than 50
per cent by 2020.
Mr Halle, who has worked in the Charite for 28 years, believes there are
several reasons why east German women are remaining childless. 'Demographers
tend to ignore the fact that we had been expecting a sharp fall in the birth
rate in the year 1995, regardless of unification. This is because the east
German abortion law of 1972 made abortion available on demand. We knew we
were not going to have many child-bearing women in the mid-1990s,' he
explained. In 1972, the birth rate fell to about 6 per 1,000, climbing back
to about 12 births per 1,000. Today it is fewer than 5.1.
But Mr Halle also believes that the process of German unification itself has
had a profound social effect on east German women. 'A young east German
woman knows that if she becomes pregnant, the chances she will find a job
are now far less, especially given the high level of unemployment,' he said.
East German women have borne the brunt of unemployment, which is officially
16 per cent of the working population, excluding those on short-time work,
early retirement schemes, or job creation programmes.
By the end of the first quarter of this year, more than 790,000 east German
women had lost their jobs, representing a female unemployment rate of 23 per
cent. In west Germany, 1.1m women, or 9.3 per cent, are out of work. 'East
German women today have freedom of choice, but they have lost their status
in society,' said Mr Dorbritz.
The other pressure arising from unification is that many east German women
have had to seek new qualifications, retrain, or change jobs more often,
unlike the former days when a job was for life. 'There is no more security.
The widespread sense of uncertainty has played a major role in the decline
of the birth rate,' said Mr Dorbritz.
The freedom to travel has played its part in the decline of the birth rate
as well: young east German women have an unprecedented chance to go abroad
before they settle and start a family.
'There was hardly anything else to do before 1989,' said Mr Dorbritz. 'East
German society was geared towards encouraging young women to procreate. All
those social planks of free kindergartens, both parents in a job, heavily
subsidised or free children's clothes and shoes, have now disappeared.'
Greater mobility and open borders have led to a sharp rise in migration from
east Germany to west Germany. More than 1.2m from a population of 17m east
Germans went to live in west Germany between late 1989 and early 1991.
'Many of these people were young and skilled,' said Mr Nicholas Eberstadt, a
demographer at the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research.
'Of the overall drop in the birth rate, roughly one-ninth can be attributed
to the sheer decline of east Germany's population during those two years.'
Staff at the Charite hospital know that, unless the birth rate increases,
the obstetricians, doctors and nurses could be without a job. 'We have 2,000
beds here,' said Mr Halle. 'Before unification, we were dealing with more
than 2,200 women a year. If we cannot account for all the beds, we will be
under pressure to make savings. That means cutting jobs.'
But his main concern is the kind of society which will evolve in east
Germany in the next century. 'The prognosis is very bad,' said Mr Halle. 'I
do not know how we are going to fend for the elderly. Who is going to pay
for them?' One answer might be to allow immigrants into the country under a
quota system to replenish the population - a solution advanced by some
liberals.
One thing is clear. Mr Eberstadt believes that, if the present trends in
east Germany continue, it will be virtually impossible for what he calls
'generational replacement' to occur.
'For generational replacement, eastern Germany's women of child-bearing age
today would have to give birth to an average of about 2.07 infants over the
course of their lives. They are now having 0.8 children, less than one birth
per woman per lifetime. This is not enough for a net population
replacement.'
