FT  12 NOV 94 / Reynolds skulks in the wings: The Newry murder has made the
Irish premier reticent
The usually firm hand of Mr Albert Reynolds, prime minister of the Irish
republic, was notably absent yesterday as his government awaited assurances
from Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing, after Thursday's murder of a post
office worker across the border in Newry.
Few commentators in Dublin can remember a time in the 10 weeks since the IRA
ceasefire in which the Irish premier has been quite so reticent about taking
centre stage on a policy which he has orchestrated almost single-handedly
from the Irish side.
After his government's decision to rescind its programme of IRA prisoner
releases, it was left to the hapless justice minister, Mrs Maire
Geoghegan-Quinn, normally a sure-footed performer, to explain the
about-turn.
The Dublin government has often warned of the dangers of leaving large
numbers of republicans behind bars once a ceasefire was in place. It argued
a goodwill gesture was needed to bolster the moderate voice in the IRA.
Mrs Geoghegan-Quinn was adamant that at no time did the government plan the
release of more than nine prisoners, in spite of newspaper reports in the
republic that as many as 30 convicted terrorists were being considered.
Her government colleagues were yesterday quick to applaud her robust defence
of the policy reversal. Only Sinn Fein expressed outright disappointment.
Another surprise was the absence of any murmur of discontent from civil
liberties groups. Some politicians, however, privately wondered about the
consistency - having offered to release the prisoners - of withdrawing the
concession because of an event 60 miles away in another state.
Not only the release programme has been put on hold. Dublin is reviewing its
whole approach to the peace process. Where days ago a cross-party consensus
had prevailed in the republic in support of Mr Reynolds' efforts, the
opposition yesterday seemed to have a renewed bounce in its step.
Both governments insist the peace process is on track. Mr Dick Spring, the
republic's foreign minister, and Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland
secretary, are due to meet in Dublin on Monday about progress on the
framework document.
The Northern Ireland Office said yesterday that nothing had changed its
'working assumption' that the IRA had ceased its military operations.
Exploratory talks with Sinn Fein about the 'practical consequences' of the
ceasefire may start this year. They would cover the decommissioning of arms
and explosives, and the steps required to return Sinn Fein to democratic
politics and the bilateral talks.
But the Newry murder and Sinn Fein's less than frank explanation underline
the danger of taking its assurances on the permanence of the ceasefire at
face value without first verifying the disposal of arms and explosives. 'It
will certainly make us more cautious,' said a UK government official.
The Newry tragedy has underscored British concerns that the issue of arms
and explosives must be addressed before full political negotiations can
begin, in spite of the insistence of Mr Martin McGuinness, Sinn Fein
vice-president, that the issue is 'down the road'.
The main outstanding question is whether the Newry attack was carried out by
a renegade republican unit or whether it was in some way at the behest of
the IRA's central command. If the former, then there seems no reason why
London should not begin discussing the handing in of arms with republican
leaders before the end of the year, as previously envisaged. Indeed, the
incident might even play a part in helping to convince the leadership of
Sinn Fein that it has something to gain from the surrender of at least some
IRA weaponry at a relatively early stage in the peace process.
But if the raid was sanctioned by IRA leaders, then the UK government's
so-called working assumption that the IRA ceasefire was permanent would be
under severe pressure. It is hard to see under those circumstances how a
severe delay in preliminary dialogue between London and republican leaders
could be avoided.
Thursday's attack also underlines the importance of efforts being made by
senior British and Irish officials to develop a co-ordinated approach to
dismantling paramilitary arsenals, as agreed at Chequers last month. Mr John
Major, UK prime minister, said the discussions would concentrate on the
'logistics and mechanics' of arranging for weapons held by paramilitaries to
be handed over.
It is almost certain that these discussions will have continued at
yesterday's meeting of the liaison committee of British and Irish officials
in Dublin. Sir Patrick and Mr Spring will be under pressure to say more on
Monday about the substance of the committee's deliberations.
