FT  18 AUG 94 / Fertility rates are down but not enough
The UN's population report tells of a dramatic drop in fertility rates in
the past 40 years, even in some of the world's poorest countries, Bronwen
Maddox reports.
In Asia and Latin America the fertility rate has nearly halved from 5.9 to
about 3 children per woman in that period, although Africa (including
northern African states) has showed a smaller decline from 6.6 to 5.8. Even
in developed countries, rates have fallen from 2.8 to 1.7 over that period.
These patterns have forced demographers to modify the old assumption of a
link between low birth rates and economic wealth in favour of a more complex
picture. Some countries, such as Bangladesh, have achieved steep falls in
fertility rates despite relative lack of economic growth. Others, notably
Pakistan and Middle Eastern countries, continue to have large average family
sizes despite relatively high levels of economic prosperity.
The UNFPA draws a close connection between low fertility rates and the
availability of contraception, even where gross domestic product per head
has not risen greatly. It attributes roughly half of the fall in worldwide
fertility rates to improved distribution of contraceptives.
The other half, it says, is due simply to the determination of parents to
have fewer children, even when contraception is not available. Even the
poorest families, UNFPA officials say, work out that they can spend more on
each child if they have fewer children.
Demographers have long agreed that improving women's education plays an
important part in reducing family sizes. But the UN report suggests that
newer pressures are also providing powerful motivation. When workers move to
towns from the countryside they tend to delay having children and to have
fewer. Anecdotal evidence from west African countries also suggests that
looming land shortages are curbing the size of rural families.
These new factors may be helping to push down fertility rates even in Africa
and central America, the regions which have persistently had the highest
rates, Mr Alex Marshall of UNFPA suggests. Since the first half of the
1980s, Tanzania has seen fertility rates drop from 6.7 to 5.9 children per
woman, Namibia from 5.8 to 5.3 and South Africa from 4.8 to 4.1.
