FT  12 MAY 94 / Dominican president faces close contest
President Joaqun Balaguer of the Dominican Republic is facing a surprisingly
stiff challenge in his attempt to win election on Monday to a seventh term
at the head of the Caribbean nation.
The latest opinion polls show the president, who leads the conservative
Reformist Social Christian party, second to Mr Jose Francisco Pena Gomez of
the social democratic Dominican Revolutionary party.
The polls put Mr Pena Gomez at 37 per cent of the vote, Mr Balaguer at 34
per cent and Mr Juan Bosch, the president's usual main political rival, at
14 per cent. Other support is split among smaller parties.
Mr Balaguer's supporters, however, argue that the polls do not indicate the
likely outcome on Monday. They say the president has always benefited by
late surges in support and that undecided voters - the polls say about 9 per
cent - will back the incumbent.
A win for Mr Pena Gomez, 57, would be a departure in Dominican politics.
The many battles between Mr Balaguer and Mr Bosch, have dominated the
political scene for decades, but they are now aged 87 and 84 respectively
and this is expected to be the last election for both.
Mr Pena Gomez has been helped by having as running-mate Mr Fernando Alvarez
Bogaert, once a senior functionary in Mr Balaguer's party.
The social democratic party's officials say that they have their doubts
about the lead shown by the polls - earlier soundings had given Mr Pena
Gomez an even wider margin.
In previous elections, Mr Balaguer has always managed 'to come from behind
at the last moment, helped by fickle voters and the vagaries of the
Dominican election machinery,' said one official.
Losing candidates in the Dominican Republic have frequently contested the
integrity of the electoral system. After the last election, Mr Bosch, who
lost by a few thousand votes, claimed that the presidency had been stolen
away.
These concerns, and the deaths of more than 30 people in campaign incidents,
have created a tense atmosphere.
In an effort to ease this, church leaders brought the presidential
candidates together on Tuesday night to sign a compact committing them to a
peaceful election and to respect for the results. These are expected for the
end of next week.
The social democratic party has also complained that its opponents have
introduced 'verbal racism' into the campaign. Questions about the competence
in the presidency of Mr Pena Gomez, whose only public office has been the
mayoralty of the capital Santo Domingo, have frequently been accompanied by
reference to the fact that he is black, party officials said.
Dominicans remain concerned that a close victory by any candidate could lead
to disputes and to political violence. They have been stocking up with food,
fuel and other essentials.
The winner, who is to be inaugurated in August, will face an immediate and
difficult task in righting an economy which has gone off course. Mr Pena
Gomez is offering no dramatic changes for the economy based on tourism,
agriculture, and gold and nickel mining.
