FT  29 APR 94 / Hard days, dollar nights: Stephen Fidler on the pressure for
economic reform in Cuba
To eat well in Havana, you need dollars.
The currency, once the hated symbol of US imperialism, was made legal tender
by President Fidel Castro last July. It gives those Cubans with access to
dollars the means to supplement minimal food rations, to buy petrol and
other 'luxury' items. It is their passport to illegal private restaurants in
houses around Havana and to the unofficial taxis cruising the city.
Those without dollars, at least in the city, are forced to depend on
government hand-outs of a few pounds of rice and beans a month, rum,
cigarettes and occasional other items. For many, daily life in Cuba after
the collapse of the Soviet Union is dominated by the chore of finding
something extra for the cooking pot.
Since the fall of the Soviet Union, which channelled Dollars 65bn in
financial support to Cuba over three decades, Cuba's economy has shrunk by
an estimated 50 per cent. Fuel shortages have closed factories and most
households suffer power cuts of six to 12 hours a day. The bicycle is the
main means of transport through Havana; many travel two or even three to a
bike.
Getting hold of dollars has become an obsession for many Cubans, forcing
almost everyone to break the country's restrictive laws. As a result,
hundreds of women in Havana have turned to part-time prostitution. A
foreigner walking along the Malecon, Havana's waterfront, does not go far
without being propositioned.
The government recognises the problem. Its reluctant legalising of the
dollar benefited those least loyal to Castro's 1959 revolution. They
included those who kept in touch with exiled relatives in defiance of the
government. Now, the government is, ironically, trying to mend fences with
Cubans abroad who send home about Dollars 400m a year in cash and goods.
The growth of a dollar economy - already probably bigger than the socialist
state sector - inevitably reduces the government's ability to dictate
Cubans' living conditions.
The government's shortage of hard currency means it has little with which to
buy the loyalty of the population. The old levers of control are rusting as
defenders of the revolution are themselves forced to move to the margins of
the law. 'The police are just the same as everyone else,' says Andres, a
catering student who is among the hundreds of youths who gather every
evening along the Malecon. 'When they've finished work, they have to find
ways to get food.'
Castro's government appears at best equivocal about what it should do next,
and there seems to be no model for reform. Officials deprecate the idea that
they are seeking some kind of 'Chinese model' - economic reform in a
strictly controlled political setting - perhaps because they recall the
Tiananmen square massacre. They argue that China's huge domestic market and
large rural population is not replicated in Cuba.
So far, the reforms have done little more than legitimise already rampant
black market activity. After authorising limited private enterprise last
year, the government last month attempted a crackdown on the black market.
The police rounded up many of the capital's Lycra-clad prostitutes, closed
private restaurants and searched cars going into Havana, confiscating food -
which by law must be sold to the government - intended for illegal sale.
This was interpreted by some Cubans as a practical move to stamp out some of
the more egregious black market activities, and to underline the
government's determination to maintain law and order. According to one Cuban
sympathetic to the government, many private restaurants were unsanitary and
were becoming havens for delinquents. But others saw the measures as a sign
that Castro remained opposed to market reform.
Either way, the effectiveness of repression has been limited. New
restaurants have replaced those that closed, while some restaurateurs have
become caterers, delivering food to the homes of customers.
If the government is to build on the limited reforms already made, many
observers reckon it should start sooner rather than later. Mr Jacques de
Groote, an executive director of the International Monetary Fund, who
visited Cuba in an informal capacity last November, said then that 'time is
running out for the orderly introduction of a critical mass of
market-oriented measures'.
His view was that the government's 'time-frame for decisive action seems to
be in the next three to six months'.
The six months is nearly up, with no sign of action. Things may be clearer
after the meeting of the country's National Assembly, scheduled to open on
Sunday. Government officials have played down expectations of what might be
achieved, though they have held meetings - with often frank exchanges - in
workplaces across the country. Mr Roberto Rivas, director of the
government's Committee of Economic Co-operation, which tries to encourage
inward investment, said this month that 'the process has been slow because
of the need to obtain consensus'.
Some fiscal and monetary measures may be adopted. For example, the National
Assembly may agree to the closure of some state enterprises - 69 per cent of
which lost money last year, according to the government, and many of which
have ceased production.
However, there is no indication of strong action on the supply side of the
economy. The most important single measure would be the liberalisation of
the agriculture sector to legalise private markets for food. But Castro has
in the past opposed this move.
Many observers see his dilemma becoming more acute. He can either try to
lead the economic reform, ceding some political control but preserving some
gains of the revolution, such as its education and health services. Or he
can resist it, and watch while the remaining structures of government decay
and 'illegal' activity proliferates.
Castro, now 67, will probably take the decision he calculates will best
preserve his hold on power. That power may be dissolving daily as the
economy moves inexorably towards the market. But there is little evidence
yet that Cubans' falling standards of living are translating into coherent
political opposition.
This may be because Havana is still free of the abject poverty that blights
most Latin cities, but it is more likely that most Cubans are too tired to
indulge in political intrigue. 'At 10pm, the last thought that working men
and women have is to get out on a bicycle once again to attend a political
meeting,' said one Cuban cited by the Cuban-born US academic Jorge Dominguez
in a recent report. 'They just want to rest and sleep because the next day
will be just as tough.'
