FT  08 NOV 94 / Tories glad to see Scott buried in paper: Jimmy Burns
assesses the effects of the delays in the arms-to-Iraq investigation
Two years after his arms-to-Iraq inquiry was set up and seven months from
the end of the main public hearings, Lord Justice Scott is not even a
quarter way through writing his report. The estimated publication date has
again slipped, this time to 'sometime around Easter'.
The latest delay has been greeted with concern by some Labour MPs, who fear
that the momentum is being lost. Some of their colleagues, however, continue
to flood the Scott team with documentation, saying that the inquiry has not
gone far enough.
Tories, predictably, appear only too pleased to have one less hot potato to
contend with in the current political climate.
Mr Peter Viggers, a Tory MP with a special interest in defence matters,
gleefully remarked at the weekend: 'It seems to have faded from the media,
from the House of Commons, from everywhere.'
Sir Charles Powell, a former senior adviser to Baroness Thatcher, the former
prime minister, said: 'I think by April the Scott inquiry is going to have a
certain stale air.'
The judge appears unruffled by such scepticism while sensitive to the
suggestion that his work is no longer an issue of public concern. And he is
somewhat irritated by what he sees as the Labour party's inconsistent
approach to his inquiry.
In November 1992 he agreed to head the inquiry in the midst of a huge public
row - led by Labour - following the collapse of the trial of three
executives of Matrix Churchill, the machine-tool company, who were charged
with breaching export regulations.
Those charged alleged that they had exported to Iraq with the full
connivance of the government, even though Britain was supposed to be
pursuing a policy banning the sale of defence-related equipment to Baghdad.
While initially focused on the Matrix Churchill case, the judge has been
determined to ensure that his terms of reference were sufficiently wide to
allow him to examine other arms-related prosecutions where the conduct of
government lawyers has been open to question.
According to his officials the judge's low profile in recent months belies
the progress he has been making towards completing an inquiry which has
already forced ministers and officials to account for their actions in a way
they have never been required to do before.
Mr Christopher Muttukumaru, secretary to the Scott inquiry, said: 'We don't
want to be open to the suggestion that we haven't followed up every
reasonable line of inquiry. If in the end we bring out a report which is not
based on a firm footing, we will be rightly criticised. We are not having
that.'
In recent months the judge has found himself having to test the massive
amounts of documentary and oral evidence made available to him by
cross-examining MI6 officers in private, and seeking further statements from
Whitehall officials and ministers.
He has widened his list of witnesses to include Mr Jonathan Aitken, Treasury
minister, and Sir Charles, neither of whom gave evidence in public hearing.
Mr Aitken told the inquiry that while serving as a non-executive director of
the British Manufacturer and Research Company, a defence group, and
subsequently as defence minister, he had no recollection of clandestine
exports to Iraq or of government connivance.
Sir Charles for his part has told the inquiry that although he was
personally aware of the attempt by Whitehall officials and junior ministers
to change secretly guidelines on defence exports without informing
parliament, this was not passed on to Lady Thatcher when she was prime
minister.
Among additional evidence that has landed on the judge's desk in recent
weeks are documents provided by Mr Michael Meacher, Labour's transport
spokesman. These relate to the activities of the defence company
International Signal and Control (ISC) before its purchase by Ferranti in
1987.
The inquiry team is probing the extent of government knowledge of an ISC
contract for the supply of a precision guided missile system capable of
carrying nuclear or chemical warheads which might have been diverted to
Iraq.
Mr Jim Cousins, Labour's foreign affairs spokesman, who has kept a close
watch on the inquiry, said at the weekend: 'It's important that Scott should
become more than an echo of distant thunder. He shouldn't be sidetracked by
minutiae but concentrate instead on what the government knew and what that
tells us about the nature of the arms trade.'
The judge is adamant that he is not dancing to anyone's political tune. Mr
Muttukumaru said: 'You shouldn't underestimate the extent to which he is
determined to follow an independent line.'
At present the balance is weighted on the side of ensuring that there is no
whitewash. Like Aesop's tale, the judge is hoping that with his 'slow and
steady' approach he will, as did the tortoise, get there in the end.
And it may be of small comfort to the government that the latest delay means
that the Scott report could coincide with the first public findings of Lord
Nolan's inquiry into standards in public life.
