FT  24 OCT 94 / Emerging Markets: Dollar stays focus of market attention -
Currencies
Foreign exchange traders will face a familiar challenge at the start of the
week: whither the dollar?
The dollar touched a post-war low of Y96.55 against the yen last Friday, and
a two-year low of DM1.4880 against the D-Mark. Many analysts predict it will
sink lower, but traders are nervous of selling the currency aggressively for
fear of being caught short by central bank intervention.
Apart from the Bank of Japan, there has been no sign of central bank
support, but the likelihood of this will increase should the dollar sink
towards the DM1.45 level.
The main concern of the market is that the Fed has not moved quickly enough
to combat rising inflationary pressures in the US. It is very difficult to
forecast a dollar recovery until this perception is effectively countered
and US asset markets look more attractive.
The key figure for the market to focus on will be the release on Friday of
the third quarter GDP growth rate. Economists will be looking to see to what
extent tighter monetary policy this year has slowed growth. Most estimates
see GDP falling towards 3 per cent, from 4.1 per cent. The employment cost
index, out on Tuesday, will also be closely watched for any signs of wage
inflation.
Outside of the US, the main influence on the dollar will be the Bundesbank
council, which meets on Thursday. Opinion is divided as to whether the next
move in German rates is up or down. Should they cut, while US rates continue
to rise, this might lend support to the dollar.
The US discount rate is currently 4 per cent, while the equivalent rate in
Germany is 4.5 per cent. Some analysts believe a cross-over in US and German
short-term interest rates could trigger a turnround in the dollar.
Investors will also be keeping an eye on sterling, whose fortunes have
revived recently. The pound has rallied from Dollars 1.5525 to a high so far
of Dollars 1.6336, a gain of over 5 per cent in fewer than seven weeks.
Although the upward move was sparked largely by dollar weakness, and
political risk attaching to the D-Mark ahead of the recent elections, it is
supported by economic fundamentals. Inflation is at a 27-year low, growth is
robust, and the balance of payments is in much better health than most
analysts had predicted.
Sterling also looks good from a chart perspective. Mr Chris Dunne, analyst
at Forexia, says sterling still looks very strong. He predicts that it will
reach Dollars 1.65 and DM2.46 over the next few weeks.
