FT  31 JAN 94 / Sweeteners for a bitter pill: The strategies adopted by
European drug companies to cope with cuts in state spending
When Boehringer Mannheim, the German healthcare company with sales of almost
Dollars 1.5bn a year, realised how much cuts in German drug spending would
damage profits, it decided to move the headquarters of its pharmaceuticals
division on the Rhine to Connecticut in the US.
Mr Mark McDade, chief operating officer, is determined to be gone by April.
'Operating profits in Germany fell by 20 per cent in the first half of last
year. We have to reduce costs. This move will save money.' About 1,500 of
the 9,660 jobs on the company's German payroll will be cut as a result of
the move.
Emigration may not be on every European drug company's agenda. But
executives across the Continent are making some tough decisions in response
to curbs in spending on drugs by governments seeking to cut healthcare
costs.
Official figures for 1992, the latest available, show prescription drugs
worth Dollars 50bn were sold in the five biggest European markets  - France,
Germany, Italy, Spain and the UK. Three years earlier, the figure was
Dollars 36bn, in real terms.
Almost all of this cost was borne by the public purse, through schemes which
reimburse or subsidise pharmacists and doctors supplying medicines to
patients.
The bill is rising as an ageing population demands more healthcare, and
medical advances offer new treatments for ailments ranging from migraine to
Aids.
But recession has blunted both the will and ability of governments to foot
the bill. Moreover, a combination of pressures has led to a re-appraisal of
the basic principle of universal provision on which many of the European
welfare state systems have been based.
In an effort to control costs, Germany has cut its national health drugs
spending from DM26bn (Pounds 10bn) in 1992 to DM22bn in 1993. Italy this
month reduced the number of drugs eligible for subsidy, saying it wanted to
cut the national drugs bill by 30 per cent. The French government last week
signed a deal with drugs industry representatives that will cut the growth
in drug sales from more than 8 per cent a year to 4 per cent, according to
estimates by Goldman Sachs, the securities house. Last year, the UK
government imposed a 2 1/2 per cent cut on the prices of drugs the NHS buys.
And Spain is considering toughening controls on drug prices.
The effect has been startling. Growth in pharmaceutical sales in Europe,
which averaged 11 per cent a year from 1987 to 1991, fell to just over 8 per
cent in 1992 and zero last year, according to Lehman Brothers, the
stockbroker.
The impact on corporate profits will be apparent in coming weeks as the
annual results season for European pharmaceutical companies gets under way.
An indication of what lies in store came last week when full-year results
from Merck, the US drugs company, showed 7 per cent sales growth in the US
but only 1 per cent in Europe.
With the impact of reforms in the UK, Italy and France still to be felt, and
with further price controls likely in Spain and outside Europe, drugs
industry executives have not waited for profit figures before taking action.
What they are doing varies by company and country, but there are four
themes:
First, they are cutting payrolls and closing sites to reduce operating
costs. In Germany, Hoechst is eliminating more than 20 per cent of its 1,400
jobs at its pharmaceuticals head office.
Bayer, where profits on drug sales in Germany for the first nine months of
1993 were down 50 per cent on the same period a year earlier, plans to cut
almost 30 per cent of its 1,100-strong pharmaceutical marketing division.
The company is also beset by troubles in its chemicals operations. 'I cannot
rule out targeted job cuts in 1995, but it will not be on the level seen so
far,' said Mr Manfred Schneider, chairman, last week.
Glaxo of the UK, Europe's biggest drugs company, is cutting staff in Germany
and Italy. And Fisons last week said it would cut 1,000 jobs, almost 15 per
cent of the workforce, and partially close its biggest plant - at Holmes
Chapel in Chesire in the UK.
Other companies have closed entire plants. Wellcome of the UK, for example,
has shut one in Belgium and another in the UK.
Meanwhile, Switzerland's Ciba is reorganising its entire pharmaceuticals
manufacturing operations in France, Spain, Italy and Belgium at a cost of
SFr250m (Pounds 114.1m). The plan involves closing general-purpose plants
and replacing them with large specialist centres. The company intends to
close, by summer 1994, two multi-product sites in France and others in
Spain, Italy and Belgium, and replace them with new plants in France, Spain
and Italy, each of which will specialise in particular products. The
programme is only half complete, but Ciba is already claiming production
cost savings of 20 per cent. Second, pharmaceutical executives are
responding to pressures by developing new marketing strategies. The
objectives are to promote drugs which governments pay for and to focus on
hospitals or doctors with the greatest buying power.
Swiss company Sandoz is one company taking this approach. It 'will promote
products that are least affected by the healthcare reforms', says Mr Urs
Baerlocher, chairman of Sandoz's pharmaceutical division. Products least
affected are usually those that are unique and have little competition.
Spending on its drugs Sandimmune, used in organ transplants, and Clozaril,
used to treat schizophrenics, has emerged relatively unscathed from
healthcare reforms.
Third, industry executives are redirecting research and development - away
from programmes producing 'me-too' drugs, which grab a small slice of an
established market for a particular treatment, towards programmes most
likely to produce high-selling drugs.
In the UK, Italy and Germany, only a handful of products in each therapeutic
area is being given official blessing for state support. Others are ignored.
'Nobody is now going to develop the 10th beta-blocker (a heart treatment) in
the hope of getting a few per cent of that market,' says Mr Steve Leventhal,
Ciba's head of central product management. 'Governments just won't reimburse
it.'
There is a corresponding emphasis on genuine innovation, which offers the
possibility of new niche markets or even monopoly products. Boehringer
Mannheim is following this route. 'We have reduced headcount and are
focusing on fewer areas of R &amp; D,' says Mr McDade.
Another option is to bolster efforts on generics - drugs whose patents have
expired (usually after 20 years). Competition means prices are low, making
them attrac-tive to government health administrations. Finally, European
drug companies are seeking alliances with counterparts elsewhere, notably in
the US, to import expertise in cost control, research and management of
generic products.
Last October, Hoechst paid Dollars 546m for a 51 per cent stake in US
generics company Copley, the company's first North American corporate deal.
Moreover, Glaxo and Wellcome last year signed deals with the US drug company
Warner-Lambert to sell generic products internationally. Last week, Bayer
said it was in the final stages of negotiating an alliance with a US
generics company.
Glaxo now has ties with no less than 12 small biotechnology companies,
mainly in the US, while Swiss company Roche has more than 20 such deals.
For Mr McDade of Boehringer Mannheim, the strategy now is simple. 'We are
going to build collaborations. We are not going to build bricks and mortar
any more.'
These efforts to create a leaner European pharmaceuticals industry may,
however, be inadequate. Government anxiety about escalating healthcare costs
looks set to spread to more European countries.
Privately, and sometimes publicly, industry executives acknowledge they
could do more. 'Every drugs company has fat to cut,' says Mr Patrick Egan,
Fisons chairman.
Ciba's Mr Leventhal believes the industry's past profitability concealed
structural weaknesses. 'Production costs have in the past not been a
significant consideration. One key to success now will be productive
efficiency.'
There is still resistance to drug price controls within the industry. The
European Commission is debating whether national drug pricing controls
contradict the spirit of the single market. But governments are bound to try
to control costs. Pharmaceuticals companies, it seems, must be prepared to
restructure.
