FT  30 NOV 94 / Business and the Environment: Amazon's saviour - A project
that provides constant monitoring of the world's biggest rainforest
By early next century, if the government and a handful of private
contractors finish the job in time, Brazil will be ready to tackle its
biggest public relations problem - a reputation for abusing the Amazon.
Environmentalists claim that illegal logging, delays in marking out Indian
lands and environmentally-damaging mining are likely to continue, but the
Brazilian government will have a trump card to play against any critical
environmental lobbyists: Sivam.
Sivam, or the System for Vigilance over the Amazon, is one of the most
ambitious environmental projects in the world. Set to cost about Dollars
1.39bn (Pounds 840m) and take five years to install, it is a network of
radars, satellites and ground sensors which will be linked to provide
constant monitoring over Brazil's share of the Amazon basin, an area which
accounts for nearly 60 per cent of the country and is about 10 times bigger
than France.
Sivam will, for the first time, provide accurate and widespread information
on the Amazon's environment and how it is changing. It will provide evidence
to counteract what the Brazilian government considers exaggerated or
misleading reports about sensitive subjects such as deforestation. It will
also, thanks to improved air traffic and radar systems, help in the fight
against drug smuggling and unlicenced mining.
These measures are likely to be welcomed by environmental groups. But
Sivam's ultimate aim is more controversial. The information gathered by the
system will form the basis for Brazil's development of the region into the
next century.
Brigadier Marcos Antonio de Oliveira, who will be appointed president of the
commission overseeing Sivam, says that accurate information is vital if
Brazil is to plan for the 'sustained development' of an area as vulnerable
as the Amazon. He adds that Brazil wants to match the wealth enjoyed by
countries in the north, and it is not feasible to make the Amazon immune
from development.
'The Amazon's resources will be used sooner or later, whatever happens. What
we need to do is develop it rationally. But it must be left to Brazil to
decide when and how to use these resources,' he says.
The Sivam project, announced at the 1992 Rio Earth Summit, was designed
partly to deflect criticism over Brazil's environmental record. Its
supporters said better communications could strengthen the government's hand
in the Amazon, where edicts to stop environmental damage were rarely carried
out, mainly because of the region's size and poor communications.
Government, environmental and Indian rights agencies were often blocked by
local leaders involved in illegal activities.
The tender for installing Sivam was won in July by a consortium led by
Raytheon, the US group. Raytheon will start work on a project plan with its
main Brazilian partner, computer and control company ESCA, once the contract
is signed with the Brazilian government. Antonio de Almeida Filho, an ESCA
director, said he hoped the contract would be signed this year, once
financing is approved by the Senate.
Sivam's main weapon will be at least 300 monitoring stations - de Oliveira
says the number could double - which will monitor up to 17 characteristics
such as air and water quality or humidity. The stations will transmit
regular readings via radio or fixed telecommunications links to three
regional processing centres, in turn co-ordinated in the capital Brasilia.
Monitoring will have several immediate uses. Soil traces in the Amazon's
river systems could be analysed to track down illegal mining, and to measure
damage caused by legal excavation. Water and air pollution from large towns,
such as Manaus, will be assessed. The Amazon's weather systems, which are
still poorly understood, will also be recorded in detail for the first time
and climatic change across the area will be measurable.
A network of long-range radars will be installed to watch Brazil's borders
and to improve air traffic control over main air corridors. In other areas,
especially those close to drug shipment sites near Colombia and the
Brazilian state of Acre, air movements will be monitored by airborne radar
likely to be installed on aircraft made by Embraer, the Brazilian
manufacturer.
Aerial detection will also be important for monitoring forest fires. Brazil
currently uses satellite photographs provided by its space research
institute. However, de Oliveira says three spotter planes will photograph
fires so that information can be gathered and assessed more quickly to help
provide evidence against individuals accused of starting them. Fires are
often used to clear an area of forest for agriculture or other purposes.
According to some specialists, 0.5 per cent of the Amazon basin is cut down
or burnt a year.
Government critics argue that Sivam will make only a limited difference
because, even when the government has information about the Amazon, it
rarely acts. For example, wildcat miners operate illegally in several
demarcated Indian areas, sometimes with the apparent knowledge of local
authorities.
One environmental adviser says Sivam will be constrained without a
government commitment to prosecute illegal activities in the Amazon, and
crack down on corruption in local justice and police departments.
De Oliveira argues this is not the case. The problem, he says, is that when
the government does have reliable information, it is not co-ordinated within
public departments, a failure Sivam will resolve. 'Sivam, by providing
better information, will strengthen the public institutions in the Amazon.
We want to strengthen the communities living there, not just the indigenous
people, but the workers living there and the immigrants who have settled
there,' he says.
At the same time, facts and figures for assessing how best to develop the
area will be stored and analysed. 'The Amazon will have to be developed, but
what we have to do is respect its fragility,' he says.
