FT  07 NOV 94 / Survey of China (13): An open door to opportunities -
Manufacturing case study, Pilkington's joint ventures
China represents a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for companies across the
whole range of industrial activity, from automobiles to telecommunications
and beyond. One company that has done better than most in laying down roots
in China is Pilkington, the UK-based glass maker.
Pilkington was one of the first western companies to walk through China's
'open door,' pushed ajar by Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, in 1979.
In 1983 the company signed a joint venture agreement to install China's
first 'float glass' manufacturing plant using Pilkington's technology. By
1988 the 5,000 tonnes a week plant was in production.
Located in Shanghai's Pudong special economic zone, Shanghai Yaohua
Pilkington Glass (SYP), is in the enviable position of not being able to
produce enough glass to meet demand. Since 1989, SYP has made a profit after
interest and dividends; last year it was listed on the Shanghai bourse, fast
becoming one of the most highly-rated listed companies in China.
Mr Zhang Sanfu, the company's managing director, is now one of the most
sought-after executives in China by western investment bankers. In September
he was in the US speaking at a conference organised by Merrill Lynch, the US
securities house. While there, he took soundings about the possibility of
raising capital to expand his glass works.
The company is already adding a second 'float line,' which will have
capacity to produce 2,500 tonnes a week of glass mainly for the automotive
industry. It is due to begin production in October 1995. Mr Zhang wants to
add a third float line (capacity 3,500 tonnes a week) soon after the second
line is completed.
Pilkington retains an 8.35 per cent in SYP, having being diluted from its
original 12.5 per cent at the time of the company's flotation last year. The
UK company maintains a close relationship with SYP in Shanghai and is keen
to develop its business in other industrial centres in China.
'It is fairly logical for us to look at China,' says Mr Terry Ginty,
vice-president Asia Pacific. 'The market is growing and there are
significant opportunities.'
Mr Ginty says that Pilkington's strategy in China is simple and
opportunistic - 'you can't have a hard-and-fast policy. You have to have a
feel for opportunities and take them when they come along. It's a big
market. But in general our strategy is to look for manufacturing
opportunities where there isn't a strong local glass maker.'
The first opportunity the company took up was to partner Taiwan Glass in a
venture in Qingdao. Taiwan Glass has been a partner of Pilkington's for more
than 20 years and when it decided to invest in a float glass plant in
Qingdao, Shandong province, it asked Pilkington to join it. The UK company
has taken a 10 per cent interest in the plant.
The Qingdao investment, however, was more by way of a favour to a
long-standing customer and friend. What Pilkington really wants to do in
China is to take larger and larger stakes in ventures targeted at the
automotive glass industry and the market for flat glass more generally. It
is actively scouting sites in China to expand its activities in float glass.
This year it has signed two joint venture agreements, one in Changchun,
Jilin province, and another in Wuhan, Hebei province, which has given it 35
per cent of the former venture and 45 per cent of the latter. Both are in
automotive glass.
In Changchun, Pilkington's partner is Changchun Tempering Glass Company and
the venture will supply automotive glass to the First Auto Works. This state
company assembles Audi 100s for German car manufacturer, Volkswagen and
additionally has a joint venture with VW to produce the company's Jetta
sedan. Phase one envisages output of 150,000 Jetta cars, rising to 300,000
after the implementation of phase two.
Pilkington's other partner is SYP which owns 23 per cent of the joint
venture company - 'it is looking for vertical integration,' says Mr Ginty,
who is also deputy chairman of SYP. The glass plant will have capacity
initially for 200,000 sets of auto glass. 'They (the VW joint venture) will
probably look for two suppliers,' he says. 'Traditionally, one takes about
70 per cent of the production and the other, 30 per cent. We aim to be the
prime supplier. We're confident that we can earn that position.'
The second foray into automotive glass - the joint venture in Wuhan - is
similar to the first. The foreign car marker this time is Citroen, and
planned output levels are identical to the VW venture: 150,000 Citroen ZX
model sedans in the first phase, rising to 300,000 in the second.
What is different is that Pilkington has effective control, with 45 per cent
of the equity - 'we wanted to get the feel of majority ownership and run the
company,' says Mr Ginty. 'With Changchun, we couldn't get a majority - the
value of the existing assets decided the equity shares. In Wuhan it was a
matter of negotiation.'
The main partner here is China Yaohua Glass Company, the oldest glass maker
in China. But, as with the Changchun venture, SYP has a stake in the company
as well. 'Equity as such doesn't mean a lot in a joint venture,' says Mr
Ginty. 'If you can't work together, you wouldn't be in the venture in the
first place.'
