FT  11 MAR 94 / Tally-ho for a cruel but therapeutic hunt
Touch down in Washington and the first thing you hear is the baying of
hounds, the clip-clop of horses in the early morning mist. The great
American game of hunt-the-president is on again. It destroyed Richard Nixon,
rattled Ronald Reagan, and badly damaged George Bush. Nothing about this
cruel sport is certain, but it is possible that President Bill Clinton may
turn out to be a more elusive quarry than his predecessors. Nearly cornered
a week ago, he has started to deploy the only defensive mechanism available
to him: an intense effort to behave in an honest, open manner or, to be
precise, to appear to do so. It might save him from the worst, if he or his
wife Hillary really have little or nothing to hide. The trouble is, you
never can tell.
To the visitor returning to what was once home ground, it is all slightly
baffling. The original charge against the Clintons was that, when he was
governor of Arkansas and Hillary was a prominent lawyer in the state's most
favoured law firm, they benefited, or may have benefited, from using their
powerful names and consequent influence in arranging a land deal that lost
money.
This account will spare you any further unravelling of what has come to be
known as Whitewater, after the name of the acreage involved. The central
point is that, if the governor of an insignificant southern state and his
wife did use their connections to engage in some fiddle-faddle or other, few
Americans would be surprised. It would be wrong, but it would not
necessarily constitute a federal case against a married couple that became
president 15 years later. This, certainly, was the view of fund managers I
consulted at a conference in Phoenix, Arizona, earlier this week.
At the next level of iniquity, and potential danger for the Clintons, stands
the 'good ol' boy' question. To what extent was the mentality of Little
Rock, in which everyone knows everyone else, imported into the White House,
along with the cronies with whom Mr Clinton surrounded himself? The Arkansas
instinct may well have been to square departments, to fix matters so that
the governor would always be in the clear, perhaps do favours for Hillary.
Was this transferred to Washington?
An independent special prosecutor, Robert Fiske, has begun to question White
House officials. He has promised to report on their behaviour within a
couple of months. Mr Fiske seems to be as determined to establish the truth
as is Lord Justice Scott in his inquiry into the probity of UK politicians
and officials who changed the rules on selling arms to Iraq. The difference
is that Mr Fiske is a Republican, while Lord Scott is a judge.
That leaves the many and varied theories of deeper and darker doings. If any
of these turns out to be true, the analogy with Watergate and Nixon, at
present far-fetched, will become worth drawing. It is whispered that Dollars
250,000 may have been illegally contributed by an Arkansas institution to Mr
Clinton's 1992 presidential election campaign. No evidence accompanied that
particular charge. Other whispers, equally free-floating, surround the
suicide of the deputy counsel at the White House, Mr Vincent Foster. He was
a Little Rock colleague and friend of Hillary. Mr Fiske expects to take much
longer - perhaps a year or two - before he can report on such accusations.
So far Mr Clinton and his wife have been only slightly damaged. Some of this
is self-inflicted, arising from their reluctance to come clean at the very
beginning. The appointment of Mr Fiske was forced on the president. This,
say Democrats and Republicans alike, was 'dumb'.
Against that, most Americans find the Whitewater affair impossible to
understand. They respond to words like 'cover up' and 'shredder' because
they have been trained to do so over the past 20 years. Yet one of this
week's opinion polls suggests that very few of them believe that Mr Clinton
is guilty of financial impropriety. Another indicates that Hillary is still
held in high regard ('honest', 'trustworthy'), while her husband is almost
as well thought of. The couple's ratings are falling, but they have not
descended anywhere near to the depths plumbed by heads of government across
the Atlantic.
The Republicans, understandably, cannot believe their luck. The visible,
smirking insincerity of senators Alfonse D'Amato and Robert Dole, as they
press for juicy congressional hearings into the whole mess, brings a tear of
recognition to the eye. These are the hounds of revenge - revenge for
Watergate, revenge for Iran-Contra, revenge for the insult of having a
Democrat in the White House. The degree to which they damage the Clintons
depends in the end on how culpable the dual presidency is in reality. What
all the false posturing of the senators may achieve, however, is a delay or
even cancellation of the Clinton legislative programme, including Hillary's
proposals on healthcare, now widely believed to be dead in the water, and
welfare reform.
None of this should diminish our admiration for the American system.
Hunt-the-president is painful, but ultimately healthy. It culled Mr Nixon,
the worst offender since the US media institutionalised the game. An
unwritten amendment to the constitution stipulates that being caught
concealing the truth can seriously - perhaps fatally - injure a presidency.
This is hugely superior to the British way in which the truth is measured in
droplets, and liars do not necessarily resign even if they are found out.
