FT  23 NOV 94 / Arts: Iron man wins the Turner
Antony Gormley is this year's winner of the Turner Prize. He received his
Pounds 20,000 cheque at the Tate last night, a safe, unexceptional choice
from a rather lack-lustre vintage. Gormley was the favourite, an established
artist whose work already sells for Pounds 30,000-plus thanks to the astute
handling of his dealer, the fashionable Jay Jopling.
Gormley is the subject and the object of his own work, plastering his body
to make moulds which are then converted into lead, or iron, or concrete
shapes. His main contribution to the Tate's display of the shortlisted
artists was 'Testing a World View', four contorted figures of Gormley cast
in iron left lying around a large empty space. As in most contemporary art
the viewer was left to decide what it was all about, but perhaps it evoked
remnants of the body left like driftwood after a natural disaster, a
Hiroshima or a Pompeii.
His most famous creation is 'Field for the British Isles', over 40,000
hand-sized clay figurines made by the people of St Helen's and, in contrast
to his Tate exhibit, displayed in packed intensity to show how man crowds
out the universe.
Among the other shortlisted artists was Iranian born Shirazeh Houshiary, who
takes a suitably mystic view of art with 'The Enclosure of Sanctity': five
lead cubes, austere from the outside but containing a kaleidoscopic display
of brilliant colours inside - silver foil, gold leaf, and more.
Representing another powerful contemporary tradition was Willie Doherty from
Derry in Northern Ireland, whose exhibit consists of a darkened room in
which two videos evoke the horrors of the Troubles, with the killer and the
victim sharing a last car ride and commenting impartially on an unsure
denouement. Doherty's thesis that there is no such thing as an innocent
victim may be specious, but the work conveys the unreality of the place.
The fourth finalist, Peter Doig, was a real outsider, being a painter whose
work is almost figurative. He paints buildings threatened by nature,
postcard scenes attacked by disjointed colours, art that both reassures
traditionalists but gives modernists enough speculative challenge to chew
on.
As is customary now, this annual award for the best British artist under 50
itself became performance art, with hundreds of wannabe artists mobbing
guests outside the Tate, many displaying their own creative ideas. Their
efforts were not in vain.
The Tate is happy that the Prize generates controversy, for this brings
visitors to the gallery to see the work of the shortlisted artists. It also
gives contemporary art a lively, combative, embattled feeling, despite the
fact that the winners tend to belong to a small, inward looking, coterie and
the event is sponsored, by Channel Four.
Although it did not produce the high jinks of 1993, when the winner, Rachel
Whiteread, was also forced to accept Pounds 40,000 from the K Foundation for
being the worst short-listed artist, the 1994 Turner was remarkable in its
own way. The prize was handed over by Charles Saatchi, the UK's biggest
buyer of contemporary art by far, but, until last night, a confirmed
recluse. Only for the Turner would he materialise and praise to the skies
the current crop of young British artists.
