FT  12 SEP 94 / Trade ministers firm on ratifying Gatt
Trade ministers from the European Union, US, Japan and Canada yesterday
expressed their determination to see the landmark Uruguay Round word trade
pact ratified on schedule by the end of this year. They spelt out their view
at the conclusion of a 'quadrilateral' meeting of the world's leading
economic powers in Los Angeles at the weekend.
The talks, covering a range of trade issues, come as implementation of last
year's agreement signed by over 100 countries under the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade faces a difficult passage in the US Congress and a
jurisdictional dispute in the EU, while other countries appear to be taking
a 'you first' approach.
'We all accorded the highest priority to the rapid and effective
implementation of the Uruguay Round and bringing the World Trade
Organisation into operation on January 1 1995,' said Mr Mickey Kantor, the
US trade representative, Sir Leon Brittan, EU external trade commissioner,
Mr Ryutaro Hashimoto, Japan's trade minister, and Mr Roy MacLaren, Canada's
trade minister.
Mr MacLaren added: 'Our commitment will encourage other parties to proceed
expeditiously and it is our expectation that there will be only a minimal
number of countries that do not meet this deadline.'
Overshadowing the Quad agenda, however, was an escalating trade battle
between the US and Japan. The US has threatened to impose sanctions unless
there is agreement on insurance, automotive parts and government procurement
of telecoms and medical equipment by September 30. Mr Kantor and Mr Yohei
Kono, Japan's deputy prime minister, agreed to meet again around September
23 in an effort to avert sanctions. Talks in Washington and Los Angeles over
the past few days had been 'instructive', Mr Kantor said. Mr Kono called the
talks 'substantial'.
Officials said it appeared some agreement may be close on insurance but the
two sides remained divided over US insistence that some means of measuring
progress on opening Japan's markets be included in any agreement.
Deregulation in Japan will lead to 'less and less influence of the
government of Japan' over commercial matters, said Mr Hashimoto. 'So we
cannot commit ourselves to something that goes beyond the scope of
responsibility and reach of Japanese government.'
At the Quad session, ministers also discussed unfinished business remaining
from the Uruguay Round. This includes reaching a multilateral agreement on
financial services, telecommunications and other areas.
'In financial services, there has been a rapprochement which will enable us
to persuade those (South East Asian) countries that have not yet done so to
make realistic offers and advance toward an agreement,' said Sir Leon.
The 'nuts and bolts' issues of the transition from Gatt to WTO took up much
of the discussions. 'We have made real progress,' said Sir Leon.
