FT  22 MAR 94 / Technology: Gold rush - Matthew Curtin reports on advances
in mining which may transform productivity
Technology has come to the aid of the volatile South African gold mining
industry more than once over the past century. Today, new advances are being
sought to transform productivity as companies recover from a crisis which
brought many mines to the brink of closure.
Executives are still nervous at memories of the early 1990s, when a
combination of steadily declining real gold prices, double-digit inflation
and the deteriorating quality of the ore reserves sent the industry into a
spiral.
In the event, only two big gold mines closed. South African gold output
steadied above 600 tonnes a year from the late 1980s, but cost-containment
and improved productivity meant the mines shed more than 150,000 jobs or
nearly a third of their workforce between 1989 and 1993.
Yet successful as this restructuring of the industry has been, the mines
need technological advances or consistently higher gold prices of at least
Dollars 450 an ounce - compared with around Dollars 385 today  - if gold
production is not to go into slow but steady decline.
The problem is, says Kobus Olivier, chief consulting engineer at the Gencor
group's gold division, that a breakthrough which would transform the mines'
productivity underground has proved elusive.
However, two new techniques are now in sight, generating more excitement
about the technological possibilities than there has been for years, he
adds. The techniques are: diamond wire cutting pioneered by Gencor and Anglo
American, the country's biggest gold producer; and the impact ripper, an
industry research project recently taken over by mining house Gold Fields.
The first simply applies the established method of quarrying granite and
other hard stones to underground mining. A synthetic-covered steel cable
less than a centimetre thick and studded with industrial diamonds saws
through the rockface, cutting away the ore in large chunks. The impact
ripper is an hydraulically powered chisel, mounted on rails, which attacks
the rockface with an accuracy that blasting lacks.
Olivier says the potential benefits are huge because either technique could
transform the cost structure of the industry and underground productivity.
Diamond wire cutters can operate 24 hours a day, require less labour and
minimise the amount of waste rock mined. Diamond wire is expensive - the
first material Gencor ordered cost R1,000 (Dollars 290) a metre - but
greater demand would reduce its cost and eliminate much of the need for
explosives used for the 900,000 blasts the gold mines make every day.
Ken Dix, general manager of Anglo American's Freegold operation, which is
using diamond wire cutters on a trial basis, says the technique would lead
to the redesign of underground mining plans and thus save more tunnelling,
timber and explosive costs and shave 60 per cent off transport costs.
Underground safety would improve, too, bringing new efficiencies, because
the narrower stope-widths and minimal use of explosives would do less to
aggravate the rock pressure underground. Rockfalls kill about 270 workers a
year underground on the gold mines.
Much the same benefits apply to the impact ripper. Len Gibbs, consulting
engineer at Gold Fields which has a number of machines operating at its
Kloof mine, says: 'The possibilities have to be exciting. The deeper you go,
the more you need mechanised mining methods and less reliance on manpower.'
This has been true since the early days of gold mining; the geological
challenges of extracting the precious metal at deeper and more dangerous
levels have forced producers to refine their techniques. Much gold output
now comes from mines sunk to below sea-level or more than 3,000 metres
underground.
The MacArthur Forrest cyanide process saved the South African gold mining
industry when it was introduced in 1890 at the Salisbury mine near the
mining camp of Johannesburg. Existing mercury-based techniques, adequate for
recovering gold from surface ore, were no good for treating metallurgically
difficult underground material which the mines had to exploit because they
had exhausted surface reef outcrops. Gold recovery rates had fallen to less
than 50 per cent, but to the surprise of miners at the time the new process
quickly achieved recoveries of 85-95 per cent.
Yet impressive as the refinements made over the years have been,
metallurgical and mechanical mining technology has not changed for decades.
The cyanidisation process has been modified to push recovery grades to more
than 99 per cent, allowing the retreatment of millions of tonnes of
low-grade waste material in recent years, but leaving little room for
improvement.
The labour-intensive underground production routine of drilling holes in the
rockface, filling them with explosives, blasting once a day and cleaning up
the broken rock before hoisting it to the surface, is the same as it was 100
years ago.
South Africa's remaining gold reserves are huge, well-defined, but deep.
Exploration has identified extensive high-grade ore reserves in the
Potchefstroom Gap, an area south-west of Johannesburg, but at depths of up
to 5,000 metres below surface. The capital cost of a sinking a new mine
shaft to that depth would be more than R2.5bn.
Despite the excitement about the new methods, there have been teething
problems. Gencor gave up its experiment with diamond wire cutting last year.
Olivier says the group 'knows it works', but found the wire tended to get
pinched as the rockface closed once it had been cut. Gencor seems happy to
wait and see what progress Anglo can make, given that the group's mining
equipment and industrial diamond businesses have a keen interest in the
technology's success.
Dix points to the excessive wear and tear on expensive equipment, but
stresses that 'it's early days'. Gold Fields has found that the first
orebody on which it tried the impact ripper proved more susceptible to the
technique than the orebody at Kloof where the equipment would most likely be
used.
However, Olivier says the problems are unlikely to be insurmountable. He
adds that while one technique might not transform gold mining, a combination
of the new technologies with further refinements still promises the
breakthrough for which the miners are yearning.
