FT  31 JAN 94 / Survey of the World's Young People (4): The picture still
looks grim - Money spent on children's health is not going where it is most
needed
The world spends Dollars 2,000bn on health care a year; the rate at which
health has improved since 1950 is unmatched in history. So says the World
Bank's recent report, Investing in Health, published last summer.
But the Bank also points out that the impressive sums are deceptive. For the
money is 'either spent on the wrong things, or wasted.' There should be more
'barefoot medicine' and a wider campaign against poverty: for example,
better education for girls and young women, which would result in better
child health and smaller families.
Nevertheless, the report is at pains to say that big spending on health  -
and it argues that more is needed - does not simply result in more babies
and all the dire consequences of over-population.
It results in lower child mortality rates and fertility rates (after a lag
of a couple of decades), as population growth rates in Asia, Latin America
and Africa have shown. Furthermore, it saves money. The potential savings
add up to billions of dollars, because premature death or disability lost
the world (on the Bank's estimates) 1.4bn years of healthy (in many cases,
productive) life in 1990 alone.
But the money is still not going where it is most needed. According to
Unicef's annual report on the state of the world's children - a sometimes
harrowing document - 8m children still die every year from five preventable
diseases: measles, whooping cough, diarrhoea, tetanus and pneumonia. Even
more grim: 1m children have been killed, 4m seriously injured, and 5m have
become refugees or orphaned as a result of wars in the past decade.
A child born in 1991 in Romania or even in Turkey, on the borders of the
European Union, is five times more likely to die in the first year of life
than a child born in Switzerland, Iceland, Sweden, France or the
Netherlands. In Turkey there are more than 56 deaths during the first year
of life per 1000 live births, compared with six in Sweden. Mortality rates
in the third world are considerably worse.
In the Irish Republic only 10 children per 1,000 live births die before the
age of five - Ireland comes near the top of the Unicef tables. In South
America the average equivalent figure is 54, in East Asia 57, in South Asia
131 and in sub Saharan Africa 183. In some African countries almost one
third of all children die before they are five.
Looking at maternal mortality, the European average is 13 deaths in
childbirth per 100,000 births. In South America the comparable figure is
210, in South Asia it is 490, and in sub Saharan Africa almost 600 mothers
die in childbirth per 100,000 live births.
But even wholescale redistribution of all the money spent on health could
never achieve an equal chance of survival. Mortality rates arise from
several different factors, such as what social and economic group a child is
born into, general standards of living, housing and diet.
Access to vaccination is also crucial: there have been big leaps forward in
the global immunisation programme. The proportion of children immunised
against tuberculosis, measles, diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus and polio rose
from 5 per cent in 1977 to 20-30 per cent in 1983. By 1990, immunisation
programmes against of polio, diphtheria and measles had reached 80 per cent
of all children, with 35 per cent of pregnant women receiving tetanus shots.
The lowest rate of vaccine coverage was in sub-Saharan Africa.
Lurking behind the call to redirect (and slightly increase) the Dollars
2000bn spent world-wide are wide disparities in health care resources, and
the resulting mortality and illness rates. The Bank says that if more money
was spent on preventing or curing the most common killers, such as measles,
whooping cough, complications of pregnancy and water-born diseases, in parts
of the world, millions of lives could be saved relatively cheaply.
In the developing world, where the amount spent per head on health care is a
only a fraction of that spent in the developed world, a little more money
would go a long way.
By contrast, the Americans spend 14 per cent of the US' gross domestic
product on health care, compared with 6.1 per cent in the UK, and 8 per cent
in Germany, France and Sweden.
Improvements in the developing world's health and child mortality rates will
to a large extent depend on the commitments undertaken by countries of the
developed world, and improving the health of the world's children will take
a greater international effort.
At the World Summit for Children, held in New York in 1990, 71 heads of
states signed a plan of action, seeking 'measurable, attainable goals' for
countries to incorporate into national planning: eradication of polio by the
year 2000; 90 per cent immunisation by the same date; a halving of child
deaths caused by diarrhoea; and virtual elimination of vitamin A deficiency.
While developing countries - Tunisia and Zimbabwe among them - have shown
themselves capable of reforming their health sectors, only 2.5 per cent of
all health spending (about Dollars 4.8bn) in developing countries comes from
donors. Meanwhile, the share of total development aid for health fell during
the 1980s from 7 per cent to 6 per cent.
In the UK much remains to be done. The Child Poverty Action Group, the
Health Visitors' Association and the Save the Children fund argued in their
submission to the health white paper in 1992: 'There are clear links between
poverty, environment and children's health. What hope is there for the
future health of the nation if the government fails to act to improve the
health of the nation's children?'
