FT  18 FEB 94 / Fears grow over action against Macedonia: Blocking the
former Yugoslav republic's access to the sea may be dangerously
destabilising
Greece's political leaders speak in smug cliches about the country's
importance as a 'force for stability in the Balkans', as the only member of
Nato and the European Union in the region.
Its businessmen, finding it increasingly hard to compete in the single
market, see Albania, Bulgaria and Romania as a natural area for investment.
Trade already flourishes and co-operation is beginning in banking and
financial services.
Yet politicians and businessmen dismiss the idea of developing similar ties
with Macedonia, which they insist on calling Skopje, after its capital.
The Greek socialist government's decision on Wednesday to close the Greek
consulate in Skopje and deny the former Yugoslav republic access to the
northern Greek port of the Thessaloniki underlines the frailty of Greece's
European commitment when it comes to a bilateral dispute with a Balkan
neighbour.
'Macedonia's position is already precarious, despite widespread recognition
and support from the EU. This kind of pressure from the Greeks could be
dangerously destabilising,' said a diplomat.
Greece's refusal for the past two years to recognise Macedonia, on the
grounds that its name amounts to a territorial claim on the Greek province
of Macedonia, has consistently irritated its EU partners.
A widespread Greek belief that Greek and western European interests in the
Balkans do not necessarily coincide is voiced publicly by nationalist
factions in both Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou's Panhellenic Socialist
Movement and the opposition conservatives.
Greece's unwillingness, for example, to endorse its Nato allies' ultimatum
to the Bosnian Serbs, or participate in military action in Bosnia, reflects
the government's reluctance to endanger Greek relations with Serbia.
However, there appears to be no connection between Mr Papandreou's
unprecedented move against Macedonia and the build-up to the threatened Nato
air strikes.
Mr Papandreou, who has been trying to improve relations with the United
States since his return to power last autumn, found himself under attack
from his party's left wing when the US recognised Macedonia last week.
Apart from helping to reassert his grip on Pasok, Mr Papandreou's decision
appears a clumsy attempt to put pressure on Mr Kiro Gligorov, the moderate
Macedonian president, to yield to Greek demands set last year as a condition
for resuming UN-sponsored talks on the name issue.
The Greeks insisted that Macedonia should change its flag, which carries an
ancient Greek symbol associated with Alexander the Great, alter the preamble
to its constitution to avoid any hint of building a Greater Macedonia and
stop propaganda against Greece.
Mr Gligorov's position is that talks should be restarted without
pre-conditions, since Macedonia's nationalist party, VMRO, has enough votes
to block the two-thirds majority needed in parliament to change flag and
constitution.
Moreover, closing the Greek consulate in Skopje will have little effect, as
Macedonian passport holders are routinely denied visas to visit Greece.
It remains unclear exactly how the Greek government intends to enforce the
embargo on Macedonia's use of Thessaloniki port. Greek foreign ministry
officials, asked how they would ensure that goods continued to move between
Macedonia and other EU countries under single market rules, appeared at a
loss.
Officials in Skopje admit that losing access to Thessaloniki comes as a
damaging blow just as Macedonia starts an economic reform programme, to be
based on an IMF stand-by loan, which aims at reviving industry. Almost all
Macedonia's oil is shipped by rail or truck from Thessaloniki.
Despite the political hostility, the volume of goods from Macedonia
transiting through Thessaloniki has risen sharply since the war in Bosnia
blocked access to ports in Montenegro and Croatia.
Macedonia's only alternative outlets to the sea are through Albania or
Bulgaria, but there are no direct rail connections with either country and
both roads are narrow and heavily congested.
Editorial Comment, Page 17
