FT  29 OCT 94 / UK Company News: US investor set to publish Heron offer
The takeover of Heron International, the indebted property group headed by
Mr Gerald Ronson, will move a step closer early next week when the full
offer document from HNV Acquisition, the US investment group, is published.
HNV, led by Mr Steven Green, the US investor, made a formal offer five weeks
ago. Since then it has been involved in complex negotiations with Heron's 82
creditor bankers, owed more than Pounds 1bn.
The US group, which emerged as the Heron board's preferred bidder last June,
has offered cash and share alternatives to debt and bond holders in its
attempt to restructure and recapitalise the group.
However, bondholders now have to approve the offer. Last May, 62 per cent of
them voted against accepting any further delay in payments due from Heron,
which scuppered a Pounds 1.4bn refinancing deal by the banks and
precipitated the move to sell the company.
Yesterday, one rebel bondholder said: 'Presumably nothing has changed with
the HNV offer - the pricing is such that it gives bondholders no real
attraction in taking the cash or the equity. We hope apathy will rule and
the offer falls.' Another bondholder voiced his concern: 'We would prefer
some sort of debt instrument as an alternative,' he said.
But Mr Basil Vasilou, chairman of Vasilou &amp; Company, which speaks for a
large number of non-bank bondholders, yesterday voiced his support. 'People
would be crazy to reject this deal. It offers you whatever you want, be it
equity, cash, or a combination. No other offer would be able to match these
terms.'
The original offer involved Pounds 450 cash or 300 HNV shares for every
Pounds 1,000 of senior debt, Pounds 60 or 40 shares for every Pounds 1,000
of junior debt, and 750p or five new shares per old Heron share. Sources
close to Heron said the full offer document contained few changes to the
initial offer. This includes the retention of Mr Ronson and his management
team, a move which has caused consternation among some of the group's
creditors.
The HNV plan would transform Heron's balance sheet, turning a negative net
worth of Pounds 172m as at March 31 into net assets of about Pounds 200m.
HNV, which would control at least 51 per cent of Heron shares, also intends
to subscribe to a Pounds 17m convertible debt issue, which it can increase
to Pounds 30m, to provide extra working capital.
Other members of the HNV consortium include Mr Rupert Murdoch, the media
magnate, Mr Craig McCaw, founder of McCaw Communications, the US telecoms
giant, and relatives of Mr Michael Milken, the former junk bond dealer.
Mr Green has said he intends to turn Heron into a force in the European
property market.
