FT  17 AUG 94 / Mexican Elections: One eye on the observers - The quest,
aided by the UN, for a free and fair poll
With Mexico about to face the most closely watched presidential poll in its
history, the impartiality of the 32,000 electoral observers who will help
assess the legitimacy of the result has come under the spotlight.
The governing Institutional Revolutionary party has long claimed that some
observers are politically partisan and that their findings are not
necessarily to be trusted. It points to the links between the best-known
observer groups and the leftist Party of Democratic Revolution as evidence
of possible bias.
However, the emergence of new observer organisations linked to the PRI has
led to the opposite accusation. The PRI is alleged to have created its own
observer groups as a counterweight to existing organisations, to make sure
that at least some observers say the elections are clean.
The observers do not have any formal authority to qualify electoral results.
But they have been given legal status for the first time ever in a Mexican
election, and are allowed a free hand to scrutinise the electoral process at
the country's 96,000 voting booths. They are expected to play a key role in
influencing public opinion's assessment of the electoral process.
The national observers will be joined by several hundred foreign 'visitors',
admitted for the first time by Mexico. The visitors have much the same
rights as national observers, although foreigners cannot interfere in the
voting process itself.
The debate over the observers in part reflects continued lack of trust in
the electoral process, despite government efforts to reform the system.
In principle there should be few differences of opinion between the 14 main
observer groups. All are being advised by a technical team from the UN, and
will be using similar methodology when observing the electoral process. They
have just signed a pact committing them to impartiality and objectivity when
scrutinising the election.
However, party officials and the UN accept the possibility that different
organisations may reach separate conclusions on the legitimacy of the
process, creating at the very least confusion in the mind of the public.
'This is a concern for us,' says Nguyen Huu Dong, the UN official who is
advising Mexican observer groups, 'but there is no solution. No one can stop
observers participating. If they use a good methodology and care about their
reputation we can avoid problems.'
The best known observer organisation, Civic Alliance, is made up of several
hundred human rights and pro-democracy groups, and is given high marks by Mr
Dong for professionalism. It has been aggressive in monitoring pre-electoral
conditions, criticising biased media coverage of the election and government
support for the ruling party, more so than the UN would have liked.
On the day of the election, Civic Alliance hopes to have thousands of
observers watching polling booths and looking out for fraud. It is
organising its own 'quick count' of a sample of representative polls, to
make any tampering with the final result, as some suspect may have happened
in the 1988 election, more difficult.
The PRI is generally mistrustful of Civic Alliance, reckoning it is too
close to the leftist PRD (some members of Civic Alliance affiliates are
running for Congress for the leftist PRD). Mr Fernando Lerdo de Tejada, a
prominent PRI congressman, recently complained in a newspaper article that
'a large number of the groups of observers are protagonists for a political
party, which reduces their trustworthiness . . . and raises the question
whether they form part of the post-electoral strategy expressly devised by
some parties'.
Mr Enrique Calderon of the Alliance says: 'It is legitimate to identify us
with the opposition. We are observers because we are not in agreement with
system.'
But he firmly denies there will be any bias in reporting what volunteers
see. He points out that the Alliance has received a large grant from the UN
(and therefore indirectly from the Mexican government, which has funded the
UN observer project).
In what some see as an effort to reduce Civic Alliance's influence, other
observer groups have sprung up in recent months. The Mexican teachers' union
will field about 13,000 accredited observers and, thanks to the union's deep
pockets, these will be among the best organised. But this union is formally
affiliated to the PRI, which makes many in the opposition suspicious of its
independence.
Proceso, a news magazine, reported this week links between the PRI and the
head of the National Democratic Crusade, another observer group. One of
Democratic Crusade's members recently claimed in a press release: 'The
changes that have been made in electoral legislation and the inclusion of
citizen advisers (in the electoral authorities) makes us certain that there
will be transparency, legality and legitimacy in the electoral process'.
