FT  22 MAR 94 / Survey of Management Education &amp; Training (9): Melting-pots
for Euromanagers - Management School Networks
The engine of European political integration may be stalled for the moment
but the high level of cross-border mergers and acquisitions last year was
just one sign of the growing interdependence of EU and Efta economies.
In this environment multinationals more than ever are on the look out for
managers who can speak foreign languages and adapt to different business
cultures and practices.
Since 1988 the Community of European Management Schools (CEMS), a network of
high prestige management schools in Europe*, has been attempting to address
their need.
So far its imaginative attempt to instil in students a common body of
European knowledge, wider language skills and broader international
experience, has produced 550 Euro-managers in four years but this may just
be the beginning.
Says Ian Du Pre, national recruitment partner at accountants Coopers &amp;
Lybrand in London, which annually recruits 700 graduates in the UK alone: '
We are extremely enthusiastic about it (CEMS). One of the problems in the UK
is that our A-Level and university system puts people into the market in
their early 20s without a business vocation. The people we get from the
continent are in their mid 20s, have a vocational degree, speak languages,
and will go where the action is.'
The challenge for the CEMS is reconciling the different European traditions
of management education. CEMS respects the broad continental model, which
differs from country to country but which in most states is based on a four
to five year university based course (combining undergraduate and
postgraduate work).
The idea of the CEMS Masters is that over this time students fulfil both
their home course requirements and those of a wider European curriculum.
Economics, law, mathematics and statistics are among core subjects in the
first three years. In the final two years a CEMS student has to take eight
courses dealing with a variety of European and international issues (of
which six, including EC law and international economics, are compulsory).
Fluency in three languages (at least two of them European) has to be
demonstrated, and to receive the qualification six months must be spent
abroad, three of them at another academic institution in the network, the
rest on secondment to a company.
CEMS is not unique, the idea having been copied in 1989 by the Alliance Of
Management Schools in European Capitals** whose AMSEC Master adds Euro
requirements to the home degree in much the same way. Even allowing for its
self-conscious exclusivity, however - there is only one CEMS institution per
country - its approach can be seen as one means of trying to harmonise
European standards for Masters level management qualifications. These CEMS
standards are defined in close collaboration with 33 corporate partners,
most of them leading European multinationals.
According to Lluis Puges, director general of the Spanish business school,
Esade, and a founder member, CEMS goes beyond mere student exchanges. 'We
are trying to mix faculty groups and to write more European cases,' he
explains. 'For me, though, the great advantage is discussing a common
problem but then hearing the different cultural solutions which you find
within Europe.'
Puges admits that more work has still to be done on harmonising standards.
'Some schools are more interested in certain issues than others. It is
particularly difficult in areas such as human resources and organisational
development. We are effectively having to negotiate to find a common
degree.'
*The 12 CEMS academic members are: Copenhagen Business School; Erasmus
Universiteit, Rotterdam; Esade, Barcelona; HEC,Paris; Hochschule Saint
Gallen; London School of Economics; Norwegian School of Economics and
Business Administration, Bergen; Stockholm School of Economics; Universite
Catholique deLouvain; Universita Commerciale Luigi Bocconi, Milan;
Universitat zu Koln, Wirtschaftsuniversitat Wien. CEMS Secretariat, 1 Rue de
la Liberation, 78350 Jouy-en-Josas, France. Tel(33)1 3967 74 57.
** The members of AMSEC are City University Business School( London), Ecole
Superieure de Commerce de Paris, Libera Universita Internazionale Degli
Studi Sociali( Rome), Norwegian School of Management, Ecole de Commerce
Solvay( Brussels), Technische Universitat Berlin, Universidad
Complutense(Madrid) and University College Dublin.
