FT  03 NOV 94 / Arts: Angelin Preljocaj - Dance
It is not the opportunity for rabid foxes to race into this country that
bothers me about the Channel Tunnel, but the increased threat from European
modern dance troupes.
So I thought during two-thirds of a Dance Umbrella evening on Tuesday at
Sadler's Wells. There on stage were the choreographies and dancers of
Angelin Preljocaj (Albanian-French and much admired on the European dance
circuit). I have reported on his work before, with some reluctance. As with
so much French modern dance, I find his creations intellectually costive,
top-heavy with meaning and woefully thin in movement.
Preljocaj's programme had the unmitigated gall to call itself a Homage to
the Ballets Russes. The first piece - Un trait d'union - was wholly
unconnected with Diaghilev's enterprise. It showed two chaps trying to pick
each other up, physically as well as sexually, while having hell with a
squat chair. It claimed to be about the quest for what is known today as 'a
relationship'. Like so much of this kind of modern dance, it was about bad
manners - social, sexual, emotional - which are as boring on stage as they
are in life. The men climb over each other, and show remarkable muscular
sympathy, while Bach and electronic clatter ring out. And, of course, they
end up as they began - alone. Someone imported a baby into the stalls on
Tuesday night: its cries of distress indicated that a critical faculty can
be encouraged at the earliest age.
There followed a shameful assault on Le spectre de la rose. The stage
laterally divided. Two girls, two matadors and two chairs on one side. On
the other, a crop-headed maiden and a man in a rose-petalled outfit trying
to toss her like a caber. The Karajan recording of Weber's waltz  - broken
into by sounds of a dripping tap and faint burblings, of course. Further
comment would be an act of supererogation.
All this was Eurotrash of the most debilitating kind. With his version of
Les Noces, Preljocaj succeeded in a reappraisal of the Stravinsky score. His
theme is still marriage, here seen as an event in which stereotypical male
attitudes remain potent. Five couples. Five benches. Five large dummies
dressed as brides. Much throwing of bodies, and of the dummies which serve
as ideals and role-models for the women. The choreography touches the score
hardly at all - hearing all those rhythms going to waste was rather like
watching fivers thrown in a dustbin. What Preljocaj does identify is the
persistence of social roles - and his piece has value because he uses
movement to convey this. The language is not very enterprising - his is a
catch-as-catch-can style - but the dance has theatrical shape, and comments
aptly on a Ballets Russes original. It was done with brilliant timing and
energy by its cast.
The end of this week will brings a Wells visit by Siobhan Davies' company in
two works - Wanting to tell stories and The Glass blew in (with a fine Gavin
Bryars score) - on which I reported admiringly earlier this year.
