FT  25 MAR 94 / Arts: Glyn and 'It' - Theatre
Nonsensical, faulty in construction and ungrammatical is the sniffy verdict
of Chambers Biographical Dictionary on the writing of Elinor Glyn. Despite
these ideal qualifications for journalism, she poured her talents into
novels and, briefly in the 1920s, writing and directing films.
Ken Hoare's new play focuses on her meeting with Clara Bow, whom Glyn
famously dubbed 'the 'It' girl' - 'it' and 'oomph' being a more reticent
age's identification of sex-appeal. Glyn and 'It' rings imaginary
wisecracking variations on the theme of patrician Englishness meeting
American crudeness and liking it. It is principally a vehicle for Penelope
Keith's Elinor Glyn.
As the curtain rises, she is revealed reclining on the inevitable
tiger-skin. Tim Goodchild's fantasy set combines Syrie Maugham's all-white
decor with a dash of Kiplingesque exoticism. Fantasy is the operative word:
Ken Hoare's previous work includes material for the comic Stanley Baxter,
and award-winning sitcoms. His first stage work emerges as a cross between
Kaufman and Hart's Hollywood satire Once in a Lifetime and a putative Carry
On Keystone, with more emphasis on the passing gag than dramatic
construction.
The undeveloped plot hinges on Clara Bow's flight from unwelcome publicity
after a spurned boyfriend shoots himself. The young man's father is a
hellfire evangelist ready to denounce the whore of Babylon unless bought
off. Meanwhile the British author and the American sexpot collaborate on a
film-script, a relationship that ripens into mutual respect and affection,
almost sabotaged by Madam Glyn's stuffy English butler.
This might fill a bright weekly half-hour slot in the summer schedules.
Taken in one insubstantial helping, the writing betrays its sitcom pedigree.
Some lines somewhat laboriously hit the target, as 'Sin in Hollywood is the
equivalent of education in England: it's there for the few who want it.'
Some fall thuddingly short as in the exchange, 'Couldn't I interest you with
a little cinnamon toast?' 'You couldn't interest me with the dance of the
seven veils.'
More importantly, the author vacillates in his portrayal of Glyn,
alternating between the gushingly precious, lost in self-love, and the
shrewdly warm-hearted worldly-wise. Miss Keith confines herself to the
upper-class cooing and whooping that she has amusingly deployed for 20-odd
years, prunes and prisms all over the stage; but, as with riding a bicycle,
when she starts to think about how she does it, uncertainty results. In Act
2, the accent is strained and fractured, for a terrible moment evoking the
awesome sound of genteel Australian.
In the supporting cast of Richard Cottrell's production, Michael Cochrane
struggles with a stereotype butler, and Samantha Spyro effectively turns
Clara Bow into a chirpy transatlantic Barbara Windsor.
At Richmond Theatre until tomorrow; then on tour.
