FT  12 DEC 94 / The Lex Column: Law of the jungle
The Morgan Stanley/SG Warburg merger, if consummated, will be like the
arrival of a new species in a jungle. Other species will need to adapt or
risk extinction. Some will seek to become integrated global investment banks
too. Others will redefine the niches in which they operate, the better to
defend themselves against competition from the emerging global houses. Over
time, the industry will polarise.
A few firms - notably Goldman Sachs and, perhaps, Merrill Lynch - are
already well on the way to achieving global status. To a lesser extent, so
are the other US 'bulge bracket' houses: Salomon Brothers, CS First Boston
and Lehman Brothers. Many European regional groups have similar aspirations.
In their struggle to become global, they could provoke a wave of mergers,
acquisitions and alliances. Much of the action will be transatlantic, but
both US and European houses will be aiming to fill holes in Asia too.
The prime movers may be commercial banks with medium-sized investment
banking arms: Deutsche Bank via its Morgan Grenfell subsidiary; Barclays
Bank with BZW; HSBC via James Capel and Samuel Montagu; and Union Bank of
Switzerland. They have sufficient capital to buy all or part of another
investment bank, if they wish. But some commercial banks - National
Westminster, for example - may need to consider whether their investment
banking subsidiaries are so far from making the global grade that they would
do better to retrench or even divest.
Which banks will be wooed? Kleinwort Benson looks an obvious target since it
is trying to compete in the big league with a relatively small capital base.
However, for European banks anyway, the priority will be to acquire US
distribution capability. So some association with a Smith Barney or a
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette may have greater appeal. Jardine Fleming and
Peregrine Capital would be attractive partners for those looking to boost
their Far Eastern presence.
Mergers or acquisitions will be risky. Putting together two or more cultures
is hard. In the process, good employees may be lost and managers may be so
concerned with internal matters that they take their eyes off the ball. At
worst, standards will slip and reputations will be lost.
There is also a risk that, if many firms chase the same goal, margins will
be squeezed. That risk will rise if commercial banks, which have a habit of
following fads, pour vast amounts of capital into the industry.
More specialised rivals may seek to comfort themselves with such thoughts.
They may reflect that even successful global houses will not devour
everything in the investment banking jungle: some of the pickings will be
just too small to arouse interest.
But specialised houses would be unwise to rest on their laurels. The
emerging integrated global houses are out to poach their biggest deals and
clients. They have strong sales pitches. Corporations are wooed with the
idea that they can cut their cost of capital by tapping a wider base of
international investors. Investors are told they can reduce their risk by
building diversified cross-border portfolios. And those buying or selling
businesses are encouraged to think they need a bank that can scour the world
for opportunities and keep in touch with shareholders in multiple
jurisdictions.
Unless they raise their game, the more focused houses could find themselves
left with just the small local deals. The likes of Schroders, NM Rothschild
and Lazard currently earn good livings by concentrating on advisory work.
Their edge comes from the attention they pay to relationships. But they also
need to arrange finance for their corporate clients - otherwise they become
little more than management consultants - and that means plugging into
securities distribution networks. For how long will they be able to access
such networks if these are part of integrated houses owned by rivals?
Schroders, at least, has an insurance policy with its Wertheim securities
operation in the US.
Similarly, Cazenove and Smith New Court make good profits from running UK
distribution networks. For the moment, they are protected from the full
onslaught of foreign competition by practices such as rights issues and
quote-driven trading systems. But US houses are fighting to bring in
American practices such as book-building and order-driven trading. There is
already some support in official circles for such changes. If the
Warburg/Morgan Stanley merger proceeds, the pressure will intensify.
None of this means that every merchant bank and broker must rush to become
one of a new species of global house. There is a role for many types of
beast in the investment banking jungle. But the jungle of the future will be
more competitive than the jungle of the past.
