FT  19 FEB 94 / Recovery doubts raised by weak bank lending: Clarke
confident on growth despite a week of poor statistics
Weak bank lending figures yesterday kindled further fears that the UK
recovery is losing strength even before April's tax increases take effect.
The data - showing the lowest level of private sector lending since November
1992 - increased discomfort for the government at the end of a week in which
a spate of poor economic statistics raised doubts about the recovery's
sustainability.
Lending by UK banks and building societies - M4 lending - was a seasonally
adjusted Pounds 200m last month, the lowest level for more than a year and
much less than the Pounds 3.6bn recorded in December. It also fell short of
economists' expectations for lending of Pounds 2.6bn.
The news failed to ruffle Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, who insisted
that the recovery was on track and described the UK as 'the fastest growing
major economy in Europe'.
He told Harrow East Conservatives the UK was the only major European Union
country where the trend in unemployment was downward.
'Our interest rates remain competitive and are among the lowest in the EU,'
Mr Clarke said.
'As a result, we were recently ranked top out of seven European countries as
a good location for manufacturing investment.'
Mr Gordon Brown, Labour's shadow chancellor, said: 'No one can be surprised,
as the scale of the Tory tax rises sink in, that consumers are refusing to
start spending, companies are nervous about new investment and unemployment
is still high.'
'The figures recently have been very weak,' said Mr Michael Saunders, UK
economist at Salomon Brothers. 'I am in the camp that believes inflation
will be subdued and recovery slow, but I didn't expect to see the evidence
so starkly this week.'
The Bank of England figures also showed that the broad money supply measure,
M4, rose a seasonally adjusted 0.2 per cent last month compared with
December to stand 5.5 per cent higher than a year ago. This compares with a
5.4 per cent rise in December. M4 takes in notes and coins in circulation,
plus bank and building society deposits.
Although disappointing, analysts said that the slowdown in private sector
lending after the large December rise was not surprising and largely
reflected debt repayment across the corporate sector.
One explanation was that companies had used improved cash flow to pay
corporation tax instead of borrowing, which usually inflates the January
figure.
The Treasury and the Bank said the figures showed that the annual growth
rate of M4 was within its 3-9 per cent monitoring range. Officials said
activity was continuing elsewhere in the economy, but was not reflected in
money supply figures.
Building societies' cash outflow, Page 4;
Editorial Comment, Page 6;
Analysis, Page 7;
Currencies, Page 11;
Lex, Page 22
