FT  30 SEP 94 / Survey of World Economy and Finance - Finance and Investment
(10): Bretton Woods twins rethink their roles - World Bank and International
Monetary Fund / After 50 years, changes are afoot
Strolling past the downtown Washington offices of the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, the casual passer-by might be forgiven for
thinking that both institutions had succumbed to an assault from the '50
Years Is Enough' campaign, a coalition of environmental and development
groups lobbying for radical changes in the structures set up at the Bretton
Woods meetings half a century ago.
But although activists from Greenpeace, the environmental group, abseiled
down the side of the World Bank building to unfurl a protest banner, the
gaping holes in front of each building are self-inflicted: the World Bank
has knocked down one of the oldest of its cluster of offices to build new
premises, while the Fund has at last bought out and destroyed the small
church that nestled in its shadow for years.
Although the vocal campaigners of '50 Years Is Enough' have made little dent
on the objects of their attack, the two institutions have been rethinking
and reworking their roles and their structures as they approach the 50th
anniversary of their founding.
At the World Bank, much of the re-orientation springs from the Wapenhans
report, a 1992 study headed by a former Bank vice-president, which found an
alarming deterioration in the quality of the loan portfolio, and suggested
changes to the institutional culture to shift the focus away from making new
loans and towards making sure that projects were properly followed through.
A series of measures has been adopted with the aim of putting the stress on
better implementation: reviews of the entire portfolio of projects within
each borrowing country have been instituted; greater efforts have been made
to improve the 'quality at entry' of projects by involving people with a
stake in the outcome from the very start of loan discussions; and the
message has been passed down to bank staff that they must spend more of
their energies on supervising the projects they have worked on.
Lower level managers say that there has been a change in the kind of
projects that win favour: projects to be carried out largely by long-term
expatriates have almost disappeared, and each project must demonstrate that
it does something to build the capacity of the borrower country to do things
on its own.
Large infrastructure loans such as dams and ports have also dwindled -
though those that remain take up a disproportionate amount of Bank staff
time, because of the opposition they invariably arouse from
environmentalists - and more loans are now targeted on social programmes
such as education, health and the advancement of women.
At the same time, the 50th anniversary, although a somewhat artificial
watershed, has provided a useful occasion for rethinking the Bank's
purposes.
One clear outcome of this reflection is a new emphasis on the private
sector. The private sector's importance in economic development has been an
article of faith for some years now, but the World Bank, headed by Lewis
Preston, is in a difficult position. It has a subsidiary, the International
Finance Corporation, engaged in private sector projects, but is not itself
allowed to lend to anything but a government institution. This means that
the World Bank may encourage a country to privatise its railways or its
banks, but once the country does so, the Bank can no longer lend to them.
Nevertheless, senior Bank staff have over the years rethought what they can
do to help provide the right conditions for the private sector to flourish
in developing countries.
'The Bank, being dominated by economists, has tended to think you can create
an enabling environment for the private sector by simply changing the
policies. It turns out not to be that simple,' says Joseph Wood,
vice-president of the south Asia division, pointing to the need for
structures such as an adequate legal system.
The IMF, on the other hand, has faced the criticism that it is trying to do
the work of its sister institution by taking on more of a development role.
'The Commission believes that the IMF should focus on the international
monetary system and macroeconomic adjustment issues, and avoid duplicating
functions of the World Bank Group,' was the conclusion of an influential
Bretton Woods commission convened by Paul Volcker, former chairman of the US
Federal Reserve Board.
The Fund no longer has to lend to the western industrialised countries - as
it once had to do to bail out the UK - and it has in recent years adapted
its loan facilities to make money more readily available not only to the
poorest countries of the developing world but also to the countries of
eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union in their transition from central
planning to a market economy.
The IMF this year won new money for its Enhanced Structural Adjustment
Facility (ESAF), which lends money at nominal interest rates to the very
poorest countries, mostly in sub-Saharan Africa.
And last year, the Fund created the Systemic Transformation Facility,
designed to make money available to Russia and other economies in transition
before they were able to qualify for the more strictly conditional financing
of a traditional IMF standby loan.
Michel Camdessus, the IMF managing director, strongly defends his
institution's role in these areas.
'We shall not get out of the aid business because we are not in it. But we
shall continue to give confidence to members by making the general resources
of the Fund temporarily available to them under adequate safeguards,' he
said in a speech to Mr Volcker's Bretton Woods Commission, pointing out that
this was one of the purposes set out in the IMF's founding articles.
Mr Camdessus would welcome a chance to follow the Commission's advice that
the Fund should play a central role in stronger co-ordination of economic
policies around the world. He recognises, however, that the willingness of
the leading industrial countries to co-operate in placing themselves under
more rigorous surveillance by the Fund is 'still somewhat embryonic'.
But although both the Fund and the Bank have made efforts to evolve and
adapt themselves to new circumstances, both remain, in a variety of trifling
and not so trifling respects, islands of self-absorption in Washington.
Both have cut back to some extent on their lavish lifestyles. First class
air travel is now largely banned, though business class is still the norm,
and officials do now at least consider the cost when examining a new
proposal. One senior IMF official even proposed profiting from the building
demolition work by renting out the wrecking ball to critical
environmentalist groups.
But cost-consciousness is still less deeply ingrained than some spending
habits. When one IMF circular suggested departments could save money by
using an airline's offer to upgrade passengers with full-fare economy class
tickets to business class, the staff association protested vigorously.
Frank Potter, a Canadian who served until recently as an executive director
on the World Bank's board, says that 'a long history of orchestrated
increments to the benefits package, never egregious but always at the limit
of tolerance, has led to a structure in which no single benefit is
outrageous but which in the aggregate amounts to a cost burden which no
private institution I know of could afford.
'A Bretton Woods secretary can earn more than ministers in most Bretton
Woods countries, yet despite such high salaries there is subsidised parking,
subsidised language training, subsidised day care, subsidised spousal travel
on missions (never in economy class), subsidised home leave for the family,
subsidised private schools for the children (but only to age 25), and so on
and so on.'
Some of this reflects serious disagreements between member countries over
the need for such benefits. Many executive directors from Latin America and
Africa argue that benefits such as first-class air travel are absolutely
necessary to attract talented staff from their countries.
'There is an inverse relationship between per capita income and the need to
be seen to be consuming conspicuously,' retorts a western executive
director.
Although the failings of the World Bank and the IMF in these respects pale
into insignificance against the shortcomings of some of the regional
development banks, notably the African Development Bank, there is a danger
in being inadequately responsive to the concerns of the shareholder
countries which provide the money for the Fund's ESAF or the World Bank's
International Development Association, which also provides concessional
finance to the poorest countries. Aid budgets in all these donor countries
are under pressure, and individual aid ministries have a growing incentive
to keep money for their own bilateral operations. The Bank and the Fund,
therefore, face increasing pressure to prove that they are, in fact, a
bargain for their shareholders.
