FT  03 SEP 94 / Books: The cultural spoils of war
THE RAPE OF EUROPA by Lynne H. Nicholas Macmillan Pounds 20, 498 pages
Art and war usually lie at the opposite ends of human experience, although
they meet sometimes in literature. But the fine arts presuppose peace: the
opportunity for the creation of painting and sculpture, and the repose
needed for their enjoyment, are fruits of tranquillity.
What, then, when art and war enter a different relationship, when
destructive, all-embracing modern war threatens to incinerate art galleries,
demolish cathedrals and museums, reduce statues to rubble, annihilate in
seconds the rich distillations of culture which have formed over centuries?
It is a 20th-century phenomenon that when great powers set upon each other,
everything is at risk, our lives and material treasures most of all.
One of the least known facets of the second world war is the fate suffered
by European art. In a book of brilliance Lynne Nicholas relates the period's
history from the novel perspective of what happened to Europe's material
culture under the Nazis. She tells the tale with absorbing narrative skill,
making an extraordinary achievement of scholarship read like a thriller.
Hitler and Goering were fanatical art collectors. Whereas the latter was
fairly catholic in his tastes, the former did not have tastes - he just knew
what he liked and disliked. He liked 19th-century German paintings, and he
disliked 'degenerate art', which meant Impressionism, Expressionism, Cubism
 -and anything that looked distorted or 'unfinished'.
Another difference between Hitler and Goering was that whereas the latter
collected for himself, crowding his vast and vulgar palace, Carinhall, with
every sort of art, Hitler had imperial ambitions. He wished to turn his
Austrian hometown Linz into one of four great cultural centres of the Reich,
and the best art plundered from Jews and conquered neighbouring countries
was destined to hang there in a magnificent public art gallery he planned
for the city. By the end of the war the Linz gallery had accumulated 8,000
pictures, nearly twice the holding built up over a much longer period at
Amsterdam's Rijksmuseum.
But the Linz plan was merely one corner of a vast displacement of art around
Europe during Hitler's 12 years, caused by many factors. The Nazis sold
'degenerate' art abroad to earn foreign currency. They looted art from Jews
and from occupied territories. The experience of the Prado collection during
Spain's Civil War persuaded curators everywhere in Europe, including
Britain, to make plans for safeguarding works of art against air attack; and
as soon as hostilities impended, tens of thousands of paintings, statues,
objets d'art, rare books and manuscripts were transported into the cellars
of castles beyond the Loire, quarries in Wales, and storerooms of
monasteries in remote corners of the Italian countryside.
With their usual thoroughness the German occupying administrations in
Poland, Czechoslovakia, Holland and France - after some resistance, in this
last case, from the military government in occupied Paris - appropriated
vast stores of art. Guises of legitimacy were devised: any German art later
than 1500 AD was 'returned' to the Fatherland on the grounds that it had
been stolen in earlier wars. Jewish-owned art was simply confiscated. Public
art collections were 'safeguarded', an official euphemism for theft.
When the Allies invaded first Italy and then Normandy, they took with them a
desperately understaffed group of men detailed to protect the cultural
treasures that would be encountered in battle areas. This heroic group
managed much with their slender resources. Their greatest triumph, arguably,
was in preventing the US from appropriating works of art from Germany by way
of war reparations. A batch of 200 pictures was shipped from the American
zone in Germany to Washington where it might have formed part of a handsome
covering for the National Gallery's then under-occupied wall spaces. But
there was a vociferous protest from a group of courageous American
'Monuments' officers based in Germany, and in the resulting controversy the
US returned the works after they had been displayed to huge crowds at
galleries in various cities.
For this, and for their work in rescuing art at the close of the war, the
Allies' Monuments men turn out to be the heroes of Nicholas's tale. It is a
tale without an ending, because many works are still missing; and some great
achievements in material culture were destroyed, and can never be replaced.
And that, in the end, is the real danger in what happens when art and war
mix.
