FT  22 APR 94 / Survey of Egypt (17): A certain hubbub around the ministry -
Population trends
Egypt is to host the third United Nations conference for population and
development next September.
Seven thousand experts will be there - and Egypt will be flaunting its
achievement of reducing growth in the birth rate, among its 61m people
squeezed into only 4.5 per cent of the country's area, from 3 per cent a
year in 1985 to a 1993 rate of 2.3 per cent.
A certain hubbub has been generated around the new Population Ministry,
created after President Hosni Mubarak's cabinet reshuffle last October.
Egypt has made impressive gains in population control over the past 10
years, largely as a result of an effective advertising campaign.
The crude birth rate has dropped from 39.9 per 1,000 in 1985 to 29.2 per
1,000 in 1993, while the crude death rate has dropped from 9.4 per thousand
in 1985 to 7.4 in 1993.
The fertility rate has fallen to an average 3.9 births per woman, from 5.3
births in 1980. About 47 per cent of couples use some form of contraception
 -almost twice the figure recorded six years ago.
Nearly 30 per cent of these use intra-uterine devices (IUDs) - mostly
supplied by the US Agency for International Development. Thirteen per cent
use the pill and the remainder use traditional methods and condoms  - the
least popular form of control. (Unhappily, several years ago a consignment
of condoms donated by the US found its way into the market place where they
were sold as children's balloons.)
However, these gains are now levelling out. The next phase, during which the
birth rate should stay the same and the death rate should drop, is going to
be more difficult.
Dr Maher Mahram, the population minister, uses the analogy of going on a
diet to lose weight.
'If you want to lose weight, it is easy at first. Once you have lost it,
keeping the weight off is the difficult part.'
Meanwhile some critics suggest that the hubbub might be kalam fadi - empty
talk. 'President Mubarak mentions population in every speech he makes but
there is no clear commitment from the cabinet,' says Dr Barbara Ibrahim,
senior representative for the west and north Africa regions at the
International Population Council.
'More than half of them do not think that population is a problem. They are
products of the socialist era and see development as the best contraception.
But unless they limit family size, there won't be any development,' she
says.
The issue has been 'ghetto-ised' she claims, with the creation of the
ministry.
The key to further progress lies with improvements in living standards and
education - over which the ministry has no control.
The World Bank estimates that 20-25 per cent of the population lives on a
total monthly income of less than Dollars 35. Almost one in four children
under the age of five is malnourished. 36 per cent of the male population is
illiterate; 48 per cent of females are illiterate.
Furthermore, attitudes among men - particularly in the rural areas of Upper
Egypt - need to be altered. The latest Egypt Demographic and Health Survey
shows that 40 per cent of men feel they should have the primary role in
decisions about childbearing (a figure disputed by Mr Robin Lee at the Marie
Stopes clinic in Shoubra, a Cairo suburb, who claims that it is more like 80
per cent). Only 27 per cent of couples in Upper Egypt use contraception and
the average number of children per household is six. In rural areas,
children are still regarded as cheap labour; it is no surprise that the
highest fertility rates are found where socio-economic indicators are
lowest.
These issues are deeply entrenched. A more recent one is the rise in Islamic
fundamentalism. Dr Mahran denies that this has become a serious problem. The
Grand Mufti, Egypt's highest authority on Islamic jurisprudence, has
declared that family planning does not contradict the teachings of Allah.
But some imams have been preaching against it in the local mosques.
According to Dr Ibrahim, studies show that some doctors serving in
government clinics are being recruited by Islamic militants who see family
planning as a western plot. The physicians are making no more than a general
protest against the government in denying contraceptive advice, she says,
rather than exercising some deeply held religious conviction. 'It has just
become a convenient whipping boy.'
More subtly, women surveyed at the Marie Stopes clinic were found to be
reacting to advertising in a manner opposite from that intended. When shown
two scenes, one with a woman relaxing and painting her finger nails, the
other a mother of five rushing about doing the housework, they saw the
harried housewife as their preferred role model.
For these attitudes to change, the ministry needs a much larger budget than
it has; Dr Mahran complains about his lack of resources.
Perhaps September's conference will give the issue sufficient prestige to
ensure renewed political will to succeed.
