FT  19 NOV 94 / UK Company News: BFI disputes Attwoods break-up value
Browning-Ferris Industries yesterday claimed Attwoods' shareholders could
get as little as 56p or 88p in the break-up being presented by the UK waste
services company as its last-ditch defence to the hostile Pounds 391m bid.
Mr Philip Angell of BFI said his company's alternative illustration of
break-up values showed the tentative nature of Attwoods' proposals. 'It is a
very iffy proposal,' he said.
BFI has attributed a range of values to Attwoods' businesses which Mr Angell
described as being nothing more than a reasonable scenario.
It values the European waste business at Dollars 15.2m (Pounds 9.2m), the US
operations at between Dollars 340m and Dollars 500m, and the German business
at Dollars 56.8m. After deducting costs of the break-up and tax charges of
Dollars 30m, and debt and preference repayments of Dollars 264m, BFI
estimates Attwoods would net between Dollars 274m and Dollars 434.7m.
Attwoods dismissed the estimates. 'If they think those are the real numbers
it rather surprises us that they bid for us in the first place,' the company
said. The multiples used by BFI for valuing the US businesses were at least
half the market average, Attwoods said.
However, it appeared last night that BFI's increased offer of 116.75p per
share, plus a 3.25p dividend, had won over shareholders. One investor
criticised the break-up strategy as toothless. He said it put no value on
the promised return to shareholders.
'Cash today as opposed to promises tomorrow is a lot more attractive,' he
said.
BFI already has the support of Attwoods' largest shareholder, Laidlaw of
Canada. Laidlaw has agreed to sell its 29.8 per cent stake and 73 per cent
preference holding to BFI under the terms of the original offer.
Perhaps, not surprisingly, shareholders felt the offer, which had been
increased from 109p, was still too cheap.
'It was tough when we did not have another bidder,' said one institution.
'It means we were essentially bidding against ourselves.'
