FT  10 SEP 94 / Travel: A land of cottages, peat smoke and pubs - Adrian
Gardiner travels from the east coast of Ulster to the west coast of the
Irish Republic. Destination: Holy Mountain
Even before the IRA's ceasefire, the 'troubles' in Northern Ireland should
not have deterred visitors. The strife was about money, about discrimination
and relative standards of living. Political mistakes have been made in
Ireland since Tudor times and the British taxpayer is still footing the
bill.
Statistically, the tourist is less at risk in Ulster than in New York or
South America, though some find the rampant jingoism unacceptable. Leaving
Newry, we skirted beautiful Carlingford Loch to Annalong, where sections of
the pavement are painted unionist red, white and blue. In the next town
along the coast a banner proclaimed: 'Kilkeel says No]' presumably to the
Anglo-Irish agreement. Farther on, a roadsign pleaded: 'Our only crime is
loyalty.'
In contrast is the legendary friendliness of Ulster's people and the
wonderfully picturesque land and seascapes. The Mountains of Mourne really
do sweep down to the sea, which washes over miles of deserted white sands.
Newcastle, the chief coastal resort, was anything but deserted. An hour's
drive from Belfast, it is popular day-trip territory and the main street has
more fast-food outlets to the mile than any town in Britain except
Blackpool. As dusk falls, a riot of neon advertises pizza, kebabs, fried
chicken and every other kind of carry-out devised. Amid the sleaze, one
elegant and sophisticated beacon shines out: a restaurant called the Percy
French.
William Percy French led an extraordinary life. He was born in Roscommon in
1854 and went to Trinity College, Dublin, to study engineering, but spent
most of his time learning to paint and play the banjo. For a while he was
inspector of drains in Cavan and in his spare time wrote songs - The
Mountains of Mourne is the best known - which made money which he invested
in a distillery.
It went bankrupt. He lost his job with the Board of Works, went to Dublin
and became editor of the Jarvey, the Irish Punch. When that folded he wrote
the first successful Irish musical, The Knight of the Road. His wife died in
childbirth on their first wedding anniversary and French moved to London
where he became established as a music hall entertainer, touring America and
satisfying the thirst for Irish pop culture.
He died in 1920, just as the era of the music hall was ending - and Ireland
was dividing - and is best remembered as the man who, in the words of one
biographer, 'captured the Irish spirit better than anyone of his time'.
The Mournes are granite. Slieve Donard offers great panoramas: the Isle of
Man is clearly visible. Wedged into these hills, the Silent Valley holds
Belfast's water supply. Three feet wide, 8ft high, 22 miles long and
connecting 15 mountain summits, the Mourne Wall protects the catchment area.
No farming or habitation is allowed within its boundary. It is great walking
country, and still relatively undiscovered.
We left the Mournes, my wild rose and I, and journeyed west across the
Republic in search of the Holy Mountain. Middle Ireland is little-visited by
tourists, but the clear lakes and tumbling streams of County Cavan are an
angler's paradise. We passed the town of Cavan, where Percy French's house
is now open to the public, and travelled the roads French travelled, easel
under his arm, for he loved this scenery, 'unique in its combination of
sun-stricken mist, brown bogland and green pasturage, solitary trees and
far-off visionary mountains'.
Rural Ireland is still a land that time forgot, a land of tumble-down
cottages, donkey carts and peat smoke, of pubs where the choice is Guinness
or Guinness.
At Carrick we were back briefly in the 20th century. Wine bars and bistros
jostle with chandlers and marine engineers, for here the broad Shannon
attracts people who like to mess about in boats.
We continued west towards Atlantic shores, through the Ox Mountains on
lonely roads, the landscape becoming increasingly wild. The northern edge of
County Mayo is the Barony of Erris and part of the Gaeltach, the
Irish-speaking fringe which runs down the west coast from Donegal to County
Cork.
Always there is restless sea and changing light. Along the northern
headlands of Erris, the Atlantic, untamed for 3,000 miles, crashes in on the
1,000ft cliffs of Glinsk and Benwee Head. Gulls circled far below us. Small
wonder that several ships of the Spanish Armada lie beneath these waves.
Halfway down the Mullet peninsula we turned for the ruins of Cross Abbey and
its dramatic hillside of Celtic crosses. Far out to sea was the island of
Inishglora where the Swan Children of Lyr served out the last third of their
900-year curse. (The wicked stepmother story is familiar to Irish children.)
From Blacksod Point, most southerly on the Mullet, the twin peaks of Achill
Island lie just four miles south, though it takes two hours by road to get
there. Above Blacksod on the headland is a henge of standing stones erected
last year as an exhibit on the Mayo sculpture trail: a dozen outdoor
structures by local and invited foreign artists. The setting is superb.
South of Achill is Westport, a Georgian town of wood-panelled pubs and smart
craft and jewellery shops, while nearby Westport House is one of Ireland's
best-known stately homes. Down the hill is Westport Harbour, a cluster of
authentic fishing taverns, and a few miles west is our 'far-off visionary
mountain': the 2,500ft sheer cone of Croagh Patrick, the Holy Mountain.
St Patrick, fresh from driving the snakes out of Ireland, fasted here one
Lent; every year on the last Sunday in July 60,000 pilgrims follow in his
footsteps to the top. You have to be dedicated because the path becomes
increasingly steep and is composed of rounded pebbles.
Two hours later and 300 yards from the summit I nearly gave up. I was glad I
did not. No superlatives could describe the view as half of the Emerald Isle
unfolded beneath our feet. To the north is Achill's brooding bulk shrouded
in aureoles of mist. To the south: the Maamturk Mountains of Connemara.
Below: the thousand islands of Clew Bay, described by Thackeray as like 'so
many dolphins and whales basking'.
Out in the Atlantic, the sun began to set behind Clare Island, where the
16th-century pirate queen Grace O'Malley built her castle. Perhaps Grace was
the first Irish rebel, for when she was captured and brought before
Elizabeth I she insisted on equal status as Queen of Ireland. It was during
Elizabeth's reign that the seeds of the present troubles were sown. But from
the holy heights of Croagh Patrick, Belfast and bombs seem to belong to a
different world.
We sailed from Stranraer to Belfast on the Seacat, a state-of-the-art
catamaran which does twice the speed of conventional ferries. It does not
carry freight, so loading and unloading is rapid. Sealink operate ferries
from Holyhead (Anglesey) to Dun Laoghaire (near Dublin). Contact a travel
agent or book the Seacat direct: tel: 0232-310910. The Northern Ireland
Tourist Board is at 11 Berkeley St, London W1X 5AD. The Bord Failte Eireann
is at Baggot St Bridge, Dublin 2.
