FT  15 DEC 94 / Berlusconi troubles deepen: President cancels engagements as
Northern League snubs coalition
President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro last night cancelled all immediate
engagements outside Rome to handle the deepening crisis facing the
Berlusconi government.
The worsening plight of the right-wing coalition of Mr Silvio Berlusconi was
underlined yesterday when the populist Northern League snubbed its partners
and voted with the opposition to defeat the government on a vote to create a
special parliamentary commission for broadcasting.
Mr Scalfaro alone has the authority to dissolve parliament or ask a new
person to form a government. He will play a key role both in determining the
length of the seven-month old Berlusconi government and its successor.
Financial markets also reflected this nervousness, even though the 1995
budget looked set to pass speedily through parliament. The lira was hovering
near its historic low against the D-Mark of L1,042.
The damaging conflict between the Italian government and the judiciary was
heightened by Milan magistrates' interrogation of Mr Berlusconi on Tuesday.
This view was echoed by politicians and in newspaper editorials yesterday
following Mr Berlusconi's defiant statement attacking the magistrates.
Mr Berlusconi took the magistrates to task for interrogating a serving prime
minister when, he claimed, they had no documentary evidence to incriminate
him. He also accused them of seeking to make the most of his being
questioned, creating 'a spectacle of justice or, rather, creating injustice
out of a spectacle'.
The Milan magistrates, who are conducting a corruption investigation and who
questioned him for more than seven hours about his running of his Fininvest
business empire, decided to observe an uncharacteristic silence. They
appeared anxious to avoid any suggestion that they were prejudicing their
case. For once, virtually nothing has been leaked to the media about what
the magistrates wanted to find out from Mr Berlusconi.
Most commentators focused on the length of time Mr Berlusconi was obliged to
spend at the Milan Palace of Justice. A spokesman for the prime minister
said only two hours were strictly interrogation - the bulk was taken up with
obtaining an agreed oral record.
