FT  03 OCT 94 / World Trade News: US and UK show best drugs markets growth
The UK and US have consolidated their positions as the fastest-growing
pharmaceuticals markets among large developed countries during the first
seven months of 1994,according to figures published today by IMS
International, the specialist market research company.
The huge north American market grew by 7 per cent to Dollars 29.9bn in
prescription drug sales compared with the first seven months of 1993. This
compares with average growth of 5 per cent for the whole of last year,
suggesting that efforts by insurers and employers to cut their healthcare
bills were having little effect on the drugs side.
The second biggest market is Japan, which imposed widespread price cuts in
April this year. Sales to July grew just 1 per cent to Dollars 12.2bn in
constant currency terms, compared with an average 6 per cent growth during
1993.
In the UK, one of the smaller markets, sales grew 8 per cent to Dollars
3.1bn, a small fall from 1993's average of 11 per cent, possibly as a result
of price cuts imposed by the government at the end of last year.
France, which has for many years had low drug prices but high per capita
consumption, saw an above-average rise in sales in July. Sales for the first
seven months grew 1 per cent to Dollars 6bn, compared with zero growth in
the six months to June. This was nevertheless a sharp fall on 1993's average
of 6 per cent growth, reflecting France's determination to maintain low
prices in the face of its high consumption rates.
Italy, which reformed its health policies at the start of the year, is now
the only country in the top eight not to show at some growth, the IMS report
said. Italy's drugs bill fell 2 per cent in 1993 and 7 per cent in the seven
months to July. The increased decline was the result of government reforms
in January this year which cut subsidies on many drugs.
Germany's drugs budget reforms were enacted in 1993, leading to a fall of 9
per cent in spending in that year. The first seven months of 1994 showed a 6
per cent rise, perhaps because doctors and patients were learning to exploit
the loophole that hospital drugs were exempt from last year's controls.
By therapeutic area, central nervous system drugs, including
anti-depressants, extended their lead as the most popular category in the
US. This may be because of continuing publicity surrounding Eli Lilly's
best-selling drug, the anti-depressant Prozac, which has been more popular
than expected this year.
