FT  14 SEP 94 / Former treasurer Villalpando jailed for federal tax evasion
Ms Catalina Villalpando, whose signature as US Treasurer once appeared on
every dollar bill, was sentenced yesterday to four months in jail for
conspiracy, tax evasion and obstructing justice, Reuter reports from
Washington.
Ms Villalpando, who was treasurer from 1989 to 1992, and one of the
highest-ranking Hispanics in President George Bush's administration,
admitted that she had under-reported her taxable income in 1989 by about
Dollars 167,000, cheating the US government out of more than Dollars 47,000.
Judge Thomas Hogan rejected her pleas that she be spared prison. He said the
sentence would 'remind all those who serve in high office' that they are
'not beyond the law'.
He also placed Ms Villalpando, 54, on three years' probation. During that
time, she must spend the first four months in detention at home and perform
200 hours of community service.
The judge added that Ms Villalpando, who had also worked in the Reagan White
House, in liaison to the Hispanic community in the US, had a 'special burden
to obey the law' because of her high government office.
As part of her duties at the Treasury Department, Ms Villalpando ran the
mint, the bureau of engraving and printing, and the savings bonds division.
She took leave of absence from her post after the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, in October 1992, had raided her home and an Atlanta
telecommunications firm, Communications International, where she had
previously worked.
Ms Villalpando has admitted filing false statements to the Treasury
department, the office of government ethics and the Senate finance committee
to conceal substantial funds she received from her former firm in 1989 and
1990.
Ms Villalpando, who campaigned for Mr Bush among Hispanics, could have
received a maximum jail sentence of 15 years and a Dollars 750,000 fine.
Ms Villalpando caused controversy at the Republican party convention in 1992
by calling Mr Bill Clinton, then Democratic presidential candidate, and Mr
Henry Cisneros, now housing secretary, 'skirt chasers'. Bush staffers forced
her to apologise.
