FT  08 DEC 94 / Arts: The Boat Plays
As a mischievous antidote to Christmas jollification, the Gate has come up
with The Boat Plays, a trio of stern morality plays by the 16th century
Portuguese playwright Gil Vicente. Set just the other side of death, these
three short pieces - Boat to Hell, Boat to Purgatory and Boat to Heaven -
introduce a procession of the recently deceased, which arrives on the
foreshore where the boats are berthed, to be assigned seats in the
appropriate vessel by two ferrymen, Lucifer and God's Angel.
Needless to say, it is the Boat to Hell that is soonest booked up: in
Vicente's scolding satirical portrait of the afterlife even the Pope has to
fight for a place on the barque to heaven. The Queen of Portugal also finds
she has no ticket to paradise: this is daring writing from a man clearly
appalled at the ethical behaviour of his country, intent on warning the
Court that gold fever might lead to spiritual bankruptcy. The pieces are
driven by sardonic humour and the possibility of drawing on the terror of
fire everlasting.
It is hard to convey this state of mind to a contemporary audience, but
David Farr's vivid, imaginative production goes a long way. For a start, it
literally takes you into the world of the plays: Angela Davies' astonishing,
beautiful set transforms the entire auditorium into a Portuguese harbour.
The walls are clad in dark, stained wood, the floor, too, is a rickety deck
of planks, and the whole is lit to match the mood of each play - cold and
cheerless for the prospect of Purgatory, warm and flickering for the hope of
heaven. The audience is seated, judiciously, in the Boat to Purgatory,
allowing leeway for reform during the course of the evening - an outcome
made more likely by the pew-like hardness of the wooden benches.
The set, the visually witty direction and David Johnston's spitfire
translation lends life and atmosphere to what could remain a rather distant
ritual. The plays are not as dynamic or interesting as our mystery plays:
rather, they work as a theological debate and an expose of the shabby
conduct of Portuguese society - we see lackadaisical workers (who go to
Purgatory), corrupt pillars of society (who go to Hell) and thoroughly
rotten heads of church and state (who are given a chance to reform). As such
the pieces work their way through a queue of souls, and the only dramatic
conflict lies in what happens to each.
Farr's production works hard: he gives each piece a different mood and he
emphasises the play's pageant-like qualities by using puppets, masks and
clever visual composition. The cast revels in the funny, outsize
characterisation of each boat passenger and the production is whipped along
by two blazing performances from Tony Curran and Phil McKee, both red-haired
Scots, as the fearsome ferrymen.
Like many a sermon, the trilogy goes on after it has made its point: the
last piece, in particular, drags. But it offers an intriguing glimpse into
the belief of that world - rather like stepping into a church and seeing its
carved figures come to life - and Vicente's warning to get your spiritual
life ship-shape calls clearly across nearly 500 years.
