FT  17 NOV 94 / Government Bonds: Treasuries fall as data-fuelled rally runs
out of steam
US Treasury prices fell sharply yesterday as they failed to hold on to
early-morning gains in the wake of positive news on inflation.
Late in the session, the benchmark 30-year government bond was down 5/8 at
93 11/32 , yielding 8.088 per cent. At the short end of the market, the
two-year note declined  1/16 at 99 17/32 to yield 7.116 per cent.
Treasuries across the maturity spectrum were unable to sustain an
early-morning rally spurred by reports that consumer prices increased less
than economists had projected. The Labour department reported that consumer
prices, excluding food and energy, increased only 0.2 per cent in October.
Analysts had expected a 0.3 per cent rise.
Overall, consumer prices grew 0.1 per cent - the smallest increase since
April - bringing the yearly inflation rate down to 2.5 per cent in October
from 3 per cent in September.
However, neither the positive inflationary news nor Tuesday afternoon's move
by the Federal Reserve to boost the Federal funds rate 75 basis points to 5
1/2 per cent calmed the skittish market.
Although the interest rate increase was larger than expected, the market was
expecting a rise of at least 50 basis points, giving the Fed move little
impact after an initial rally on Tuesday, just after the announcement.
Also, in its announcement on the rate increase, the Fed clearly left the
door open for a another rise if it continues to see signs of inflation. Such
uncertainty about interest rates may keep some investors out of the market
for fear that interest instability could undermine prices.
Mr Robert Brusca, chief economist at Nikko Securities, believes the market
is unsatisfied with the interest rate increase, although he does not see
signs of inflation. 'The bond market loves it when bad things happen,' he
said.
UK government bonds were buoyed by favourable inflation data yesterday, but
other European government bond markets dipped, following US Treasuries down
in the absence of a lead from German bunds due to a national holiday.
Gilts rose  5/32 of a point and the December long gilt future closed around
102 3/16 as investors reacted to figures which showed year-on-year
underlying retail price inflation unchanged at 2 per cent, and a fall in the
public sector borrowing requirement.
Mr Michael Saunders, economist at Salomon Brothers, said: 'The inflation
figure was better than everybody had been hoping for.'
The March short sterling future rose 19 basis points on the day to 92.95,
suggesting that investors now believe there is less likelihood of a rise in
UK base rates from the current 5.75 per cent. Mr Saunders said: 'Short
sterling is moving to price in unchanged base rates. I would say it looks as
if rates are on hold until next year now.'
However, this view was not shared by Mr Nigel Richardson at Yamaichi, who
believes there may be a base rate rise before Christmas. He said: 'The
authorities will have to play it safe, and that means raising base rates.
Everyone seems to accept that base rates will have to go up further, and if
you are going to do it you might as well do it early.'
However, he remains bullish on gilts. 'Base rate rises don't have to be bad
for gilts. In the international context gilts are looking a very attractive
proposition,' he said.
Yields on the 10-year benchmark Italian government bond rose yesterday as
prices fell on political worries. The yield rose 14 basis points to 12.05
per cent from 11.91 per cent. Mr Graham McDevitt of Paribas Capital Markets
said: 'The same old theme of politics and the budget has come back. The
government has called a confidence vote. This is a brutal way of passing the
budget, because if things go wrong it could cause the government to fall.'
Swedish government bond prices also fell yesterday, with the yield on the
11-year benchmark bond rising 17 basis points to 11.01 per cent. Mr McDevitt
of Paribas pointed out that the yield on Friday, before the 'yes' result on
the referendum on Swedish membership of the European Union, was 11.11 per
cent.
