FT  22 JUL 94 / World Trade News: A Riviera to replace the razor wire -
Plans for a Jordan-Israel-Egypt tourist triangle on the Gulf of Aqaba
The mayor of Eilat, Mr Gabi Kadosh, points to architects' plans, aerial
photographs and drawings of multi-million-dollar projects adorning his
office.
There is a polo club, a sports centre, hotels, marinas, artificial lagoons
and a regional tourism university. But the drawing that most inspires Mr
Kadosh is of a residential development around lagoons and canals straddling
the Israeli-Jordanian border, now the site of land mines and coils of razor
wire.
Israelis hope one of the quickest changes to follow the historic summit
between King Hussein of Jordan and Israeli prime minister Yitzhak Rabin in
Washington on Monday will be opening of borders, boosting tourism and trade
and paving the way to regional co-operation and joint planning.
Nobody wants these changes more than the tourism and municipal officials in
Eilat, where there are grand dreams of building a Red Sea tourism triangle
between Eilat, the Jordanian port of Aqaba and the tiny Egyptian resort of
Taba. In their enthusiasm, officials say they envisage a 'Middle East
Riviera' in the desert which will also operate as a free trade zone.
Some of the grandiose projects, such as a desalination plant, may remain on
the drawing board for a long time. But opening the border and funding
limited infrastructure projects is certain to fuel an investment boom in the
Gulf of Aqaba, where Mr Kadosh says Israel and private companies are already
investing Dollars 500m (Pounds 322m) this year in infrastructure, new hotels
and tourist facilities.
Among the most attractive projects to both sides are a paved 14km
Taba-Eilat-Aqaba promenade snaking around the Gulf of Aqaba, shared use of
airports, ports and roads, joint management of water, waste and sewage and
co-operation to combat industrial pollution and preserve the delicate marine
environment.
'The only way to survive in the world today is to be part of something
bigger and to co-operate with your neighbours,' says Mr Dov Sharf, the town
clerk. 'Both sides have to be satisfied. We can help the Jordanians a lot
and they can help us.'
An obvious example is shared use of airports. Eilat, which receives at least
500,000 visitors a year, has a small airport which cuts the town in half and
cannot receive jumbo jets. The town would like to close the airport or
shorten it for internal flights only, and use the large Jordanian airport at
Aqaba, which operates at 10 per cent capacity, for charters and
international flights.
The municipality has developed a proposal for a separate exit terminal for
Eilat from the Aqaba airport, similar to the separate exits at Basle airport
to France and Switzerland. Under this arrangement Israel would pay Jordan
for airport services.
Co-ordination in pollution, environmental production and town planning is
also vital in an area short of land and developing rapidly.
Two projects are almost certain to be among the first in the wake of the
summit in Washington - a Dollars 450m toll road linking Egypt to Jordan via
Israel and the phased opening of the border, first to foreign tourists and
then to Israelis and Jordanians.
The road has been planned for more than a decade but has been held up
pending progress in peace talks. Israel wants to construct a 14km tunnel
from Ras el Naqeb in Egypt to Ein Evrona, 17km north of Eilat on the
Israeli-Jordanian border. Such a tunnel would avoid traffic congestion in
Eilat and lessen security and customs difficulties for transit traffic.
Trucks and buses destined for Jordan and Saudi Arabia would have a fast
channel.
The road would link, for the first time, Jordan and Saudi Arabia with North
Africa for cargo and commerce. Israel hopes much of the money would come
from foreign private investors and would like Saudi Arabia to participate.
Much of the traffic on the road would be North African pilgrims to Mecca who
now have to take the ferry from Nuweiba, in the Egyptian Sinai, to Aqaba. At
the height of the annual pilgrimage, at least 4,000 people are ferried
across the Red Sea every day.
Opening the borders to tourism is also a easy first step with obvious
economic benefits. Once foreign tourists can cross between Eilat and Aqaba,
the two countries can market combination packages and develop joint
promotion campaigns overseas with a 'peace' package which might include the
Red Sea, Jerusalem, Petra, the Dead Sea, Wadi Rum and the Negev desert for
the price of one air ticket. With Egypt in a regional tourism association,
Cairo, Luxor and Aswan would all be reachable.
The tourist boom is already unfolding in Eilat. The Dollars 90m, 370-room
Royal Beach Hotel, part of the Isrotel chain, has just opened. At least
eight hotels are under construction to join the existing 43 hotels with an
average occupancy last year of 85 per cent. The tourism ministry says Eilat
will double its hotel rooms to 12,000 within five years.
In October, the city will open a Dollars 5m artificial lagoon development on
the north beach and break ground on a Dollars 6m regional tourist management
university and a Dollars 5.5m sports centre which it hopes will attract
international teams from Europe seeking a warm winter training location.
Government and municipal development, combined with the prospect of an
opening of the Israeli-Jordanian border, will fuel further private-sector
investment. The biggest Israeli development will be in the Timna Valley,
site of ancient copper mines, 28km north of Eilat. Mr Sol Kerzner, the South
African hotel tycoon, has proposed to build a Dollars 450m Holy Land 'Sun
City' if the government grants him a concession for a complex of casinos, at
present banned in Israel. A French consortium has also tabled plans for a
massive resort development, as has a sister company of Disneyland.
