FT  15 JUL 94 / Management: 'Global web' still not free of tangles
The proposition that multinational companies are fast going 'stateless' has
grabbed the imagination of business leaders and government ministers over
the past five years. From Akio Morita, the legendary founder of Sony, to
Robert Reich, a Harvard economist who is now US labour secretary,
policy-makers have become wedded to it.
From their different points of view, the 'stateless' image depicts a
paradoxical new world in which multinationals, though beyond the reach of
individual governments - and, in some respects, of international
institutions - are becoming 'insiders' everywhere.
There are several facets to this supposedly universal trend, which Morita
christened 'global localisation' and which - in theory - allows
multinationals to get the best of both worlds: exploiting global economies
of scale while also maximising their responsiveness to local markets and
sources of expertise.
The most evident facet is the siting of factories in foreign countries, such
as the Dollars 1bn (Pounds 600m) semiconductor plant which Japan's NEC
announced last week will be built in either Scotland or California.
More significant, because of their higher value-added and skill content, is
the location of research, design and development (RDD) centres not just at
home but in international networks - what Reich has called 'global webs'.
This gives companies access to localised technical skills around the globe.
A further facet is the transfer away from a company's home country of some
of its global divisional headquarters. The best-known example occurred in
1991, when IBM shifted its network systems business from the US to the UK.
To Reich and other analysts, this new world has already arrived. In a series
of publications in 1990-91, when he was still at Harvard, he argued that the
nationality of a global company's ownership no longer mattered. Like
manufacturing, he claimed, research, design and development were now being
sited with almost total disregard to a company's 'nationality'.
It was obvious at the time that Reich was exaggerating, and that
multinationals are not locating their RDD units, or their divisional HQs,
anything like as freely around the world as their factories. Nor are all
such moves permanent: IBM's new management has since repatriated its network
systems HQ to the US.
But Reich's cry that 'ownership is unimportant' has been echoed ever since
by government ministers in liberal economic regimes desperate to encourage
foreign inward investment, notably Britain.
Until now there has been no authoritative statistical study which showed how
far Reich was exaggerating. Given the complexity of the subject, no single
study can be conclusive or unquestionable. But a brave first stab has now
been carried out by John Cantwell, an economist at Reading University.
His study has not yet been published. But when he presented his data for the
first time last month at a symposium in Stockholm of top international
economists, technology and business academics, it was heralded as
'remarkable' by Michael Porter, Harvard's leading professor of business
strategy and national competitiveness.
By examining the extent to which US patents granted to 280 big US and
European companies over various periods between 1920 and 1990 resulted from
work in their domestic or foreign units, Cantwell has created a rough but
very detailed impression of the geographic location of what he calls their
'technological activity'. He uses this odd phrase to encompass patents
arising from production engineering, as well as from RDD.
His study challenges the Reichian myth in several senses. First, it shows
that US multinationals still conduct the vast majority of their
technological activity at home, not abroad; during the 1970s, less than 7
per cent of their patents arose from work done abroad and in the 1980s the
proportion was less than 9 per cent.
Second, Cantwell shows that big American companies have only just regained
the degree of internationalisation which they achieved between 1920 and
1939, before many of them retreated from their foreign RDD operations
because of the second world war.
Third, the study suggests that although European companies carry out more of
their technology activity abroad, their rate is still only 30 per cent, and
there has been little overall increase since the 1950s. Only Dutch, German
and Swedish companies have increased their proportion sharply. The Italian
rate has halved since the 1960s.
Cantwell himself makes all sorts of caveats about his study. For instance,
it shows relative geographic shifts between home and abroad, not absolute
changes (foreign activity can rise even if its ratio falls); and some of the
territorial shifts - possibly half - result from takeovers of foreign
companies, not from new technological activity.
He also says that Reich is right to the extent that much of the foreign RDD
within very select leading companies is changing character. From being
mainly local adaptation of basic technology developed at home, it is
shifting to the origination of new knowledge. As Reich's 'web' analogy
suggests, some of this is being developed jointly by several centres of
expertise.
The fact remains that, except within leading Belgian, British, Dutch and
Swiss companies, home country activity is still of overwhelming importance.
Reich's 'global webs' are very much the exception. It is an open question
whether they will ever become the rule.
