FT  20 AUG 94 / The Nature of Things: A simple pill to beat the body clock -
Clive Cookson explains how our brains tune in to the rhythm of life and how
we can reduce jet lag
Within each of us ticks a biochemical clock, which has evolved to keep our
minds and bodies in tune with the natural cycle of night and day. Most
people know how it feels to be out of step with their internal clock,
through jet lag after an intercontinental flight or the exhaustion of
working night shifts. They may not know, however, that there are now
scientifically valid ways to re-set the clock.
Biologists proved during the 1960s and 1970s that there really was an
internal circadian rhythm (not to be confused with new-age 'biorhythms'
which claim, without scientific foundation, to relate cyclical events in
your life to your date of birth). And they showed how the clock affects
people's performance in a wide range of mental and physical tasks, as well
as their susceptibility to disease and response to drugs.
In the 1980s it became clear that a hormone called melatonin plays a key
role in regulating the daily cycle. Melatonin is produced by the pineal
gland, which Rene Descartes, the great 17th-century philosopher, decided
must be the seat of the soul because it was the only unpaired structure he
could find in the human brain.
Animal experiments showed, however, that the main clock lies not in the
pineal gland but in the brain's suprachiasmatic nucleus, an organ no larger
than a grain of rice. (Although it is convenient to think of a single
circadian clock, there are in fact several timekeepers acting together to
control the daily rhythm - and we have other clocks controlling different
cycles including the annual rhythm of the seasons.)
Research in the 1990s has given scientists hope that they will soon discover
the precise molecular mechanism of the clock. It should then be possible to
intervene directly to synchronise your internal cycle with the world
outside, if you are flying across time zones or working nights. There might
also be new treatments for sleep-related disorders and some mental illnesses
that are related to faulty internal time-keeping.
As in so many other fields of current biomedical research, genetics seems
set to provide the answer to the riddle of the clock. Biologists have found
clock genes in primitive organisms (frq in bread mould and per in fruit
flies) and this year Joseph Takahashi and colleagues at Northwestern
University near Chicago caused great excitement by creating a mutant breed
of mice with no circadian rhythm. The mice have a defective gene which the
American researchers called clock (for circadian locomotor output cycles
kaput).
Clock is the first circadian gene discovered in a mammal. Scientists expect
now to move quickly to find out exactly what protein the normal version of
the gene, cloc, makes and then to propose how it could work as a clock in
conjunction with other genes.
Any clock must be based on a periodic or oscillating system. Man-made
instruments use physical oscillators: a pendulum in a grandfather clock, a
vibrating atom in an electronic clock.
Our body clock probably uses a chemical oscillator based on the
transcription of genes. Think of two genes, A and B. If A makes a protein
that switches on B, and B makes a protein that switches off A, the feedback
can cause a natural oscillation in the system, with a characteristic period.
The natural free-running period of the human clock is close to 24 1/2 hours.
When volunteers live for many weeks in isolated windowless chambers, where
there are no clues about the time outside, they follow a pattern of waking,
sleeping and other activities in which each 'day' lasts slightly longer than
a real day.
In our normal lives, the internal circadian clock is constantly being re-set
by signals from the world around us. Much the most important of these
'zeitgebers' is the presence or absence of bright light.
In darkness the pineal gland produces melatonin, whereas daylight stops its
production. Presumably the melatonin acts in some way on the clock cells in
the suprachiasmatic nucleus to adjust their chemical oscillation.
Although natural zeitgebers can bring the cycle forward or push it back by
an hour or two within a day, more serious desynchronisation - in the form of
jet lag - can take as much as several days to overcome. However there are
ways of speeding up the process by reinforcing the signals.
One is exposure to bright light. But the simplest step is to take a
melatonin tablet before going to sleep at night. Tests with small groups of
volunteers indicate that melatonin reduces the time intercontinental flyers
feel jet lag by about a third, without adverse side-effects.
Unfortunately, no pharmaceutical company has taken up melatonin as a
commercial product and carried out large-scale trials to prove its safety
and to discover what doses work best. The lack of interest is explained by
the fact that melatonin is a simple natural molecule which is easily
synthesised and not eligible for patent protection. So drug companies
calculate that the potential financial returns would not be sufficient to
justify spending several million pounds on the clinical trials required to
obtain a licence for melatonin.
Yet, through a loophole in the regulations, melatonin can be sold as a
nutritional supplement so long as no medical claims are made for it. You can
buy it from some health food suppliers in the US and Europe, but not from a
chemist's shop as a jet lag pill.
Josephine Arendt, a pioneering jet lag researcher at the University of
Surrey, says she takes melatonin 'and so does almost everyone else in the
field. It is tragic that it has not been developed by the pharmaceutical
industry,' she adds.
