FT  29 SEP 94 / Leading Article: Paying for equality
The courts are better at legal principles than they are at actuarial
science. The attempt to combine the two can lead to a muddle, as it did
yesterday when the European Court of Justice pronounced on a number of
issues arising in the wake of the Barber case, which involved sex equality
in pensions, on which the judgment was handed down in 1990.
Headline reactions are likely to focus on the issue of retrospection, under
which part-time employees are entitled to reinstatement in company schemes
as far back as 1976. This could cost UK companies up to Pounds 10bn on worst
case estimates. On closer inspection, however, these costs turn out to be
highly hypothetical, though still enough to worry certain financial
companies, like banks and insurance companies, which run non-contributory
schemes.
The more important consequence of the process of pension fund equalisation
is that women are, perversely, rather likely to end up worse off. For
instance, the Coloroll pension scheme trustees can now go ahead with paying
out equalised benefits, which means that at least in respect of service
after May 1990 women will receive slightly less of the available funds. Many
other terminated schemes of insolvent companies are in the same position.
Core workers
In many cases pension schemes have never been designed by employers to be
'fair', but to create discriminatory incentives intended to be in the
interests of the company - for instance, to direct extra benefits towards
core long-term workers rather than to temporary staff or part-timers. Where
such discrimination is based upon sex - but not on other factors - it is now
outlawed. But although discrimination against mostly female part-timers may
have been a practical consequence of their exclusion, it will never have
been explicitly recognised by the employer and may never even have been
intended.
Although part-timers excluded from pension schemes are now able to claim
retrospective inclusion, the employer will still be able to claim that no
sex discrimination was involved and this will have to be tested in the
national courts. Opinions vary on whether they will find it easy to make
their cases stand up.
So the apparent victory of the part-timers may yet prove pyrrhic, but even
so, the principle that employers should be subject to retrospective
judgments going back 18 years is obviously unacceptable. So long as
employers behaved reasonably in terms of general opinion and practice at the
time, they should not be vulnerable to unpredictable bolts from the
legalistic blue. If the European Court continues to behave like this, it
will be seen to have increased the risks of doing business in the EU, with
little justification.
Retrospective demands
Paradoxically, the original Barber judgment was implemented without
retrospection (only, however, after the separate Ten Oever case in 1993).
But part-time workers can now claim 18 years' worth of reinstatement. The
difference in treatment depends upon a distinction the European court has
drawn between benefits paid by a scheme and the right to join a scheme in
the first place. The latter happened to have been covered by another
judgment in 1986 which in turn related back to the 1976 judgment on the
enforceability of Article 119 of the Treaty of Rome. None of this
Euro-legalism will make much sense to the average British or German company
now faced with costly retrospective demands from part-timers.
Similarly, the rigid application of legal principles has led the court to
rule out any provision of transitional relief for women who find that the
Barber judgment has disadvantaged them. The reason is that the transitional
provisions would themselves involve sex discrimination. But this is not the
way in which employer/employee relations can be harmoniously conducted.
Nevertheless, the series of rulings published yesterday does at least
clarify many previously outstanding issues. That legal constraints should be
placed upon pension schemes in order to protect the interests of otherwise
vulnerable employees is sound enough in principle. But the European court
must find more flexible ways of handling such detailed and complex
commercial problems if it is not to become discredited.
