FT  10 FEB 94 / Nato's jets converge with its diplomacy: About 140 fighters
and bombers await the last throw of the dice on Bosnia
The Nato alliance has more than 140 aircraft at bases in Italy and on
aircraft carriers in the Adriatic that could be mobilised if air strikes
were sanctioned against Serb positions around Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital.
Fighter and support aircraft as well as aircraft carriers from the US,
France, the UK, Turkey, the Netherlands, and Spain, are in the region, with
some armed jets already patrolling the skies over Bosnia.
Nato aircraft in the region include US F-15s, British Tornadoes and French
Super Etendards.
Military sources say the two aircraft best suited to any such raids were the
heavily-armed, slow-flying US ground attack aircraft, the A-10, known as the
'Warthog', and the AC-130, or 'Spectre' converted cargo aircraft.
The Warthog and the Spectre would be particularly well-suited to hitting
artillery and mortars hidden in the hilly and wooded terrain around the
Bosnian capital.
'They can see targets better because they fly much slower than the high-tech
jets, which also have the disadvantage that they need to react with
split-second timing if they want to hit the spot,' said another military
source.
The A-10 does not have its wings swept back like higher-profile jets and its
two engines are clamped to the fuselage in ungainly fashion. Heavily clad in
armour to protect it from anti-aircraft fire, its top speed is just 450
miles (730km) an hour.
Its main weapon is a seven-barrel revolving Gatling gun that can fire up to
70 30mm armour-piercing rounds a second, making a sound like a an industrial
saw.
It can also carry 28 500lb (227kg) bombs or even larger laser-guided bombs,
six air-to-ground Maverick missiles and has two pods for extra 23mm guns.
Twelve A-10s are based at Aviano in northern Italy.
Two AC-130 Spectre gunships are based at the southern port of Brindisi and
the US has two more on standby, ready to send to Italy if needed.
A modified version of the C-130 turbo-prop transport plane, it is armed with
a 105mm cannon and heavy machineguns. The aircraft uses sophisticated
electronics and laser sights for accuracy in attacking troops, tanks or
other equipment.
It usually carries a crew of 14, while the A-10 has just a single pilot. In
Italy, the UK has eight Tornadoes at Giola Del Colle in the south, as well
as nine Jaguar attack aircraft.
The HMS Ark Royal is alongside in the Adriatic with six Sea Harrier
dual-role attack aircraft. The US has more than 40 attack aircraft,
including the A-10s and AC130s. It also has 12 F-16s along with air-to-air
refuelling aircraft and further attack jets on board the USS Saratoga
carrier in the Adriatic.
The French have eight Jaguars and five Mirage reconnaissance aircraft, as
well as six Super Etendard fighters based on the Clemenceau carrier.
The Netherlands and Turkey have 18 F-16s between them, based in Italy at
Villafranca and Ghedi. Spain has one Casa support aircraft at Vicenza.
