FT  08 JUL 94 / Li Peng fails to face protesters in Berlin
China's Premier Li Peng failed to appear at the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin
yesterday, where some 200 human rights protesters gathered with banners
branding him a 'mass murderer' and the 'butcher of Tiananmen'.
On the fourth day of his tour of Germany, Mr Li became the first visiting
dignitary to a reunited Berlin to miss a stroll through the gate, symbol of
the city's former cold war division. A surprised Berlin mayor, Mr Eberhard
Diepgen, was left waiting for the Chinese party, which flew on to Weimar.
There, Mr Li interrupted a speech by the curator of the ciy's museum, who
referred to the writer Goethe's work on human rights. 'I know Goethe's
work,' Mr Li said angrily. 'I want to see how Goethe worked and lived.'
During three days in Bonn, the Chinese delegation signed contracts and
letters of intent worth Dollars 3.5bn. Chancellor Helmut Kohl and Mr Klaus
Kinkel, his foreign minister, raised the question of human rights in talks
with the Chinese leader, but the issue did not head the agenda.
Mr Norbert Blum, employment minister, took a hard line: 'There is no
business deal big enough to make us forget the slaughter on Tiananmen
Square' in 1989, he said in a newspaper interview. Mr Li cancelled an
official lunch in Weimar and left three hours early for Munich, the last
stop on his six-day tour.
Mr Qian Qichen, Chinese foreign minister and vice-premier, again denouncing
the democratic reform bill passed by Hong Kong's legislature, ordered an
advisory body yesterday to study ways to put a new parliament in the colony
after it returns to China in 1997, Reuter adds from Beijing.
Mr Qian said the narrow passage of the reform bill on June 30, three years
to the day before Beijing takes back Hong Kong from London, proved the plans
did not have great support.
Conservatives in Hong Kong's legislature narrowly failed to water down
radically the proposals put forward by Governor Chris Patten that have
enraged China. Mr Patten's legislation finally went through by an eight-vote
margin.
'This plan was passed by a slender majority, proving that 'the Patten plan
is accepted by the majority of the people' is nothing but a lie,' Mr Qian
told a meeting of the Preliminary Working Committee, an advisory group
helping China plan Hong Kong's transition.
