FT  07 JUN 94 / Nato arms pour into Greece and Turkey
The arsenals of Turkey and Greece, nominal Nato allies whose chronically
tense relations have come under fresh strain in recent weeks, are being
upgraded at an unprecedented pace, according to an independent study.
Last year alone, Turkey received a total of 1,017 main battle tanks - almost
as much as the entire holdings of the British army - from the US and
Germany, while Greece took delivery of 725, the study shows.
Figures on the two countries' arms imports were extrapolated by researchers
in Britain, the US and Germany from the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms, which has been tracking the weapons trade since the
beginning of 1992.
They indicate that total deliveries to Greece and Turkey in 1992-93 from
Germany and the US included 2,822 tanks, 1,084 armoured combat vehicles, 303
large calibre artillery systems, 28 attack helicopters and 14 warships.
The statistics were compiled by the British American Security Information
Council and the Berlin Information Centre for Transatlantic Security. Both
are independent lobby groups that promote disarmament.
A spokesman for the Stockholm Institute for Peace Research, another arms
trade watchdog, said its researches also pointed to a heavy flow of
armaments to Greece and Turkey.
Most of the deliveries were made free of charge under a programme known as
Cascade, under which the smaller Nato countries can receive weapons from
allies who are obliged to slash their arsenals under arms control agreement.
Even though much of the equipment being transferred is secondhand, it
represents a huge improvement over existing Greek and Turkish stocks.
Most of the tanks involved have been US-built M-60s or German Leopards, both
of which carry much more sophisticated electronic equipment than the M-48
which has been a mainstay of both armies until recently.
During the cold war period, the leading Nato members worked energetically
behind the scenes to put some limit on the intensity of Greek-Turkish
rivalry, but this effort has now slackened.
An initiative to promote confidence-building measures among the countries of
southeastern Europe - launched in Vienna under the aegis of the Helsinki
process - was quietly abandoned after one meeting in March, diplomats say.
Greece and Turkey now find themselves sympathising with opposite sides in
former Yugoslavia, with Turkey one of the strongest supporters of Bosnia's
Moslem leadership and Greece a traditional friend of the Serbs.
Relations between Athens and Ankara have deteriorated in recent days
following allegations in the Turkish media that supporters of the Kurdish
insurgency which has claimed around 12,000 lives in eastern Turkey were
trained in Greece.
Without directly blaming the Greek government, the Turkish authorities have
pointedly drawn the attention of several western governments to these
reports.
The Greek government has angrily rejected the allegations, and the Athens
media have quoted a Kurdish prisoner in Turkey as saying, in a message
smuggled out of jail, that his account of training in Greece was extracted
under duress.
