FT  24 MAR 94 / International Company News: Wal-Mart to supply Japanese
chain
Wal-Mart, the leading US discount retailer, and Ito-Yokado, a large Japanese
supermarket chain, have reached an agreement under which Wal-Mart will
supply its own-brand products to the Japanese retailer.
The move comes as an increasing number of Japanese retailers are
diversifying product procurement, especially from overseas, due to the
growing preference of consumers for cheaper discounted goods.
Such strategies among leading supermarket and discount chains are expected
to prompt a further shift of retailing power from the national brand
manufacturers, which until recently have controlled retail prices of
products, to retailers.
For Wal-Mart, the agreement to supply Ito-Yokado is the first of its kind,
according to analysts, who say overseas markets represent a small but
increasingly important segment of the company's business.
The deal highlights a wider trend in Japan. The country's old-fashioned
distribution and retail system, which has been controlled by manufacturers
and wholesalers, is facing modernisation due to deregulation, and the rise
of discount retailers and large supermarket chains which are creating their
own production and procurement networks.
Aoyama Trading, a leading men's suits discounter, this week announced it
would tie up with JC Penney, the US department store chain, to sell its
casual wear in Japan, while Yaohan, the Japanese retail and distribution
chain based in Hong Kong, will also market Wal-Mart's items in Asia.
Although the Ito-Yokado deal is one of Wal-Mart's first forays outside North
America, the expansion-minded company has been active in Canada and Mexico
over the past year.
The Arkansas-based retailer, which rang up total sales of Dollars 67bn in
the year to January 31, recently announced an agreement to acquire 120
Woolco discount stores in Canada from Woolworth, giving the chain a strong
footing north of the border in a single transaction.
In Mexico, Wal-Mart is opening a string of warehouse clubs and discount
stores in a joint venture with Cifra, the country's largest retailer.
Mr Saul Yaari, managing director of Piper Jaffray, a Minneapolis securities
house, downplayed the significance of the Japanese deal and the extent to
which Wal-Mart will pursue expansion and supply links with retailers outside
North America.
'I assume they will dabble overseas, but their plate is full in the US,' Mr
Yaari said, pointing out that the company was focusing on new 'superstores'
 -combining groceries and general merchandise - in its domestic market.
A spokesman for Wal-Mart declined to comment on the Japanese agreement.
For its part, Ito-Yokado will provide Wal-Mart with its sophisticated
point-of-sales technology, which helps efficient product and shelf
management. The two companies are to develop jointly low-cost products and
co-operate in expanding sales networks in Asia and Europe.
