FT  14 MAR 94 / UK may use army at airports: Flight delays after third
mortar attack on Heathrow
The UK government is this week expected to consider using army patrols to
boost security at British airports after the third Irish Republican Army
mortar attack at Heathrow in five days.
Both Heathrow and Gatwick airports were closed for several hours last night
after coded warnings. Scotland Yard later described the warnings as a
'cynical ploy by the IRA to cause unnecessary confusion and fear amongst the
public'.
Meanwhile army personnel and equipment helped search Heathrow for further
devices following yesterday's attack in which four mortars, fired from a
heavily camouflaged launcher, failed to explode.
One hit the roof of Terminal Four,which was closed for eight hours, causing
delays to flights and diversions. The IRA's ability to embarrass the
security forces and cause severe disruption for travellers will today bring
renewed calls at Westminster for tighter security.
The government, however, will be anxious to prevent the IRA using the
introduction of army patrols as a propaganda coup. It is also aware that
tighter security measures in one location may only switch IRA attacks
elsewhere.
Ministers could meet as early as today to decide whether to approve a
high-profile army presence at airports to help deter further attacks.
Downing Street said last night that Mr John Major, the prime minister, was
in close touch with events and any requests from the police for the army's
help would be considered.
Mr Dick Spring, Irish foreign minister, last night accused Sinn Fein and the
IRA of showing 'utter contempt' for the peace process. He believed the
mortar attacks had turned Sinn Fein's internal discussions on the peace
process into a 'bizarre charade' and said people viewed with growing dismay
the prospects for an early end to violence.
Last night the IRA accused police of gambling with lives and claimed their
warnings were deliberately ignored. 'The luck of the British authorities who
are deliberately taking these calculated and cynical gambles with people's
lives will inevitably run out,' it said.
London hotels fear the IRA attacks will lead to cancellations by businessmen
and tourists this summer - particularly US visitors. 'It is almost
inevitable that this sort of thing leads to cancellations by Americans,'
said an official at London's Hilton Hotel. But in the US, business people
leaving New York for London said they thought it would have little immediate
effect.
One businessman boarding yesterday afternoon's Concorde flight to London
said: 'My sense is that incidents like this simply lead to tighter security,
so it all balances out. My main concern is that the extra security will
increase delays.'
The IRA action is also likely to bring Dublin under more pressure from
British ministers to improve cross-border co-operation in combating
terrorism. The issue is already high on the Anglo-Irish agenda.
In Dublin, a government spokesman said the intention was to maintain and
increase whenever possible security co-operation between the two countries.
