FT  04 MAY 94 / Last-minute deal sets up Gaza signing
Palestinian officials early this morning said last-minute differences that
had soured the run-up to today's signing of an historic accord to withdraw
Israeli troops from Gaza and Jericho had been overcome.
'We have finished everything, (today) we sign,' said Palestinian negotiator
Nabil Shaath after six hours of talks.
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's prime minister, and Mr Yassir Arafat, Palestine
Liberation Organisation chairman, met last night in a final effort to
resolve the differences under the pressure of expectation and potential
embarrassment created by the arrival of 2,500 dignitaries and a host of
foreign ministers to witness today's event.
The disagreement occurred when PLO officials claimed Israel had 'reneged' on
more than 20 detailed points of the agreement.
Mr Arafat accused Israel of 'manoeuvres to obstruct the signing', prompting
Israeli officials to blame the disagreements on 'a last attempt' by the PLO
'to get a bit more'.
The points of disagreement included whether the Palestinians could issue
their own postage stamps and have their own phone codes for Gaza and
Jericho, and a dispute over the length of validity of proposed Palestinian
travel documents.
Israel had balked at the inclusion of Mr Faisal Husseini, a Palestinian
leader from Jerusalem, on the proposed list of 25 Palestinians to constitute
the Palestinian authority which will administer limited self-rule until
elections due in October. Israel says no Jerusalem-based Palestinians must
serve on the body.
PLO and Israeli negotiators had left Mr Rabin and Mr Arafat to resolve two
final points of disagreement: whether a uniformed Palestinian guard would be
allowed on the Allenby Bridge linking Israel and Jordan, and the delineation
of the area around Jericho to be ceded to Palestinian control.
The PLO had been seeking more than twice the 54 sq km offered by Israel.
The 200-page document, entitled Agreement on the Gaza Strip and Jericho
Area, would give the Palestinians their first limited degree of political
and economic autonomy since the Israeli state was created in 1948,
committing Israel to withdraw troops from land claimed by the Palestinians
and occupied by Israeli forces during the 1967 Arab-Israeli war.
The agreement is already 20 weeks behind the schedule under which Israel
should have completed its military withdrawal by April 13.
Once signed, the deal would prompt the immediate conclusion of Israeli
military withdrawal from Gaza and Jericho. Under a draft text, Israel will
complete the withdrawal within three weeks of signing.
Joint co-ordination and co-operation committees formed under the agreement
will also begin work immediately on overseeing the arrival of the eventual
9,000-strong Palestinian police force, the first 1,000 members of which are
due to begin arriving in Gaza and Jericho to-morrow.
