FT  03 NOV 94 / German coalition talks make steady progress
The three political parties negotiating a new coalition government under
Chancellor Helmut Kohl have agreed in principle to introduce wide-ranging
environmental and education reforms during the next legislative period,
their spokesman said yesterday.
However, despite broad agreement on these issues, which dominated
yesterday's discussions, and a general willingness to try to end the talks
by tomorrow, all three parties face difficulties on three outstanding
issues: internal security, foreign policy and the future of the 'solidarity'
income tax to help curb the budget deficit.
Mr Werner Hoyer, general secretary of the Free Democrats (FDP), the junior
partner in the coalition, said the next government would introduce a tax on
CO gases, but only provided countries within the European Union did
likewise.
'We cannot go it alone,' an FDP official said.
At the same time, as a means of reducing energy consumption, the FDP, the
Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and the Christian Social Union (CSU), its
Bavarian sister party, said they would also try to encourage the production
of cars with much lower fuel consumption.
On education, Mr Peter Hinze, general secretary of the CDU, said reforms
would be introduced with the aim of reducing the amount of time spent by
students in the universities, while the quality of teaching and the
structure of higher education would have to become more cost-effective and
competitive.
Mr Hinze conceded that some of the east German states had already introduced
education reforms which also include cutting back the number of years for
secondary school students.
The coalition talks have gone better than expected, with few important
disagreements.
However, FDP officials admitted they expected some tough bargaining today
when foreign policy and internal security were discussed.
At issue is how far the FDP is willing to compromise its libertarian
principles on combating crime. The CDU and the CSU want to give the police
more powers to use electronic surveillance of private individuals.
An attempt was made during the last legislative period to tighten internal
security, but the FDP opposed any extension of bugging powers.
The FDP will also try to push for granting dual citizenship for foreigners
living in Germany, who already make up nearly 6 per cent of the population.
But if they fail on this, as is expected since the CSU has traditionally
adopted a tough stance, the FDP will try to make access to citizenship
easier.
