FT  29 SEP 94 / Party sticks to quotas ruling
Labour's national executive committee yesterday decided to stand by one
strand of its tough policy on discrimination in favour of women - increasing
the prospects of a serious battle over quotas at next week's party
conference.
The committee warned 11 constituencies exempted from rules requiring female
representation on delegations that the regulations would be sternly enforced
next year. 'It is pretty ridiculous that constituencies say they cannot find
a woman delegate,' said a senior official.
However, the NEC sought to defuse tensions on the second strand of the
discrimination policy by endorsing a flexible interpretation of the rules on
the selection of women for winnable parliamentary constituencies. The
decision was in line with a compromise approach developed by Mr Tony Blair,
party leader.
It was decided not to insist on the selection of all-women shortlists in 50
per cent of winnable seats without a sitting Labour MP, as required under
rules approved by conference delegates last year.
Members were told that the flexible approach has already been applied in the
south-west, where all-female shortlists have been accepted in four of nine
winnable constituencies, allowing one constituency party to disobey the
rules.
Officials said they expected that a similarly trouble-free process in the
rest of the country would lead to agreed women-only shortlists in up to 35
other winnable seats - potentially more than doubling the number of female
Labour MPs.
However, the ruling on delegations will harden the determination of critics
to repeal rules they regard as demeaning to women and discriminatory against
men.
The NEC also approved plans to invite Mr John Hume, leader of the
nationalist SDLP, to address the conference immediately before a crucial
debate on the future of Labour's 13-year-old commitment to campaign for a
united Ireland by consent.
Supporters of a more neutral approach fear that the timing of his speech
will bolster support for the party's nationalist wing.
An NEC statement is expected to endorse the policy while stressing the need
for northern unionists to consent to constitutional change and acknowledging
that the leadership must respond to the developing Ulster peace process.
The NEC was told that party membership has increased by 25,000 to 288,000
since Mr Blair was elected leader in July. The total is well short of the
record membership of more than 750,000 in the early 1950s, but marks a solid
recovery from 260,000 in mid-1993 when membership stood at 260,000.
