FT  18 OCT 94 / Survey of Fraud - Prevention and Detection (5): Is there a
spy in your boardroom? - Industrial espionage is a growing problem in
business
Is there a turner in the boardroom? This question, being increasingly asked
by big and small companies around the world, has nothing to do with art
collections but is concerned with the growing problem of industrial
espionage.
Industrial espionage can be defined as virtually any technique aimed at
taking a company's secrets. Although electronic surveillance or computer
hacking more often grab the headlines, the most common form of industrial
espionage is for a rival company to employ an insider - or a turner in the
trade jargon - to give them inside information.
Industrial espionage is increasingly worrying executives in highly
competitive areas of industry. High-tech businesses such as aerospace,
engineering, computers and telecommunications are frequent victims but
companies in other fields, where marketing or advertising strategies may be
as important as new product information, are also suffering.
Behind the phenomenon is the large financial advantage that a rival company
may gain from a timely insight into a competitor's product ideas or
marketing plans.
'Why should a company spend Pounds 100m on research and development when it
can gain the relevant knowledge from a rival for a much smaller outlay?'
asks Peter Heims, a British security consultant.
According to Paul Carratu, managing director of Carratu International, a
London-based fraud investigator, the most common form of industrial
espionage concerns disaffected employees offering this type of information
to a rival for a fee.
'More often than not you see the opportunist approach where the employee
makes the information available via an intermediary such as a security
company. It is less common to see the more direct approach where a rival
goes out actively to seek the information through bugging or similar means,'
says Mr Carratu.
It follows, therefore, that the most sensible ways to try to stop industrial
espionage are through common sense tactics that are really nothing more than
an extension of good management. Among these are restricting access to
sensitive product or marketing information; keeping a check on documents
that could be of value to a rival; and trying to sort out personal problems
involving employees before the person affected becomes so disgruntled that
he or she even thinks of starting to hawk secrets to competitors.
Of course, deciding on where to draw the line on potentially sensitive
information may be highly tricky. There is a story much recounted among
industrial espionage investigators of a company that, in the cause of
improving communications with its employees, revealed detailed marketing
information about a new product launch in its internal company newspaper
several weeks before the product appeared. Not surprisingly, the details
leaked out to a competitor and the company launched an industrial espionage
probe which ultimately led to the dismissal of the newspaper's unfortunate
editor.
The point underlines the fact that industrial espionage covers a wide
spectrum.
One estimate of the extent of industrial espionage is that about half of all
big companies may have had secret information leaked over the past decade by
some form of espionage. The phenomenon is relatively widespread in the US,
France and Italy, according to Mr Carratu. 'There is less industrial
espionage in Britain: in the UK it's thought not to be ethical to indulge in
this kind of thing,' he says.
Understandably enough, most companies hit byindustrial espionage do not like
to talk about it. But in recent years the businesses affected have included
BP and Shell, which suffered as a result of outsiders gaining access to
secret tender information for engineering contracts through the information
leaking out via an unscrupulous marketing agent. Volkswagen and General
Motors have recently been locked in a long-running battle over allegations
by the US company that its rival 'stole' secrets - allegedly channelled to
the German car maker by the defection to Volkswagen of Jose Ignacio Lopez de
Arriortua, a Spaniard who had been running GM's worldwide parts purchasing
operations. SKF, the Swedish ball-bearing company, also recently suffered an
embarrassing loss of its new product plans which was later traced to a
disgruntled employee.
Electronic surveillance is a method frequently used by competitors to gain
access to secrets. A rival boardroom can be bugged - perhaps using the
services of a person contracted for this purpose who uses the 'cover' of
working for a cleaning company - with an instrument the size of a matchbox
and costs no more than Pounds 100. Such devices, with tiny microphones and
which transmit over perhaps a quarter of a mile, can be very difficult to
spot if cleverly hidden.
