FT  10 DEC 94 / Caribbean nations win day after US banana drama
The tiny nations of the Windward Islands stared the US in the eye this week,
and it was Washington that blinked.
The US has backed down in a hard-fought battle over bananas to maintain
harmony at this weekend's summit of the Americas in Miami.
President Bill Clinton had boasted that the meeting would bring together
every democratically elected leader in the western hemisphere and exclude
only President Fidel Castro of Cuba. But the anger of Dominica, St Kitts, St
Lucia and St Vincent at US opposition to their preferential banana export
deal with the European Union had put that boast in peril.
The EU's banana import regime favours ACP countries - African, Caribbean and
Pacific nations which are mostly former colonies - over Latin American
producers and US-owned banana multinationals.
A full house was only assured when the US agreed at talks in Geneva not to
oppose the EU's request for a waiver from the terms of the newly completed
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade for the banana regime.
'The US has now withdrawn its reservations in Geneva and come up with a form
of words in Gatt that we can live with,' said Mr James Mitchell, prime
minister of St Vincent and the Grenadines. 'We are satisfied that this
banana hurdle is moving out of the way.'
With this obstacle removed, Mr Clinton said the Miami summit is expected to
agree to 'begin immediately to construct the Free Trade Area of the Americas
in which barriers to trade and investment will be progressively eliminated'.
Negotiations would be completed by 2005.
'Here in Miami we have the chance to act and we're going to take it,' Mr
Clinton said as he welcomed his guests in the art deco district of Miami
Beach.
'By the year 2005 we will be selling more to Latin America than to Japan and
Europe.' He hailed a 'dazzling opportunity to build a community of nations'.
The meeting started yesterday in the 1920s splendour of the Biltmore Hotel
where Al Capone and the Duke of Windsor stayed, and will move on today to
the Italianate Vizcaya mansion on Biscayne Bay.
The summit is the first to bring together the Americas since a meeting at
Punta del Este, Uruguay, in 1967, when 10 of the leaders represented were
military dictators.
'Today, 34 of the leaders have won their posts through ballots, not
bullets,' Mr Clinton said.
Nafta aims for swift Chilean entry, Page 3
