FT  07 JUN 94 / Business and the Law: Headhunting season closed - A US
injunction that limits poaching of a rival's staff
In April, Arthur D Little, the Massachusetts-based management and technology
consultants, obtained an injunction from a California Superior Court judge
banning Electronic Data Systems, an information-services subsidiary of
General Motors, from soliciting its employees anywhere in the world.
The move followed a lawsuit filed by Little alleging that EDS had unfairly
hired away almost the entire staff of Little's aerospace consulting
practice, resulting in a significant loss of business.
The sweeping nature of the injunction took corporate America by surprise.
Although companies frequently threaten legal action when one competitor
poaches another's talent, cases rarely reach the courts. Broad prohibitions
on soliciting employees are rare. The 13th amendment of the US Constitution
guarantees citizens the right to work for any employer they choose if that
employer is willing to employ them.
EDS is considering an appeal. But, if the injunction is upheld on appeal, do
US companies need to reconsider their hiring policies?
EDS denies it has done anything wrong. Mr Mark Fox, an EDS spokesman, says:
'We believe the suit is without merit and the injunction is without merit.'
The lawsuit should be put into perspective, he says. EDS has built up a
management consultancy of 1,100 people from scratch in two years. Of that
number, 30 worked in the aerospace field and, of those 30, eight were former
Little employees.
'We're building something very exciting, of which aerospace is a key area.
People are attracted to that and are keen to work for us. But we've done
nothing to twist their arms or use illegal means to bring them in,' he says.
So why did Little bring the action? Mr Sam Gallo, the company's general
counsel explains that the poaching of almost its entire aerospace
consultancy was an unprecedented event.
'Over the years many people have moved in and out of the company, but we've
never had a situation where an entire practice area was essentially raided
from the firm,' he says.
When Little subsequently discovered that EDS was attempting the same thing
with its metal industries consulting practice, it felt it had little choice
but to take legal action.
Mr Gallo says the suit has three parts. Little is suing EDS for unfair
competition under the California Business and Professions Code; theft of
trade secrets; and for inducing Little employees to breach fiduciary duties
to the company.
It is also suing Mr Charles D Scales, former head of the aerospace
consulting practice, for breach of fiduciary duty and contractual
obligations. Little alleges that, while still working for the company but
after being hired by EDS, Mr Scales used his influence and position as an
officer of the company to persuade colleagues to move to EDS.
Finally, Little is suing Heidrick &amp; Struggles, an executive recruitment
firm. Little alleges the firm acted improperly by helping EDS recruit
members of its aerospace group while Little itself was a client of the
headhunters. Heidrick &amp; Struggles denies it acted improperly.
Having filed the lawsuit, Little then sought a worldwide injunction to
preserve the status quo until trial of the action. Its intention was not to
prevent any Little employees from applying for jobs at EDS but to stop EDS
from approaching any more Little staff around the world.
Mr Gallo says that, to get the injunction, Little had to satisfy the judge
it was more likely than not to win the lawsuit. 'He must have been satisfied
we had a strong case or he wouldn't have granted the injunction,' he added.
Does the sweeping nature of the protection gained by Little have broader
implications for US businesses? Mr Jeffrey Kingston, a partner of San
Francisco-based Brobeck Phleger &amp; Harrison, says there are several
dimensions to the case.
At one level the lawsuit appeared to be a straightforward Bancroft-Whitney v
Glen claim, named after the 1960s case which established the principle under
California law that it is a civil wrong, or tort, to conduct a raid designed
to cripple a competitor by luring away a group of its employees.
'It's fairly difficult for a plaintiff to prove but, if (the raid) delivers
a crippling blow, then it's a tort for which damages are payable,' says Mr
Kingston.
The action against Mr Scales was more commonplace, he says. If a manager,
before leaving a company, induces employees under his supervision to leave
with him, it is a breach of his fiduciary duty of loyalty to the company for
which he could be held liable in damages.
Few of these cases reach the courts, however, because where only one or two
employees have been lured away it is very hard to quantify damages. Where,
on the other hand, a large group of employees has been lured away en bloc,
as is alleged in this case, such an action becomes more viable as the
damages can be more easily quantified.
In the Little case the hiring away of almost an entire practice group is
said to have crippled Little's Dollars 4m aerospace consultancy.
The case was also about theft of trade secrets, says Mr Kingston. The
allegation is that EDS misappropriated Little's trade secrets by using Mr
Scales' inside knowledge about employees at Little and their terms and
conditions of employment to lure them away. Such knowledge would not
normally be available to outside headhunters.
Overlaying all this, however, is the allegation that the EDS action amounted
to unfair competition in breach of the California Business and Professions
Code.
According to Mr Howard Fine, a partner in the San Francisco office of Baker
&amp; McKenzie, if the Little claim is upheld by the courts it would represent a
novel application of the unfair competition law.
By granting the injunction the court appeared to be saying that, where a
company undertakes a targetted business programme to undermine a competitor
by picking out its more gifted employees, that would amount to unfair
competition.
The unfair competition law could not be used to block EDS from soliciting
one or two employees, he adds. To succeed when the action comes to trial
Little will have to show a concerted plan by EDS to damage its aerospace
consultancy. That may prove difficult, he says, unless it can produce
evidence such as internal EDS memos planning to target Little employees.
Unfair competition cases normally involve allegations of unfair business
practices and other restraints on competition, Mr Fine says. If the Little
case goes to the California Court of Appeals it could represent an important
development in the law.
But most lawyers believe the case will be settled before going to trial. Mr
Fine says the likely course of events is for the two sides to reach an
agreement that the defendant company will not solicit the plaintiff's
employees for a certain period of time. Provided it does not restrict the
freedom of individual employees to work for whomever they choose, such an
agreement could provide the basis of an amicable settlement, he says.
Mr Fox says EDS are anxious to move on and put the dispute behind them. Mr
Gallo says Little are 'not averse to settling it' on the right terms.
Clearly, a settlement would make commercial sense for both EDS and Little.
But if they do settle, the uncertainty surrounding this area of the law will
continue, and that may be in nobody's interests.
