FT  22 JUL 94 / Technology: Reality catches up with vision - Neil Buckley
concludes a series on electronic retailing by looking at multimedia's
unstoppable rise
Step into the store of the future. Just inside the doorway is a kiosk
containing an interactive computer terminal that will become your personal
guide to the store, showing you what is on offer, giving information on
products in attractive audio-visual displays, and eventually taking your
order and payment.
Multimedia, the combination of sound, moving and still pictures, graphics
and text on a computer screen, has long been seen as one of the most
exciting new technologies for retailers. It is potentially a powerful tool
for communicating with customers and improving service and sales.
Unlike many technological changes in retailing which have occurred behind
the scenes, multimedia is a highly visible way of using technology to
enhance the customer's shopping experience.
Until now, the reality has lagged behind the vision. Retailers have been
cautious about exploring the possibilities of multimedia, regarding it as a
solution waiting for a problem.
However, Don Jackson, a consultant specialising in multimedia with ICL
Retail Systems in the UK, says following demonstrations of multimedia given
by ICL earlier this year, 48 retailers from several countries have expressed
interest.
'At last the technology has caught up with the hype,' he says. 'Retailers
are recognising and accepting the benefits. We could see significant
movement next year.'
He adds that the progression from electronic points of sale, the biggest
retail innovation of the 1980s, to electronic points of service, is a
logical and natural one.
Crude forms of multimedia have been around since the early 1980s, when
computers linked to laser discs began to be used in shops to provide visual
displays.
What makes modern multimedia systems more attractive to retailers is the
ability to integrate them into their logistics and distribution systems, and
to make them interactive. That gives customers the opportunity to control
information displayed on the screen rather than watching a pre-recorded
sequence.
The in-store kiosk assists customers in selecting their purchases and
eliminates problems caused by store assistants having inadequate knowledge
of products, by offering customers far more information than could be
retained in the head of shop staff.
Moreover, by including a video camera in the terminal, the screen could
display an image of what a particular garment, for example, would look like
on a customer, and show the garment in a range of colours or sizes. The
system could also be programmed to suggest alternatives if an item was out
of stock, or additional purchases linked to the main purchase.
A more advanced version of the multimedia kiosk would include a credit card
reader to allow customers to pay for goods and a link communicating the
order to the stockroom, and if necessary triggering re-order of items from
the manufacturer.
It might also record the customer's choice, as well as the alternatives
considered by the customer and the length of time spent looking at different
parts of the catalogue, to allow the retailer to build up a profile of the
shopper's preferences. This could be linked to a loyalty scheme, whereby
regular shoppers would receive 'smart' cards which they would insert into
the multimedia kiosk, allowing the system to 'recognise' them, greet them
and offer discounts or inform them of special offers.
The development of multimedia kiosks opens up other possibilities. They
could, for example, be placed in shop windows or outside stores, to allow
customers to look through the catalogue and even place orders outside shop
opening hours. Kiosks could be removed from the store altogether, and placed
in areas of high customer traffic such as airports, railway stations or even
office reception areas.
From there, it would only be a short leap to customers being able to access
the systems from their homes, once sophisticated digital communications
networks are developed. 'There are retailers who look on current multimedia
systems as a stepping stone to proper, interactive home shopping systems,'
says Jackson.
In addition to allowing stores to provide better service, and understand
their customers better, the most important benefit of multimedia is likely
to be to enable retailers to carry much wider ranges.
As customers grow accustomed to using multimedia, retailers might be able to
reduce and eventually abandon display items altogether, storing products in
a stockroom with customers picking up their orders from service points. That
would allow greater ranges to be sold from the same, or less, floorspace.
For the moment, examples of multimedia being used in retailing remain
isolated.
Woolworths in the UK has experimented with a system called MV offering a
15,000-item catalogue of home entertainment products and giving the customer
the chance of browsing and listening to or viewing clips before purchasing
them.
Ford is one of several car manufacturers introducing interactive terminals
into showrooms to allow customers to see their chosen car in the colour and
with the specifications they want.
Comsys of Belgium has developed a system already being used by some Belgian
hairdressers to enable customers to choose a hairstyle from a database of
4,000 styles and see an impression of how it would look on them. In Denmark,
estate agents are using multimedia kiosks to present information about
properties on the market.
At London's Heathrow Airport, Galleria 21 has installed 24 multimedia kiosks
for duty-free shopping designed by the John Herbert Partnership, and using
multimedia technology developed by AT&amp;T.
One of the most advanced test programmes so far has been by Argos, the UK
catalogue retailer. It introduced eight multimedia terminals into stores
last autumn, and is installing another 12 this summer.
Argos' catalogue-based format lends itself naturally to multimedia, and the
system, known as Impact (Interactive Multimedia Project - Argos Customer
Terminal) offers both an electronic version of the catalogue and payment
facilities.
Geoff Robinson, director of information systems, told a retailing conference
earlier this year that the project had been a success, producing positive
reactions from customers and staff, and achieving significant sales
increases.
However, he added, usage rates by customers were only half the rate hoped
for as it was often quicker to go through standard tills if the queue was
short, the terminals were not promoted heavily enough or put in sufficiently
prominent positions in the store, and the software was sometimes too slow
and not exciting enough.
Argos says it has tried to rectify these problems with its second generation
of terminals, but its experience demonstrates the complexities of getting
the most from retail multimedia systems.
Multimedia is also likely to be more beneficial in some areas of retailing
than in others. Those with most to gain are likely to be fashion stores and
health and beauty chains, high street banks and sellers of complex and
expensive items such as electrical and electronic goods retailers, and
travel agents. The technology is expected to make less of an impact in
grocery retailing, although it could be used for menu and recipe suggestions
and to guide customers around stores.
Julia Schofield, of Julia Schofield Consultants, an IT specialist which has
formed a partnership with ICL to develop multimedia for retailers, says
getting multimedia systems right requires strong software design and systems
integration skills. 'These must be focused on clearly defined and achievable
goals, so that the return can be measured,' she adds.
Retailers must have a very clear idea of what they want multimedia
technology to do for them, she says, and make sure their system achieves
that. But the technology already exists to enhance both the ease and
excitement of shopping, and is waiting for retailers to use it.
Previous articles have appeared on June 9, 16 and 23, July 1, 8 and 15.
