FT  05 FEB 94 / EU plans closer ties with Ukraine
The European Union aims to wrap up negotiations on a more generous
partnership and co-operation agreement with Ukraine before the March 27
parliamentary elections, a European Commission official said yesterday.
The announcement of closer ties reflects concern in Brussels over the
collapse in Ukraine's economy and a desire to use the prospect of stronger
western trade and political ties to dampen extreme Ukrainian nationalism in
the March poll.
At the same time, there was continued confusion over whether Thursday's vote
by the Ukrainian parliament had gone as far as ratifying the Start 1
disarmament treaty, although it was widely acknowledged to have removed
obstacles to ratification.
The UK interpreted the vote as a decision to ratify, which it 'warmly'
welcomed, but the US did not go as far. Mr William Miller, the US ambassador
in Kiev, said the US was 'very pleased' that the vote had marked the
'removal of the parliament's reservations to ratification of the Start
treaty'.
During Thursday's debate MPs insisted on more specific details on financial
compensation, security guarantees and dismantlement procedures. Parliament
told the government to finalise these technical agreements with the exchange
of ratification instruments. This leaves a loophole for the Ukrainians on
ratification should the technical agreements not be concluded to
parliament's satisfaction.
Parliament did not ratify the Nuclear Non-Proliferation treaty on Thursday,
but will reconsider in a couple of weeks.
Meanwhile, EU officials said partnership pact with the Kiev government could
be signed before a similar agreement with Moscow.
High-level talks between Russia and the European Commission continued
yesterday, but there were few signs of progress on the two most difficult
obstacles, the treatment of Russian uranium exports and the need to
safeguard the position of foreign banks operating in Russia.
These issues have held up an EU-Russia partnership accord since President
Boris Yeltsin's visit to Brussels last December.
The uranium dispute is particularly tricky because Russia wants uranium
imports to be subject to the liberal safeguard clause in the planned
partnership agreement; but France wants to protect its own industry, which
supplies its nuclear power programme.
On Monday, EU foreign ministers will discuss progress on the Ukraine and
Russia partnership agreements at a meeting in Brussels. Ministers are
expected to agree to a mandate for the Commission to negotiate proposed free
trade agreements with Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, with Estonia likely to
receive more favourable treatment because it has liberalised its economy
faster than its Baltic partners, a Commission official said.
Ministers will probably make clear that the Baltic-EU free trade pacts are a
significant step toward an association agreement with the Union on the lines
of those already agreed with the Czech republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia,
Bulgaria and Romania.
