FT  26 JAN 94 / Traders in Islington fear for their survival
Confused traders and residents in north London near the point where the deep
rail tunnel through Islington will surface expressed anger yesterday at the
plans.
They said they have been struggling to get answers Union Rail, the company
set up to develop the Channel rail link, and the Department of Transport
about the impact on Caledonian Road.
Construction will involve digging a trench along the road and could take
from a year to five years to complete.
Several businesses along the road could suffer a severe drop in trade during
that period, as well as a blight on property prices.
Mr Stan Klepka, owner of a metal-polishing business and chairman of the
traders' association, said: 'Eighty per cent of the businesses would go
under because the road would be closed for three to five years.
'Everyone on this road who is not a wholesaler relies on passing trade
through Caledonian Road down to King's Cross.'
Mrs Dawn Spyrou, who owns Caledonian Super Cleaners, said she tried to sell
her business last year but nobody was interested.
She said: 'I absolutely think it was because of the rail link plans.'
Mrs Vijya Patel, owner of Newstop, about 60 yards from the proposed tunnel,
said: 'Even if the lease expired and we wanted to move we could not because
no one else wants to move in.'
Mr John MacGregor, the transport secretary, announced that the tunnel would
surface in a 'grade-separated' junction east of Caledonian Road. Members of
a local pressure group yesterday called it a 'spaghetti junction'. They had
received a Union Rail map which suggested that the tunnel would surface west
of the road.
Mr Ken Cordner of Union Rail yesterday confirmed that the tunnel through
Islington would surface west of Caledonian Road, but the last stretch of the
route would be in a shallow tunnel beneath the road.
Mr Robert Bleasdale, who owns R. Bleasdale and Co, The Cast Iron Shop on
Caledonian Road, said he had heard rumours that the building next door to
his workshop would be demolished during the construction of the route. The
government has not offered him compensation for any damage that he believes
will be caused to his building and business.
The government may offer a voluntary purchase scheme for homes directly
affected by the rail link, but most residents do not think they will get a
decent sale price.
Ms Diana Shelly, a member of the Cally Rail Group, said: 'If they do offer
us a voluntary purchase it is not likely to pay off our mortgage. But at
least we're lucky as homeowners because we are in a position to fight for
some compensation. Council tenants are completely left out of the equation.
'When we moved in here it was quiet and beautiful, but with the construction
and the noise levels it is going to be disastrous.'
