FT  04 MAR 94 / Sweetener offered to rail losers: Bids for Channel link
invited
The government yesterday offered unsuccessful bidders for the Pounds 2.7bn
Channel tunnel rail link a compensation package worth a third of the costs
of their bids up to a ceiling of Pounds 1.5m. Mr Roger Freeman, transport
minister, explained that compensation was being offered 'in the interests of
vigorous competition and because of the size and complexity of the project'.
But he also indicated that the project might not receive any government cash
on top of the selection of assets and rights listed yesterday. 'The
government's contribution to the project should be sufficient to attract the
private sector, so that the private sector can earn a sufficient return on
its contribution,' he said.
'It (the contribution) will be a substantial one . . . and, as part of the
necessary contribution will be determined by the competition, it may involve
distributing some cash.'
Mr Freeman was speaking at the launch of a competition to find a
private-sector consortium to build the 68-mile rail link between London's St
Pancras station and the Channel tunnel. It is expected to be the largest
joint public-private sector construction project this decade.
The public contribution to the scheme is expected, subject to bargaining
with bidders, to consist of:
The Pounds 800m assets owned by European Passenger Services, the company
which will run trains between London, Paris and Brussels. These comprise
Waterloo International station, the North Pole rail depot in north-west
London and the Eurostar rolling stock. The government will not transfer the
Pounds 1bn of debt incurred to acquire these assets.
The right to revenues from EPS's train services when these start this
summer.
The right to charge domestic train-operating companies a fee for running
trains over the rail link's tracks.
The intellectual property built up by Union Railway, the company which has
been developing the rail link for the past six years. No formal value has
been given to this.
