FT  21 JUN 94 / International Company News: High-speed steels group rolls
toward flotation - Kenneth Gooding examines Eramet's plan for a year to
remember
This is a year to remember for Eramet, the French group which is the world's
biggest producer of both ferro-nickel and high-speed steels.
It has just put the finishing touches to a FFr2bn (Dollars 360m), five-year
investment programme and Mr Yves Rambaud, chairman and chief executive, says
that, as long as there is no collapse in share prices, Eramet will be listed
on the Paris bourse before the end of 1994.
A meeting on June 15 made the changes necessary to permit Eramet's
shareholders - ERAP, the French state holding company, with 70 per cent, Elf
Aquitaine of France and IMetal, the Paris-based industrial holding company,
with 15 per cent each - to reduce their holdings.
Eramet has embarked on a series of roadshows and Mr Rambaud says he expects
the first tranche, of up to 20 per cent the group, to be placed privately
with European institutional investors.
Banque Paribas has been retained for this exercise which he hopes will be
followed by full flotation in Paris. This would involve the present
shareholders selling at least another 10 per cent of Eramet to the public.
However, ERAP will still retain majority control of Eramet. This, says Mr
Rambaud, is to give comfort to the 2,000 people Eramet employs in New
Caledonia, the South Pacific island which contains the heart of Eramet's
nickel operations.
'The French government does not wish to give the impression it is ready to
desert them,' he says. In all, the group employs 3,400.
Dominating New Caledonia's economy is SLN (Societe Metallurgique Le Nickel),
82 per cent owned by Eramet. SLN dates back to 1880 and owns nickel mines
and a smelter on New Caledonia. Its new FFr800m Nepoin-Kope mine was
formally opened last month . While the mine was being developed, annual
capacity at SLN's smelter at Doniambo was boosted to 50,000 tonnes. Mr
Rambaud says that by spending modestly to remove bottlenecks, its capacity
could rise by 2,000 tonnes to 60,000 tonnes
Last year Eramet, ranked third among the world's nickel (as distinct from
ferro-nickel) producers with 8 to 10 per cent of the market, lifted output
from a depressed 40,750 tonnes to 46,310 tonnes. This year's output should
be between 48,000 and 50,000 tonnes.
A long-term relationship between SLN and Nisshin Steel has recently been
strengthened at the Japanese company's request. By October Nisshin will have
paid about FFr400m for 10 per cent of SLN and for a contract guaranteeing
Nisshin 10 per cent of SLN's output at a fixed price.
Mr Rambaud points out, however, that, although the Nisshin deal apparently
indicates a value of FFr4bn for SLN, the supply contract confuses the
arithmetic.
Nickel operations contributed 68 per cent of Eramet's total sales of
FFr2.63bn last year. World demand for nickel has been growing at more than 2
per cent a year, driven mainly by its use in stainless steel - a material
for which annual demand is growing by 4.3 per cent.
Stainless takes 62 per cent of all the nickel produced but accounts for 80
per cent of Eramet's output. Despite consistent demand, nickel prices last
year were the lowest for 20 years (with the exception of 1987) because the
market was distorted by a sudden surge in Russian exports to the west, up
from 40,000 tonnes a year in Soviet days to 120,000 tonnes.
Eramet's sudden emergence as the world's biggest producer of high-speed
steels - which have a value four times as great as stainless steel - dates
back to decisions in 1989 when, like other producers, it benefited from
extraordinarily high nickel prices.
The group decided to invest part of the proceeds in the New Caledonia
expansion and modernisation programme while beginning a search for a 'second
leg' or a logical industrial and geographic diversification. First it bought
Commentryene in France in 1991 and quickly merged it with Kloster Speedsteel
of Sweden. The total cost was FFr900m.
Mr Rambaud says Eramet found that the French and Swedes can work well
together.
The high-speed steels business has prospered under new ownership and a
unified international marketing team is doing better than when Kloster and
Commentryene were in competition separately.
The steel operations use no nickel to make their metal - employed for such
things as high-speed cutting tools. Eramet wanted to make sure it did not
compete with its customers, says Mr Rambaud.
Last year Eramet was one of the few nickel or steel groups to remain
profitable, if only just. It made net profits of FFr120m, down from FFr229m
in 1992 when there was an extraordinary gain of FFr100m.
More important, in Mr Rambaud's view, is that Eramet's cash flow remained
stable last year at FFr356m. The group's balance sheet remains strong, with
cash and near-cash of FFr1.3bn, compared with financial debts of FFr635m.
As the expansion programme has been completed, capital expenditure will come
down from last year's FFr531m (following a record FFr614m in 1992) to about
FFr300m in 1994 and even less next year.
Mr Rambaud says the nickel operations are in good shape - the group has at
least 40 years of reserves in New Caledonia and costs were reduced last year
by 15 per cent to 1980 levels in real terms.
Eramet last year could break even with the nickel price at Dollars 2.78 to
Dollars 2.80 a lb when the London Metal Exchange price averaged Dollars
2.40.
Eramet is likely to use its cash to add a third industrial 'leg'. Like the
high-speed steel operations, this will have to have technology and customers
with which the group's management are familiar but does not compete with
Eramet's present customers.
Mr Rambaud says that no list of likely candidates has yet been drawn up. He
explains: 'Our first priority is to arrange a smooth change in Eramet's
shareholders.'
