FT  13 DEC 94 / Safety strategy at BR 'changed'
British Rail is no longer in favour of the introduction of an automatic
system to prevent trains passing signals at danger, a senior railway manager
disclosed yesterday.
Mr David Rayner, Railtrack's director of safety and standards, was giving
evidence to the public inquiry into the latest fatal BR crash, the head-on
collision at Cowden in Kent on October 15 in which five people died.
Mr Rayner outlined a series of alternative ways of improving safety, which
Major Kit Holden, the inquiry inspector, suggested amounted to a hotchpotch
of ideas and 'a jam tomorrow syndrome'.
General provision of automatic train protection, to prevent trains passing
signals at danger, going too fast or running into buffers, was recommended
by Sir Anthony Hidden in his report on the inquiry into the 1988 Clapham
disaster in which 35 people were killed.
The report's recommendation was accepted by BR and the government at the
time.
But Mr Rayner told the public inquiry yesterday that the situation had
changed.
Pilot schemes on the Great Western main line and the Chiltern line showed
costs were much higher than expected. He said: 'It was therefore concluded
that it was difficult to justify a complete system installation using that
form of technology.'
Mr Rayner said the main alternatives were a variation of the automatic train
control system adopted on high-speed trains in France and Japan, and
introducing systems to give some of the benefits of the BR automatic system
to particular areas.
He said this view was passed to the government in March.
Maj Holden said he was sceptical about the prospects of seeing any benefits
from the proposed systems in less than about 10 years.
Questioning Mr Rayner about the local options, he said he was concerned that
there would end up being what he dubbed 'slightly unfairly' a hotchpotch of
ideas at various sites on the railway.
He added: 'It would become very difficult to analyse the benefits of any
single one of these options.'
Mr Rayner disagreed. It was normal for signalling to vary.
The inquiry, in East Grinstead, West Sussex, also heard from Mr David
Burton, director of product quality for BR's south and east passenger group.
He said he believed the cost of the crash was higher than the savings made
by making the line single track in 1990.
Reducing the 26-mile Oxted-Uckfield branch line to single track saved Pounds
1.1m compared with renewing double track. He confirmed that there had been
no assessment of the risk of accidents when the project was considered -
such techniques were 'not available' at the time.
Questioned by Mr Allan Gore, counsel for the train drivers' union Aslef, Mr
Burton said he did not know the cost of the crash. Nor did he know the costs
of recovering the trains and track, the internal and current public inquiry,
and the likely compensation for those involved.
Mr Gore said: 'I suggest to you that if you take all of these factors into
account they will be larger than the perceived cost savings in choosing
between the options for this line's future.'
Mr Burton said: 'I believe that to be correct.'
The inquiry continues
