FT  01 DEC 94 / The Budget: Reaction tempered by government's poor record of
cuts - Philip Coggan on doubts about the chancellor's spending plans
When chancellors promise to cut public spending it is all too often a case
of 'give me chastity, but not yet'.
City reaction to the chancellor's ambitious plans for cutting the real -
after inflation - growth of public spending, was yesterday tempered by the
government's poor record of achieving actual cuts.
In the last Budget the chancellor forecast that in the current fiscal year,
1994-95, the control total - the core, mainly non-cyclical, elements of
spending - would fall by a real 1.25 per cent.
In fact, it is now set to rise by 1.4 per cent.
This spending overshoot, allied to lower than expected tax receipts, helped
explain part of the market's disappointment with the Budget. Some analysts
had forecast that this year's public sector borrowing requirement would be
as low as Pounds 30bn. The chancellor predicted a figure of Pounds 34.5bn.
To be fair, the real spending overshoot in 1994-95 has been due to
inflation, which came in at a lower rate than had been expected when
departments were set their nominal spending targets.
Mr Roger Bootle, chief economist at Midland Global Markets, said: 'It's not
that they've exceeded their nominal targets, it's just that the nominal
targets mean more in real terms.'
The chancellor has forecast a real cut of 0.8 per cent in the control total
for 1995-96. In nominal terms this translates into a reduction of Pounds
7bn, rather bigger than the Pounds 5bn many analysts had been expecting.
Mr Darren Winder, UK economist at SG Warburg, said: 'The 1995-96 figure is a
demanding one and more demanding than the one they set themselves last year,
which they didn't meet.'
The economics team at Goldman Sachs is more sanguine. It said: 'In real
terms, the government's public spending plans are intended to be much
tighter next year than envisaged last November.
'This is because the government hopes to claw back the overshoot in real
government spending that has taken place this year.
'Although the plans sound extremely ambitious, they seem reasonably
realistic for 1995-96.'
This year's cuts are mainly due to lower than expected inflation and the
time-honoured expedient of reducing the contingency reserve, the piggy bank
set aside to cover unforeseen events such as the Gulf war.
Some analysts had hoped that the contingency reserve might be abolished,
leading to the more optimistic predictions of spending cuts made before the
Budget.
Nevertheless, in 1995-96 the reserve has been cut from Pounds 7bn to Pounds
3bn, contributing more than half of the reduction in the control total.
Mr Bootle points out that the retention of the reserve, which amounts to
Pounds 9bn in 1997-98, gives the chancellor a margin for error he can draw
on when making tax cuts in future years.
There is certainly suspicion in the City that the chancellor, having played
the role of Mr Scrooge this year, will turn into the more profligate Mr
Micawber as the election approaches.
The Kleinwort Benson economics team believes that 'next year's Budget is
likely to contain significant tax cuts and public spending increases'. The
team points out that 'in real terms general government consumption has risen
in every election year, with the exception of 1970, which Labour lost'.
Mr Winder suggested that the government's long-term forecasts are also
suspect, given the expectations of 2.75 per cent annual GDP growth in the
last few years of the decade. This is well ahead of the long-term growth
rate of the UK economy.
The Treasury's long-term growth assumption has changed three times since
1992. Mr Winder said: 'The Treasury may be leaving itself open to
accusations of projecting a growth rate which allows it to present whatever
medium-term PSBR projections may suit.'
Given the doubts about the scope for reductions in spending, and the
expectations of tax cuts, there is accordingly deep cynicism about
projections of a budget surplus by the end of the decade.
The Kleinwort Benson team said: 'With an election to win, we doubt whether
there will be a public sector debt repayment this century.'
