FT  14 JUL 94 / Redesign for dollar to beat counterfeiters
The US Treasury yesterday unveiled plans to change both the look and
security features of the dollar, to try to stem the rising tide of fake
bills.
This is the first significant change to US paper money since 1929, when note
sizes were reduced by 25 per cent.
But, while the dollar may be out of favour on the foreign exchange markets,
it remains the currency of choice among international counterfeiters.
No-one knows the full extent of their work but Mr Guy Caputo, deputy
director of the US Secret Service, the Treasury's anti-counterfeiting
bureau, yesterday estimated that, for fiscal 1994, fake bills with a face
value of some Dollars 130m (Pounds 82.8m) would be seized overseas and about
Dollars 70m in the US.
More than Dollars 350bn of US notes is in circulation, more than half
outside the US. However, the US is becoming increasingly concerned at what
could be destabilising effects of counterfeiting overseas, particularly from
plants in the Middle East, officials said.
Mr Lloyd Bentsen, Treasury secretary, rejected suggestions that the US
should recall its existing currency and issue a new one. The advantages of
that, such as flushing out criminals' cash hordes and disrupting the
laundering of drug money, would be more than offset by the potential loss of
confidence in the dollar, said Mr Frank Newman, Treasury under-secretary for
domestic finance.
The US has never demonetised or recalled its currency, official after
official told the House banking committee yesterday as the plans were
unveiled, nor will it now.
Older bills will continue to be valid but Secret Service operations against
faking the older-style notes would be stepped up and destruction of old
notes, as they wore out, would continue until the vast majority of bills in
ciculation was of the new design, Mr Newman said.
The Treasury does not intend to change the size, colour or portraits on the
notes, but the central portrait that dominates one side of each bill will be
enlarged and moved off-centre, and a battery of new security devices will be
introduced, to try to combat ever more sophisticated counterfeiting
technology.
The Treasury plans to introduce a watermark and an enhanced security thread
in a different position for each denomination. Such threads were first
introduced in 1990 for Dollars 50 and Dollars 100 notes. The plans also
include increased use of microprinting, in the design and in reflective
material embedded in the paper.
The new bills would also feature 'interactive or moire'' patterns that
distort when copied photographically. Covert, machine-readable features
would also be introduced.
The changes would increase the cost of producing an individual note by an
estimated 1 per cent and the first new Dollars 100 notes would be in
circulation by 1996, officials said, with other demoninations to follow.
Despite the fanfare with which the Treasury unveiled its proposals,
officials admitted that they are now on a treadmill of introducing new
design features in efforts to thwart forgers.
'In the future, more frequent changes will be required, to meet the threat
of advances in technology, and each change will necessitate further public
education,' said Ms Mary Ellen Withrow, US Treasurer.
'Our plan is a pre-emptive step to protect US currency from high-tech
counterfeiting,' Mr Bentsen said.
Although forged bills made up only a tiny fraction of those in circulation,
'we would risk eventual diminishment of confidence in the integrity of our
currency if we did not change it to meet the challenges of a new generation
of technology,' he said.
