FT  17 DEC 94 / Books: Ethnic bricks exposed - JDF Jones on the difficult
role of the Zulus in the new South Africa
SHAKA'S CHILDREN by Stephen Taylor HarperCollins Pounds 18, 416 pages
Just a couple of years ago, the guest of honour at a luncheon in the
officers' mess of the South Wales Borderers in Brecon was an ancient and
distinguished Zulu gentleman called Magqubu. He and the colonel toasted each
other and reminisced about the exploits of their forefathers in the
Anglo-Zulu War of 1879, when - the stuff of legend - at Isandhlwana and
Rorke's Drift, assegai-wielding impis gave a nasty shock to the pride of the
British Empire. Here in Brecon warrior-nation (in decline) saluted
warrior-nation (ditto).
The colonel was not so rude as to point out that that unequal conflict dealt
a fatal blow to the Empire's most picturesque and legend-worthy ethnic
group, militant tribesmen eulogised by Rider Haggard and other writers,
respected for their (alleged) dignity, stoicism, generosity, honesty,
elemental and intuitive integrity, etc, and at the same time notorious for
their bloody barbarity. (It was in this minor war that the young Louis
Napoleon, the Prince Imperial, met his end, occasioning Disraeli's remark,
'A wonderful people, the Zulus. They beat our generals, then convert our
bishops, and they write finis to a French dynasty . . .')
The fact is that the Zulus, who had emerged from obscurity to notoriety
under Shaka at the beginning of the 19th century, plunged after 1879 into a
decline from which they have only just escaped. Their place in the modern
world is still not clear; and they are at the very heart of the South
African political drama today.
Stephen Taylor's book, Shaka's Children, is therefore very timely. His
thesis is that 'once the cement of apartheid, which had bonded together the
foes of white domination, was lost, the ethnic bricks that made up this
diverse and complex nation would be exposed . . .' Looking at the events of
1994, it is impossible to disagree; South Africa will have to reconcile its
tribes to the future - and the trickiest will be the Afrikaners and the
Zulus.
The Zulus, or rather the Inkatha party of Chief Gatsha Buthelezi, joined in
the April election at the last imaginable moment and made a good showing at
the (rather dubious) polls, as a result of which the increasingly-impossible
chief is - at the moment of writing - in Cabinet. But Zululand is the
shakiest card in the new South African pack, as president Mandela (a Xhosa)
is well aware, and the history of this arrogant and impressive people, the
largest ethnic group in the country, is highly relevant.
Taylor's first 250 pages is a straight-down-the-middle story which is
competently, even elegantly, done, always readable and pleasantly
un-academic. He then tackles the post-1879 period and gets a bit unfocused -
this becomes not so much history as extended journalism, which is probably
inevitable because he has to pose questions rather than recount the answers.
He hangs on to the point that the Zulus are not a homogenous people and have
for a century been split between traditionalists (strongest in the north, in
the kraals) and (Christian, educated, southern) urbanites. In different ways
Buthelezi and King Goodwill (a Christian polygamist now being courted by the
ANC government) represent two ways of bridging this division, which was
downplayed until recently because, so long as the white government
emphasised ethnicity under apartheid, anyone hostile to that government was
bound to decline to endorse that ethnic view of South African society. But
this is a new world and the Zulus' place in it will have to be sorted out,
which means that the division in the tribe will have to be resolved. It
would of course have been so much easier if Britain had reserved Zululand
(like Basutoland and Bechuanaland) to its own direct rule many years ago.
Stephen Taylor's account of the Zulus in this century is a little thin - but
maybe he has no significant story to tell. The Xhosas hijacked the ANC at
some stage; Albert Luthuli managed to straddle the traditional/urban Zulu
divide; Buthelezi was a protege of Luthuli but post-1980 his willingness to
associate with Pretoria inevitably turned him into a 'stooge' (and his
opposition to sanctions, Taylor correctly emphasises, was 'a colossal
blunder').
Are there lessons? Nothing encouraging. 'Faction fighting' will continue,
with the appalling and weekly bloodshed that entails. The Tugela River will
continue to divide the Zulu nation. And the fact that there are eight
million Zulus will remain the single most significant element in South
Africa's political future.
