FT  08 JAN 94 / Jordan, PLO sign bank deal
Jordan and the Palestine Liberation Organisation yesterday signed a long
awaited economic agreement which gives the Central Bank of Jordan
wide-ranging monetary responsibilities in the occupied territories during
the transitional period of Palestinian self-rule.
The deal was signed after three days of intense talks between Jordanian and
PLO officials in Amman. It followed a speech by King Hussein last week in
which he said the PLO had a 'last chance' to come to an agreement.
Its main impact will be to clear the way for the re-opening of Jordanian
banks in the West Bank and Gaza Strip which were closed following the 1967
war.
Non-Jordanian banks, such as the British Bank of the Middle East and ANZ
Grindlays, which had both expressed an interest in re-opening their
branches, have not been included at the moment.
A joint Jordanian-Palestinian monetary and banking committee will be
established to work under the CBJ on monetary policies in the occupied
territories during the interim period. It also provides for the continuation
of the Jordanian dinar as legal tender in the territories. One third of
Jordan's money supply is said to be in circulation in the West Bank.
The PLO leadership had previously postponed endorsing the deal, which has
been ready since November, for fear of relinquishing too many Palestinian
monetary responsibilities to the Jordanians. But the king's ultimatum, in
addition to an agreement between Jordan and Israel to go ahead with the
re-opening of banks without PLO consent, seems to have forced their hand.
Mr Mohammed Nashashibi, chairman of the PLO's department of economic affairs
and planning, described the deal as 'positive for both sides' and one which
'will increase co-ordination between the Palestinians and Jordanians'. Mr
Jawad Anani, Jordan's minister of information, said the accord met 'the
level of our ambitions'.
The agreement also provides for future co-ordination between Jordan and the
PLO on joint projects in the fields of agriculture, industry, commerce and
tourism.
It sets an initial figure of Dollars 300m (Pounds 200m) for two-way trade
across the Jordan River.
