FT  17 AUG 94 / Ballot box blarney: An 'either-or' choice will not solve the
conflict in N Ireland
If one thing is now clear about the conflict in Northern Ireland, it is that
the Irish nationalists are deeply divided over how to respond to last
December's peace proposals, put forward by the British and Irish governments
in their joint Downing Street declaration. Formally, Sinn Fein, the
republican political movement, last month appeared to reject the Anglo-Irish
overture, and terrorist attacks have continued. But all recent statements by
Mr Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein, have suggested that he personally is
more in favour of peace than war, and has recommended a ceasefire by the
IRA.
According to a recent editorial in the Irish Times, 'a great body of
informed opinion now agrees that the provisional IRA will shortly call
another cease-fire in the North'. But the paper concluded gloomily that any
ceasefire would be unlikely to last, since the IRA was still hoping for
peace on its terms; in other words it was still hoping for total victory.
There was little evidence so far that the IRA would settle for peace on the
terms offered, which was a peace of compromise and consent, without winners
and without losers.
The difficulty for the terrorists - and the problem is the same for the IRA
as for its extremist counterparts in the Protestant community - is that the
Anglo-Irish declaration is deliberately couched in terms designed to shut
out a victory by either side. It speaks sympathetically of the principle of
self-determination, but makes clear that this principle will be enacted only
through a process of democratic consent. If the nationalists and the
Catholics in the province want Northern Ireland to become part of a united
Ireland, they must persuade the Protestants and the rest of the population
in Northern Ireland of their case, and get it accepted through the ballot
box.
The problem with the declaration is that the terms as stated are either
wholly disingenuous or deliberately deceptive. In it, the British government
says that it has 'no selfish strategic or economic interest in Northern
Ireland', and will uphold 'the democratic wish of a greater number of people
of Northern Ireland on the issue of whether they prefer to support the Union
or a sovereign united Ireland'.
On the face of it, such a position is democratic, statesmanlike,
unexceptionable. In fact, it appears to bear little relation to a province
which is the product of an Anglo-Irish conflict at least 400 years old, and
which has been racked by terrorism from both sides for a quarter of a
century.
For the moment, the Protestants are in a clear majority, and it is obvious
that, if a plebiscite were held now on the future of the province, it would
go in favour of continued membership of the United Kingdom. But the
Protestants' share of the population is declining relative to the
Catholics', and this causes them profound anxiety; if a similar plebiscite
were held in a few decades, it might go in favour of a united Ireland.
But these two innocent and contrasting scenarios bear no relationship to the
reality that Northern Ireland has lived through for the past 25 years. The
idea that there can be a simple 'either-or' choice for the future of the
province, which could be settled peacefully and definitively by a majority
vote, is a fairy tale. The reason for IRA terrorism is that a tiny minority
of the minority community does not accept the will of the majority or the
legitimacy of the present constitutional position, and is prepared to kill
and maim to overthrow it. But a tiny minority of the majority community is
also prepared to kill and maim to uphold the present constitutional
arrangement.
In other words, the one thing missing from Northern Ireland is the principle
of democratic consent, which means acceptance of the will of the majority.
And since the province is nearly equally divided between two opposing
communities, any question which pits them against each other will have the
smallest chance of gaining general democratic consent. So if the question
which is supposed to be addressed by the Anglo-Irish declaration is the
either-or choice between the United Kingdom and a united Ireland, we can be
fairly sure that there is no chance of a peaceful decision through the
ballot box.
Some people maintain that the British government's apparent indifference to
the constitutional destiny of Northern Ireland, provided it is settled
democratically, could have the perverse effect of provoking terrorism. For
if the UK government really does not care whether Northern Ireland stays or
goes, maybe the terrorists have more leverage. I am not sure I go this far.
But it is nevertheless rather extraordinary that one of the oldest nation
states in Europe should profess disinterest in hanging on to one of its
provinces.
It is, by contrast, inconceivable that any French government should disclaim
any 'selfish strategic or economic interest' in Alsace-Lorraine; and just as
inconceivable that any Spanish government should shrug off the destiny of
Catalonia or the Basque country. On the contrary, they would rule out, as a
matter of principle, any amputation of their territory as an outrage to
national sovereignty.
Some who think the declaration dangerously provocative would argue that the
British government ought to rule out, for ever, any change in the formal
constitutional attachment of Northern Ireland. Again, I would not go that
far. But since it is almost inconceivable that there could be a peaceful
constitutional settlement through a simple majority vote, it seems reckless
to indulge in loose talk about 'self-determination' and 'consent', when the
first is inapplicable and the second is unavailable.
