FT  13 DEC 94 / Iran gains in scramble for central Asia: John Barham and
Scheherazade Daneshkhu on strategic struggle with Turkey
The decision last month by the former Soviet republic of Azerbaijan to give
Tehran a share in a Dollars 7.4bn international consortium to develop its
oil fields in the Caspian Sea was a triumph for Iran but a setback for
Turkey as the two historical enemies compete to extend their influence over
the young republics of the Caucasus and central Asia.
Iran was not involved in the deal at first but after a visit to Baku by Mr
Gholamreza Agazadeh, Iran's oil minister, Azerbaijan, which holds 20 per
cent of the shares in the consortium, agreed to transfer a quarter of them
to Iran - giving Tehran a 5 per cent stake in the consortium - in exchange
for financial and technical assistance.
Turkey has been trying to raise its 1.75 per cent stake in the consortium,
which includes British Petroleum, Russia's Lukoil, and US oil companies.
Apart from outmanoeuvring Turkey, Iran's involvement has caused 'great
concern' according to a Russian foreign ministry official because of fears
that Iran and other littoral states of the Caspian Sea will conclude a
pipeline deal to carry oil through Iran and outside Russia's control.
Iran's deal with Azerbaijan highlights the limits of Turkey's much-vaunted
cultural, linguistic and religious ties with central Asia. After the Soviet
Union collapsed, Turkey hoped the republics - Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan - would form a sub-regional bloc
under its leadership. President Suleyman Demirel envisaged a new regional
sub-bloc under Turkish leadership. He spoke of 'a Turkic world stretching
from the Adriatic Sea to the Great Wall of China'.
In October he hosted a second summit of regional leaders in Istanbul.
However, officials realise nowadays that expectations on both sides were
raised too high, acknowledging that Turkey is financially and technically
unable to meet many of the republics' needs.
Mr Mumtaz Soysal, who resigned as foreign minister last week, said Turkey's
interest in the region was 'mainly sentimental'. Policy was being developed
'under pressure from public opinion and does not yield much profit. It is a
drain on our economy for the time being.'
Troubles at home - high inflation, Kurdish insurgency and growing Islamic
fundamentalism - have not helped. Yet Turkish officials still view central
Asia as a strategic and trade priority. The Caucasus and central Asia are
rich in oil, gas and minerals and could yet develop into an attractive
export market.
Turkish companies have signed Dollars 3.7bn-worth of construction contracts
there in the last three years and trade has risen rapidly to Dollars 640m a
year. Ankara has a Dollars 100m a year aid budget. Turkey broadcasts to the
region from its new Turksat satellite. Over 10,000 students from the
republics study in Turkey.
The west viewed positively Turkey's drive to extend its influence in the
region because it feared that Iran would export militant Islam to the
republics. But the Iranian government has shown greater pragmatism than
this. Its strategic aim is to ensure that Turkey, and through it the west,
does not gain enough of a foothold to pose a security threat. Tehran has
also operated cautiously for fear of fanning secessionist tendencies within
its own borders.
It has sought to exert political influence by trying to revive the old Silk
Route with a series of transport and trade agreements with these landlocked
states. Here it has an important advantage over Turkey, since it shares a
long border with the central Asian states and with Azerbaijan.
Its initiatives include a number of oil and gas agreements. Iran and
Turkmenistan have signed a co-operation agreement to lay a pipeline to carry
Turkmen gas to Europe through Iran. An agreement has also been signed for
the transfer of 2m tonnes of crude oil from Kazakhstan through the Caspian
Sea to Iran and the two countries are also discussing an oil pipeline.
Weekly flights between the capitals of the republics and Tehran have been
established, more than 10 new border crossings have been opened, roads have
been repaired and projects for bridges and new roads prepared.
Construction has begun of a railway from Tedzhen in Turkmenistan through the
Iranian border city of Sarakhs to Mashhad, where it will connect with the
rest of the Iranian railway system leading west towards Europe or south to
the Persian Gulf. Ports are also being built or expanded along the Caspian
Sea, and new shipping routes created.
The route of future pipelines carrying oil and gas from the region to
markets in Europe is vital. All three rivals believe infrastructure links
will help determine strategic and trade links. With Russia, Turkey and Iran
all competing, Russia has the advantage because of its continued
relationship with the central Asian states since the break-up of the Soviet
Union.
Despite Turkey's declared interest in the area, the Azerbaijan-Iran oil deal
shows it still lacks clear means of implementing its objectives. Mr Sami
Kohen, a veteran Turkish foreign affairs columnist, says the post-Soviet
world offers 'new opportunities for Turkey to emerge as a regional power.
But first it must put its domestic house in order.'
