FT  18 APR 94 / Israel eases bar against Palestinians
Israel yesterday slightly eased an 11-day-old ban barring the nearly 2m
Palestinians from entering into Israel but said closure of the occupied
territories would continue indefinitely.
Mr Amnon Rubinstein, education minister, said the cabinet had agreed
yesterday to grant 16,000 entry permits to Palestinians for humanitarian
reasons and 4,000 work permits for Palestinians employed in Israel's
agricultural sector.
The government approved Shk30m (Pounds 6.8m) for public works and aid to
assist Palestinians suffering from inability to travel to their jobs in
Israel since the entry ban was imposed by the Jewish state to try to prevent
attacks by Palestinian extremists.
The cabinet also issued a strong warning to the Palestine Liberation
Organisation after hearing security reports which alleged the PLO had local
co-operation agreements with the Hamas Islamic Resistance Movement,
responsible for two recent suicide attacks on Israelis. The warning to the
PLO came after Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the prime minister, lashed out at Jordan
last week for allowing Hamas to operate offices and issue media statements
in Amman and called on the government to close down Hamas offices.
King Hussein on Saturday said Hamas was illegal in Jordan and denied his
government helped the Islamic guerrilla group. Hamas responded saying it
would strike Israeli and Jewish targets worldwide if Israel attacked its
leaders or political and media offices abroad. Hamas's military wing said it
would consider such attacks 'a start of a new war in which Israeli blood and
interests and Jewish communities around the world are open for our strikes.
We will respond to every attack by a stronger one.' But Hamas also offered
yesterday to stop attacks on Israeli civilians if Israel halted assaults
against Palestinian civilians.
Israeli concern about Hamas rose as the PLO and Israel resumed peace talks
in Cairo on a long-delayed agreement providing for Palestinian self-rule in
the occupied West Bank town of Jericho. Major General Amnon Shahak, head of
the Israeli delegation, said: 'I do not expect we will finish this week, but
let us see what happens next week.'
Israel and the PLO have several issues left to finalise including the
security zoning arrangements in the Gaza Strip, the jurisdiction of
Palestinian courts in Gaza and Jericho - especially their power to prosecute
Israelis - the fate of Islamic extremist prisoners held by Israel, and water
issues.
On the economic track of talks in Paris, both the PLO and Israel say they
could complete an agreement by the end of this week to establish the
economic relations between Israel and the self-governing Palestinian
economy. Both sides have already reached final agreement on energy, industry
and agriculture and have a conditional understanding on taxation subject to
agreement on the rate of value added tax to be levied in the Palestinian
economy. The two sides have yet to agree on labour relations, and
Palestinian demands for their own currency.
