FT  01 DEC 94 / EC fines cement groups after claims of rigging
The European Commission yesterday imposed record fines on 33 European cement
producers, accusing them of using secret agreements to rig the market for
more than 10 years.
Mr Karel Van Miert, competition commissioner, said the producers, eight
national associations and the European Cement Association which masterminded
the illegal operations, had three months to pay penalties totalling Ecu248m
(Pounds 193m).
The biggest producers in Italy, France, Britain and Germany said last night
that they would appeal against the decision to the European Court in
Luxembourg. Most of the other companies are expected to follow suit.
Companies will have to pay the fines, or provide equivalent bank guarantees,
pending the outcome of the appeal.
The stinging fines reflect the Commission's determination to clamp down on
producers which infringe EU competition law. They were the third such
penalties to be imposed on cartels so far this year.
'I hope now everyone has got the message,' said Mr Van Miert. 'There are
still cartels out there that will do everything they can to stop us finding
the evidence . . . but we will continue, and we will upgrade our means for
tackling cartels.'
The biggest fine, of Ecu32.5m, was imposed on Italcementi of Italy, Europe's
biggest cement producer. The Swiss company Holderbank was fined Ecu5.3m. La
Societe des Ciments Francais, controlled by Italcementi, was fined Ecu24.7m.
Italcementi said the Commission's charges were unfounded and that it would
appeal, adding that the system of cement pricing in Italy meant it would
have been impossible for the company to be part of a pan-European cartel.
Lafarge Coppee, the largest French producer, which was fined Ecu22.8m, and
Blue Circle, the largest British producer, fined Ecu15.8m, also intend to
appeal, as does Heidelberger, the largest German producer.
Blue Circle said it could take 18 months to two years before the appeal
would be heard with judgment likely to take a further six months. Cement
producers from all 12 member states of the EU were affected.
Earlier this year Mr Van Miert levied fines totalling Ecu100m on steel beam
makers and Ecu132m on cartonboard producers.
The principle accusation against the cement companies and associations is
that from 1983 they colluded to reduce price differences between EU member
states plus Norway, Sweden and Switzerland so as to remove any temptation to
export and to get those producers which did export to align their prices
with those of local producers.
They thus blatantly breached the principles of the single market by
maintaining artificial frontiers on the basis of domestic markets in an
industry with an annual turnover of Ecu7bn.
The producers could not hope to deny their illegal activities, said the
Commission. It alleged that at a meeting of the European group, the chairman
stated that 'needless to say there will be no minutes of this meeting'.
The Commission said that it had taken into account the fact that EU
companies had been faced with a surge in cement imports, just as they were
struggling to emerge from recession.
Editorial Comment, Page 23
Lex, Page 24
