FT  03 AUG 94 / World Trade News: Ships deal fuels rivalry - Effects on
Japan and S Korea of world shipbuilding accord
The recent agreement by leading shipbuilding nations to end government
subsidies and to allow for anti-dumping duties has added a new element to
the rivalry between the two largest shipbuilding countries, Japan and South
Korea.
The agreed ban on government subsidies to shipyards promises to strengthen
the global market share of both the Japanese and South Korean shipbuilding
industries - neither of which receives direct subsidies - by undermining the
competitive advantage enjoyed by their European rivals.
But the introduction of anti-dumping duties - tariffs designed to compensate
for what are regarded as artificially low export prices - on ships could
pose problems for Japan and South Korea, which have frequently resorted to
price cuts to win new orders. The two countries build about 70 per cent of
the world's ships.
Last year, for the first time, South Korea had more orders than Japan with
40 per cent of worldwide orders against Japan's 32 per cent. In the first
six months of this year, however, Japan has again risen to the top with
4.95m gross tonnes in orders against 1.9m gross tonnes for Korea, according
to the Shipbuilders' Association of Japan.
'There is a widespread belief in the South Korean shipbuilding industry that
Japan has gained the new orders by quoting below-cost prices,' said Mr D J
Yook, shipbuilding analyst for W I Carr in Seoul.
Japan's pricing is designed to compensate for the competitive advantage
enjoyed by South Korea whose production costs are 25 per cent lower.
Labour costs in Korea are half those of Japan and Korean prices for steel,
which account for half of raw material costs for ships, are 20 per cent
cheaper. In addition, the sharp appreciation of the yen's value against the
US dollar has further raised the relative costs of Japanese shipbuilders.
The measures to end 'injurious pricing' by 1996 could benefit Korea in the
short-term by forcing Japan to raise its prices.
But Korean shipbuilders may also be subject to anti-dumping suits if they
cut prices to fill the order books of their expanding network of shipyards.
'Korea is committed to becoming the world's largest shipbuilding nation and
I believe the Koreans are willing to risk dumping suits by offering low
prices if it means full dockyards,' said Mr Yook.
Korea decided at the end of last year to lift a government ban on increased
shipbuilding capacity, which is expected to rise by 3m tonnes in the next
few years.
The Korean Maritime Institute recently estimated that the country's
shipbuilding capacity was likely to surpass that of Japan by 2000, with an
annual production of at least 8.5m tonnes against 8m tonnes for Japan.
The expansion has triggered an outcry among other shipbuilding nations
concerned that it will cause a supply glut and depress prices.
'There is no need for increasing capacity,' protested Mr Shigeru Gohda,
chairman of the Shipbuilders' Association of Japan and of Sumitomo Heavy
Industries. 'If the Koreans increase their capacity as much as reported,
that would increase world capacity by 10 per cent. That would lead to
another recession in the industry.'
Korean shipbuilders justify the move by arguing that the government
restriction on shipyard expansion had prevented them from accepting new
orders last year. And, they say, the new capacity will lower production
costs since shipbuilding benefits from economies of scale.
Whether Korea's low prices are the result of improved efficiency or dumping,
the new anti-dumping measures 'give the EU and other countries the chance to
harass Korean shipbuilders by suing them', said Mr Lee Keunmo, an analyst at
Baring Securities in Seoul.
Meanwhile, ship owners are delaying new orders in the expectation of lower
prices.
So far, Japanese shipbuilders have stood up moderately well to the Korean
challenge. They have the advantage that the quality of their vessels has a
superior reputation.
Japanese productivity is also higher than in Korea, according to Mr Bruce
Roscoe, vice president of the investment research department at Goldman
Sachs in Tokyo.
But time is running out for the Japanese industry. The real threat for the
Japanese is not so much greater capacity in Korea, but how soon the Koreans
catch up in productivity, Mr Roscoe added.
To meet that challenge, Japanese shipbuilders are moving to reduce costs by
increasing foreign procurement, including buying steel from Korea, and
raising productivity further.
'This is the third major challenge we have faced since the war,' said Mr
Gohda. He is counting on the ability of the Japanese shipbuilding industry
to repeat the restructuring it went through during the oil shock of the
1970s and the yen appreciation of the mid-1980s.
