FT  14 NOV 94 / Survey of Greece (8): Visitors are spending less / A look at
tourism
An unusually warm autumn and a rush to the Aegean by eastern Europeans
should add up to a record year for Greece's tourist industry. According to
several projections, arrivals in 1994 will reach almost 11m.
The region with highest growth was Halkidiki in northern Greece where the
number of summer visitors grew by 54 per cent to 485,000 and hotel occupancy
rates approached 90 per cent.
Yet two years ago, local hoteliers worried about being driven out of
business by the conflict in the former Yugoslavia, the main source of
tourists to northern Greece.
Thanks to an energetic promotion campaign by the Halkidiki hoteliers' union,
charter flights filled with British, German and Russian tourists have
replaced the streams of Yugoslav cars heading south to Thessaloniki.
However, improved occupancy rates this year brought little consolation to
hoteliers elsewhere in the country. Greece has 6,500 hotels with 235,000
beds, but many of these are family-owned operations with fewer than 100 beds
each and have little margin for bargaining with the international tour
operators who dominate the market.
'We're squeezed on room prices so we rely on the bar and other extras for
earnings,' says a hotelier on Rhodes. 'But the northern Europeans are more
careful with their money now - they're not drinking whiskies by the pool.'
The state development bank, ETVA, recently agreed to reschedule about
Dr100bn in debts owed by 700 hoteliers following the government's refusal to
subsidise interest rates on outstanding hotel loans. According to some
estimates, about 20 per cent of Greece's hotel stock is up for sale.
Another reason for the hotel industry's problems is that Greece has become a
'sun and sea' market for package tourism rather than an exotic destination
for better-off visitors looking for ancient sites and traditional village
life and tourism earnings have failed to keep pace with the increase in
numbers.
Tourist arrivals rose from 5.2m in 1983 to 9.9m in 1993, while revenues grew
from Dollars 1.7bn to Dollars 6bn during the same period. But the average
European tourist spent less than Dollars 250 in Greece last year, compared
with about Dollars 350 a decade ago.
'The tourist season is only six months long. Revenues would be much higher
if it could be extended by providing more sports and entertainment
facilities for visitors,' says Vassilis Avramopoulos, an adviser to the
tourism ministry on foreign investment.
The government's plans for moving Greece's tourist industry upmarket are
based on the creation of resort complexes that will include casinos. Last
month, the tourism ministry awarded four casino licences to international
gaming operators for a total of Dr13.2bn.
Another six licences, including two in the Athens area and others on Rhodes,
Crete and Corfu, are to be granted in the next two months.
Hyatt Casino Corporation, the gaming arm of the US hotel chain, paid Dr9.2bn
for a 12-year licence to build and operate a casino resort on a greenfield
site outside Thessaloniki. The Dollars 120m investment will include a
120-bed luxury hotel, a conference centre and a park.
Hyatt is also bidding for one of the Athens licences, which are valued at
about Dr10bn each, while London Clubs, the UK casino operator, is a
frontrunner for the second licence, which would involve the building of a
luxury hotel, marina and park on the sea-front near Piraeus.
'The casino projects will do much to upgrade Greek tourism over the next
five years by setting higher standards of accommodation and entertainment in
the main tourist areas,' says Christos Vlachos of Eurofin, an investment
consultancy.
