FT  02 JUL 94 / Markets: Predatory bears make a meal of the Dow - Wall
Street
If anyone doubted that the US stock market was in a steep decline, consider
this: the Dow Jones Industrial Average has fallen for the past two quarters,
the first time it has registered consecutive quarterly declines since 1984.
True, the loss in the latest three-month period was only a modest 11 points,
or 0.3 per cent. But when added to the 118-point decline recorded in the
first quarter, it was the Dow's worst first-half performance in a decade.
Does this mean the long bull market is over, and that equities are now
entrenched firmly in a bear market phase? Not necessarily.
While it is clear that the bulls no longer have the upper hand on Wall
Street, and have not had since the Federal Reserve raised interest rates
early in February, it is not so clear that large numbers of investors' are
looking elsewhere in search of better returns. For many, stocks remain the
best bet in town.
Although recent anecdotal evidence from the mutual fund industry indicates
that investor demand for stock funds slowed in June, more money was still
flowing in than flowing out. Fidelity, the largest mutual fund group in the
US, says the amount put into its stock funds by clients last month was about
half the total recorded in May.
Yet, May was a surprisingly strong month, both for Fidelity and the rest of
the mutual fund industry, with a net Dollars 11.8bn invested in all US-based
stock funds by individuals and institutions - a total comparable with some
of the best months of 1993. (It is bond, not stock, funds which have taken
the real beating this year, recording net outflows of cash in February,
March and May - and probably also in June - in the wake of steadily
declining bond prices).
According to fund analysts, the slowing of investment in stock funds is the
result of investors taking a more cautious, rather than an outright bearish,
view of the market. Instead of putting more cash into stocks, they have been
putting it into short-term money market funds.
This is not because these are offering better returns than stock funds, but
because they represent a safe haven at a time when the equity market is
behaving erratically.
That erratic behaviour was on display this week. On Monday, trading opened
with analysts in a nervous mood after the previous Friday's 62-point drop in
the Dow.
They were worried that fresh weakness in the dollar would create further
turmoil in bond and stock markets, with investors increasingly fearful that
the Federal Reserve might be forced to raise interest rates to defend the
ailing US currency.
To no one's surprise, the Dow dropped 26 points in early trading on Monday,
and the pessimists began predicting that it would fall below 3,600 well
before the week was out. Yet, for no immediately apparent reason, the market
staged a dramatic recovery, the Dow rallying more than 70 points to end
48.56 higher at 3,685.50.
The rebound, however, was not as impressive as it seemed because volume was
low by recent standards (at 250m shares) and because there were almost as
many shares which ended lower on Monday as ended higher. This indicated that
strength in a few prominent stocks - Caterpillar, General Motors, General
Electric and IBM all rose more than a dollar - had pulled the market higher.
The weakness in market sentiment was underlined over the next two days when
stocks eased slightly across the board. Then, on Thursday, the bears
returned in force, sending the Dow 42 points lower as bond prices tumbled
following another decline in the dollar.
The stock market's losses would have been worse but for the usual
end-of-quarter buying by fund managers and the psychological boost provided
by news of a planned multi-billion dollar merger between CBS, the network
television group, and QVC, the home shopping cable channel.
The merger, if not the only positive news of the week, was certainly the
most interesting. Under the planned coupling - a complex stock swap - Barry
Diller, the charismatic chairman of QVC, would take over running CBS day to
day with Laurence Tisch remaining chairman of the overall group.
Although analysts struggled at first to identify the natural synergies
between the two companies, they welcomed the prospect of Diller running the
CBS broadcasting business. The QVC chief made his name as a creative
television programmer while at ABC television in the 1970s, and at the
then-fledgling Murdoch-owned Fox network in the 1980s.
Investors were even more enthusiastic about the proposed deal, bidding up
the shares of both CBS and QVC on the New York and Nasdaq stock markets.
 ------------------------------
Monday        3685.50 + 48.56
Tuesday       3669.54 - 15.86
Wednesday     3667.05 - 02.59
Thursday      3624.96 - 42.09
Friday        3646.65 + 21.69
 ------------------------------
