FT  29 AUG 94 / French rate their prime minister highly
The presidential ambitions of Mr Edouard Balladur, the centre-right French
prime minister, were boosted yesterday by an opinion poll showing him with
the highest approval rating of any French premier for 24 years.
The poll, conducted by the IFOP research consultancy for the Journal du
Dimanche newspaper, suggested that the proportion of the French public
approving of Mr Balladur's performance had risen to 63 per cent at the end
of last week, from 58 per cent a month ago.
This score gives the avuncular Mr Balladur the highest approval rating of
any prime minister since Mr Jacques Chaban-Delmas hit 66 per cent in
November 1970. Mr Chaban-Delmas, a centre-right reformist who was premier
under Mr Georges Pompidou, saw his popularity soar during a period of
frenetic growth.
Mr Balladur's stature has risen for different reasons. The French economy is
still in a fragile state, although his standing among the electorate has
undoubtedly benefited from the recent stream of encouraging indicators. But
the main factor behind his ascent is his success at playing the role of de
facto president during Mr Francois Mitterrand's recent illness.
Since undergoing prostate surgery last month, Mr Mitterrand has withdrawn
from public life. His absence has left Mr Balladur in charge at a time when
the political agenda has been dominated by foreign issues which would
usually be the preserve of the president such as the capture of the
terrorist Carlos and the crises in Algeria and Rwanda.
Mr Balladur has thus been able to cast himself in a presidential mould. He
has also been helped by the role played by Mr Charles Pasqua, his pugnacious
interior minister, who has handled controversial issues such as the police
crackdown on potential terrorists.
As a result Mr Balladur's popularity has soared way above that of Mr Jacques
Chirac, the mayor of Paris who is his chief competitor for the right-wing
presidential ticket. 'He is no longer prime minister, he is already a
president,' said the editorial of yesterday's Journal du Dimanche.
The presidential elections are only eight months away but Mr Balladur would
do well to heed the fate of Mr Chaban-Delmas. He won his record approval
rating on the eve of the first oil shock which sent the French economy into
recession. His popularity plummeted, and, worse still, he was fired by Mr
Pompidou.
