FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (20): Just round the S-curve -
The future
Predictions
by Theodore Modis
Simon &amp; Schuster, Dollars 21
300 pages
What's the link between Aids deaths, road accidents, fruit-fly breeding and
the development of new computers?
According to Theodore Modis, all these phenomena can be understood better by
searching for patterns from the past. Modis spends much of the book looking
at 'S-curves' - the pattern by which growth in a specific variable starts
slowly, and gradually picks up before reaching a plateau.
He ranges across human and animal activity in picking out events where the
S-curve pattern seems to hold. Modis argues that by studying past patterns
we may be able to shed light on future events. According to this thesis,
Mozart died at a young but entirely appropriate age, at the point where his
creative juices had all but expired as shown by the S-curve of his major
compositions.
The writer attempts, with some success, to fit similar ideas to broader
areas of activity such as oil consumption or the development of rail
networks.
He melds into the S-curve view of life some fairly familiar discussion of
Kondratieff cycles, spiced with the variant that, according to Modis, the
boom/bust period of such cycles often lasts for precisely 56 years. On this
basis, the final 28-year phase of the current cycle is virtually upon us, as
a result of which the period between 1996 and 2024 will be a long economic
upswing.
While stimulating, the book has two main faults. Modis frequently gives the
impression that he is too smart for his own good. He switches a little too
easily between discussion of the growth behaviour of bacteria, building of
12th century cathedrals and the role of information technology.
One revelation, made in best clever-clogs style, but which seems wildly
implausible, is that the 56-year boom/bust cycle is related to the
construction of Stonehenge.
A more serious criticism is that Modis seems unsure who he is writing the
book for. Many economists and business planners may turn to the volume for
guidance as to how to improve their highly unsuccessful forecasting methods.
Although they may enjoy the read, they will get little practical advice.
