FT  10 MAR 94 / Labour refuses to back anti-terrorism order
Attempts by Labour leaders to secure a new cross-party consensus on
anti-terrorism legislation ended in acrimony and recrimination in the
Commons last night.
Mr Michael Howard, the home secretary, seized on the mortar bomb attack on
Heathrow airport in a vain appeal to Labour MPs not to vote against an order
renewing the Prevention of Terrorism Act for a further 12 months.
To government cheers, he said that if the attack was meant to send 'some
signal to the House' MPs of all parties should respond by joining together
in voting for the order.
Labour MPs ignored the home secretary's appeal, angered by his rejection of
their pleas for an inquiry by a senior judge into the provisions permitting
terrorist suspects to be detained for questioning for up to seven days, and
for those from Northern Ireland to be excluded from mainland Britain.
The order was approved with a government majority of 86 (328-242).
Mr Howard infuriated Labour MPs by repeatedly insisting that their main
objective was to escape the political consequences of continuing to vote
against the renewal of the Prevention of Terrorism Act.
In a series of clashes Mr Tony Blair, shadow home secretary, accused Mr
Howard of 'ranting' in the hope of securing party advantage by accentuating
the divide between the two main parties.
Mr Blair suggested that the government's partisan approach had been
signalled in advance of the debate by the leaking of information about last
week's confidential talks on the operation of the act between Mr John Smith,
the Labour leader, and Mr John Major, the prime minister.
Like the prime minister, Mr Howard denied that the leak originated from the
Home Office, either through civil servants or political advisers, or other
government sources.
Mr Smith issued a statement underlining his dissatisfaction with the outcome
of the inquiry ordered by the prime minister, which had been carried out 'in
little more than 24 hours'. He added: 'I remain deeply disturbed both at the
leak and at Mr Major's failure to discover its source.'
Mr David Trimble, chief spokesman in the debate for the Ulster Unionists,
reaffirmed support for the renewal of the act but agreed with some points
made by Labour.
He suggested that a judicial officer, with a role similar to that of
procurators fiscal in Scotland, should be involved in authorising the
detention of terrorist suspects for as long as seven days.
