FT  25 MAR 94 / Development aid goals must be 'rethought'
Donors and beneficiary countries must rethink development goals in the light
of radical changes in the world order, according to the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development's development assistance committee.
Events since the collapse of the Berlin wall in 1989, including the Mideast
peace initiative and the end of apartheid in South Africa, and new demands
from eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, made it 'imperative' that
aid be used more efficiently.
This should be done 'essentially through implementing agreed aid principles
and practices', the committee says in its annual report published today.
Aggregate official development assistance (ODA) from the committee's members
increased 6.6 per cent in 1992 in nominal terms to Dollars 60.4bn (Pounds
40.3bn), a 0.5 per cent rise in real terms. Twelve of the 21 member
countries increased the volume of their aid, including Sweden, Denmark, and
Norway. With the Netherlands, these countries were at or above the UN target
of setting aid spending at 0.7 per cent of GNP.
The group of eight countries whose official aid-to-GNP ratio was below the
average 0.33 per cent in 1992 includes the US, Japan and the UK. Between
them, these countries provide almost 50 per cent of member countries'
official aid budget.
Foreign direct investment in developing countries, at Dollars 24bn in 1992,
was on par with 1991 levels, the bulk of which went to large economies
including China, India and Indonesia. Net private flows to the poorest
countries and to sub-Saharan Africa were negative in 1992.
Total net resource flows to developing countries (measured in terms of 1991
constant prices and exchange rates) increased Dollars 28bn in 1992 to a
record Dollars 159bn, mainly due to private flows.
The debt situation of developing countries as a whole continued to improve.
The stock of debt, which rose 4 per cent in current terms in 1992 to Dollars
1,542bn, is growing at a 'slower, more serviceable pace'. The debt of some
of the poorest developing countries, many in sub-Saharan Africa, 'continues
to be a major burden for development efforts'. The ratio of debt stock to
GNP for developing countries as a whole was about 37 per cent in 1992 (109
per cent for sub-Saharan Africa).
The OECD annual aid and development review is to be followed within the next
month by a country report focused on the UK.
Publication is likely to refuel the controversy within the UK over the
funding of the Malaysian Pergau dam project.
Ms Anna-Liisa Korhonen, a Finnish government official who conducted the UK
review for the OECD, said her report did not intend to single out individual
projects for criticism. But it is understood the report will reflect OECD
concern over aid resources when defence and commercial interests may
influence government decisions.
