FT  27 SEP 94 / Cubans urged not to forget their sugar: Havana recognises
food market reforms are not enough to rescue economy
In a recent broadcast, Cuban state radio chastised some of the country's
sugar workers for spending more time growing food than weeding cane fields.
More food is what the government would like - and has announced reforms to
encourage - but not at the expense of sugar production. Even if its farm
reforms, modelled on those that proved so successful in China and Vietnam,
do produce results, boosting sugar production will prove more difficult.
But Cuban officials say it is imperative to help haul the country out of its
four-year-old recession that has seen the economy's buying power (its
capacity to import using available export revenues) contract from USDollars
8bn in 1989 to Dollars 1.7bn in 1993.
'Cuba is a sugar economy . . . . Economic recovery must come through
recovery in the sugar harvests,' Mr Octavio Castilla, deputy minister for
foreign investment and economic co-operation, said.
From this Saturday, Cuba's farmers will gradually start legally selling
produce directly to the public. Under reforms detailed last week, state
farms and individual growers, excluding sugar co-operatives, will be allowed
freely to set their own prices to sell surplus fruit and vegetables after
they have fulfilled government supply quotas.
The reforms, part of an on-going cautious process of economic
liberalisation, are aimed at easing chronic food shortages and combating the
flourishing black market. To some extent they amount to the legalisation of
an already widespread sale of black market produce by Cuban farmers which
has resulted in inflationary black market prices.
'I am sure that with this legislation we can stimulate food production
through the law of supply and demand,' Cuban defence minister Raul Castro,
brother of President Fidel Castro, said.
The strategic sugar sector appears headed for another difficult season. It
was one of the areas hardest hit by the unravelling of the comfortable
cocoon of preferential trade and aid ties Cuba had enjoyed with the now
defunct Soviet bloc. The impact of this economic shock has been compounded
by a US trade and financial embargo that remains firmly in place.
The 1992-93 sugar harvest, hit by bad weather and shortages of fuel,
fertilisers and spares, was only 4.2m tonnes, a 40 per cent drop from the
previous season. The 1993-94 crop fell lower still. Cuba put it at just
above 4m tonnes. Some international traders said it was even lower.
Sugar is not just the island's biggest export earner, accounting for about
40 per cent of total external revenue in 1993. It is also a key commodity to
trade for vital oil imports and is closely inter-linked with other sectors
such as farming, export rum production and energy generation.
As Cuba prepares for the start of the next harvest in November, alarm bells
are sounding about sloppy preparations. In unusually frank reports, the
state media have criticised poor repairs and maintenance at sugar mills,
delays in new cane plantings and the failure of sugar workers to weed
growing cane fields.
'One of the most critical points at this time is the sugar harvest,' Mr
Castilla said. He said urgent reforms were needed to de-centralise,
re-organise and revitalise the sugar sector.
Incentives for sugar workers either in the form of bonuses or improved
access to necessary consumer goods in exchange for higher productivity,
similar to those already introduced in the tourism sector, are being
discussed.
If this season's harvest is as bad, or worse, than the last, gross earnings
from tourism could overtake sugar as the island's leading hard currency
earner. The tourism industry, one of the first to be opened to foreign
investment, had became more profitable and cost effective as the number of
foreign visitors increased.
Figures published by Cuba's Centre for Studies on the Cuban Economy show
that tourism grossed Dollars 650m in 1993 - net earnings are substantially
less because of the imports needed to service the tourist industry -
compared with Dollars 720m earned by sugar exports.
Besides tourism, foreign investors, especially Mexicans, are putting money
into textiles, cement, steel and glass manufacturing, cosmetics production
and citrus farming. Canadians are leading the field in the oil exploration
and mining sectors.
One additional external squeeze will come from the US government's decision
on August 20 to restrict dollar remittances sent to relatives in Cuba by
Cuban-Americans living in the US. Mr Jose Luis Rodrguez, the finance
minister, said this would hurt, but described as 'exaggerated' US reports
that the remittances represented Dollars 500m of income for Cuba each year.
Over the last 18 months, the government has lifted a ban on Cubans using
hard currency, legalised limited private initiative in some trades and
crafts and moved to balance the country's lopsided internal finances through
cutting subsidies, starting a tax system and raising prices of utilities and
consumer goods such as alcohol and cigarettes.
'We're moving, we're not standing about with our arms crossed. There is a
process of reform in progress,' Osvaldo Martnez, president of the Cuban
parliament's Economy Commission, said.
But it is clear the reform process will be cautious and controlled and
limited by the government's expressed intention to preserve its one-party
socialist system. 'We can't let the process run away from us,' Mr Martnez
said.
The government's dilemma is that it must move quickly enough to respond to
popular pressure in demands for improved economic conditions while not
letting the momentum of economic reform wrest centralised control of the
economy completely from it hands.
