FT  18 OCT 94 / Arts: Aurelie, My Sister - Theatre
Incest may be rife in Quebec: even if it isn't, it is taken remarkably
calmly when it occurs and can be beneficial to family relationships, or so
we learn from the new production at The Gate.
Aurelie, My Sister, by the prolific French Canadian, Marie Laberge, is
beautifully acted, meticulously directed and has one of the most lovingly
detailed sets ever seen in this theatre. It is also very well written. But
it is not much of a drama.
The plot is complex and tends to unfold backwards. There are only two
characters: the 45-year-old Aurelie and the near 25-year-old Cat, who could
be her daughter. Their relationship is close and friendly. Cat is having an
intensely physical affair with a married man whom she hopes will leave his
wife. She tells Aurelie all about it. In what seems a fairly banal
development the man decides to spend more time with his family.
Yet this is only a teasing, though longish, start: almost a decoy, just as
Hitchcock and Truffaut have been mentioned in the early dialogue. Cat is not
Aurelie's daughter: she is her young sister. She was conceived by their
father in a fit of incest with Aurelie's other sister, Charlotte. The latter
has packed her bags and gone off to sculpt in Italy, leaving Cat in
Aurelie's care.
Most of this comes out about half way through when Cat and Aurelie return
from the father's funeral in small town Quebec.
If the play has a coherent theme, it is that life in French Canada can be
petty and bigoted, but that human relationships can survive in unexpected
forms. Aurelie, who is divorced, says that she was brought up with a terror
of God and sex. She declares herself a pagan like her father, but adds that
'in this neck of the woods, you don't have to be a Catholic to have all the
symptoms'.
Nevertheless, Quebec seems reasonably affluent. Aurelie and Cat are seldom
less than well dressed and the friendship between them is civilised - closer
perhaps than between a real mother and daughter. One can just about read
into the text a political allegory: either French and English-speaking
Canada should stick together despite their differences, or that Quebec
should get on with the separation.
The flaw is the absence of action. Aurelie, My Sister is a peculiarly
passive play. It might be better as a novel: certainly it has possibilities
as a movie where the camera could range to scenes which are here only
referred to in the dialogue.
Given the text as it is, however, nothing can detract from the performances
of Sheila Reid as Aurelie and Carol Starks as Cat. Both have a quiet
dignity, even beauty: neither has much of a chip, despite the circumstances.
The set, full of old books, rag dolls and all the paraphernalia of half a
life-time, is Aurelie's conservatory, plants and vegetables to the fore. She
seems content to be there, and so does Cat.
Laurence Boswell directs. I do not wholly like the technique of pulling a
semi-transparent curtain round the stage between scenes, especially when
nothing much is changed, but it does have the effect of suggesting a kind of
therapy. There are characters who need to be treated carefully, wrapped and
unwrapped: otherwise they might go mad.
Gate Theatre until November 4. (071) 229 0706
