FT  25 OCT 94 / Survey of Italian Industry and Technology (4): Remarkable
resilience - Prato textile industry
Sitting round the table with the leading representatives of the Prato
textile industry, one can feel a palpable sense of relief. The worst of the
recession is behind.
Prato has come through a long, lean patch, beginning with a brutally
enforced structural adjustment of the industry in the mid-1980s, which was
then capped by recession - first in the main markets abroad and then at
home. The experience has proved the remarkable resilience and adaptability
of the 8,500 companies in the Prato area near Florence.
This is the single biggest agglomeration of textile manufacturing facilities
in Europe with a turnover close to L6,500bn (including textile machinery).
The health of Prato is an important symbol of the way Italy's myriad small
and medium-sized companies can cope with fast-changing industrial
conditions.
'The secret of our survival and success is above all owed to our enormous
flexibility,' says Mr Lamberto Cecchi, chairman of the Prato Industrialists
Union, the co-ordinating body for the local textile business. 'We also rely
on the speed of our responses; our closeness to clients; the high degree of
specialisation among our own companies, plus our permanent search for
innovation,' he adds.
Mr Cecchi and his colleagues speak with infectious self-confidence about
their ability to face challenges. The business is in their blood with a
tradition of cloth production that dates back to the 12th century. But all
this does not conceal the traumatic upheavals caused by a combination of
increased third country competition and recession in the main markets.
Over the past 15 years employment has fallen by one third, the worst
casualties being in the 'artisan' sector - very small companies with limited
technology and where the workforce is non-unionised. On average, some 550
companies disappeared every year during the 1980s. The sector now employs
42,000 people of whom 33,000 are directly linked to textile production that
covers wool, cloth, linen, silks and knitwear.
Perhaps the most encouraging sign is precisely on the employment front. 'We
think at last that employment has stabilised, and there could even be a
slight upswing ahead,' says Mr Cecchi.
According to the Industrial Union's research department, the recovery can be
traced back to latter part of 1992. In 1993, the value of production grew 11
per cent, while exports increased 20 per cent to L4,100bn. However, only in
the past six months has the recovery extended across the board. Exports are
up 24 per cent on the same period in 1993.
Prato caters essentially to the fashion business, and mainly at
the-ready-to-wear end. This involves ephemeral tastes in fabrics and the
constant search for something new, the latest being washed silk. In any one
year, Prato companies turn out 70,000 different materials. These are usually
small runs in specialised market niches.
'We cannot now compete with countries like China - nor do we try - in
producing large quantities of cloth. Our competitive edge comes in our being
able to find new combinations of materials, of understanding and
anticipating what the fashion designers might want,' says Mr Cecchi.
But the real strength of what is often called 'the Prato system' is more
complex. Within a relatively compact geographical area, a complete
integrated industry has grown up in a dynamic but organic way. Thousands of
mostly small family companies exist side-by-side, each specialising in one
particular activity - whether it be special dyeing facilities, techniques of
blending artificial fibres or packaging machinery. Facilities such as
industrial water recycling are shared and backed by a sympathetic local
council.
Though competing, these companies also exchange ideas and frequently turn to
each other to help with orders.
During the difficult years, a few of the medium-sized groups bought up
rivals or sought to establish more integrated operations. But integrated
operations covering several aspects of textile production are still rare.
Takeovers are complicated and the tax legislation remains punitive on
mergers.
'In Prato, the companies are people; their energy and their ideas. You risk
getting a factory shell if you buy a company. . . and it wouldn't be easy
for an outsider to buy in. The Japanese tried and withdrew perplexed several
years ago,' observed Mr Roberto Cenni who runs Gomtex, one of the bigger
companies in Prato.
Another tendency has been for companies to reduce their operational size.
This was motivated both by the need to cut costs and to reduce the hold of
the unions over work practices.
A company employing fewer than 15 people, for example, manages to avoid
nearly all the tough norms imposed by the Ministry of Labour. Once a company
employs more than 25 people, it has to begin recruiting 10 per cent from the
handicapped.
According to the latest figures, 47 per cent of all companies employ fewer
than 10 people, while a further 40 per cent employ fewer than 50 people.
Less than 4 per cent of the textile workforce is employed in companies with
more than 100 people on the payroll. And two thirds of Prato companies are
still classified as 'artisan'.
The businesses that have survived have investing heavily in new machinery
and R&amp;D. Many factories have been completely re-equipped during the past
five years. Roughly 5 per cent of Prato's turnover is devoted to research
and development.
Coupled with this upgrading, the Prato producers established closer ties
with their markets, ensuring they offered the right kind of product. In the
fast-moving ready-to-wear business, product lines are short. This accounts
for Prato's enormous flexibility - but it also means that the companies face
extra costs in frequently setting up new production lines.
To narrow the gap with customers, Prato has begun to move away from a rigid
two-season production for winter and summer - with consequent irregularities
in the rhythm of production. Instead, Prato now offers two mid-season ranges
which are a refining or a 'second edition' of what has already been produced
for the start of the winter-summer range.
The manufacturers are concerned that the recovery will push up raw material
costs. Already this year, cotton, wool and linen prices have risen almost 15
per cent. In the first six months of the year, a combination of greater
demand and higher prices saw the cost of imported raw materials and
semi-finished goods increase from L338bn to L653bn.
As companies come to terms with the recovery, they will have to focus more
on the problems created by their under-capitalisation. The capital structure
of the majority of companies is weak, companies are underfunded and
accounting procedures are particularly poor among the smaller businesses.
The other problem worrying the managers is that of labour. Skilled workers
with a priceless knowledge stretching back over three decades are beginning
to retire and it is hard to find replacements.
