FT  04 MAY 94 / Backbench dismay over in-fighting on EMU
The latest ministerial in-fighting about a decision that a future UK
government may or may not have to take in the late 1990s provoked dismay
among the level-headed on the Tory back benches yesterday.
But it is a measure of the depths of the fundamental Tory divide on Europe
that Mr Michael Portillo's off-the-cuff dismissal at the weekend of a single
European currency could provoke such disarray.
The chief secretary's antipathy to European monetary union is well known.
His Euro-scepticism has propelled him within a few weeks into the position
of the leading candidate of the right in the event that Mr John Major is
forced from office. But in articulating in public what he and his rightwing
cabinet colleagues have long said in private - that a single currency would
fatally undermine British sovereignty - Mr Portillo broke a carefully
constructed cabinet truce. The official government stance on whether or not
the government would participate in a single currency was set out in a
European elections campaign document last month. It was a fudge,
deliberately designed to prevent the sort of row which has broken out in the
past few days.
The document states that because of the opt-out negotiated by Mr Major at
Maastricht, Britain retains the right to make its own decision on whether to
take on the obligations leading to a single currency. It adds: 'That will be
the subject of a separate decision by our national parliament at
Westminster, if and when that decision ever has to be taken'. And in the
meantime Britain will not rejoin the European exchange rate mechanism within
the 'foreseaable future'. Put another way, the formula says there is no need
now for the Tory party to tear itself apart over issues which will not
confront it at least during the next several years and, perhaps, not at all.
Mr Portillo, on instructions from Downing Street, yesterday fell in again
behind that neutral formula. But on the other side of the European fence, Mr
Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, made no secret of the fact that he could
envisage supporting a single currency.
Esoteric though it may seem to the voters the split will not go away. And
with five weeks of campaigning ahead of it before the European elections on
June 9, there is ample scope for further public squabbling.
The latest Scottish opinion poll shows support for the Scottish National
party growing. A System Three opinion poll for today's Herald newspaper
shows that support for Labour has dropped since March from 46 to 44 per
cent, while backing for the SNP has risen by one point to 27 per cent. The
Tories have improved to 14 per cent from 13 per cent in February, equal with
the Liberal Democrats.
