FT  23 FEB 94 / Russians face G7 inflation warning
Finance ministers and central bank governors of the Group of Seven
industrialised nations will be calling on the new Russian government to give
them clear assurances this weekend of its determination to bring the
country's soaring inflation rate under control.
In return, the G7 hopes to be able rapidly to liberate the substantial funds
agreed at the last world economic summit in Tokyo, but blocked by the lack
of progress in the Russian reform programme.
Mr Theo Waigel, the German finance minister and host at the top-level talks
on Russia to take place outside Frankfurt on Saturday, yesterday stressed
particularly the need for a clear anti-inflation strategy, to provide
reassurance not only for the G7 governments, but also for foreign investors.
'The danger of hyperinflation, with its destabilising, destructive and
anti-social consequences, must be avoided,' Mr Waigel said yesterday. 'That
is the lesson of our own bitter experience, both in the 1920s, and after the
Second World War.'
He made his statement against a background of western concern at the
relaxation of the Russian government's former tough anti-inflation strategy,
although that is tempered by understanding at the political backlash
triggered by the reform policies.
Mr Waigel has invited Mr Sergei Dubinin, the new Russian finance minister,
Mr Alexander Shokhin, the economy minister, and Mr Victor Gerashchenko, the
governor of the Russian central bank, to attend the talks at Kronberg, to
take stock of the state of the reform programme.
The G7 will receive reports from Mr Michel Camdessus, the managing director
of the IMF, and Mr Lewis Preston, the president of the World Bank, giving
their assessment of the Russian economy.
Mr Waigel said the G7 meeting was also intended to consider the state of the
world economy, and expressed his confidence that a gradual upturn was under
way.
He expressed his concern at the trade conflict which has broken out between
the US and Japan, and urged both sides to reach a resolution.
The German government is obviously concerned that the meeting, intended
above all to consider the plight of the Russian economy, might end up being
dominated by the US-Japanese question.
