FT  10 MAR 94 / Government Bonds: US Treasuries move higher on economic
report
After a hesitant morning, US Treasuries moved decisively higher yesterday
after the Federal Reserve made reassuring comments about inflation in its
latest report on the economy.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year bond was up  13/32 at 92- 9/16 , to
yield 6.834 per cent. Prices were little changed at the short end, where the
two-year note was up just  1/32 at 99 15/32 , to yield 4.893 per cent.
After firming slightly at the opening, prices eased mid-morning as investors
sold securities after news of a 0.8 per cent increase in January wholesale
sales compared with a forecast of only 0.6 per cent.
Traders said the selling also reflected nervousness ahead of the midday
publication of the Fed's 'beige book' report on the economy. The market has
been sensitive to signs of resurgent inflation in recent months and analysts
feared any indication of rising prices might prompt fresh selling.
The beige book, however, turned out to be bullish for bonds. The Fed said it
had found only 'limited price pressures' in the economy. Bond prices
gradually began to recover and by late-afternoon were in positive territory.
Earlier, European bonds had ended a featureless session slightly weaker as
traders reported continued technical trading in the absence of significant
investor activity.
With market-moving news thin on the ground, traders focused on the
forthcoming release of the US beige book report and European bonds once
again took their cue from the US Treasuries market.
German government bonds ended a volatile day little changed. bunds rose
briefly after the Bundesbank's 3 basis point reduction in the minimum repo
rate, slipped as investors sold into the strength, and rose again in the
afternoon on short-covering.
Dealers reported scant investor activity and said trading was dominated by
the futures markets. On Liffe, the June bund futures contract fell by 0.02
point to 96.51.
Implied volatility on bund options on Liffe remained high after last week's
sharp increase, indicating continued nervousness and uncertainty. Throughout
the day, implied volatility on at-the-money June bund options ranged between
6.5 and 7 per cent. That compares with last Wednesday's 10 per cent peak,
but is still almost double the average level.
'Volatility is still high after last week's rise - it's lingering in the
market like an adrenalin shock,' said Mr Peter Kerger, head of futures and
options at NatWest Markets in Frankfurt. Gilts, Italian and Spanish bonds
historically have had higher volatility than bunds, and the rise in bund
volatility might indicate 'a certain volatility convergence' resulting from
international portfolio shifts between different markets, he suggests.
French bonds weakened, despite a report from the OECD stating that France
could ease short-term rates independently of Germany at little risk for
long-term yields.
On Matif, the March notional bond future fell by 0.80 points to 125.42,
though it rose by around 0.14 points in after-hours Globex trading.
Belgian bonds outperformed bunds after the Belgian central bank cut its key
central rate by 10 basis points to 6.15 per cent. The Belgian 10-year yield
gap over bunds narrowed to around 60 basis points from 64 on Tuesday, a
trader said.
UK gilts had an uneventful day, tracking other European markets higher and
then easing towards the close as players sold into the firmer market.
The June long gilt futures contract ended around 112 9/16 , down  5/32 from
Tuesday.
Ecu bonds ended little changed after the relatively smooth auction of French
five-year Ecu BTANs and 10-year Ecu OATs. France issued Ecu305m of the 5 per
cent BTANs and Ecu210m of the 6 per cent OATs. The BTANs attracted cover of
3.9 times and the OATs 4.4 times.
