FT  15 JUL 94 / Filling in the pink spaces
The patience of those of us whose pulses race at the prospect of Mr Tony
Blair becoming lead-er of the Labour party is being tested. The young man's
stubborn insistence on starting and ending every discussion with a
declaration of values and principles is costing him dear. In England, where
most of the electorate lives, abstract discourse, the deployment of grand
perspectives, is regarded with suspicion. It is the sort of thing you expect
from the French.
Indeed, Mr Blair is turning out to be an awkward repository of our
expectations. His series of protracted lectures may be the best way of both
winning the Labour leadership and positioning the party for a two-year
assault on the Conservatives, but it stretches the nerves of those who are
doomed to sit in the back of the class. They fidget and look out of the
window. The hot summer sun beckons. Do they have to go on hearing why they
should not present the tutor with a false choice on this or that political
conundrum? They ask themselves the question common to all participants in
seminars - 'what am I doing here?'
At his most persuasive, Mr Blair sounds as if, running for professor in a
theological seminary, he would appear to dismiss as outmoded the choice
between chastity and depravity. In truth, the case for purity would be made.
The trouble is that not everyone would know it. You would find it buried
inside a wrapping of verbiage that suggested, to those who wanted to have it
both ways, that they could. Thank heavens he would not go into detail.
Yet my enthusiasm for the prospect of a refreshment of British politics by a
reconstructed Labour party remains undiminished. Mr Blair is the only active
politician who is displaying the potential to be an agent of reconstruction.
There is no serious alternative. We must presume that Labour realises this.
Nothing should be taken for granted in a democratic contest. An upset is
extremely unlikely, but not impossible. If, by some mishap, the party gets
its sums wrong and chooses either of the other contenders, we can forget the
whole matter.
Labour led by Mrs Margaret Beckett or Mr John Prescott would stand as little
chance of forming a government as did Labour under Mr Michael Foot. We would
have to concentrate on the frustrating task of improving the Tories,
gritting our teeth at the prospect of enduring their misgovernance until the
millennium.
The electorate will see how deep Labour's comprehension of these political
realities runs when the result of the leadership election is announced. The
sensible assumption is that Mr Blair will be declared leader of the
opposition next Thursday and, probably, prime minister in 1996 or 1997. What
difference would that make to the way we wash our socks? The putative new
leader gives the following reply in the New Statesman this week: 'Think
about the huge amount of constitutional reform with the Freedom of
Information Act, the Bill of Rights, the changing of the constitution in the
House of Lords, the Scottish parliament, a Welsh assembly, regional
government, quangos.' Britain would sign the social chapter of the
Maastricht treaty. Trade union recognition rights would be granted. 'These
are not minor or irrelevant changes. Labour has a huge radical agenda in
this area,' said Mr Blair.
He - Labour - also has an agenda, some of which is radical, for the
management of the economy, education, participation in the European Union,
and welfare. Mr Blair has spoken at length on each of these. The trick is to
brush aside the false-dichotomy preambles and pull apart the wrapping of
placatory verbiage. Then we can see what is a specifically Labour or Blair
proposal and what is an attempt to persuade his party to accept what the
Conservatives have put in place.
Mr Blair has adopted the economic strategy of his shadow chancellor, Mr
Gordon Brown. This relies heavily on the promotion of education and
training. So does the government. Labour would, uniquely, introduce a
minimum wage, of an unspecified amount, and tax the very rich, at an
unspecified rate. As to Europe, Mr Blair's tone is friendly, the
government's suspicious. There is less division on matters of substance. Our
great pink hope dances round the issue of a single currency, insisting, as
does Mr John Major, on full convergence of the participating economies
before Britain's opt-out can perhaps become an opt-in. Political reform is
urgent, he says. He proposes looking at the involvement of both the European
and national parliaments in European decisions.
Acceptance of the social chapter is special to Labour; for the rest Mr
Blair's positive but cautious approach to a changing Europe would not offend
Mr Douglas Hurd or Mr Kenneth Clarke. Only hardline Eurosceptics could take
offence; Europhiles in all parties should approve of the language, while
appreciating, with Mr Blair, the immensity of the task of persuading the
rising generation of Europeans of the validity of what he calls the European
'project'.
Wednesday's lecture on welfare was the most outspoken to date. 'I quite
understand the resentment of every taxpayer who has to pay Pounds 20 a week
in taxes to keep 3m unemployed,' said Mr Blair. He spoke of helping people
to help themselves, as did Mr Bill Clinton in his presidential campaign.
'Work and welfare go together,' said Mr Blair; '. . . welfare must enhance
duties and responsibilities and not be a substitute for them.' Talk of
removing the poverty trap that acts as an incentive to stay on the dole is
part of mainstream politics, common to all parties.
Mr Blair was, however, speaking to a Labour audience that history suggests
might regard such thinking as an act of betrayal. So he sweetened the pill.
Using President Clinton's very words, he argued that the Conservatives'
trickle-down philosophy has been discredited. 'Britain is more unequal and
divided than it has been for a generation.' That is the stuff to give the
troops. Better yet, it was not followed by a mindless promise to shell out
even more to the poor. Mr Blair's contribution this week was to specify the
principles, although not the specific means, by which the welfare rolls
might be diminished. 'The benefit system must find as many exits from
dependency as possible,' he said. Great. We must now presume that when he
becomes leader he will tell us how.
