FT  10 MAY 94 / Labour warns of poorer service
The Labour party yesterday issued a sharp attack on the consultation
document outlining how the British Gas monopoly could be abolished. It
claimed that the proposals, if implemented, would lead to higher prices and
a lower quality of service for many customers.
Mr Nigel Griffiths, Labour's consumer spokesman, claimed that businesses
would be most likely to gain from the recommendations and that medium to
small customers would be threatened with a poorer service.
'It is no wonder that this document has been delayed for three months and
was not published before the local elections,' he said.
He added: 'And I am not surprised that the government has failed to bring
the document before the House of Commons, where it would have been savaged
by MPs.'
Mr Tim Eggar, the energy minister, insisted yesterday that gas prices would
fall across the board, and would bring 'very considerable benefits' for
consumers.
However, in a detailed critique of the document, Mr Griffiths said that the
intention to move to 'more cost-reflective pricing of transportation
tariffs' could penalise people who live at a great distance from Britain's
main gas terminals.
He was also concerned by the Department of Trade and Industry's claim that
'standing charges tend to shelter low-volume gas consumers'.
He said the implication of this was that British Gas was thinking of raising
the standing charge, penalising 6m gas consumers. He felt the charge should
be abolished.
A third cause of concern was the invitation for comments on whether all
suppliers 'should be required to offer prescribed levels of service to all
levels of customers'.
Mr Griffiths claimed that, with that statement, the DTI was leaving open the
possibility that it would reduce current services.
Labour's criticisms were echoed by the Gas Consumer Council, an industry
watchdog. Mr Ian Powe, the council's director, said: 'It is difficult to
avoid the first impression that low-income consumers, hardest hit by VAT,
will gain nothing over the next four years and could even face higher gas
bills than they were expecting from British Gas.'
