FT  05 MAR 94 / Markets: Thunderbolt scatters investors - London
The Germans unveiled on Wednesday a whispering arrow and a roaring
thunderbolt, each with distinctly different effects on their respective
target markets.
The former, a magnetic levitation train under spasmodic development since
the 1930s, will make 'less noise than a Volkswagen minibus' as its whisks
passengers from Berlin to Hamburg at 250 mph.
The latter, the M3 measure of money supply under intense pressure since
German unification in 1990, scattered investors in its wake as news of its
20.6 per cent rise in January roared through global markets.
What with US growth, price and employment figures also giving investors
further opportunity to worry, it was another highly volatile week for
equities and bonds around the world. Buffeted by these forces, London stocks
rose on the first and last days of the week but had a couple of sharply down
days in between. The FT-SE 100 index swung some 80 points during the week
but ended only a net 3.2 points down at 3,278.
The Footsie has now retreated 242 points, or 6.9 per cent, since its record
high of 3,520.3 on February 2, two days before the Federal Reserve unleashed
an interest rate rise in the US and resulting market mayhem around the
world.
For all the earnest efforts of analysts to decouple UK and European bonds
from US bonds by arguing that inflation and growth trends over here argue
for falling interest rates, European bonds have taken a hammering. UK gilts
have fared worst. They notched a negative 3.47 per cent total return in
February, the sharpest drop among the 13 biggest bond markets around the
world.
The clear consensus is that the bond market sell-off has been greatly
over-done. Fears of inflation and sharp tightening of policy by the Fed are
excessive; worries about the Bundesbank's inability to cut German interest
rates soon because of the runaway money supply are unfounded. Once the Fed
raises rates slightly and European central banks resume lowering their own,
stability will return to bond and thus stock markets.
Into this soothing balm dropped this week a challenging report on
commodities, inflation and the markets by Kleinwort Benson. 'We regard the
sharp rise in global bond yields as warranted by the fundamentals,' says
Albert Edwards, Kleinwort's global strategist who had accurately forecast
the markets' recent turmoil.
For the first time all 15 prices in Kleinwort's commodity index are rising.
A year ago, only seven were rising. The index, which boasts a higher
correlation to OECD GDP growth and world industrial production than
competing indices, has shown a dramatic rise over the past year. When the
index has reached this level in the past, the growth rate of OECD industrial
production has accelerated to 5 per cent or better within a year.
'Rarely has (the index) reached its current level without inflation turning
decisively upwards in the next year to 18 months,' the report concludes. 'We
also suspect that non-US bond markets will continue to be adversely effected
by the global inflation threat.'
Kleinwort is gloomy enough to advise investors to hold substantial cash. To
satisfy the remaining equity component in its assets allocation, it is
steering investors towards markets likely to spring positive earnings
surprises: only Japan and the UK qualify on that score for a hefty
overweight position.
The steep fall in UK share prices over the past month certainly makes stocks
look superficially better value in terms of price / earnings ratio and
dividend yield. Both yardsticks have retreated from the uncomfortable levels
they clocked at the market's peak. The rare, fervently bullish analysts such
as James Capel, have been joined recently by many others.
In spite of all the mayhem in the markets, trading volumes have been
relatively light on down days while up days have encouraged quite wide
buying from investors. Some of them, of course, will be trying to ride every
twist and turn of the market, so exacting can be the measures to which fund
managers have to perform.
The point was driven home this week by the news that last year pension fund
managers achieved, on average, a 27.9 per cent rise in their equity
portfolios against a rise of 28.4 per cent in the FT-SE-A All-Share Index.
For many, the cause was being underweight in shares of HSBC, parent of
Hongkong and Shanghai Bank and Midland Bank.
HSBC was the star results reporter of this week. Pre-tax profits rose 51 per
cent to Pounds 2.58bn within which Midland quadrupled its profits to Pounds
844m. The group's full-year dividend rose 24 per cent to 23.5p. Rather
disturbingly, though, Pounds 1.1bn of the profits came from foreign exchange
and capital market trading. It admitted this was a performance it was
unlikely to repeat this year, even with a Pounds 26bn bond portfolio.
In the home-grown UK corporate sector, the news was positive almost without
exception. In the engineering sector, Vickers said it had 'turned the
corner' although GKN is still being dragged down by the slump in continental
European vehicle production. Cookson (industrial materials), Zeneca (drugs),
Associated British Ports (port operations and property), Serco (business
services), General Accident (composite insurance) and T. Cowie and Henlys
(car dealers) reported sharply higher 1993 profits.
Ladbroke, the hotel, casino and betting group, cut its dividend for the
first time in its 27-year pubic history and took hefty writedowns on its
properties. But investors had long ago priced in these reforms of new
management and the shares have been one of the best performers this year.
