FT  18 JUL 94 / Details of the complaint and settlement
Microsoft is alleged to have engaged in several restrictive practices
limiting competition in the software market, according to a complaint filed
in a Washington district court by the US Justice Department, writes Louise
Kehoe.
'Virtually all major PC manufacturers find it necessary to offer Microsoft
operating systems on most of their PCs,' the complaint states. 'Microsoft's
monopoly power allows it to induce these manufacturers to enter into
anti-competitive, long-term licences under which they must pay royalties to
Microsoft, not only when they sell PCs containing Microsoft's operating
systems, but also when they sell PCs containing non-Microsoft operating
systems.'
The Justice Department alleges that by making its MS-DOS and Windows
programs available on a 'per processor' basis, Microsoft requires PC
manufacturers to pay a fee for each computer shipped, whether or not that
computer contains a Microsoft operating system.
This arrangement gives Microsoft an unfair advantage by causing a PC
manufacturer selling a non-Microsoft operating system to pay at least two
royalties - one to Microsoft and one to its competitor - thereby making a
non-Microsoft computer more expensive, it is alleged. Microsoft, however,
said that the Justice Department and European competition authorities had
misunderstood the terms of its licensing arrangements, noting that
manufacturers could exclude specific models from their Microsoft licence
agreement.
The Justice Department further charged that Microsoft's contracts are
unreasonably long. By binding manufacturers to purchase Microsoft products
for years the agreements make it difficult for new competitors to enter the
market.
Under the terms of the settlement, Microsoft will be prohibited, for the
next six-and-a-half years from:
Entering into any 'per processor' licensing agreements with PC
manufacturers. Instead, Microsoft must license its operating systems on a
'per system' or per computer basis.
Requiring PC makers to purchase any minimum number of Microsoft operating
systems, regardless of how many computers are sold.
Entering into licensing agreements with terms longer than one year.
Requiring licensees to pay Microsoft on a 'lump sum' basis, rather than
according to the number of copies of the software used.
Another significant element of the settlement refers to alleged 'tying' of
sales of other Microsoft products to purchases of operating systems.
Competitors have charged that Microsoft forces PC manufacturers to buy other
products to obtain discount prices, a charge Microsoft has denied. The
settlement specifically prohibits this practice.
The Justice Department also charges that Microsoft's 'non-disclosure
agreements' with some software developers have been unfairly restrictive.
This issue surfaced recently when software developers claimed Microsoft was
attempting to prevent them working on applications programs that would run
on non-Microsoft operating systems.
The NDAs required programmers granted access to pre-release versions of a
new version of 'Windows' could not work on programs for competing operating
systems for a period of three years. When the issue came to light Microsoft
acknowledged that it had 'made a mistake' and offered to modify the terms of
the agreements.
The antitrust settlement limits duration of an NDA to 12 months and
prohibits Microsoft from imposing any terms that would prevent a software
developer from developing products to run on competing operating systems.
Notable missing from the complaint and settlement documents is any mention
of allegations raised by software industry executives that Microsoft's
applications software developers gain an unfair advantage because they have
greater access to the company's operating system technology.
Microsoft has stridently denied these and other charges. On Saturday,
Microsoft stressed that the settlement agreement covers 'all matters' raised
by the antitrust investigations, which the company acknowledged had
'initially included many allegations raised by our competitors and began as
a very broad probe into lots of aspects of the way we do business.'
