FT  14 MAY 94 / Lunch with the FT: Young master of moviedom - Michael
Thompson-Noel talks to Tim Bevan
Last night, the hit film Four Weddings and a Funeral opened in London,
having gushed big revenues at the US box-office. At face value, Four
Weddings is a quintessentially English film, which is why it is being touted
as the most successful such product since A Fish Called Wanda.
Four Weddings was shot in London just over a year ago. Its male lead is the
stiff-upper-lipped English heart-throb actor Hugh Grant - already a lust
object in Japan and the US. It cost Dollars 5m, some of which came from the
British television company, Channel 4. Four Weddings' production company,
Working Title, is London-based. And its executive producer, Tim Bevan, 36,
could pass as James Bond.
Yet spend two hours in Bevan's company and you realise that the phrase
'British film industry' is passe, despite pleas for subsidies for British
film-makers. What London has become is the main branch office of the
English-language movie business. This is not to belittle it but precisely
the opposite, especially for a producer of Bevan's status.
I met him at Alastair Little's restaurant in Soho, London, which is
informal, minimalist and excitingly expensive. Bevan asked for a goat's
cheese salad, grilled sole, mineral water, a glass of dry white wine and a
double espresso. Very Hollywood Hills, which is not surprising: he spends
half his time there. He has given up cigarettes, but was pleased to see my
Marlboro. 'Please go ahead,' he said. 'I am the world's most dedicated
passive smoker.'
He is tall, athletic-looking, fresh-faced and frank: a skilled charmer but
capable, no doubt, of considerable toughness. His first film, 10 years ago,
was My Beautiful Laundrette.
He told me that Four Weddings and a Funeral looked like grossing Dollars
40m-Dollars 50m world-wide, which is starting to sound like an
under-statement.
'Would that make it your biggest?'
Bevan choked on his fish.
'Yes, the biggest by a long way. Laundrette, for example, which cost Dollars
1m, didn't do great money though it made a few careers. Four Weddings, in
contrast, is going to spew money. It has had a fairly charmed run. Nothing
major went wrong during its shooting, and it opened in the US with a huge
push: brilliant reviews, very strong marketing, and then word-of-mouth.'
'If it's such an English film, why open it in America?'
'Oh - all quite deliberate. We platformed it. British film audiences are
susceptible to movies that have succeeded in the US. It went to No 1 in
America with no drop-off after six weeks, and also to No 1 in France.'
Bevan's partner at Working Title is Eric Fellner, an equally well-regarded
young producer, whose first film - a hit - was Sid and Nancy. One of them is
usually in London, the other in Los Angeles, where they have a house in the
Hollywood Hills. Both are married to actresses, Bevan to Joely Richardson,
Fellner to Gaby Delall.
They divide projects between them. Their lifestyles have been portrayed as
'flash cars, power wives, hot tubs and Sunday night red-eyes to LA, the Big
Apple and back', and their ambition as the making of stylish, commercial
films aimed at maturing yuppie audiences on both sides of the Atlantic.
They have the track records to succeed. And they certainly have the backing.
Working Title is now a fully-owned subsidiary of PolyGram, of the
Netherlands, a big-time entertainment company with plenty of ambition.
Bevan says that he chanced into film-making. Otherwise he might have been a
journalist. 'Originally, as an independent film-maker, Working Title lived
hand-to-mouth. But Eric and I certainly learned how to produce movies. We
have had our fair share of dogs, but also of bad films that made money as
well as good films that did well. Yet to do what you want to do as a
producer you need a great deal of money behind you.
'Prior to PolyGram, I spent 99 per cent of my time trying to raise finance.
The beauty of PolyGram is that I now have a great deal of time to spend on
making films.
'Movies are a bit like the aerospace business, fully international but also
a cottage industry. The village where the movies' cottage industry is based
is Los Angeles, so even if we shot all our films in Britain we'd still need
to have an office in LA. That is where the money, the distribution muscle
and the talent is - writers, actors, agents - even for quite small TV
productions. Even to hire British talent, you have to go through Hollywood.
Movies are talent-driven.'
At present, Working Title has five projects in advanced development -
serious talking, final budgets - plus one being shot, about the Black
Panther movement, and about 20, says Bevan, in preliminary development -
money being spent, a writer at work.
'How about film violence?' I asked. 'What do you think of the British
government's recent move to tighten the censorship of screen violence and to
crack down on retailers who peddle violent videos to under-age children?'
He swirled his coffee.
'In parts,' said the producer, 'My Beautiful Laundrette, which was not cut
10 years ago, was extremely violent. There was one shot, I remember, where a
man's head was smashed through a car windscreen. Very violent. If I were
making Laundrette today, they'd probably want me to cut bits out. Would I
fight for every frame of that film? You're damn right I would, though I am
against gratuitous violence. That is not something that interests me.
Film-making is about truth and the honesty of the characters.'
'All right,' I countered. 'Let's be specific. Let's take torture. Suppose a
script calls for a character to be strapped to a chair and for another
character to take a cigarette lighter to his ear, or even to his eye, right
there on screen. Why should that be necessary? Are there any circumstances
under which a producer could possibly justify such material?'
Bevan scrunched up his eyes. 'I hate to say this,' he said, 'but I think
almost certainly that the answer is Yes.'
The British end of the English-language movie business is in up-beat mode.
'Here is an example,' said Bevan. 'There are five young British actors at
present - Liam Neeson, Daniel Day-Lewis, Hugh Grant, Ralph Fiennes and Gary
Oldman - who are all under 42 and so talented that you can open a picture
with any one of them. That is extremely rare.'
I said: 'How about London film critics? Aren't they the lamest dogs?'
Bevan's face cracked with laughter. Again he swirled his coffee. 'They have
often had a go at me,' he said. 'They've been there far too long. Always the
same old faces.'
At 3pm precisely, without indicating that he was remotely in a hurry or had
anything better to do than sit and drink espressos, Tim Bevan said goodbye
and eased his tall frame back into the Soho snarl. Probably caught the
red-eye.
