FT  22 APR 94 / Police abandon hunt for pub bombers
West Midlands police have abandoned the search for the IRA members whose
bombs, placed in Birmingham pubs on November 21 1974, killed 21 people and
wounded 162 others in the worst UK mainland terrorist incident.
Investigations into the bombing, re-opened in March 1991, have failed to
find enough evidence to start criminal proceedings.
'The file, so far as we are concerned, is closed unless further evidence
comes forward,' said Mr Ron Hadfield, the West Midlands chief constable,
yesterday. 'There are no more lines of inquiry.'
Mr Hadfield's declaration follows an investigation which cost Pounds 1.7m
and occupied up to 40 police officers.
The results of their work are contained in eight interim reports and one
final report to the Director of Public Prosecutions, who decided there was
insufficient evidence to charge anybody with the bombings. The contents of
the reports have not been disclosed.
This latest investigation was initiated by the release of the Birmingham Six
on a Court of Appeal judgment. The six - Mr Hugh Callaghan, Mr Patrick Hill,
Mr Robert Hunter, Mr Noel McIlkenny, Mr William Power and Mr John Walker -
were arrested within 24 hours of the pub bombings and subsequently sentenced
to life imprisonment. The six were asked if they wished to help the
investigation, but Mr Hadfield would not say whether they did or not.
With the perpetrators of the bombing still at large, Mr Hadfield said: 'My
officers have done everything they possibly could have done over the past
three years.'
He said he would not offer any opinion on the evidence which had been
gathered during the latest inquiry for fear of compromising the
confidentiality or personal safety of witnesses involved.
None of the officers in the 1990s investigation took part in the 1970s
investigation, the conduct of which was later subject to a police inquiry.
Meanwhile in Belfast yesterday, Mr Paul Hill, one of the four wrongfully
convicted of the 1974 Guildford and Woolwich pub bombings, won his appeal
against conviction for the murder in 1974 of former soldier Mr Brian Shaw.
The overturning of his conviction clears the way for him to receive the full
interim award of compensation already paid to other members of the Guildford
Four. Part of Mr Hill's interim award had been withheld pending the outcome
of the appeal in this case.
Full compensation for the four men is still being assessed by the
independent assessor Sir David Calcutt QC. He must calculate their
entitlement to special damages based on such factors as loss of earnings and
loss of job prospects.
