FT  11 OCT 94 / Directors accused of illegal deals: Share support charges
denied
Directors of European Leisure, the entertainment group, mounted an illegal
share support operation during the company's successful 1990 takeover bid
for Midsummer Leisure, it was alleged at Southwark Crown Court yesterday.
Mr Michael Ward, the former European Leisure chairman and chief executive,
and other former directors used their own money to fund third parties buying
shares in the company to maintain or increase its share price during the
bid, Mr Anthony Donne QC, prosecuting, said.
Mr Donne was opening the prosecution of Mr Ward, Mr Jeremy Howarth, a former
EL finance director, Mr John Doyle, a Jersey taxi-driver, Mr Walter
Crawford, a Glasgow ship-repairer, and Miss Angela Pollard, a former EL
public relations manager.
Mr Ward denies charges of conspiracy to defraud, conspiring to create a
false market and theft. The others deny various similar charges. Mr Crawford
is charged only with theft and false accounting.
Mr Donne told the jury that the share support operation was started after
EL's share price dropped in a general slump in the leisure sector after
which Midsummer withdrew its approval of the bid. Mr Donne said that during
the takeover period, in April and May 1990, four separate share support
operations were carried out to purchase stock worth almost Pounds 500,000.
These involved:
Using an intermediary company and later covertly reimbursing losses suffered
on the sale of the shares through paying a false invoice.
Paying cash to Mr Doyle to buy shares.
Using a Guernsey account in the name of Rebecca Tye, Mr Ward's former
housekeeper and sister-in-law of Angela Pollard, to buy more shares.
Using Mr Crawford to buy shares paid for through a false invoice for work on
a ship.
The false ship repair invoice was questioned by other EL executives
including Mr David Brownstone, the commercial director, and discussed at a
meeting with EL's lawyers. Before the meeting the EL company secretary, Mr
Tony Freeman, gave Mr Brownstone other documents about the share support
operation.
Although the lawyers accepted Mr Ward's denial of any impropriety, Mr
Freeman and Mr Brownstone both resigned. Mr Donne said that before Mr
Freeman resigned he was subjected to a tirade of abuse from Mr Ward.
The trial continues today.
