FT  07 JAN 94 / IMF-World Bank warning on Russia
The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund are urging western
countries not to abandon the tough economic policy conditions they have
placed on financial aid to Russia.
Making loans conditional on policy reforms, the two Washington institutions
argue in an unusual joint note on their operations in Russia, is the best
way of speeding up the process of stabilising the Russian economy and
bringing about an early improvement in living standards.
Officials from the IMF and the World Bank criticised the Russian government
for not following through an attack on inflation and for maintaining
inefficient subsidies to vested interests such as state businesses and
collective farms, at the expense of vulnerable groups such as pensioners and
teachers.
'Despite announced policy intentions, Russia has produced an extremely
gradual approach to the reduction of inflation. Experience elsewhere
suggests that this is not an effective way of minimising economic hardship
or maximising political support,' the joint note says.
The IMF and the World Bank, as well as the western donor nations, have been
criticised both in Russia and the west for being slow to fulfil their
promises of financial aid to Russia.
The IMF has so far lent Dollars 2.5bn (Pounds 1.7bn) to Russia, some of it
under a scheme specially devised to ease the conditions for lending money to
the former Soviet states. A disbursement of another Dollars 1.5bn under this
scheme, however, has been held up while the IMF waits for evidence of an
effort to curb inflation and the budget deficit.
After the surprising success in last month's Russian elections of the
extreme right-wing followers of Mr Vladimir Zhirinovsky, some policy makers
in the west have questioned whether shock therapy was the right approach to
Russia's economic problems.
In the US, the vice-president, Mr Al Gore, suggested that the IMF should
loosen its conditions for further disbursement, while Mr Strobe Talbott, who
has been nominated to become deputy secretary of state, said the Russian
people needed 'less shock and more therapy'.
But Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the treasury secretary, appears to have prevailed in a
debate within the US administration on policy towards Russia, arguing that
there is no alternative for Russia to carrying out the painful measures
needed to stabilise its economy.
President Bill Clinton this week said that more attention needed to be paid
to the construction of a social safety net to mitigate the consequences of
reform, but that should not mean any slowing of reform.
The joint IMF-World Bank note urges Russia to pursue a macro-economic
stabilisation programme built on cutting the growth of central bank credit,
limiting the 1994 budget deficit and maintaining a liberal price and
exchange system. It goes on to advocate structural reforms, including
expanded privatisation, changes to insolvency and ownership laws, and
improvement of the banking system.
