FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (18): Bare-footed boot-makers - Jimmy Burns
probes conditions in the booming light industry sector
There is a flourishing equity market in Bombay, and a rash of high-tech
companies in Bangalore. Foreign trade missions and multinationals are
knocking on government doors. So much for the new India.
But visit the tanneries of Kanpur, or the brass makers of Moradabad, and you
glimpse another India, where small is not so much beautiful as rather ugly.
Notwithstanding a good export performance, people in these places -
including young children - work in conditions which the developed world
banished from the factory floor decades ago.
Investment in technology, training, and health and safety is kept to a
minimum. Instead the focus is on low wages payable to a seemingly endless
supply of unskilled destitute labour which still manages to churn out
'quality' hand-made goods to order.
The tanneries and the brass workshops belong to India's small scale
industrial sector which has for decades retained an important and privileged
status in the local economy.
Small scale industries employ 139m people, account for 35 per cent of total
manufacturing output, and some 34 per cent of total exports.
Since independence the sector has been highly protected largely for
socio-political reasons. It has become a kind of informal welfare agency
capable of providing jobs to the country's massive population, but providing
little incentive for investment in new production techniques or a safer
working environment.
Now, however, the sector is facing a fresh challenge. As the Indian
government opens up the country to foreign investment and gradually
deregulates the economy, small scale industries are being given the
opportunity to prosper, but in a potentially much more competitive
environment.
As Mr A Arunachalam, the minister for state for industry, put it recently:
'There are immense opportunities for small scale industries in global
markets ..but they will have to upgrade technologies and the quality of
their products, and formulate strategies to that end.'
The scale of the challenge facing India's small scale industries was
underlined recently by research jointly undertaken by the National Council
of Applied Economic Research and the German Friedrich-Naumann-Stiftung.
The research, one of the most comprehensive studies ever undertaken of the
sector, found that over the last four decades the small scale sector had
both grown and diversified considerably, made a significant contribution to
employment generation and exports, and to a large extent managed to meet the
consumer demand of the Indian masses even if the products sold on the home
market were generally of poor quality. The sector produces a range of more
than 7,000 products, a large number of which are consumer items.
The overall conclusion, however, was that the sector remained structurally
weak and highly dependent on Government help and protection. The report
noted: 'The sector is beset with several problems, such as sub-optimal scale
of operations, sickness and morbidity, technological obsolescence and poor
market image. A bandwagon approach leads to overcrowding in the same lines
of production. Consequently, there is intense inter se competition, lower
capacity utilisation and compromise on quality and standards to make way for
price cutting. The small scale sector has not been encouraged to grow
vertically and face competition.'
The following were among the findings of the research carried out among a
sample of 657 small scale companies located in various parts of India:
Low level technology: 56.62 per cent of companies had a manual manufacturing
process; 36.66 per cent were semi-automated; while only 4.72 per cent were
fully automated. Most companies said they could not afford testing
facilities, while 83 per cent of respondents said they did not perceive the
non-availability of trained staff to be a problem.
Limited institutional finance: Inadequacy of credit together with excessive
and cumbersome bureaucratic procedures in the way of obtaining it was
identified as a major problem by many of companies surveyed. It was pointed
that one of the major impediments in getting adequate finance was the lack
of trained banking staff which in turn led to a mistaken assessment of the
companies' requirements.
Poor infrastructure: Companies faced problems of obtaining industrial space,
as well as inadequate supplies of power and water. Other weak areas
identified were transport, warehousing and effluent disposal.
Some of the problems identified in this wide ranging research are only too
evident in towns such as Kanpur and Moradabad, where whole communities have
grown up around local small scale industries with mixed benefits in social
and economic terms.
In Kampur, one of the more 'successful' small scale companies is Sultan
Tanneries. Sales last year at Rs300m were 15 per cent up on the previous
year, with 45 per cent of manufactured 'tanned' leather products exported.
Senior executive Mehmood Alam resists the suggestion that his company is a
sweat shop. His are the best tanners in the world, working for a tenth or
more of what they would be paid in Europe or the US. (His investment in
machinery has been limited and will only be significantly increased if and
when this comparative wage advantage is lost.)
The tanners do, however, walk around bare footed and without protective
clothing in an unfiltered atmosphere heavy with toxic fumes and liquids.
None of them wears the safety leather boots which they are tanning and which
are exported to the UK for use on the factory floor of British chemical
companies.
Mr Alam insists that as one of the bigger companies in Kanpur he cannot
afford to play 'hide and seek' with government health inspectors and
pollution controllers. But when I visited the factory young boys were
working on the production line and the pollution control equipment was
switched off.
Success and squalor coexist too in Moradabad, a town whose brassware exports
were valued at Rs6.5bn last year, a 30 per cent increase over the previous
three years.
One of the oldest and most successful companies, C L Gupta &amp; Sons
(established 1889), boasts an ability to respond quickly to customer
specifications on anything from a candle stick to a bed. The company's
quality hand crafted brass products made in India are increasingly seen in
US design shops and European antique sales. They are made by workers,
including children, earning Rs25 - Rs35 a day and lacking the face and body
protection which is compulsory under western health and safety standards.
In Moradabad, a UN sponsored training centre run by government officials is
trying to bring about an improvement in the quality of metal finished
products.
And yet, in a typical Indian paradox, Moradabad brass makers complain that
their export efforts are hampered by constant power shortages and bad
transport communications with New Delhi.
What the government has promised so far is less bureaucracy and better
managed credit facilities. It is also opening up local industry to foreign
investment by liberalising, among other things, its policy of product
reservation whereby selected products can only be manufactured by small
scale Indian companies (although multinationals are not yet allowed full
access to the much coveted icecream market). The hope is that investment
will improve productivity without harming jobs.
It remains to be seen when and how a new breed of entrepreneur can emerge
from the sweat shops of Kanpur and Moradabad.
