FT  13 AUG 94 / Iran simmers with discontent: Rafsanjani is seen to have
lost control at home and abroad
While international attention has again focused on Iran in the wake of bomb
attacks against Israeli targets in London and Buenos Aires, the government
of President Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani has been facing increasing
violence and unrest at home.
Earlier this month riots broke out in Qazvin, an industrial city 50km north
of Tehran, ostensibly over the rejection by the Iranian parliament of a
proposal to allow the city of 1m people to become an autonomous province,
devolved from that of Zanjan.
The unrest, which resulted in at least four deaths, was so serious that Mr
Ali Mohammad Besharati, interior minister, was forced to visit Qazvin and
pledge that, as a comprise, it would be separated from Zanjan and included
in Tehran province instead.
The most spectacular violence occurred in June, when a huge bomb exploded at
the country's most important Shia religious shrine - the mausoleum of Imam
Reza in the holy north-eastern city of Mashhad - killing dozens of people.
The bomb was possibly in revenge for the earlier destruction of a Sunni
mosque by the authorities which triggered serious riots in the eastern town
of Zahedan, with its large Sunni population. Potentially the most serious
incident of the year occured in February when a gunman fired shots at Mr
Rafsanjani, who was unwounded, at Friday prayers.
The emergence of ethnic and religious divisions was further underlined
earlier in the year, with the mysterious murders of a number of Christian
priests. First, Mr Haik Hovsepian Mehr, the head of the small evangelical
Assemblies of God, was killed in January, followed in June by his successor,
Mr Tateos Michaelian, and then by a younger priest and convert to
Christianity, Mr Mehdi Dibaj, in July.
The government has denied involvement and has sought to pin the blame for
all these acts of violence on the country's largest and most organised
opposition group, the Iraqi-based Mojahedin-e Khalq.
The violence caused by the public challenge to the government's authority
reflects the confusion and lack of coherence in the government's
implementation of policy. Mr Rafsanjani, who was elected president for a
second four-year term just over a year ago, has been widely credited with
shaping a more pragmatic face for the Islamic Republic. A shrewd political
operator, Mr Rafsanjani understood that Iran's interests were not best
served by confrontation with its pro-Western Arab neighbours or the rest of
the world.
After Ayatollah Khomeini's death in 1989, he set out to revise some of the
central policies of the earlier revolutionary era. One of the mistakes he
declared, was for Iran to have made so many enemies, leaving it friendless
and isolated in the eight-year war which followed the Iraqi invasion.
Yet, five years after Khomeini's death, Iran's foreign policy, while not in
tatters, can hardly be judged a success. Four Iranian diplomats are being
sought for questioning by Argentina over the Buenos Aires bomb, which killed
nearly 100 people last month.
Mr Warren Christopher, the US secretary of state, has again described Iran
as an 'international outlaw' and has renewed pressure on Iran's main trading
partners, Germany and Japan, to scale down commercial ties with Tehran.
Success has been no more forthcoming domestically, where Mr Rafsanjani
sought to place the need to rebuild the economy at the top of the political
agenda, in stark contrast to Ayatollah Khomeini.
But for all the attention given to the economy, it is arguably at its nadir,
with high inflation, a mounting debt burden and a shortage of foreign
currency earnings caused by the weakness of oil prices. Rising inflation has
also placed a heavy burden on many increasingly resentful Iranians.
With so many of the foreign and economic policy goals set in the early
Rafsanjani years either waylaid or unsuccessfully targeted, the government
appears to lacks direction and has been impotent in its efforts to weld
together the multiplicity of power centres of which it is comprised.
The public perception of Mr Rafsanjani, who has adopted a much lower
profile, is that he has lost control at home and abroad, so the challenge to
his authority is likely to continue and may even intensify.
