FT  08 JAN 94 / How to Spend It: Positive thinking to beat the blues - Sarah
Stacey finds some pleasant ways to shake that after-Christmas feeling
As the new year gets underway anyone without the willpower of a Trappist
monk may be feeling a touch under par. The long days of feasting, combined
with lack of sleep and exercise, result in what the French call une crise de
foie - in other words, an overloaded liver exacerbated by dehydration.
This sluggishness is also primarily responsible for the January blues,
according to Dr Susan Horsewood-Lee, a London general practitioner who is
particularly interested in nutrition. The answer, she says, is a programme
of detoxification, rehydration and relaxation.
If that conjures visions of pills, potions and deprivations, take heart. Of
course, you can go the whole way and opt for a lemon and water fast - under
medical supervision only - but there are gentler and positively agreeable
ways of tackling this lethargy.
First, let us suppose you want to detox at home. Undoubtedly the best way to
start the day is with pure water, warm or cool, not ice-cold, or herbal tea.
Peppermint has been used to aid digestion since Roman times. Add a dribble
of cold-pressed honey if you wish.
Next, try a brisk skin brushing to get your circulation moving and speed the
loss of toxins. Use a fairly stiff brush, (the Body Shop version at Pounds
4.95 is perfect) on dry skin, always working up legs and arms towards the
heart.
Follow with a hot shower, perhaps using a herbal hair and body shampoo such
as Aveda's aromatic Futurity Relax, oozing with camomile, comfrey and witch
hazel. Finish with a cold, or cool, splash from head to toe. It is
gasp-inducing at first, but makes you feel sparkling throughout the day.
The bottom line with detox eating and drinking is to do it gently. If you
can manage one or two days without caffeine and alcohol, largely eating
fruit and vegetables, you will feel great benefits. Although beware,
expelling toxins from an overloaded system can temporarily induce headaches
or other aches and pains, dizziness and a degree of lassitude. The best way
to combat this is to drink as much cool, pure water as possible, two to five
pints daily, submerge yourself in warm baths and rest.
Dr Horsewood-Lee also recommends taking a multivitamin and mineral
supplement. The Japanese would add Chlorella, emerald green algae which is
stuffed with nutrients and Japan's best selling supplement. It is available
in tablet or powder form and, like a wide range of other supplements, a
positive library of books and some health foods, is stocked by the
Nutricentre, which also has a very efficient mail order service. Contact the
Nutricentre at 7 Park Crescent, London WIN 3HE. Tel: 071-436-5122.
Now for the good news. Massage of all kinds is excellent for releasing
toxins, used in combination with diet and gentle exercise such as walking
and swimming. Aromatherapy massage, with essential oils such as juniper,
rosemary and grapefruit, is a powerful detoxifier, working on the lymphatic
system, boosting the vital organs, and helping the digestion.
From January 4, Aromatherapy Associates, the company which ministers to the
Princess of Wales, is offering a 10 per cent discount on treatments in the
middle of the day. Normal prices are Pounds 40 for the 1 3/4 hour initial
consultation, Pounds 35 for 1 1/4 hr follow-ups. It also supplies mail order
bath oils (65ml for Pounds 19.95, plus Pounds 2 p&amp;p). Contact: Aromatherapy
Associates at 68 Maltings Place, Bagleys Lane, SW6 2BY. Tel: 071-371-9878.
Alas, it only looks after women.
The International Federation of Aromatherapists, (081-846-8066), provides a
national list of practitioners, who may also do home visits. Some
practitioners will only treat women, although those based in health clubs
and health hydros will usually treat men as well.
If you like massage and water, try Thalgo hydrotherapy. Our jaded tester
emerged from a session at Harrods' revamped Hair and Beauty Salon
revitalised. She began to feel better when her body was exfoliated with a
mallow and ivy scrub. Plunged into a large tub, laced with seaweed extract,
our tester felt a rapid improvement as high-pressure jets of water pummelled
her from neck to sole for about half an hour. A deep body massage topped it
off and sent her tripping into Knightsbridge. Thalgo detoxifying
hydrotherapy costs Pounds 40 for one hour as does the seaweed body wrap. You
might like to follow it with a facial treatment and scalp massage, such as
the Clarins Paris Method lymphatic drainage facial, Pounds 45.
Harrods Hair &amp; Beauty Salon is offering a special deal to Weekend FT readers
from now until January 31 - for Pounds 60 you can have either a Thalgo
Hydrotherapy bath or a relaxing body massage plus a full face facial, neck
and shoulder massage. Just say you are an FT reader and the offer stands.
For a more baroque treatment, you could try the Dead Sea Inchwrap. For
Pounds 50, plus VAT, you can be exfoliated with bright blue gel, painted in
Dead Sea Mud and swaddled in cling film from jaw to toe, until you look like
a sci-fi mummy. As the name implies, you may lose some inches, but the
minerals in the black mud are also said to draw out toxins, as well as
emulsifying fat, reducing cellulite, improving muscle tone and generally
revitalising the skin. Our tester felt invigorated after the treatment. A
few inches were indeed knocked off her vital statistics and several pounds
off her weight, albeit temporarily. For local therapists, contact Finders
International on 0580-211-055.
For those whose willpower may flag, Grayshott Hall health and fitness
retreat specialises in individually designed detox programmes. Diets are
based on vegetables, salads and fruit, with a little protein. Light
exercise, such as swimming or walking is advised to speed the process.
Grayshott, which comes with high commendations from doctors and those who
have stayed there, also provides massage, hydrotherapy and spa body
treatments. A single room for four nights costs from Pounds 525, including
all meals, a daily massage and heat treatment, and one-to-one health and
nutritional consultations. Grayshott Hall, Headley Road, Grayshott, Nr
Hindhead, Surrey GU26 6JJ. Tel: 0428-604-331, fax: 0428-605-463.
Lady de Saumarez, owner of Shrubland Hall, is adamant that this elegant
Georgian house, set in magically beautiful Italian gardens, is a health
clinic 'not a hotel with treatments'. Three doctors are there day and night.
The emphasis is on cleansing the system, diet is a treatment, and everyone
is treated as a patient. On his first evening, workaholic TV producer Clive
Syddall found his dinner diet of orange juice, yoghurt and honey, an
appalling prospect. Over the next few days, the benefits were so great - and
the myriad relaxing treatments, which included a wide range of therapies
plus amenities such as art lessons, so pleasant - that he voted it entirely
worthwhile.
Ages range from eight to 80. Staff, who outnumber guests, are sympathetic
and standards are high. During three days of detox and relaxation, Syddall
lost several pounds, and left feeling 'much refreshed and lighter . . . it
gives you the impetus to continue with a good diet and make time to relax'.
Single rooms range from Pounds 420 to Pounds 650 per week. For more details,
contact Shrubland Hall Health Clinic, Coddenham, lpswich, Suffolk lP6 9QH.
Tel: 0473-830-404, fax: 0473-832-641.
On mainland Europe, detoxifying at thalassotherapy spas is regularly
prescribed by doctors. French friends become lyrical when describing the
effects of a week's stay at the Institute of Thalassotherapy at Le Touquet
on the north-west coast of France. Easily accessible from Britain, the spa
is right on the beach. Treatment regimes are planned individually,
alternating half days of therapy with periods of rest.
Erna Low Consultants, which specialises in spa travel, offers a package to
Le Touquet of six nights with half board and three to five treatments daily,
starting from Pounds 570 for a shared twin room, Pounds 729 for a single
room. Flights Pounds 89 return. Contact Erna Low at 9 Reece Mews, London SW7
3HE. Tel: 071-584-2841.
Dr Horsewood-Lee recommends Helianthal, the wonderfully located spa at St
Jean de Luz, in the south of France, as ideal for detoxing. It offers
excellent cuisine under your personal nutritional adviser, a gym, and 'a
dream of a salt water swimming pool' with hydrotherapy. Tel: 010-33 59 51 51
51.
Finally, Chinese medicine links the state of your liver with how happy you
are. A poorly functioning liver means that the vital chi, or energy, is
restricted, leading to depression, anxiety and lack of joy. For a list of
qualified TCM practitioners, write to the Chinese Herbal Medicine Register,
PO Box 400, Wembley, Middlesex, HA9 9NZ, enclosing a large self addressed
stamped envelope and a Pounds 1.50 cheque or postal order.
