FT  05 MAY 94 / Berlusconi to inherit economy on the mend: The incoming
government has room for manoeuvre
The incoming Italian government will inherit an economy showing timid signs
of recovery after two years of recession.
Coupled with the innate optimism of the Italian business community, Mr
Silvio Berlusconi's government will have a positive atmosphere in which to
frame economic policy.
Though the senior ranks of Confindustria, the industrialists' confederation,
have been careful to retain their distance from Mr Berlusconi in the media
magnate's new role as a politician, the rank-and-file membership openly
endorses him as able to head Italy's first genuinely 'pro-business'
government. They also consider it propitious, despite Mr Berlusconi's lack
of political experience, that he should be taking office at the moment of
recovery.
'I can see signs of the recovery written on the faces of our members,' says
Mr Stefano Micosi, Confindustria's head of research. However, he warns: 'The
recovery is still export-led; domestic demand remains weak and the
industrial recovery is patchy.'
Exports grew an average 18 per cent, with more than double that level to
newly industrialised countries, and the trend is continuing. Industries in
Lombardy and the Po Valley have begun to rebuild stocks and recommission
spare capacity. The south, meanwhile, is still gripped by recession, and
unemployment there is almost three times the national average of 10.7 per
cent.
Istat, the national statistics institute, pointing to a revised index of
industrial production, said output was still declining even in the first
three months of this year; the old index began to climb in the last quarter
of 1993.
The old index tends to square with the 0.3 per cent year-on-year fourth
quarter increase in GDP, which also finds confirmation in the official
monthly surveys of business and consumer confidence which bottomed out last
November. The key indices of business opinion for machine tools showed
domestic orders up 44 per cent in the first quarter compared with 1993.
In this uncertain climate of tentative recovery, Mr Carlo Azeglio Ciampi,
the outgoing prime minister, has been cautious. But last week at the annual
Turin motor show he declared: 'The recession is behind us.'
As a former governor of the Bank of Italy and having made economic
management a central pillar of his year-long premiership, Mr Ciampi has
every interest in demonstrating the worst is over without encouraging
overdue optimism.
But Mr Ciampi's audience in Turin, which had seen demand for cars drop 20
per cent in 1993, scented a change. The Fiat-dominated automotive industry
expects car production to increase 12 per cent this year.
Already Fiat shares on the Milan stock exchange have risen on hopes of the
automotive industry being the engine for recovery.
The stock market has witnessed an unprecedented boom since Mr Berlusconi's
right-wing Freedom Alliance won the general election at the end of March.
The lira has also recovered from nearly L1,000 against the D-Mark to L950.
This reflects confidence that the new government will favour business
against a background of continued low inflation (running at an annualised 4
per cent) and improvements in the balance of payments.
However, the Ciampi government's projections for 1.6 per cent growth this
year, drawn up last autumn for the 1994 budget, still seem optimistic. The
International Monetary Fund recently produced its own forecast of 1.1 per
cent against the 0.7 per cent negative growth of 1993.
The IMF, like the Bank of Italy, prefers to focus attention on unresolved
business: the inter-connected problems of the continuing large budget
deficit and the huge stock of state debt. The latest figures suggest a
combination of lower Treasury receipts in 1993, the slower than expected
growth in 1994 and heavy social security spending have undermined the hope
of reducing the budget deficit to 8.7 per cent of GDP, as planned.
The deficit looks set to remain around 10 per cent without remedial measures
and the primary surplus (the budgetary balance excluding interest payments
on debt) will be cut by two-thirds. Meanwhile the debt stock continues to
increase and is now close to 120 per cent of GDP.
As a condition of obtaining an Ecu8bn (Pounds 6.3bn) loan last year from the
EU, Italy undertook to reduce the budget deficit and conform to the
Maastricht treaty convergence criteria. This, coupled with the 1994 budget
already having been approved by parliament, places constraints on the extent
of initiatives by the incoming government.
Thus it would be surprising, and would be judged negatively by the markets,
if corrective measures were not introduced before the summer to hold the
budget deficit down to its planned levels of around L144,000bn (Pounds
60bn). Economists differ on the extent of the money needing to be found
either through spending cuts or new fiscal measures, or a combination of the
two. The amount varies between L5,000bn to L10,000bn.
However, Mr Berlusconi has to balance short-term remedial measures with a
more general consideration. Instinctively, he would like to give the economy
some stimulus to encourage the recovery, having promised to cut taxes and
provide 1m jobs. To achieve this, he will have to reach a clear
understanding with the unions, a good deal of luck.
Those close to the next government argue that the extra budget revenue now
needed can be raised by 'swinging the axe' at the enormous amount of fat
still contained in Italy's inefficient public sector. This is easier said
than done, given the inertia of Italy's bureaucracy. But whatever happens
the incoming government will seek to give itself space by blaming the
inheritance it has received.
