FT  27 JUL 94 / 'Nothing happened' over Whitewater
Mr Lloyd Cutler, the White House legal counsel, told Congress yesterday that
President Bill Clinton's close aides had breached no ethical standards
during discussions with government regulatory officials, in connection with
the savings and loan institution at the heart of the Whitewater affair.
He also asserted, in testimony to the House banking committee, that there
was no evidence that any regulatory agency had altered its approach as a
result of representations by White House officials. 'Nothing happened,' he
said bluntly.
'There were too many people involved in those discussions and some of those
discussions should not have occurred,' Mr Cutler said. It would have been
better if exchanges had been confined to legal counsel at the White House
and Treasury. Procedures were now in place to ensure this.
However, such was the media interest in Whitewater during last winter, it
was not unreasonable for those responsible for press relations at the White
House to try and find out exactly what was going on in the regulatory
agencies, he added, if only to prepare themselves to answer questions.
Mr Cutler's detailed testimony was given to the first congressional hearings
on the Whitewater affair, the complex tale of President and Mrs Clinton's
financial and land dealings in Arkansas in the 1970s and 1980s.
The counsel declined to criticise any individual, with the possible
exception, and then only by implication, of Mr Roger Altman, deputy
secretary of the Treasury, for having told a New York Times editor, before
informing the White House, that he would excuse himself from his savings and
loan regulatory duties. Mr Altman was then acting head of the Resolution
Trust Corporation, the federal agency formed to clear up the US savings and
loan mess of the 1980s.
Mr Cutler also addressed the question of Mr Clinton's own involvement in the
investigations of Madison Guaranty, the defunct Arkansas savings and loan
institution at the heart of the Whitewater affair. The president had
approached Mr Eugene Ludwig, comptroller of the currency, while both were at
a holiday retreat over the last New Year, and suggested a further talk.
Word got back to Mr Joel Klein, deputy White House legal counsel, who was
present at the same retreat. He promptly told the president it would be
better to seek advice from someone else. 'This brief encounter,' Mr Cutler
said, 'is hardly worth mentioning', though reports about it have appeared
recently in the media.
