FT  28 OCT 94 / Back on its feet, Argentina casts aside its financial props:
Menem's administration has certainly transformed the economy but the
emergence of a budget deficit is causing some concern
In seeking to explain why Argentina had recently turned down International
Monetary Fund loans worth Dollars 400m, President Carlos Menem chose the
image of a baby finding its feet. 'You've seen how a child is given a walker
to help him learn to walk. Well Argentina is already up and walking,' he
said. 'We simply did not need these credits.'
Other commentators, however, have speculated that Argentina chose to cut off
IMF assistance in order to avoid too close scrutiny of its public accounts,
particularly in relation to the recent emergence of a budget deficit.
'The withdrawal from the extended facility agreement, due to the
impossibility of meeting the goals for the public sector fiscal surplus,
revealed (brusquely for some) that, in the economic arena, a new era has
begun,' says a recent report from economic consultant Mr Rodriguez Giavarini
y Asociados.
After more than two years of being in the black and a 1994 first-half
primary surplus, excluding privatisations, of Dollars 2.4bn, Argentina's
fiscal position has begun to deteriorate. Earlier this week, Mr Domingo
Cavallo, the economy minister, announced that the third-quarter primary
surplus had shrunk to just Dollars 9.7m, representing a deficit of Dollars
665m after interest payments.
The announcement contributed to a one-day fall of 3.15 per cent on the
Merval selected share index. 'There are clouds on the horizon. What was a
surplus of nearly Dollars 500m a month is probably going to be a deficit
throughout the whole second half,' says Mr Javier Fraga, managing director
of the Argentine Institute of Capital Markets.
Much, though not all, of that weakening is related to social security
spending. But Mr Cavallo denies that monthly revenue shortfalls of about
Dollars 180m a month - provoked by the recent shift of 2m workers from a
pay-as-you-go system to a private capitalisation scheme - are to blame.
This funding gap was budgeted for, he says. What has come as a surprise has
been a series of court rulings in favour of retired people demanding higher
pensions. The court decisions, which Mr Cavallo believes may open the
floodgates for thousands of other claims, could add hundreds of millions of
dollars to government expenditure. They have also undermined the governing
Peronists' attempts to limit the pensions bill, which accounts for nearly
half the federal budget.
'If this spending continues we will have problems,' says Mr Cavallo, who has
sought to curb judges' generosity by raising the spectre of renewed
inflation should expenditure get out of hand. 'We have been using the
surplus of the first half to finance the Dollars 600m deficit of the third
quarter,' he says.
Mr Cavallo may find his efforts to put a lid on spending particularly
difficult given that general elections are only seven months away.
Provincial governors are not likely to curb their demands for extensive,
voter-friendly, public works programmes.
Difficulties have been compounded by a drop in the collection of value added
tax and customs revenue, partly as a result of tax rebate measures intended
to help exporters. In September, total tax collection fell by 3.4 per cent
against the same month in 1993.
Mr Cavallo is again unrepentant, saying that lowering payroll taxes is
essential to boost competitiveness. 'Of course it may look a bit risky
because, just on a purely fiscal evaluation, it could be safer not to reduce
tax rates and collect more revenue. . . . But we are convinced that every
time we create a surplus there will be more pressure to spend it.'
Nevertheless, the combination of falling income and higher expenditure has
forced Mr Cavallo to ast Congress to amend the 1994 budget, authorising
extra spending of Dollars 1bn-Dollars 1.5bn. He will also push for measures
aimed at limiting future pensions payouts, forcing 'an interpretation of the
law that is in line with what is feasible from a financial point of view'.
Says Mr Daniel Artana, economic consultant at the Foundation for Latin
American Economic Investigation: 'It is the first time that Cavallo has
retroactively changed the budget. This is a bad sign, but he has little
alternative.'
Mr Artana believes, however, that the government's difficulties are
temporary and not structural. 'We are in a more fragile situation than we
used to be, especially on the fiscal side. But everyone tends to exaggerate,
including Cavallo.'
Mr Miguel Angel Broda, head of the Broda economic consultancy, agrees that
it is important to keep things in perspective. Argentina is moving from one
of the strongest fiscal positions in the world to a slightly weaker one, he
says. The break with the IMF was almost inevitable, given that 'everybody
looking at the fiscal goals for 1994 (a total primary surplus of Dollars
3.9bn) knew that it was going to be difficult to meet the second-half
targets.'
Mr Fraga goes one further: 'I congratulate the government for seeking a
reasonable fiscal position and not the exaggerated one asked for by the
IMF.'
Mr Cavallo is not overly worried by the emergence of a deficit. 'We had
planned a half per cent surplus in 1994, but now we think that we will have
a balanced budget for the year.'
Mr Menem, too, displays confidence. 'We have only received congratulations
from the IMF,' he says. 'We are now a country that is growing, producing and
progressing.'
Certainly, few would dispute that Mr Menem's administration has successfully
hauled the country out of the economic ditch of instability and
hyperinflation. But now that Argentina is on its feet - and walking on its
own - all eyes will be watching to make sure that it does not stumble.
