FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (36):
Weak links mean big risks - System security / As increasing amounts of data
are moved around the world, the need to maintain security integrity has
become paramount
There is a direct relationship between the number of information tools used
by a company and the chances of its information system being insecure.
A singleton PC used at home can be the victim of the occasional virus, which
is often irritating to the user but rarely fatal to the system or the
information. For a company with multiple, linked networks of PCs,
workstations, departmental servers and enterprise repositories, however, the
potential risks can border on the incalculable.
The PC has moved from being little more than a toy used for tactical
personal productivity applications to become one of the key strategic tools
for delivering meaningful information to users. As such it has moved
centre-stage in the on-going struggle to keep information secure and systems
up and running.
The problem is, of course, that the PC's history contains nothing to
associate it with the concept of security. As security consultant, Robert
Schifreen, suggested, even DOS, the PC's native operating system, can be
readily re-written to make the machines a source of secure information.
'For example, it is possible to embed code in the operating system that will
log all keystrokes made on a PC,' he says. 'In that way, log-in sequences
and passwords can be recorded for later use.'
As increasing amounts of sensitive data are moved around the world using
datacommunications technologies, the need to maintain security and integrity
becomes paramount. This not only affects how users should view the weak
links in their information systems - predominantly the PCs being used - but
also security at a higher level.
Until now this has started to look like a problem solved. The US Government
is, however, currently considering throwing what many see as a large spanner
in the works, in the form of what is generally referred to as the Clipper
Chip technology.
Currently, many companies regularly employ a data encryption technology
known as DES (the Data Encryption System). This is one of several
alternatives that are, ironically, published specifications. This would seem
to degrade their value, but as Schifreen put it: 'Everyone knows how DES
works, but it is not easy to crack. It can be done, but it would need a team
of programmers a year and a Cray supercomputer to do it. By being a
published specification everyone knows the weaknesses of DES and works to
plug them.'
The US Government is currently considering an alternative to these
encryption systems, based around a hardware chip, known as the Clipper Chip,
which would contain the encryption algorithm. A company using the chip would
then be able to pass encrypted data to any other using the same system.
What has upset users, according to Schifreen, is the fact that the US
Government is considering passing use of this CIA-developed encryption
technology into law. All US datacommunications users would then be legally
obliged to employ Clipper, which would mean that recipients around the world
would also be obliged to use it. What makes the situation worse is the fact
that Clipper is a proprietary system, and that the CIA has written a back
door into the technology allowing information to be decrypted.
The fear is that, either through theft, or the actions of a disgruntled
employee, this code could fall into the wrong hands. Another fear is that,
because it is from the CIA, the backdoor code may be made available to other
national authorities.
Perhaps most important of all, however, is that because it is a proprietary
solution, its method of working and its weaknesses remain unknown. As all
encryption systems are ultimately breakable, this is being seen as a serious
potential weakness of the system.
As PCs become more prevalent as a strategic tool, other weaknesses may serve
to compound the potential problems of Clipper encryption. For example,
access control on PCs is still a weak area, though there are now products
available to solve the problem, if companies are willing to make the
investments necessary. This may be significant, for the most comprehensive
solutions can cost up to Pounds 1,000 per PC.
Many new PCs come with access control available as standard, but these tend
to be simple password systems where the password is stored in a
battery-backed CMOS memory. Removing the battery, therefore, will normally
circumvent the password.
Investment in security is a key factor not always considered by users. This
starts with education about the simplest access issues. For example, it is
rare for thought to be given to individual passwords and most people make
obvious choices. 'Many users choose words like FRED, SECRET, PASSWORD and
LETMEIN,' Schifreen said, 'which are easy to guess.'
Even Unix systems, increasingly popular both as workstations and servers,
suffer access control weaknesses. For example, there is a well-known bug in
Unix Mail which will allow embedded code in a mail message, which runs when
the message is read. The code can, for example, request the system to
transmit the receiver's password file back to the sender.
It can also be used to transmit a complete system's password listing. This
contains user IDs and their apparently safely encrypted passwords. There
are, however, shareware products available - such as Websters, a program
with 234,000 unique English words - which, when passed through the Unix
encryption algorithm, will produce a table against which the encrypted
passwords can be compared, and cracked. Using numerals in passwords usually
helps solve this problem.
Many such routes into systems can be trapped with sufficient thought and
planning by users. For example, an increasing number of these programs are
now available from Bulletin Board Systems, so access by staff to such
systems must be closely monitored, particularly on the larger networks. One
way of doing this is to audit the applications being run.
There is now a new class of application appearing that scans all the disks
on a network to locate and report on all applications found. This should
include those that are hidden behind filenames that do not include the
standard applications file extensions such as . exe, .com and . bas.
In this way, systems managers can know the location of all approved
applications, as well as those that are not approved. The benefits of this
are two-fold. Not only are potential security risk applications identified.
It also ensures that no illegal copies of applications are being used,
preventing possible legal action by the application's authors.
