FT  21 MAR 94 / Dublin willing to back a temporary IRA ceasefire
The Irish government sought to breathe fresh life into the Northern Ireland
peace process yesterday by indicating that a temporary ceasefire by the IRA
would be welcomed in Dublin.
Speaking on Irish radio, Mr Dick Spring, the foreign minister, said a
temporary ceasefire would be 'a step in the right direction'.
The Irish government's decision to encourage a temporary ceasefire contrasts
with the previous approach in both London and Dublin of concentrating on the
prospects for a permanent cessation of violence.
Mr Spring said the Irish government would 'encourage' the IRA to move to a
permanent end to violence, and 'would want to build upon' a temporary
ceasefire.
His comments followed weekend reports of an interview given to New Century,
a leftwing British magazine, in which he appeared to suggest that a
temporary ceasefire could help to break the deadlock in the peace process.
In remarks intended to reassure unionist opinion, Mr Spring said Dublin's
view on the timing of talks with the republican movement remained 'very
firm'.
'I have to repeat that we will not negotiate with the IRA/Sinn Fein as long
as they support violence. If they want to enter the political process, there
has to be a permanent cessation of violence and a very firm declaration to
that effect,' he said.
That formula fits in with the consistent approach by the British government
since the publication of the British-Irish Downing Street declaration on
Northern Ireland in December.
But Dublin's increased willingness to welcome a temporary ceasefire appeared
to take the British government by surprise.
The Northern Ireland Office was unwilling to endorse Mr Spring's views.
Officials would say only that Sinn Fein could enter exploratory talks with
the British government within three months of a permanent cessation of
violence.
In the New Century interview, parts of which were published yesterday in The
Observer, Mr Spring appeared to indicate that a temporary ceasefire could be
built upon 'without making concessions' to the IRA or Sinn Fein, its
political wing.
In the interview, given two weeks ago, Mr Spring said the republican
movement's strategy appeared to be to offer a temporary cessation of
violence 'in order to sit down round the table with other nationalist
parties'. He said this would 'pose a bit of a dilemma'.
The apparent contradiction in Dublin's position would seem to lie in a
semantic distinction being drawn by Dublin between 'talks' and
'negotiations'.
An Irish government spokesman was unable to confirm or deny that talks,
either directly or indirectly with Sinn Fein - as distinct from negotiations
 -could take place after a temporary IRA ceasefire.
The IRA admitted yesterday carrying out the attack on Crossmaglen police and
army post, which seriously injured a policeman and brought down an army
helicopter on Saturday night.
