FT  05 JUL 94 / Doctors will hold summit on reforms
Leaders of Britain's doctors are to meet later this year to discuss the
future of healthcare against the background of continuing anxiety about the
government's National Health Service reforms.
The meeting would be the first such gathering of leaders of the health
professions for more than 30 years.
The undiminished level of concern about aspects of the reforms, three years
after they were introduced, was demonstrated at the annual conference of the
British Medical Association which opened in Birmingham yesterday.
Dr Sandy Macara, chairman of the BMA council, received a standing ovation
when he spoke of a mood of despair, alienation and demoralisation in the
NHS, and announced the BMA's 'unswerving determination to reform the
reforms'.
The planned meeting will be attended by representatives of the Royal Medical
Colleges, deans of university medical schools, representatives of the
General Medical Council and BMA leaders.
It will consider the implications of a range of radical changes - such as
the shift of much treatment from hospitals to family doctors' surgeries and
patients' homes - that are starting to transform traditional patterns of
healthcare. The meeting will provide a unique opportunity for many of the
profession's leading figures to consider the effects of the government's
market-style reforms.
Dr Macara told the conference that as a result of the reforms, co-operation
had been supplanted by commercial competition in 'an uncontrolled,
ill-managed internal market' driven by the 'perverse philosophy' of winners
and losers.
Business plans now overrode clinical priority and treatment, except in
emergencies, had become a national and local lottery. There was no longer a
single national service but 100 purchasing consortia and 400 provider units
battling for survival.
BMA leaders say Mrs Virginia Bottomley, the health secretary, and other
ministers have shown increased willingness to meet them during the past
year. But they are frustrated that, even when they believe they have
specific evidence of problems - such as complaints of patients of
fund-holding doctors receiving preferential treatment at hospitals -
ministers have always defended the reforms rather than taken action.
Dr Macara yesterday set out a seven point plan on which the BMA will build a
campaign to reform the reforms.
This includes finding better ways of determining healthcare priorities more
clearly, better assessment of needs and outcome of treatment, restoring
strategic planning which the BMA feels has been lost in the reforms and
improving co-operation between purchasers and providers of healthcare.
