FT  07 MAR 94 / Freight companies to shun Channel tunnel
Transport companies are hostile to the Channel tunnel and are unlikely to
make much use of it for freight shipments, says a survey published today.
Only a quarter of British freight companies questioned thought the tunnel
would have a positive effect on their business.
The poll of 102 senior executives was carried out in January by MORI for
Scania, a manufacturer of heavy trucks. It found 62 per cent of transport
companies believed their drivers would prefer to stick with the ferries,
while 84 per cent thought the ferries would offer better facilities than the
tunnel.
'We've managed perfectly well without the tunnel; I don't see it making a
big difference except for the novelty value,' said one transport company
executive.
Mr Dieter Merz, managing director of Scania (Great Britain), said:
'Eurotunnel has predicted it will carry more than 8m tonnes of freight in
its first full year of operation and its aim is to take a significant share
of the ferries' freight business. Our survey shows it may be in for a
surprise.'
The running of freight services through the tunnel was intended to start
today but has been postponed until some time in March or April. Difficulties
in completing tests and safety checks have been blamed.
Only 44 per cent of freight operators questioned in January felt industry
needed a tunnel to make shipments to the Continent. And only 16 per cent of
transport companies believed the tunnel would be cheaper to use than the
ferries.
Shippers wishing to use the tunnel will negotiate individual rates with
Eurotunnel, which will operate shuttle services between Folkestone and
Calais. Only one in five companies said it would use the tunnel if costs
were higher than for the ferries.
'The tunnel will need to set competitive prices for freight to attract
haulage companies away from a ferry service which seems to be more than
satisfying their needs,' the survey said.
Transport companies saw the main advantage of the tunnel as speed but very
few executives mentioned the other benefits which the tunnel claims to
provide: reliability, frequency and convenience.
The survey, which was carried out before the launch of Eurotunnel's
advertising campaign aimed at freight carriers but after extensive general
publicity, showed 64 per cent of respondents knew little or nothing about
how tunnel services would operate. Fifty-eight per cent thought - wrongly -
that they could reserve a place for their trucks on a train.
French transport companies had given more thought to using the tunnel and 55
per cent thought it would have a positive effect on business.
The Channel Tunnel: Sink or Swim? Scania (GB), Tongwell, Milton Keynes, MK15
8HB. Free.
