FT  05 OCT 94 / Business and the Environment: Power to the petrol - John
Griffiths finds battery cars cannot keep up
In 2015, most cars will still be powered by conventional petrol or diesel
engines, with battery-powered cars and alternative fuels relegated to the
'politically correct fringe', according to a research report from The
Economist Intelligence Unit.
It also takes a strongly pessimistic view of the prospects for
hydrogen-powered cars, on which several leading manufacturers are working as
one of the most promising alternatives to battery vehicles in the search for
environmentally 'clean' private transport.
The 200-page study* appears to reinforce the arguments of the US 'big three'
car makers, General Motors, Ford and Chrysler, that electric vehicle
technology is not sufficiently advanced for viable battery cars to go on
sale in California in 1998 in line with state environmental legislation.
Under directives drawn up by the Californian Air Resources Board (Carb), and
which are being copied by some other US states, 2 per cent of a car maker's
Californian sales must be zero-emission vehicles (ZEVs) in 1998, rising to
10 per cent by 2007.
The penalty for non-compliance could be exclusion from the Californian new
car market, which with well over 1m sales a year is bigger than that of many
countries.
No mainstream car maker could contemplate such a prospect, so all are
developing electric cars to meet the deadline, despite reservations about
their cost and whether they will have adequate range for the sprawling
greater Los Angeles area, where California's air pollution problems are
concentrated.
The EIU report concentrates on what it describes as the 'extreme
inefficiency' of batteries as a means of storing energy, maintaining that
150 conventional lead acid batteries, weighing several tonnes, would be
needed to store the equivalent energy of a tankful of petrol.
Even the most advanced forms of battery now at the research and development
stage would only improve the situation by a factor of three, according to
the report. 'But each of these batteries also suffers from technical
problems of one kind or another, as well as from very high cost.'
However, despite many months of lobbying by the motor industry, Carb and
other states' clean-air authorities are showing little inclination to dilute
or delay their legislation.
And with no hydrogen-fuelled or other alternative zero-emissions vehicle on
the immediate horizon, the Carb directive is effectively ordering
manufacturers to produce battery-powered cars or EVs (electric vehicles).
However, it cannot order motorists to buy them at prices which -
unsubsidised - could be double that of a conventional family car. So most
initial production will go to concerns such as power-generating utilities
with a vested interest in the vehicles' long-term success. Sales to private
motorists will have to be subsidised by the conventional cars their makers
sell in much larger numbers.
General Motors is providing the most visible evidence that electric cars
will be available from 1998.
It has just finished building a fleet of 30 models based on the Impact, a
prototype unveiled about three years ago. The fleet is starting trials,
under a programme called PrEView, in Los Angeles and will be evaluated,
along with prototype systems for recharging the vehicles, by 1,000 drivers
of widely varying types and needs over the next two years.
Ken Baker, vice-president of GM's research and development centre, insists
that 'GM wants electric vehicles to be a marketplace success. The PrEView
drive will help us understand the potential EV customer and help take us one
step closer to making EVs a reality.'
All other problems such as cost apart, the programme should go a long way
towards establishing whether the cars' estimated average range of 70 miles
using lead acid batteries - rather than the more advanced, costly and
commercially not yet available nickel cadmium ones of the prototype - really
is of any practical use to most Los Angelinos.
*New Generation Engines. Economist Intelligence Unit, 15 Regent Street,
London SW1Y 4LR. Pounds 495.
