FT  16 SEP 94 / UK Company News: French purchase cuts Courtaulds Textiles
Entering the competitive French hosiery market has cost Courtaulds Textiles,
the clothing and fabrics group, Pounds 7.4m in the half year to June 30 and
helped to depress pre-tax profits by 26 per cent from Pounds 13.7m to Pounds
10.1m.
Mr Noel Jervis, chief executive, said that in spite of the losses incurred
by businesses acquired from Hartstone in March, including Cogetex of France,
he was pleased with their progress.
'They have performed in line with our expectations,' he said. 'The recent
hosiery acquisition is highly seasonal and the loss incurred was as
anticipated.'
The months consolidated by Courtaulds were the French businesses' worst
trading period, he said. From March to June, they achieved on average just
12 per cent of annual sales, whereas the bulk arose in the autumn and winter
months. 'It's a bit like selling fireworks and Christmas cards,' he said.
The heavy second half bias meant that predicting the outcome for the year at
this stage was difficult, although the businesses were expected to
contribute a profit. Courtaulds said it would update shareholders in
December when trading patterns would be clearer.
Excluding the effects of acquisitions, disposals and other one-off charges,
profits on a like-for-like basis rose by 22 per cent to Pounds 14.6m. The
profits improvement was largely due to lower interest costs relating to the
underlying businesses, and reduced reorganisation charges.
Like-for-like operating profits before reorganisation costs were 1 per cent
down at Pounds 16.9m.
Sales rose 10 per cent at Pounds 463m, including Pounds 15.3m from
acquisitions, against Pounds 422.5m, including Pounds 600,000 from
discontinued activities.
All divisions returned improved profits before interest charges, with the
exception of branded clothing which fell into loss. This included the
Hartstone businesses as well as Aristoc, which was affected by problems at a
factory and Georges Rech, which suffered from difficult trading.
Mr Jervis said the problems with Aristoc were now 'well over' and it was
expected to make a 'respectable profit in the second half. Georges Rech had
been restructured, but trading continued difficult.
The dividend was increased by 4.25 per cent to 4.9p (4.7p) although earnings
fell by 33 per cent to 7p (10.4p).
COMMENT
Courtaulds may be optimistic about its future in Europe but the market is
not going to take any chances until that December trading statement. While
encouraged by noises that Sara Lee may be retreating on its aggressive price
cutting campaign, there are a few too many burnt fingers out there after
last years profits warning. The biggest factor in Courtaulds' favour, for
the short-term, anyway, is its management. They have done well in recession
and the Hartstone purchase does have considerable recovery potential.
Forecasts this year are for about Pounds 45m, putting the shares on a
prospective p/e of about 17. This premium appears justified given the
opportunities for recovery in Europe.
