FT  06 JAN 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Congress 'still needs
convincing' on Gatt
Mr Mike Espy, US agriculture secretary, cast doubt on the acceptance by the
US Congress of the recent General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade settlement
yesterday when he said its passage would not be 'automatic'.
'I don't think we need to add or subtract anything to the basic Gatt
agreement, but we need to explain it to Congress,' he told an audience of
British farmers at the Oxford Farming Conference.
While the deal presented a good opportunity for US farmers to expand their
markets overseas, congress needed to be convinced of the benefits, Mr Espy
explained. He said, however, that last minute changes to the Blair House
accord, which allow the US to subsidise an additional 7.4m tonnes of wheat
exports in the six years from 1995, would help to win congressional support
for the deal.
Modifications to the Blair House agreement will see the US Export
Enhancement Programme budget rise by Dollars 694m in 1995 from the planned
level of about Dollars 1bn.
'The US will continue to compete toe to toe on subsidies with other large
exporters which are doing the same thing,' Mr Espy said. 'I hope the Gatt
agreement will be passed through congress, but until it does we must
maintain our levels of competitiveness whether through export enhancement or
other measures.'
However, Mr Espy said he saw the handwriting on the wall for export
subsidies: 'We will join hands with others to go down the slippery slope of
subsidy reduction together,' he told the conference.
Mr Espy was met with a fairly frosty reception from some UK farmers, who saw
their livelihoods threatened by falling support prices.
'The Gatt deal is a major threat to European farmers and you couldn't care a
fig about us,' one producer commented. 'Farmers here are frightened of a
life without subsidies after the privileged world we've lived in,' said
another.
Conference organisers admitted that Mr Espy's bodyguards had feared for his
safety amid 500 British agriculturalists.
UK producers are also suspicious of moves by the US this year to abandon
acreage reduction programmes while European farmers must set-aside up to 15
per cent of their land. US producers are currently being urged to grow more
to make up for a shortfall in output caused by last year's massive flooding.
Mr Espy said that 21m acres of farmland in the Midwest had been under water
with 8m acres totally destroyed because it was covered with six to seven
feet of silt and sand.
