FT  11 JUL 94 / Kim Il-sung: war hero, skilled politician and tyrant: A look
at the career of the 'Great Leader' who exploited North Koreans' xenophobia
The death of 82-year-old North Korean President Kim Il-sung ends the longest
rule of any political leader in the 20th century. His durability was based
not only on the brute force of the authoritarian regime that he created, but
also reflected his consummate political skills.
Mr Kim's strength rested on his ability to appeal to Korea's strong national
pride and his rule was deeply-rooted in Korean tradition. His policy of
juche (self-reliance), which gradually replaced Communism as North Korea's
main ideology, was based on Korean resentment against centuries of foreign
intervention.
In his 46 years as leader, he manipulated Confucian principles of filial
piety to promote his own role as Great Leader and to establish a dynastic
succession for his son, Mr Kim Jong-il.
But Mr Kim's passing is likely to prove it was the power of his personality,
bolstered by mass adoration expressed in semi-religious public ceremonies,
that was the glue that held North Korea together.
His absence will expose more clearly the faults of his policy of xenophobic
nationalism, which carries with it the seeds of North Korea's own
destruction. His efforts to create a self-sufficient Korea have taken a
heavy toll on the economy, apparently heading toward collapse.
Mr Kim's nationalist attitudes were formed in his youth under Japanese
colonial rule. He was born as Kim Song-ju on April 15, 1912, two years after
Korea was annexed by Japan. His family moved when he was seven from his
birthplace near Pyongyang to Manchuria, northern China, where he became
involved in Communist organisations in his late teens.
Mr Kim became a genuine hero of the Korean independence movement, commanding
units ranging from a handful of soldiers to 300-man forces within Manchuria
and along the Korean border. But by 1941, Japanese military pressure forced
him to withdraw to the Soviet far east.
He used his Soviet military contacts to gain a leadership position in North
Korea Communist party by December 1945 and two months later was chairman of
the North Korean provisional government.
Mr Kim introduced popular measures in late 1940s including land reform and
nationalisation of the mostly Japanese-owned industry. He become the prime
minister of North Korea when the country was officially established in
September 1948 and chairman of the ruling Korean Workers' Party a year
later, securing a dominant political position.
His main goal was then to reunite North and South Korea. He deftly played
off the Soviet Union against China to gain the support of both for an
invasion of the South. The gamble seemed reasonable, as the southern
military was weak and ill-equipped, while the US had indicated it would not
come to Seoul's defence.
But the gamble failed disasterously after the US decided to intervene in its
first main armed confrontation with the Communist bloc.
With the end of the Korean war in 1953, Mr Kim embarked on a Stalinist
policy of forced agricultural collectivisation and creation of heavy
industry. The programme relied heavily on Soviet economic aid, including
supply of plant facilities and machinery, but it initially provided the
North with faster growth than the South.
A critical turning point came with the Sino-Soviet split in 1961 and the
Soviet retreat in the Cuban missile crisis a year later. Both events
convinced Mr Kim he could not rely on either Beijing or Moscow for his and
North Korea's survival.
He began constructing a fortress state that would increasingly divert
massive resources from the rest of the economy. He built a domestic arms
industry and created one of the largest armies in the world. It was during
this period that North Korea laid the foundation for a nuclear weapons
programme that would fruition almost 30 years later.
By the early 1970s, North Korea was losing its economic race with the South,
which had embarked on its own military-led industrialisation programme in
the early 1960s. Pyongyang made one last effort to import western technology
to replace outdated Soviet and Chinese machinery, but subsequently defaulted
on international bank loans used to buy the equipment.
This was accompanied by political repression, with an estimated 100,000
persons being placed in prison camps. North Korean terrorist activities also
multiplied.
But in the late 1980s, North Korea began tentative moves to open itself to
the outside world. in 1990 it joined the UN and the prime ministers of the
two Koreas began meeting regularly. Progress was capped by the signing of
non-aggression and non-nuclear pacts with the South in late 1991.
The North's gradual opening was forced by the collapse of Soviet bloc, which
deprived Pyongyang of important export markets and source of vital oil and
food imports. The economy began shrinking at an annual rate of 5 per cent
after 1989.
North Korea's threat last year to pull out of the nuclear non-proliferation
was regarded as an attempt to win Western concessions and Mr Kim appeared to
be achieving his goal of gaining US support when he died.
