FT  22 AUG 94 / Arts: Young stars out on an Edinburgh night - Richard
Fairman assesses the European Community Youth Orchestra
With the arrival of the European Community Youth Orchestra the platform at
the Usher Hall was a blaze of colour. The twelve flags of the member
countries were on display and regulation attire for the ladies of the
orchestra was bright blue dresses and stoles decorated with European stars,
as though each had been wrapped in the Union flag before coming on.
What a lot of blue there was, too. About three-quarters of the ECYO's
present membership are women, the heavy brass and double-bass sections
seeming to be the only remaining bastions of male domination. No doubt the
administration wants as many youngsters as possible to have a chance of
taking part and the size of the orchestra is huge, including so many string
players that there was barely room for them on the stage.
The orchestra's summer tour is split into two parts: smaller venues are
getting a Bartok and Mahler programme under James Judd (the ECYO's Artistic
Director), while major festivals such as Salzburg and the Proms warrant
Carlo Maria Giulini, who is conducting Brahms symphonies. For Giulini, a
visit to the Edinburgh Festival must seem a sentimental affair, as this was
the scene of his British debut back in 1955.
Forty years on, his conducting style has become more notable for its gravity
of expression than any youthful spontaneity. With the massive army of
strings at his disposal, these were always going to be weighty performances
anyway. It would be rash to claim that the ECYO is up to professional
standards (student bands rarely manage to produce a sophisticated quality of
sound and there were some raw noises here) but it manages an impressive
unanimity of ensemble, given the numbers involved.
Indeed, there are major orchestras which might be less responsive to
Giulini's indulgent phrasing of the Second Symphony. His Brahms now goes
very slowly and the richly lyrical playing that he likes is not enough to
make up for a debilitating lack of momentum. In the Fourth Symphony, there
was some good solo playing to hold the attention - first flute and clarinet
both wanting to make real music - and Giulini's muscular rhythms also
generated more tension. The end of the symphony was awesome and powerful.
After Edinburgh and a Saturday night appearance at the Proms, the ECYO is
heading off to Germany and the Netherlands. Presumably the young musicians
of four other countries will soon be hoping to join, which will mean still
higher standards and even more stars on the designer evening wear.
