FT  07 OCT 94 / World Trade News: Support grows for free trade in Apec -
Indonesia's Suharto emerges as a surprise advocate of liberalisation
The leaders of Asia-Pacific nations, including President Bill Clinton, could
make a public commitment to free trade in the region by the year 2020 or
even 2010 when they attend a summit in Indonesia next month, according to
officials of several governments supporting the idea.
The proposal for a bold statement of intent from the leaders of the
17-nation Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation forum (Apec), who meet next
month in Bogor, near Jakarta, is broadly in line with the recommendations of
an Apec 'eminent persons group' (EPG).
Supporters of rapid liberalisation have found an unexpected ally in
Indonesia's President Suharto, who has surprised other south-east Asian
governments and some of his own ministers by declaring his wholehearted
support for free trade as the Apec summit approaches. Indonesia has lowered
tariffs and reduced non-tariff barriers in recent years, but it still has
one of the most protected economies in the region.
'We have high hopes that the forthcoming meeting in Bogor will produce
fundamental agreements on the type of co-operation between Apec members and
on the rate of trade and investment liberalisation among us,' Mr Suharto
said in a speech yesterday.
In a report in August the EPG urged Apec to complete trade liberalisation by
2020; it also said economically advanced Apec members should eliminate their
trade barriers more quickly than developing or newly-industrialised nations.
Although they have reservations about the EPG report, the US and Australia
are among the most prominent supporters of a target date for free trade.
Malaysia, on the other hand, is opposed to the idea, arguing that Apec risks
being dominated by the US and should remain an informal consultative
organisation; Dr Mahathir Mohamad, Malaysian prime minister, refused to
attend the first Apec summit in Seattle last year.
Apec - whose members yesterday reiterated their support for global trade
liberalisation and the formation of the World Trade Organisation - comprises
the US, Japan and China, as well as Thailand, the Philippines, Indonesia,
Singapore, Brunei, Malaysia, South Korea, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Australia, New
Zealand, Papua-New Guinea, Canada and Mexico. Chile is due to join next
month.
At an Apec ministers' meeting in Jakarta yesterday, Mr Bob McMullan,
Australian trade minister, said that the EPG report was a matter for debate
but that there was support for a declaration of principle on free trade by a
specific date.
'It's more likely than not that there will be an agreement about a timetable
for trade liberalisation at the Bogor meeting,' he told reporters.
However, critics of Mr Suharto, who is 73, say he is more interested in
hosting a memorable summit and leaving his mark on world affairs than in the
reality of free trade. His new allies respond that they would rather applaud
his change of heart than question the motives behind it.
