FT  11 JUN 94 / Government backs plan for Hualon Ulster plant: Executives
defend Taiwan group's reputation
The government yesterday fully endorsed the controversial plan by Hualon
Corporation of Taiwan to build a Pounds 160m textile plant outside Belfast,
but emphasised that it might withhold grant aid if the project failed to
match the owner's pledges.
An agreement paving the way for the start of construction in the next three
months was signed in Belfast yesterday between Hualon and the province's
Industrial Development Board. A parallel ceremony was held in Taiwan.
Hualon executives took the opportunity to defend both the company's
reputation and its ambitious plan to build its first manufacturing unit
outside Asia. The plant, which will supply synthetic fibre to low-cost
clothing manufacturers in Europe, is intended to provide products to compete
against imports from the Far East.
Doubts about the 1.5m sq ft plant arose after disclosures of court
proceedings against two Hualon executives over alleged share fraud. Other
textile makers have also queried the company's ability to succeed in a
European market suffering from overcapacity, and challenged Hualon's
forecast of 1,800 new jobs.
In Taiwan, Mr Oung Ta-Ming - the multi-millionaire who controls the Hualon
family empire from behind the scenes - made an unscheduled appearance
half-way through the ceremonies. He referred all business-related inquiries
to company executives, saying: 'I don't know  - you have to ask them. They
tell me what they are doing and I say okay.'
Hualon's president, Mr Liang Ching-hsiung, said the Northern Ireland project
was intended to upgrade product standards and to gain a foothold in Europe.
The investment would be made directly from the parent company in Taiwan, but
the group's unlisted Malaysian arm would play an important role in the
project, as its operations were similar to those planned for Belfast, Mr
Liang said.
In Belfast, Mr Andrew Oung, vice-chairman of Hualon, rejected suggestions
that the company's production and job forecasts were over-ambitious and
insisted that the recent court cases had no bearing on the company's
standing. He said Hualon was 'a decent company' and the allegations against
two of its executives had failed to harm its stock market standing in Asia.
Mr Tim Smith, Northern Ireland industry minister, said he had 'every
confidence' in the project.
He emphasised the phased nature of the nine-year project and said the Pounds
61m grant aid would depend on Hualon's objectives being met at each stage.
About 10 per cent of the total grant aid is related to job creation.
Hualon breaks ground for project, Page 7
