FT  12 DEC 94 / Escape from the scrapheap: Motoko Rich on how Workstart
helps the long-term unemployed by paying subsidies to employers
When Mr Mike Taylor went to Devon Waste Management's site in Plymouth for an
interview at its revamped recycling centre last August he was not really
expecting a job.
He is a former dockyard and city council employee and has been unemployed
for nine years, during which he had only been asked to four interviews.
'I never thought I would work again,' he said. 'You wouldn't, not after nine
years.'
But Devon Waste Management took him on and he has been sorting garden waste
for compost. Mr Taylor said he was delighted at the chance to work again.
He was one of six people hired by the company in August as a result of
Workstart, a pilot scheme to help the long-term unemployed back to work.
In the Budget Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, said the scheme would be
expanded in further trials around the country and promised to allocate
Pounds 5.5m in 1995-96 to create 5,000 jobs. This week an independent
evaluation of the scheme is expected to be published by the Institute for
Employment Studies.
Under the scheme, which has been tried out since last year in Devon and
Cornwall, East Kent, south and south-west London, and Tyneside, employers
are given a subsidy of Pounds 60 a week for 26 weeks per candidate, and
Pounds 30 a week for a further 26 weeks. Anyone who is hired under Workstart
must have been unemployed for two years or more.
Between June last year and this month the Department of Employment invested
Pounds 3.4m in the project and filled 1,474 places.
In Plymouth, identified by the government as a deprived inner-city area, the
unemployment rate is 10.4 per cent in a population of 250,000. With
industrial work at the city's naval dockyards shrinking every year companies
such as Toshiba, British Aerospace, Plessy and GEC have been unable to take
up the slack in the labour market.
The employment service for the area estimates that about 19.3 per cent of
its unemployed have been on the dole for more than two years. For many of
them Workstart has been the first government scheme that has actually led to
a job.
Ms Pat Stratton, a Workstart receptionist since September at Fearbuster
Business Centre, a government funded training centre in Plymouth, said she
tried other government job-search assistance programmes while she was
unemployed for two years.
Other schemes such as Employment Training and Job Clubs, designed to give
the unemployed basic job-hunting skills, were 'utter rubbish'. She said: 'I
used to sit in a room and just drink coffee and smoke all day. We got Pounds
18 extra a week for that.'
After two years of applying for 'stacks' of jobs, she went to Fearbuster to
train in office computing skills. When its manager, Mr Tom Harvey-Robinson,
heard about the Workstart subsidy he offered her a job as a receptionist and
conference organiser.
The weekly payments also helped Devon Waste Management, which is part of
Devon County Council, to expand its recycling business. But Ms Sandra
Craddock, personnel manager, said the subsidy did not influence the
company's hiring decisions inordinately. She said: 'We would have taken the
six on anyway. The kind of people we were looking for matched the people on
the scheme.'
Ms Frances Hart, Workstart co-ordinator for Plymouth and Torbay, said Devon
Waste Management, a relatively small business with low-skilled jobs, was the
kind of company the scheme targeted.
She said: 'Small businesses are more open to funding and are more flexible
about taking on someone who has been unemployed for more than two years.
There is a great psychological barrier that employers have in taking on the
long-term unemployed.'
Fuelserve, a fuel and lubricant distributor for Esso based in Plymouth,
hired two telephone sales employees through Workstart. Mr Tony Jackson,
managing director, said the subsidy helped the company overcome its
prejudice against the long-term unemployed.
He said: 'Without that cash incentive it would be another mark against a
person who had been out of work for a long time. It is easier to take
someone who has only been unemployed for less than six months because they
have not got out of the habit of work.'
