FT  22 SEP 94 / Political Notebook: Dodging the political realities
No one, least of all Mr Tony Blair, will be surprised by the apparent fall
in Labour's lead in the opinion polls. In relative terms the opposition
always fares badly during parliament's summer break. The Blair bubble was
destined to burst.
The latest snapshots of public opinion should inject a dose of realism into
politics during the distinctly surreal world of the autumn conference
season. The next general election is at least two years off. Labour needed
reminding that the result is not pre-ordained.
The precise voting intention figures are unimportant. Take account of all
the technical adjustments the pollsters make these days and a Friday night
vox-pop in the local pub provides as accurate a picture.
In broad terms where we stand is as follows: the electorate is still
bitterly resentful about the pain inflicted on them by the recession. They
feel suspicious of the present and insecure about the future. Their anger
over tax increases is matched by concern over crime and dismay over the
state of the health and education services. Fewer than a third can bring
themselves to admit they will vote Conservative next time.
Labour is still way out in front. The late Mr John Smith offered solid
reassurance. Mr Blair promises excitement alongside the responsibility. Half
the electorate says today it would vote Labour if there were a general
election tomorrow.
But that judgment - as anyone in the pub will tell you - is only
half-formed. The voters like Mr Blair, but many are not at all sure about
the rest of the Labour party. The unions are down but not out. The left may
be biding its time. The new leader must prove in Blackpool next month that
he lives as comfortably with his own party as with the wider electorate.
This is not a static picture. The opinion polls will be volatile, but -
barring another bout of self-destructive panic in the Tory party (and that
can never be ruled out) - the government's underlying position should begin
to consolidate and then improve. The first economic recovery in living
memory which is not being driven by a housing boom will take a long time to
deliver political rewards. The government will discover that the punters
quite like a burst of the sort of inflation that puts Pounds 20,000 on the
value of the average semi.
But falling unemployment and modest improvements in living standards should
allow Mr John Major to start building on the core Tory vote. He understands
the urgency. If Mr Blair is still 20 points ahead a year from now the
Conservatives will be looking for another leader.
It is on this political landscape - a strong Labour party and a Tory
government that is patently battered but cannot yet be declared beaten -
that Mr Paddy Ashdown has been attempting to reposition the Liberal
Democrats.
His fear is the obvious one: that the two-party squeeze will leave the
Liberal Democrats as the 15-per-cent party. That need not be disastrous.
Stronger regional bases should mean it can use its votes more efficiently.
Party strategists plan to concentrate all its resources in perhaps 70 or 80
marginal seats at Westminster. The third party historically has prospered
from an anti-Conservative swing.
But to win the votes they need in Tory-held seats the Liberal Democrats need
to be credible and coherent. Mr Ashdown has probably overreacted to the
votes in Brighton this week to decriminalise cannabis and to back a minimum
wage. He is right to be deeply concerned about the party's failure to
present an intelligible economic strategy. His colleagues are dismayed at
the way Mr Malcolm Bruce mishandled his debut as Treasury spokesman. More
seriously, many in the party have not grasped the basic implication of the
new landscape. Mr Robert Maclennan's attack on Mr Blair won the newly
elected president easy applause in the conference hall. It revealed also a
preference in the party for comfortable expedience over hard-edged strategy.
Mr Ashdown knows his party can break into real politics only if it reaches
some form of accommodation with Mr Blair. He would prefer such an
arrangement before the election. He wants anyway to prepare enough ground to
ensure that a post-election deal is possible. Senior party figures have been
encouraged by the way Mr Blair has kept open informal channels of contact.
Mr Ashdown had hoped this week to respond in kind - sending a coded but
strong signal that if there is a bargain to be struck he is ready to talk.
But the message from Brighton is that his party is not ready yet to face
political realities.
