FT  06 OCT 94 / Russian deal with banks paves way for debt plan
Russia cleared the way yesterday for a rescheduling of its Dollars 24bn
(Pounds 15.1bn) commercial bank debt by reaching a compromise with its 600
creditor banks on a legal obstacle which has blocked progress for the past
year.
They agreed a legal framework for re-scheduling bank debt - part of Dollars
90bn Russia owes to banks, foreign governments and trade creditors. It is
likely to make an initial payment of up to Dollars 500m this year.
The compromise was over the banks' earlier call for Russia to waive
'sovereign immunity', which would have allowed banks to seize assets if debt
was unpaid. Instead of this, Russia made a statement committing itself to
payment obligations.
The Russian government intends to follow the agreement - signed yesterday in
Madrid at the annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund and World
Bank - with attempts to lower other parts of its debt burden.
Mr Christian Vontz, chairman of the London Club of commercial banks, said
that the agreement would 'give the Russian government a breathing space to
deal with its domestic problems' before starting to repay debt.
The banks also agreed to accept the state-controlled Vneshekonombank as the
body assuming legal responsibility for the debt.
'Negotiations may take some time, but the result is already there,' Mr Vontz
said.
The re-scheduling is likely to allow Russia a grace period of five to 10
years before it has to start making capital repayments. The Dollars 500m
payment covers a portion of interest on the capital due in 1992 and 1993.
Although the agreement does not improve the government's financial position
 -since it has not been making payments to banks - Mr Alexander Shokhin,
deputy prime minister, hailed it as 'a vote of confidence'.
He said that the deal 'signals that Russia is beginning to put behind it the
financial consequences of the collapse of the former Soviet Union', the
debts of which it assum-ed when the union broke up.
The deal was some consolation to the Russian government after a testing week
during which it was rebuffed over an attempt to increase its IMF borrowing
facilities, and an effort to postpone other debt repayments.
It is likely to have talks with IMF officials later this month on its
request for larger facilities. This could be followed by separate talks with
the Paris club of government creditors over some Dollars 42bn of debt.
However, Russia received warnings from the Group of Seven leading
industrialised nations last weekend that it should control domestic
inflation, and creditor governments want it to reach an IMF deal before
re-scheduling debt. Bank creditors include Deutsche Bank, Credit Lyonnais
and Industrial Bank of Japan. Mr Vontz, a Deutsche executive, said the deal
'accepts the Russian government in the banking and financial community of
the world'.
Why the World Bank is shifting policy, Page 9
