FT  19 AUG 94 / Arts: Elias Canetti - Obituary
The death of the 1981 Nobel Prize-winning author Elias Canetti at the age of
89 at the weekend removes one of the most enigmatic figures of the literary
world.
The enigma begins in trying to define his nationality. He was born in
Bulgaria of Spanish-Jewish parents who moved to Manchester running a family
business where he learned English.
After the death of his father in 1913 they went to Vienna where he reverted
to the family's usual language of German. At the Nazi takeover in 1938 he
moved to England and for many years lived in a flat in Hampstead with his
first wife Veza, who died in 1963.
Canetti's circle of English friends included Iris Murdoch and Andre Deutsch
who published his books here. But while seemingly settled in London he also
maintained an apartment in Zurich and latterly went there to live. Now he is
buried in a grave next to that of James
Joyce.
It was in German that he wrote his books. The best known is his novel Auto
da Fe (in German Die Blenduing) which was translated into English in 1946 by
the historian Veronica
Wedgwood 'under the personal supervision of the author'.
Its Austrian hero Peter Kien is an authority on ancient China who lives only
for learning. He immures himself in a vast library and dreams of leading a
life of uncompromising scholarship. The destruction of his dream by
malignant human forces male and female and the ultimate loss of the library
in a vast conflagration is the theme of the novel originally published in
1935. It stood as a prophetic, poetic warning of the fate that was about to
befall Europe.
Then Canetti produced what is his most accessible and masterly work Masse
und Macht (in English Crowds and Power) in 1960. It is a sociological and
anthropological study of mob behaviour based on personal experience in
Vienna ranging widely across many cultures from that of the Navajo Indians
and ancient Islam to modern Europe.
Its appearance brought Canetti international recognition as a major writer.
Canetti continued to develop in a series of autobiographical volumes
beginning in 1977 with The Tongue Set Free, followed by The Torch in My Ear
in 1980 and The Play of the Eyes in 1986.
The latter contains portraits of his eminent Viennese contemporaries, Herman
Broch, Robert Musil, Alban Berg and Alma Mahler.
There were several other volumes of essays including a charming record of a
visit,
The Voices of Marrakesh in which Canetti observed the Arabs, Jews and
Europeans who make up the city's population.
Canetti's profundity is
a corrective to insularity and is likely to gain in stature and importance
in the years ahead.
