FT  23 SEP 94 / Survey of Property in London's West End (1): Call of the
wide open spaces - Despite the abundance of empty offices, rents are rising
and developers are dusting off some long deferred projects
Tower cranes and concrete lorries, symbols of a virile commercial property
market, could soon be starting to re-emerge in London's West End where rents
for top quality new buildings are rising for the first time in five years.
Development plans are being tentatively dusted off as land owners and
development groups consider whether the time is now right to begin
construction again.
At first glance, prospects for London motorists finding their passage
blocked by fleets of building material lorries and contractors plant would
seem unlikely.
According to City University Business School, there remains a 'chronic
oversupply of sub-standard second hand office space in the West End' leaving
too many landlords chasing too few prospective tenants. The university has
drawn its conclusions after studying the findings of 10 of the largest
commercial agents in the capital.
Jones Lang Wootton and St Quintin, two of the agents, estimate that there
are still about 8m sq ft of empty office space in the area compared with the
3.25m sq ft estimated by Jones Lang Wootton to have been been occupied last
year by West End tenants. On the basis of last year's take-up the area would
appear to have at least two years supply of ready built accommodation.
However, says City University, new development is still needed because the
general oversupply of offices is masking a shortage of new large buildings -
particularly in the core area of Mayfair and St James, one of Britain's
richest property markets and favoured for prestige corporate headquarters.
Prof Piers Venmore-Rowland, of the university's business school, says: 'The
situation has become acute. There remains significantly less than one year's
supply of new accommodation available and, for large occupiers seeking in
excess of 100,000 sq ft, there are no new buildings currently available.
'They (the figures) should make alarming reading for those businesses
seeking large new offices in the West End. Many people have become used to
the idea that there is far more office space available in central London
than there are tenants to fill it.
'In general terms they are right but  .. for those high profile,
internationally orientated businesses looking for top quality space there is
very little to choose from.'
Rents, according to Jones Lang Wooton, have started to rise for quality
buildings in prestige locations. More important, landlords have been able to
reduce some of the rent free periods and other sales incentives they have
been offering tenants.
A recent landmark letting was achieved at the 95.000 sq ft Almack House in
King Street which is to be occupied by international bankers JP Morgan at an
initial rent thought to be Pounds 42.50 a sq ft.
This is well short of the Pounds 60 plus achieved in Mayfair and St James at
the end of the 1980s but nonetheless represents an important breakthrough,
breaching the psychological Pounds 40 a sq ft barrier.
Jones Lang Wootton expects headline rents will reach Pounds 50 a sq ft next
year. It says average rents of Pounds 65 a sq ft in 1989 in Mayfair/St James
had fallen to a low of Pounds 35.50 in the second quarter of last year but
have since risen to about Pounds 37. Rent free periods of 2 1/2 years
offered as a sales incentive to reluctant tenants at the height of the
recession have fallen to about 18 months, says the agency.
Other important West End lettings this year, according St Quintin, include:
Saudi International Bank which took 46,000 sq ft at No 1, Knightsbridge;
Allied Dunbar Insurance, 31,000 sq ft at 120 New Cavendish Street; Cable
London, 30,000 sq ft at Central Cross, 2 Stephen Street; and Hongkong and
Shanghai Bank Corporation 24,000 sq ft at 29/31 Hill Street.
The agents say the supply of available offices in the postal districts of
W1, SW1, WC1 and WC2 peaked at 11m sq ft during 1992 as tenants' needs
reduced due to business rationalisations and a sharp rise in company
liquidations.
At the same time, the number of new buildings coming on to the West End
market rose sharply reflecting the fruits of the late 1980s building boom.
By the third quarter of 1992 empty buildings represented 13 1/2 per cent of
the areas stock of offices. St Quintin says the vacancy has dipped below 10
per cent although still well in excess of the 3 to 4 per cent required for a
healthy market. 'It is worth remembering,' it says, 'that in the late 1980s,
when the market tightened considerably, the vacancy rate dropped to 1 to 2
per cent, which was equally unhealthy.'
Jones Lang Wootton says that the availability of new properties has almost
gone from feast to famine with vacancy rates for new buildings now just
under 2 per cent compared with a vacancy rate of 8 per cent for all West End
properties.
Rents also have begun to recover for better quality space in one or two
other West End districts beyond Mayfair and St James. Top rents in Soho and
Covent Garden, says the agency, are averaging Pounds 22.50 a sq ft to Pounds
25 compared with Pounds 15 to Pounds 20 two years ago and a peak of about
Pounds 40 to Pounds 45 in the late 1980s.
The recent improvement reflects increased demand from media and advertising
companies, benefiting from the growth in cable and satellite television,
which provide the backbone of tenant demand in the area. It has also
benefited from a spill-over of interest from companies unwilling to pay
higher rents or unable to find the right kind of quality space in Mayfair
and St James.
Some agents, however, report that more recently there has been a slight
slowdown in the rate of improvement in West End lettings. Similarly,
property investment purchases which rose sharply in 1993, partly triggered
by demand from overseas investors, have slipped back as bond yields have
become more competitive.
Institutions are likely to want to see further evidence that tenant demand
will prompt further rent rises before they embark on high risk new
developments which will only proceed if substantial pre-lets can be
achieved.
Many companies which might have been considering a move within the West End
remained trapped by high rent leases, negotiated many years ago and which
they are unable to reassign - the commercial property equivalent of negative
equity.
New tenants are reluctant to commit themselves to traditional long leases
with upward only rent reviews. 'It is quite difficult to secure a tenant for
longer than 15 years,' according to St Quintin which says 'break clauses' at
the 10th or even the fifth year 'are not unknown'.
New investment also is unlikely to take place while substantial rent free
periods are still available. Older, poor quality buildings will remain very
difficult to let while tenant demand in the absence of new construction is
likely to be concentrated on refurbished second hand buildings of high
quality.
This points to the development of a two tier market with rents rising
modestly for quality space as shortages emerge. Poorer quality buildings
where there is still a large over-supply will remain very difficult to let,
rents will remain static and sales incentives will be slow to disappear.
Tenants have become more cost conscious during the recession and the general
oversupply of accommodation will continue to act as a brake on the market
preventing a rapid escalation in rents even for the best quality offices.
