FT  24 DEC 94 / Books: A suitable case for treatment? - Jackie Wullschlager
on a skewed interpretation of the life of the youngest, saddest Rossetti
sibling
CHRISTINA ROSSETTI
by Jan Marsh
Cape
Pounds 25, 634 pages
Once upon a time there were four beautiful gifted Anglo-Italian children who
lived in a happy family in London. They grew up in great harmony, drawing
and writing precocious poems, but then suddenly they were adults and their
fates diverged.
The two boys had bright careers as a civil servant and an artist. They were
agnostic and open minded and socially popular; they had romantic
entanglements and both eventually married for love. In their forties they
earned between Pounds 800 and Pounds 2,000 a year. But the two girls stayed
at home and turned away suitors in favour of a blazing religious fervour.
One became a nun, the other looked after Mama, wrote devotional verses, and
suffered a series of nervous breakdowns and illnesses. Their annual income
rarely rose above Pounds 50.
The story of the Rossettis is a dazzling illustration of the social,
economic and emotional conditions of middle-class Victorian England, and as
fascinating a tale of family dynamics as any novel. It threads in and out of
this biography of the youngest and saddest sibling, Christina, like gold
braid, illuminating her loneliness with the lively colour of her brothers,
Dante Gabriel and William; bringing warmth into her often arid and bigoted
life.
Virginia Woolf once said that if she were bringing a case against God,
Christina Rossetti would be her first witness. Christina's pious rhapsodic
verses - the Christmas carol 'In The Bleak Midwinter' and the self-denying
funeral poem 'Remember Me' are now best known - were so popular among the
Victorians that she was a strong contender to be Poet Laureate when Tennyson
died. But her religion brought her little comfort. As Dante Gabriel's famous
portrait of her in 'Ecce Ancilla Domini' and 'The Girlhood of Mary Virgin'
suggest, she was awkward, over-serious and tormented. She slashed her arms
in frenzies of self-disgust, and she was so fanatically guilty that she
would not tread on a piece of paper in case the word God were written on it.
In a conversation about economics, she believed it blasphemous to refer to
the 'almighty dollar'.
She is not an easy focus for a biographer, and Jan Marsh has fallen into the
fatal trap of using wild speculation to make her subject seem more
appealingly contemporary. Why was Christina depressive and earnest and
secretive? she asks. Compare her with the other great Victorian writers
whose creativity came out of frustration and spiritual agony - Hopkins and
the late black sonnets, Charlotte Bronte and Villette - and the answers seem
clear: lack of opportunity, emotional and social repression, the
strangleholds of narrow moralism.
They are not enough for Marsh, however, who locates the heart of Christina's
life and work in the trendy theory of child abuse. The evidence? Afternoons
spent alone with Papa when he had lost his job and Mama went out to teach.
The result? The oppressive sexual imagery of characters like the voracious
Mouth Boy and the boys and girls studded with quills and slime in
Christina's children story Speaking Likenesses and her fairy poem 'Goblin
Market'.
If every work of literature which employed this sort of imagery were rooted
in sexual trauma, the history of literary biography would be the history of
child abuse. Both unhappy (eg Dickens) and happy (eg Nabokov) childhoods are
the vital inspiration for some of our most haunting literature. But it shows
grave critical misjudgment to interpret images and symbols as revealing of
childhood experiences in the literal way Marsh does here.
Fleshed out with quotations from contemporary abuse victims to substantiate
the unprovable, and written in thudding prose, this is a skewed biography.
Christina Rossetti died 100 years ago this month and her story is still of
historical interest; this book, with its emphasis on an obsession from 1990s
psychoanalysis, makes nonsense of the art of historical reconstruction on
which biography depends.
