FT  25 MAY 94 / Business and the Environment: A bigger splash on the canals
 -Jane Martinson on plans to boost British Waterways Board's income
The British Waterways Board, the nationalised body which runs Britain's
canals, plans to turn people's desire to mess about by the river into
profit.
With a leisure and tourism strategy launched by Robert Atkins, environment
minister, today, the board appeals for 'imaginative partnerships' to
increase the money-making potential of its most popular sites.
Such developments would have to satisfy the board's commitment to conserving
the heritage and environment of the land and buildings it controls,
including more than 2,000 listed structures and ancient monuments and 64
sites of special scientific interest.
A private bill before parliament defines the board's statutory duties with
regard to maintaining environmental conservation.
'We have to appreciate that many people enjoy going to the canals to
'gongoozle' - to simply watch the wildlife and canal life go by,' says Simon
Salem, marketing and communications manager. 'Our aim is to increase
everybody's enjoyment of this natural resource.'
Another aim is to increase profits. The board earns 40 per cent of its
annual running costs of Pounds 87m, the rest coming from subsidies. Profits
from leisure and tourism contribute 25 per cent of that earned income, a
percentage the board wants to increase. Market research has suggested there
is potential for this, says Salem.
Possible developments include leisure facilities such as tea shops, small
museums or playgrounds. Financial incentives will be considered for suitable
proposals and extensive consultation with local interest groups is planned.
The board hopes to capitalise on the 158m visits made to British canals each
year by more than 7m people. It plans to improve access for particular
interest groups such as anglers and boaters and attract some of the 47 per
cent of the population who live within five miles of a BWB canal.
Popular sites which regularly attract in excess of 200,000 visitors each
year, says Salem, would particularly benefit from further development. 'We
see tourism, and particularly the day trip side, as a key growth area,' he
adds. 'At the same time, we are aware that plans have got to be balanced.
Our main aim is to conserve our heritage.'
He says 'sensitive' proposals would be welcomed. Fast food chains and vast
car parking space would not. Plans are particularly welcome in inner cities
where canals are vital 'green lungs'.
Today's launch follows a report on the board by the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission in January which made 48 recommendations for improvement,
including cost control and more active marketing of leisure facilities.
Neil Hamilton, corporate affairs minister, said: 'BWB has changed from a
centralised organisation orientated towards administering a grant to one
developing a strong commercial outlook.'
But he added that the MMC felt BWB could continue to improve its efficiency
and the quality of its services, and expected BWB to be able to generate
higher net revenue.
The board supplied half the funding needed for a Pounds 1.5m refurbishment
of grade two listed canal warehouses in Burnley last year in partnership
with Lancashire county council. The site is to be used for mixed commercial
and leisure development.
In developing its strategy, the board has taken advice from the National
Trust, the charity which operates a business arm known as National Trust
Enterprise and which saw a large increase in membership in the 1980s. The
board is considering a membership scheme which could include a magazine and
lecture programmes.
Bernard Henderson, the board's chairman, says: 'Of course, it's early days
but we certainly think that the National Trust is a template which deserves
study. We have two main responsibilities - to provide facilities for people
to enjoy the environment and to improve it.'
