FT  24 MAY 94 / UK Company News: Kunick expects to resume dividends
Kunick, the fruit machine company which earlier this year floated its
nursing homes division, expects to return to the dividend list after a
three-year absence.
Mr Christopher Burnett, chairman, said he was 'confident we will pay a
dividend at the year-end', barring unforeseen circumstances. Kunick
suspended payments in 1992 when recession and the restructuring of the UK
pubs industry hit profits in the leisure division.
Mr Burnett was speaking at the company's interim results announcement, which
showed a 50 per cent increase in profits before tax and exceptional gains to
Pounds 3.1m. There was an exceptional profit of Pounds 1.9m, after goodwill
write-offs, on the flotation of Goldsborough Healthcare in March.
Sales fell by 3 per cent to Pounds 47.8m in the six months to March 31.
Pre-tax profits were Pounds 5m (Pounds 2.1m) and earnings per share came
through at 1.07p (0.26p losses).
Mr Burnett said the group had begun to see some recovery in its core leisure
business, while plans for Kunick's future strategy were well advanced.
Kunick is thought to be planning to develop its trial games arcade operation
in Leeds along theme park lines, using proceeds from the Goldsborough
flotation. Mr Burnett said Kunick would announce details of its commercially
sensitive strategy in the second half.
He reiterated that the group's efforts to refocus on its core amusement
machine business had begun to pay off.
The amusement machines division had increased operating profits by 10 per
cent to Pounds 2.5m in spite of the fact that consumers were not spending
any more in pubs. Cost-cutting and new types of machines helped profits in
the UK, he said.
The discount retail business in France survived a severe price war to report
a 6 per cent increase in operating profits to Pounds 731,000.
The four remaining nursing homes in France increased profits by 54 per cent
to Pounds 522,000, with occupancy levels running at 97 per cent. Mr Burnett
said that business would be sold at some stage.
The Goldsborough disposal also left the group with a strengthened balance
sheet. Kunick raised Pounds 25.6m from its share of the nursing homes
business, jointly owned with NatWest Ventures. Net cash was Pounds 6.9m at
the half-year, against debt of Pounds 17m last time.
