FT  15 JAN 94 / Accountants seek liability limits
Britain's largest accountancy firms have begun putting pressure on clients
to agree to limits on the firms' liability when providing professional
services.
Several of the biggest eight firms have started to introduce into contracts
for work a maximum multiple of the fee they will pay compensation if a
client seeks redress.
They have suggested the limits in higher-risk areas such as due diligence
investigations and valuations in corporate finance deals, and when
conducting internal audit work for companies.
The initiative was triggered by Arthur Andersen as part of the firm's
leading role in efforts to reform company legislation which forbids
accountants from limiting their liability on audit work. The firms have
attempted to steer clear of breaching any contracts legislation.
Mr Chris Nunn, a senior technical partner with the firm, confirmed yesterday
that the idea had been running over several months among several accountancy
firms. He said its launch reflected the desire to develop a consistent
approach across all accountancy services in line with lobbying efforts to
allow auditors to limit liability.
'We have had a sensible discussion between the firms,' he said. 'We want to
compete on quality and value for money, not on who is prepared to underwrite
the biggest risk.'
He said the multiple agreed was generally between five and 10 times the fee,
and sometimes with far simpler agreements for reimbursement if the client
was dissatisfied.
Mr Nunn said that most clients had been receptive to the idea of limiting
liability. He said firms would be reluctant to work for those who were not,
since they were seeking guarantees rather than professional advice.
In spite of many high-profile audit negligence actions - such as surrounding
the collapsed Bank of Credit and Commerce International - many writs against
firms relate to their activities in areas other than audit work. These
include acquisition advisory and tax work.
KPMG Peat Marwick has in the past few weeks submitted two tender proposals
to companies to run their internal auditing, with liability limited in one
case to twice and one to about five times the fee.
Mr Jerry Acher, head of accounting and auditing, said his firm was
considering proposals to limit liability in other specialisms during the
year, such as investigations and public-sector consulting.
'Litigation is blunting the effectiveness of the audit process,' he said.
'This will enable us to provide the proper service without having to watch
over our shoulders. I would be prepared to take a small discount on our fees
as part of the cost of practice protection.'
