FT  28 OCT 94 / London Stock Exchange: Irish debut
The transformation of Irish Permanent from Ireland's biggest building
society to a bank was completed yesterday, with shares in the group making a
sparkling debut simultaneously in Dublin and London.
In a move almost a mirror image of that carried out some years ago by Abbey
National, Irish Permanent shares were given to borrowers and lenders and
priced at 180p in the Republic of Ireland, the equivalent of 180p sterling.
The flotation was organised jointly by Riada, the Irish stockbroker, and
Hoare Govett.
After opening at 208p the shares raced ahead to touch a high of 217p before
closing at 215p. Turnover reached 6.1m shares with dealers reporting
aggressive demand for the shares from Ireland and the UK.
Excellent third-quarter figures from Shell Oil, the Royal Dutch/Shell
subsidiary, triggered a bout of strong support for Shell Transport stock
from both sides of the Atlantic. At the close Shell were 11 1/2 higher at
711 1/2 p after turnover of 3.9m shares. Analysts moved to upgrade forecasts
for Shell Transport after the Shell Oil numbers, its best third-quarter
results since 1985.
'We're upgrading our recommendation on Shell from hold to buy,' said Mr John
Toalster at Strauss Turnbull. 'There is a feeling of confidence about Shell;
they're tackling the problem areas, such as chemicals, and the recovery in
the group is gathering momentum,' the Strauss analyst said.
BP was rather left behind by Shell, the shares edging up only 2 to 415 1/2 p
on 7.2m traded.
Airports group BAA rose 11 to 503p following a reassuring note from NatWest
Securities which attempts to put the Heathrow subsidence problems into
perspective.
Heathrow accounted for 59 per cent of passengers handled by BAA last year
and 68 per cent of operating profits. NatWest says the disruption is
squeezing spending levels but sees higher spending at other BAA airports as
a cushion as traffic switches.
Second quarter results are due November 7.
Media conglomerate Pearson was a strong performer on the back of broker
presentations regarding the impending flotation of satellite broadcaster
BSkyB, in which Pearson has a significant stake. The shares jumped 18 to
613p.
Reuters Holdings slipped 3 to 447p ahead of third-quarter revenue figures
due today.
International advertising group WPP jumped 4 to 109p on heavier turnover
than normal of 7.8m shares with SG Warburg recommending the stock.
Medeva jumped 15 and closed 9 better at 174p after announcing it had won the
right to continue development of its hepatitis B vaccine following a
judgment by the Court of Appeal that Biogen's patent is invalid in the UK.
Drinks group Allied Domecq advanced 13 to 587p following the announcement of
talks aimed at selling its Dutch brewing operations helped refocus attention
on the potentially much bigger disposal of Allied's food manufacturing
business.
Best known for its Tetley tea-bags, the food division accounted for more
than a tenth of group trading profits last year.
A number of potential buyers are being pencilled in by the stock market,
notably the Dalgety and Irish group Kerry which is said to be keen to
acquire DCA, Allied's US supplier of bakery mixes and equipment.
Elsewhere in the drinks sector, Bass continued to gain ground, adding 6 to
547p for a three day gain of almost 4 per cent. In contrast, Greenalls shed
4 to 405p. High street fashion chain Next rose 6 to 242p as Morgan Stanley
reiterated its strong buy stance.
Other statistics, Page 30
