FT  12 MAR 94 / Hillary Agonistes: The maelstrom swirling around President
Clinton's wife
Washington is Salem,' the veteran lobbyist was quoted as saying about
something else. 'If we're not lynching somebody 24 hours a day in this
wretched town, we're not happy.'
Certainly the noose round Hillary Rodham Clinton's neck must have felt a
little tighter this week, a far cry from the adulation accorded her last
autumn when she took the town and country by storm with the clarity and
vigour of her presentation of the administration's healthcare reform plan,
as much as anybody else's her plan. This legislation finally got a
congressional hearing this week, but only the vested interests were
watching. All other eyes were on Whitewater and this most distinctive first
lady's presumed role at the heart of it.
Hillary's week has seen her portrayed variously as Lady Macbeth, Michael
Millken and Joan of Arc. It is best described in the words of her assailants
and defenders.
On Sunday the New York Times let loose Maureen Dowd on Hillary. Last year,
the Clintons, knowing Ms Dowd is a reporting trendsetter, sought to charm
her and she confessed in print to being charmed.
Not now. She clinically dissects the sources of Hillary Clinton's power,
beyond the relationship with her president husband, and sees them
collapsing. Her healthcare plan is in trouble in Congress; Bernard Nussbaum,
her old colleague on the Watergate prosecution team whom she championed, has
quit as legal counsel; questions are, perhaps cruelly, asked about the
circumstances of the suicide of Vincent Foster, the deputy counsel, her
close friend and former Rose Law Firm partner in Little Rock, Arkansas;
Webster Hubbell, also a Rose graduate, now associate attorney-general, is
under ethical fire.
Ms Dowd lards her story with lethal quotes: the influential, unnamed
Democratic friend of the Clintons who says, 'It's especially hard to run a
White House with no one in charge but two presidents'; the anonymous senior
official who comments, 'No one wants to tell Bill, or especially Hillary,
that they can't do things the way they're used to doing them'; Marlin
Fitzwater, press secretary to presidents Reagan and Bush, who gleefully
twists the knife and cracks, 'Don't say I said anything bad about Hillary,
I'm as scared of her as everyone else'.
The ink barely dry, Vice-President Al Gore, invariably the soul of reason,
goes to bat for her on a morning talk show. He detects a 'generational issue
 -it's relatively new to have a husband and wife who consider themselves
totally equal partners' not only in marriage but in work, including the work
of government. Ms Dowd's picture of the White House, he says, is 'a cartoon
image'.
On Monday the news magazines hit the street. Newsweek is particularly tough
in a big feature called 'Hillary's trouble'. Four of the 10 officials under
subpoena by Robert Fiske, the special counsel, are 'Hillary's employees or
allies'; there are reports of shredded documents at Rose, perhaps ordered by
her.
Again, many of the 'mood' quotes are anonymous but they are hard. 'Advisers
say no staffer wants to be the first to talk bluntly to Mrs Clinton because
of the 'fear wall' around her'. 'For the first time someone has questioned
her skill as a professional,' says an administration official, 'you can see
the pain in her bearing.' Even the firings of the White House chef, a
Frenchman unwilling to meet her taste for American fat-free cuisine, and an
usher, who made Mrs Clinton 'uncomfortable', are ascribed by innuendo to her
intolerance.
At least on Monday afternoon Bill Clinton stood by his woman. 'I believe I'm
a better authority than anyone else in America on my wife. I have never
known a person with a stronger sense of right and wrong in my life - ever.'
So did the National Organisation of Women, which held a rally in support of
her.
Nevertheless, on Tuesday, Mr Clinton brought in Lloyd Cutler, a wise old
Washington bird, as legal counsel. At 76, he needed no new challenges and he
agreed only to take on the job for 130 days - and not be paid for it. One
thing about Mr Cutler is certain: he will not be afraid to tell the
president and first lady what is right and what is wrong, which has been a
problem for many of the Clintonistas around 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue. If he
is not heeded, he can walk away, and that would mean real trouble.
By midweek it was impossible for a pundit not to have an opinion about
Hillary. Some tried to have it every which way. Ted Koppel, cerebral host of
ABC's 'Nightline,' declared: 'There is no doubt many of those who oppose the
health plan are only too happy to see Mrs Clinton distracted and weakened by
the Whitewater fiasco. But that doesn't mean the criticism is inappropriate,
unjustified or unworthy of a straightforward answer.'
Anna Quindlen, the New York Times columnist, thought the president came
perilously close to a 'little woman' defence of his wife. Her ironical
conclusion was this: 'Hillary Clinton will once more break new ground, this
time as a presidential adviser-spouse in the midst of a political maelstrom.
It will take a great mind to determine how to play this out. Luckily we have
a great mind in the White House. Unfortunately, she's the one most involved
in the mess.'
In this maelstrom, not many things are certain any more. Some now seem
irrelevant - that, for example, Mrs Clinton is a person of exceptional
intelligence and qualifications with a long-standing interest in the policy
issues that drive her husband's administration. This may puzzle Europeans
accustomed to invisible political spouses, but until she became such a
Whitewater target this week, most Americans were comfortable that her policy
wings had not been clipped.
Second, and perhaps less well appreciated, is that for most of their
marriage she has been the principal breadwinner, earning, as a legal star,
many times his governor's salary. She, like many modern American women, ran
their investments. None of his Arkansas enemies have ever claimed he knows
much about finance and the family.
Third, there is a well-established pattern to doing business in small
states. There will be a dominant local law firm, a leading local brokerage
and bank, and a powerful company or three, all of them accustomed to doing
business, sometimes sweetheart deals, with each other and with state
politicians. The Clintons covered most of these connections one way or
another and their state prospered, relatively, under their tutelage. On the
evidence so far presented - an important caveat given all the rumours of
smoking guns to come - Arkansas was no exception to the rule. And both
Clintons seem baffled that they should be thought to have done anything
wrong.
And they do not have the brass nerve of Orville Faubus, the Arkansas
governor of legend, who, when asked how he could afford a multi-million
dollar house when his salary had never exceeded Dollars 10,000 a year,
replied: 'I was parsimonious.' But that was Little Rock 25 years ago and
this is Washington today and the witch hunt is afoot.
