FT  30 APR 94 / Indonesian bank scandal investigation widens: Private
banking benefits as clients move over
For Indonesians weary of corruption and secrecy in government and big
business, the recent sight of some of President Suharto's most influential
advisers being summoned by the attorney general's office for questioning
about a Dollars 430m (Pounds 286m) bank scandal has been particularly
invigorating.
The crippling bad debt problems of the Indonesian state banks - often the
result of collusion over loans between powerful officials and the ethnic
Chinese businessmen who dominate the economy - have been a topic for gossip
in Jakarta for the past three years.
Only in the past two months, however, has the matter been publicly aired.
The authorities have arrested businessman Mr Eddy Tansil and five officials
of the state-owned PT Bank Pembangunan Indonesia (Bapindo) in connection
with a Dollars 430m letter of credit supposedly earmarked for petrochemical
projects in Java. With accrued interest the loan should be worth some
Dollars 620m, but prosecutors allege some of the money was diverted to Hong
Kong and the loan is not being serviced.
The Bapindo letter of credit is only one of more than 40 bad or doubtful big
loans of Dollars 50m or more believed to be on the books of the seven state
banks, but private commercial bankers have praised Mr Mar'ie Muhammad, the
finance minister, for at least starting to bring the bad debt crisis out
into the open.
Mr Muhammad announced that 21.2 per cent - or about Dollars 7bn - of the
outstanding loans extended by the state banks were classified as bad or
doubtful, compared with 17.4 per cent at the end of 1992, and 6 per cent in
1990; the true situation may be even worse, according to economists and
bankers in Jakarta, because Mr Muhammad's figures are based on the banks'
own, probably over-optimistic, assessments of their loans.
To the delight of Indonesian liberals pressing for a more open and
accountable government, those questioned at the attorney general's office
over the Bapindo scandal include Mr JB Sumarlin, former finance minister and
now chairman of the Supreme Audit Agency, and Mr Sudomo, the former senior
minister in charge of political and security affairs who provided a
reference for Mr Tansil; their testimony will be used in a forthcoming trial
of Mr Tansil and the Bapindo suspects.
The disclosure of the extent of the difficulties faced by Indonesian state
banks has had both good and bad results for the Indonesian authorities. It
may have dented international confidence in the banking sector; the country
has more than 230 commercial banks, but the seven state banks account for
half of banking business and the top 10 private banks for a further 35 per
cent.
However the scandal has helped the growing private bank sector (some of the
state banks' more reputable clients have moved their custom to the stronger
private banks) and shown the seriousness of government efforts to curb
'memo' lending - the informal system whereby bankers approve loans on the
basis of an instruction from an influential official rather than on the
economic merits of the scheme for which the money is theoretically being
disbursed.
A government programme to reform and recapitalise the state banks - financed
by the Indonesian budget, by converting central bank loans to the state
banks into equity, and by a Dollars 300m loan from the World Bank approved
in 1992 - is already well under way, although the troubled Bapindo itself is
excluded from World Bank support.
The authorities have hired Kroll Associates, the international detectives,
to hunt for assets of Golden Key, Mr Tansil's group of companies. They have
raised the possibility of bringing in foreign managers to clean up the
banking system. Disclosures about the activities of the banks are
nevertheless likely to be restricted by the desire to protect the Suharto
family and other influential Indonesians.
Mr Hutomo Mandala Putra, better known as 'Tommy' Suharto, the president's
youngest son, had a stake in one of the Golden Key companies but it is
claimed that he sold it before the controversial loan was made in 1992. The
Bapindo-Golden Key loan agreement, meanwhile, seems to have disappeared, if
it ever existed.
'The squashing of the information is already going on,' said one
Jakarta-based economist who has followed the Bapindo saga.
Or, as a banker put it, 'They are struggling between making a clean breast
of things and not being able to be too open about what happened.'
