FT  05 NOV 94 / As They Say in Europe: All the president's cardinals
Le Soir of Brussels proclaimed: 'Santer forms his Commission but not without
conflicts.' The Corriere della Sera of Milan led on 'The Pope suddenly
changes his Conclave.' It was nice that secular and spiritual Europe should
move in step. And interesting that in catholic Europe (outside Brussels) the
Vatican was generally given pride of place; in protestant lands it was the
'puff of white smoke' from Jaques Santer's Luxembourg castle as he handed
out his gifts.
Le Monde was the one paper to get the balance right. Both stories featured
heavily on the front page and were analysed by similar yardsticks. The
French were pleased that the trade commissioner, Sir Leon Brittan, was
deprived of what he saw as the central element in his portfolio - relations
with eastern Europe. Le Meridional said: 'The manner in which Santer cut
down to size the notorious Leon Brittan, the bete noire of the French . . .
demonstrates his will to stamp his mark on the future development of
Europe.'
Le Monde reckoned that Santer had 'to act straightaway and decisively in
face of the strong personality and ambitions of the British commissioner'.
It also derived a good deal of innocent pleasure from the reaction in
Britain: 'In a fit of offended nationalism the 'Eurosceptic' current of
British Conservatives stands behind Sir Leon and sees, once again, a hard
blow from the despised Brussels institution.'
The analysis of winners and losers dominated much of the account of both
decisions. The big loser in both cases was Italy. Rome has no senior
commissioner in Brussels and gained only three new cardinals among the 30
named last Sunday. The Germans were left out of this list entirely, and they
made no advances in the Commission. Spain, curiously, emerged well from both
conclaves, for similar, third-worldly reasons. Le Monde said it now seemed
to be the 'great country' of southern Europe. But where the paper made an
error was to fail to run the two stories as one.
After all, the Pope, a Pole, promoted east Europeans in large numbers and
Santer fellow members of the Benelux grouping. If indeed there is a pattern
emerging in Brussels it is one modelled on Rome.
So we should look to history to see what the future may hold. In his book
The Italians, Luigi Barzini wrote that popes were at a disadvantage compared
with kings. Just as, one might say, Euro-presidents are compared with prime
ministers. When a pope was appointed he was often old and decrepit. 'He was
in a hurry: he had to do for his kinsmen, within a few years, before it was
too late, what most royal families had taken centuries to achieve . . . The
men surrounding him were adequately loyal, but not to him.'
The parallel offers sufficient similarities to merit further consideration.
The European Union offers a reasonable facsimile of western Christendom
circa 1540. The protestant Reformation was well under way and the uniformity
of medieval Europe had fallen apart. The key novelty was the doctrine of
justification by works ('do good and you shall be saved') as opposed to the
catholic emphasis on justification by faith ('believe and you shall be
saved'). Martin Luther thought that anybody worth anything should be able to
prove it through actions rather than by public displays of devotion.
In the European argument the questions at issue in the reformation are
translated into modern terms. One's fidelity to the European cause is, in
most of the Union, judged by one's ability to recite the trinitarian creed
of one currency, convergence and monetary union. The protestants reject this
idolatry. They ask whether devotees have in fact implemented the
Commission's directive on asbestos extraction in forklift trucks.
Euro-protestantism is at its strongest in Britain and Denmark; in Germany
the post-reformation concept of cuius regio, eius religio is in force. The
Germans prefer the protestant virtues of their D-Mark to the universality of
the ecu. But their leaders' Euro-orthodoxy means they have no choice but to
accept the direction in which the country is being driven.
Unfortunately, Brussels is not yet in all respects a new Rome and the
Commission not yet a college of cardinals. In the Corriere della Sera, a
reporter who is a long-time friend of one new cardinal, Ersilio Tonini,
quoted him as saying: 'To live in peace, a chunk of bread and a clear
conscience suffice.' Try telling that to a European Commissioner.
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.
