FT  12 JUL 94 / Peres to make first official trip to Jordan
Mr Shimon Peres, Israeli foreign minister, is next week to become the first
senior Israeli official to set foot publicly on Jordanian soil, in the
latest sign of the fast-warming relations between Israel and its eastern
neighbour.
Mr Peres announced yesterday he would cross the border on July 20, for an
unprecedented official meeting with his Jordanian counterpart, Mr Abdul
Salam al-Majali, and Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state. Two days
earlier, in air-conditioned tents at a desert site just north of Israel's
southern port of Eilat, Israeli and Jordanian officials are scheduled to
hold their first-ever Middle East-based session of peace talks, focusing on
minor border disputes and the vexed question of water rights.
While Jordan's King Hussein is known to have met privately every Israeli
prime minister since Mrs Golda Meir three decades ago, his public
declaration to parliament at the weekend that he was now ready openly to
meet Mr Yitzhak Rabin marked the breaking of a taboo between two countries
still technically at war. The announcement of Mr Peres's official visit can
only heighten expectations of an Israeli-Jordanian peace deal.
Mr Peres declined yesterday to specify where in Jordan the trilateral
meeting would take place, noting only that it would be 'on the other side of
the border, in a place less romantic than the tent'. He added that he did
not yet know how quickly the Jordanians wanted to proceed towards a peace
deal, and that he could not say what obstacles might crop up on the way.
Nevertheless, he went on, 'I'm sure we can reach a peace deal with Jordan in
the not too distant future.'
The thawing relationship with Jordan constitutes another boost for the Rabin
government, which this week marks the half-way point of its four-year term
in office. With the Jordanians extending peace feelers, and the transfer of
power to the Palestinians in the newly autonomous areas of the Gaza Strip
and Jericho proving remarkably trouble-free, the pressure is now on Syria to
move towards an accommodation with Israel, or risk being left behind and
incurring the wrath of an American administration pressing hard for a
comprehensive package of Middle East peace accords.
In Cairo yesterday, Israeli and PLO negotiators settled down for a series of
meetings on extending self-rule arrangements elsewhere in the occupied West
Bank; and in Tunis Mr Yassir Arafat, PLO chairman, bade farewell to his
hosts of the past 12 years and headed off, via Cairo, to make his permanent
home in autonomous Palestine.
