FT  25 NOV 94 / Technology: Caught in the web - A new cyberspace
neighbourhood has joined the Internet and traffic is brisk
If you thought the Internet was for 'techno-nerds', think again. Over the
past 18 months a vast new array of information resources has been added to
this global computer network that even a novice can navigate.
The World Wide Web (WWW) is the newest and fastest-growing neighbourhood in
cyberspace; a collection of about 10,000 'servers', or database computers,
up from about 3,000 in August with more being added everyday - containing
information on topics as diverse as fly fishing and home brewing to film
reviews and electronic newspapers.
The Web provides a set of standards, or formats, that enable users to access
information files on the Internet. What marks it out from earlier efforts is
its ability to allow users to move easily from relevant information in one
database to linked information in another one - which might be on the far
side of the world. The Internet itself is the network of computers that
exchanges information by using the same interconnection rules.
The Web has a flourishing 'commercial district' as hundreds of companies
begin to promote their wares over the Internet's global links. Most
important, it is the site of the first 'electronic commerce' on the
Internet, which is expected to explode over the next year.
The first filaments of the Web were spun in 1989 at Cern, the European
particle physics laboratory, in a project led by Tim Berners-Lee, a computer
scientist who is known as the 'father' of the WWW.
'The WWW was conceived as a seamless world in which all information, from
any source, can be accessed in a consistent and simple way . . . on any type
of computer, from any country, using one (standard) program,' says
Berners-Lee.
His vision has come close to reality over the past year, largely as a result
of the popularity of Mosaic, a software program that enables computer users
to 'browse' the databases and search swiftly through thousands of on-line
documents. It simplifies the task - a click of the mouse on a link-word in
one document automatically executes computer instructions to take the reader
to another related piece of information, be it text, graphics, sound or
video.
This is a huge improvement over the bewildering mass of different computer
protocols and languages that Internet users faced until recently. In effect,
Mosaic has become a tour guide to cyberspace - a guide that speaks all the
computer languages and knows the best sights.
Developed at the University of Illinois' National Centre for Supercomputing
Applications, Mosaic is available to individual users, via the Internet, at
no charge.
Since May, corporate computer users have purchased more than 10m copies of
an 'enhanced' version of Mosaic from Spyglass, a company set up to
commercialise the university's technology.
Traffic on the WWW is growing so fast that it is difficult to keep pace.
About 30m people are estimated to be using the Internet, with about 1m new
users logging on each month - many of them drawn by interest in the WWW.
Almost anybody can put up a 'home page' on the WWW. The McBryan family of
Boulder, Colorado, for example, claims to be the first home on the
information superhighway. Dad, Mum and the three kids are all wired up to
the Internet. 'What you will find here are prototypes of future infobahn
users,' they say, throwing in some family photos to illustrate their text.
Then there is Hillside Elementary School, in Minnesota, where Mrs Collins'
sixth-grade class project is to create a site on the WWW. Last year, the
third grade (ages 7-8) also participated.
An Intel engineer proudly shows off his contribution to the WWW - mock-up
photos designed to make him look like a felon being booked into jail and
some hyperlinks to discussions of British cars, his hobby.
The friendly feel of the WWW is also, however, making it the ideal locale
for businesses. You can find IBM, AT&amp;T, Ford, Mitsubishi and the Bank of
America on the Web, among many others. Search a bit further and you may find
menus of restaurants in Palo Alto, California, a wedding planning service
called 'Bridesmaid for Windows', a listing of homes for sale in San
Francisco and hundreds of other businesses.
Commercial 'domains', the Internet addresses for groups of users, have
multiplied from about 9,000 in 1991 to well over 20,000. Most are
experimenting on the Internet by posting public information and seeing how
much notice it gets.
A fledgling industry of consulting groups and service organisations is
growing up around the WWW, helping companies to create an on-line presence.
Business interest in the WWW is rapidly shifting, however, towards
electronic commerce. In Silicon Valley, for example, a group of electronics
manufacturers is building CommerceNet, an Internet marketplace for
electronics products.
Intel, one of the participants, predicts that eventually electronic commerce
will eliminate the 'middle men' or distributors that today play a critical
role in delivering all sorts of products to end-users.
The Web is also a new medium for publishing groups, with several newspapers
and magazines already on the Web. HotWired, an electronic version of the
trendy San Francisco high-tech magazine, is a big attraction on the WWW. The
San Jose Mercury News, a pioneer in electronic newspapers publishing with
its 'Mercury Center' on America Online, is also planning an Internet version
on the WWW.
As business interests multiply on the WWW, it is beginning to be seen as a
competitor to commercial on-line services such as Prodigy, Compuserve and
America Online for which users pay subscription plus fees according to how
much time they spend on line. The trend on the WWW, in contrast, is towards
free services supported by advertising revenues.
For the average user with a personal computer and a modem, access to the WWW
is slow. Yet as the availability of high-speed communications lines
increases, and prices decline, the WWW appears set to continue its
exponential growth and to create the much heralded 'information
superhighway' long before predictions of 'movies on demand' and 500 TV
channels come true.
