FT  06 MAY 94 / Survey of The Channel Tunnel (14): Inter-City and coast to
coast - A basic guide to the system and how it works
The Eurotunnel system consists of three parallel tunnels: two single-track
tunnels and a smaller service tunnel. They run for 38km under the Channel.
The rail tunnels will be used by Eurotunnel shuttle trains carrying road
vehicles, and by through-trains operated by the British, French and Belgian
national railways.
The service tunnel, which is linked to the rail tunnels by cross passages
every 375 metres, will be used for maintenance and also for evacuation in
case of emergency.
There are two undersea crossover caverns where the rail tunnels are brought
together, making it possible for trains to cross from one track to the
other. The crossovers divide the length of the rail tunnels into three equal
sections, any of which can be closed off in an emergency or for maintenance.
The two rail tunnels were excavated 30 metres apart and no closer than 8
metres to the walls of the service tunnel.
When it opens for business later this year:
Eurotunnel will operate a rail shuttle service for passenger and
road-freight vehicles on a rail loop between terminals at Folkestone and
Calais;
the national rail companies of Britain, France and Belgium - BR, SNCF and
SNCB - will operate through-train services. High speed passenger services,
using specially built Eurostar rolling stock, will link London with Paris,
Brussels and beyond. Rail freight services will also serve UK regional
centres.
In both Britain and France, vehicles will turn off the motorway directly on
to the terminal approach roads. After passing the toll booths, frontier
controls and security checks, they will be directed to an allocation area
before boarding the shuttles.
Vehicles will pass through both French and British frontier controls before
departure and there will be no further checks on arrival. Amenity buildings
at both terminals will offer a range of services to travellers.
Most drivers and passengeers will remain with their vehicles during the
shuttle journey, which will take about 35 minutes. The total transit time
from motorway to motorway is expected to be just over an hour.
Motorcyclists will also travel in passenger vehicle shuttles, but will park
their machines in a special section of the shuttle and travel in separate
passenger compartments. Cars and other vehicles less than 1.85m high will
travel in double-deck carriages. Coaches and vehicles more than 1.85m high
will travel in single-deck carriages.
Eurotunnel describes the passenger vehicle shuttles as well-lit
airconditioned and sound-proofed. During the journey each carriage will be
divided off from the next by sliding fire shutters. Passenger access doors
will allow free movement on either side of these fire barriers and there are
toilet facilities in every third wagon.
Cars will board the shuttle through wide access doors in a loading wagon at
the rear of each section, moving forward through the carriages until
instructed to stop. On arrival cars will leave the shuttle through an
unloading wagon at the front of each section.
The service will operate day and night throughout the year. Tickets may be
bought at the toll or in advance, but will not involve a reservation for a
specific shuttle departure. When a vehicle arrives at the terminal it will
be put on the first available shuttle.
In the early years, passenger vehicle shuttles will run at about 15 minute
intervals during peak periods and 20 minute intervals during the day. The
minimum service, at night, will be one passenger vehicle shuttle per hour.
Freight vehicles will be separated from cars before the toll booths and
follow different routes through the frontier controls and security.
The shuttle wagons for freight vehicles are not air conditioned or sound
proofed. Lorry drivers will travel in a special coach, the Club car, at the
front of the shuttle, where refreshments are served.
Initially freight shuttles are to run up to three times an hour; the overall
motorway to motorway transit time is expected to be about 80 minutes. In
addition to the rolling motorway shuttle serivce, half the tunnel capacity
has been leased to national railway companies who will operate conventional
freight and passenger through services.
Passenger through trains will link London Waterloo with Paris Gare du Nord
and Brussels Midi. Intermediate stations are at Lille and Frethun near
Calais and a third is planned at Ashford in Kent. Later there will be day
and night 'sleeper' services running beyond the three capitals.
