FT  13 AUG 94 / Timetable for route out of an impasse: The pressure signal
workers are under to accept a pay settlement soon
The 10-week rail signal workers' dispute is rapidly approaching a showdown,
with the threat of the loss of future pension rights looming ever closer for
the strikers.
Mr David Armstrong, industrial relations director of Railtrack, has warned
that if the company and the RMT transport union do not reach a restructuring
agreement by September 30 the signal workers will lose out in the carve-up
of the British Rail pension fund on October 1.
Under railway privatisation the BR pension fund is to be split between the
successor companies. Actuaries appointed by the trustees will calculate the
amount each company will get based on the level of basic pay rates on
September 30.
Mr Armstrong insisted that Railtrack was prepared to improve the basic rates
of signalling staff by up to 26 per cent through restructuring. If this was
done before the division of the pension fund it would substantially improve
their pension entitlements.
He said that failure to reach a deal was likely to mean that between Pounds
30m and Pounds 50m of the BR pension fund would be lost to the signal
workers, to the benefit of other rail workers. The cost to each signal
worker would be between Pounds 1,000 and Pounds 1,700 a year on pensions.
Mr Armstrong said: 'We have 33 working days left before this happens.' Any
package agreed after September 30 could not be backdated to ensure enhanced
pensions.
The pension issue seems likely to grow in importance in the next few weeks.
The signalling workers, who have already lost more than Pounds 500 through
the strikes, stand to lose substantially more.
Whether this concern will modify what Mr Armstrong sees as the RMT's
intransigent position is unclear. He has serious doubts about whether the
union is in any mood to negotiate a flexible new deal for the signalling
staff.
He pointed to what he saw as the union's almost continuous opposition over
recent years to restructuring proposals for other groups of railway workers.
'They have walked away from other restructuring deals,' he said. 'If we
agreed to the kind of up-front payment for the signal workers that the RMT
wants they could do the same again. They want to lock a pay deal into the
present archaic wages structure with its knock-on effects on overtime and
shift pay. This is why I am cautious about taking the first step.'
Pinned on the wall outside his office door is Railtrack's mission statement,
signed by Mr Bob Horton, the chairman. Mr Armstrong is anxious to stress
that it offers its workers 'a fulfilling and challenging career in which we
all share equal opportunities'.
Railtrack is not going to precipitate a showdown by sacking all the
signalling workers if they strike again and replacing them with a substitute
labour force. 'We don't want 4,500 unemployed signalmen. We want them all
back at work.'
He pointed out that Mr Ronald Reagan, the former US president, was able to
fire striking US civil air-traffic controllers in 1981 because he could call
on trained military air-traffic controllers to take over their jobs. It
would take from eight to 13 weeks to train new signalling workers, and most
of the railway network would be shut during that time.
Mr Armstrong is also concerned that such action would leave a legacy of
bitterness and division. It is unlikely that such draconian action could be
taken without provoking severe unrest among other railway workers.
He notes, however, that there is no shortage of recruits willing to become
signal workers. He said: 'We had two vacancies in the north-east recently
and we had over 2,000 applications for the two jobs - so much for the low
pay and poor conditions of signal workers.'
On the day Mr Armstrong started his job he found the signal workers dispute
smouldering in his in-tray. It has been a harsh apprenticeship for a man who
came from Trainload Freight, BR's heavy haulage company - his background was
in shipbuilding industrial relations.
Now he faces the unenviable task of trying to end the rail dispute with the
least pain and without imperilling the privatisation of the industry.
