FT  14 SEP 94 / Leading Article: Who regulates?
It is almost 10 years since British Telecommunications was privatised under
the watchful eye of an independent regulator. Since then, gas, electricity
and water have followed the same path. Regulators will also oversee the
privatisation of British Rail and postal services. Regulation is here to
stay.
This is despite some discontent over the regulators' record. The recent
water and electricity price reviews are widely judged to have let the
companies off too lightly. Until recently, the regulators were charged with
over-zealousness (largely by the companies they regulate). Now they stand
accused of treating their industries too generously, with
higher-than-necessary prices, growing dividends and fat salaries for top
executives.
In practice, regulators are always likely to disappoint the consumer. There
is every incentive for regulated companies to underplay the scope for
efficiency savings. And regulators cannot precisely calculate the efficiency
gains that are possible. If the regulator is over-ambitious, the consequence
could be failures in vital services that would also draw public opprobrium.
In the absence of Solomon's judgement, regulatory decisions will tend to
tilt towards the shareholder.
A small tilt need not fatally wound the system if it is demonstrably
outweighed by the benefits of privatisation. These include lower prices in
some industries, better service in most and new investment after decades of
Treasury parsimony. But if the tilt is to be minimised, regulators must
maintain an aggressive approach to their industries and a sceptical eye on
corporate pleading.
There are therefore few attractions in yesterday's proposals from the
left-leaning Institute for Public Policy Research to do away with individual
regulators and give the government a stronger role in regulation. The IPPR
wants to set up regulatory commissions representing 'stakeholders' such as
suppliers and employees, with a requirement to operate under industrial
policy objectives set by the government. This would seriously weaken
regulation by opening it up to lobbying by special interest groups, many
with little commitment to efficiency or low prices. It would also
reintroduce the short-term political pressures that were so disastrous for
the old nationalised industries.
Some of the regulated industries could be set more demanding targets.
Regulators' decisions might win greater public support if they were reached
in a more open fashion. And parliament should encourage them to account for
their decisions by appearances in front of select committees. But the
individual accountability and independence of the present system has
delivered benefits that should not be thrown away lightly.
