FT  22 MAR 94 / Survey of Management Education &amp; Training (5): New routes
are opened up - Studying for an MBA
The death of the MBA has indeed been much exaggerated - but its character in
Europe, notably in the UK, has undergone radical change.
Course content is a case in point - relevance, interdisciplinary teaching,
internationalisation, and 'soft' issues, such as business ethics, are just
some of the current buzzwords. Perhaps the most striking development,
though, has been the dramatic widening in range of delivery.
It used to be that a two year full-time MBA was the norm in the US. Now,
only the powerful London Business School among UK suppliers retains a
genuine two year programme as its main option, following Manchester's
decision to offer a restructured course for the forthcoming year. Manchester
now offers what it calls a standard full time MBA over 16 months with a
longer 20 to 22 month alternative or a fast-track route of just over 12
months.
'This was in response to a consultation process which showed that most
students wanted a shorter career break and lower opportunity cost,' explains
Anne Keddie, Manchester's marketing manager.
Therein lies the rub. For all the well publicised doubts of employers and
the sceptical British approach to management as an academic subject, the MBA
remains a much sought after qualification on the right terms.
The result has been a significant increase in part time MBA programmes
(evenings, weekends, a combination of both,'modular' weeks); the astonishing
popularity of distance learning (where students work from home with teaching
material provided by the sponsoring institution); and the introduction of a
range of programmes generically known as company MBAs. These are usually
part-time and organised in partnership with individual companies, or a
consortium of companies.
Latest figures from the Association of MBAs (Amba) suggest that the shorter
delivery times for full time programmes may be having an impact. Revised
figures for 1993/94 show that the number of full time MBA students joining
UK business schools rose by 9.7 per cent (thanks in part to the addition of
five new courses), while new part-time students showed an increase of just
2.6 per cent (with the help of two new courses).
The key features of the part-time and company variants are that participants
can stay in their jobs and look to their employers for time off and
financial support.
Many business schools - such as Warwick - are taking advantage of this
flexibility. There, students can follow a 12 month programme (which has a
class this year of 114, average age 28, 85 per cent of whom pay for
themselves); a part time evening MBA over three years (class size 56,
average age 32, 90 per cent employer sponsored); a modular MBA (class size
29, average age 35, 95 per cent sponsored); and distance learning (350
students, average age 31, 50 per cent sponsored).
Henley Management College also has full time, part time, and distance
learning options (the latter is followed by nearly 5,000 students, based in
92 countries). More recently Henley has developed what it calls a third
generation MBA which tries to integrate traditional learning styles and
newdelivery technologies (including distance learning).
City University Business School specially targets those who work in the City
of London with its two year evening MBA but it is also notable for its
management, or consortium MBA. The course has powerful backers, which
include Rover, J Sainsbury, Norwich Union, American Express and BT.
An innovative MBA run by the Judge Institute of Management Studies at the
University of Cambridge combines full-time study with full-time work
experience. - 12 months out of the 21 month course, two 12 month periods in
the 33 month option. Because of the real world content Cambridge is less
strict than some business schools about prior work experience. It makes the
point that the salary earned during 12 months of the MBA makes fees easier
to handle than on a conventional full time programme.
The Open University, claims to be the largest business school in Europe and
a market leader in distance learning with 24,000 managers following its
courses and a turnover of Pounds 17m. Some 5,500 managers are studying for
its MBA (including 670 students in continental Europe). It expects to be
providing more than 20 per cent of UK MBA graduates within the next two
years. A further 3,000 managers are using its material in central and
Eastern Europe.
