FT  13 APR 94 / Rethink in the west: Recession is not to blame for all the
strains on democratic institutions
Public speculation over the future of UK Prime Minister John Major has
become so obsessive that politics in Britain seems to have been reduced to
the single question: can he stay or must he go?
The trouble is that this preoccupation with the person of Mr Major distracts
attention from bigger issues. The proverbial visitor from Mars may perhaps
conclude that he is to blame for all the woes of the British Conservative
party. But there may be systemic causes which are not peculiar to the UK,
and which will not be cured by the replacement of the Conservative party
leader. The personal shortcomings of the UK prime minister need no further
demonstration; but they are surely not the whole of the story.
Throughout the western world, democratic governments are under stress if not
actually under siege. Look at what happened to the Liberal Democratic party
in Japan, or to the Conservative party in Canada; look at what happened to
the entire political system in Italy; look at the results of December's
elections in Russia. And everywhere there is widespread popular alienation
and disillusionment with the institutions of government.
There is no mistaking the anxiety this is causing the political classes of
Europe. Last week UK and German politicians, civil servants and academics
held their annual Konigswinter conference. Their chosen title, Democracy on
Trial, was in part an allusion to the tribulations of Russia and eastern
Europe: democracy in those countries is on trial because it is unfamiliar.
But the earnest debaters from Germany and Britain were also concerned with
the stresses on democracy in western Europe: social alienation, crime,
racism, xenophobia and the perceived failure of political parties and public
institutions.
There is a ready-made explanation for these troubles which is always trotted
out: European countries have been going through, and many are still in, the
worst recession in recent memory; the result is high unemployment; so no
wonder governments are unpopular.
The unstated implication of this is that present problems are mainly
cyclical: growth will return as it always has; unemployment will go down
again; and governments will recover their popularity. This is monumental
Mikawberism.
Current unemployment surely owes as much to massive restructuring as to
deficient demand, and we have no reason to assume this process will come to
rest on a new plateau of stable growth and secure employment any time soon.
On the contrary, it seems more probable that we have entered a new global
industrial revolution. This means a far-reaching process of economic
transformation, with dislocations to our social structures which may be just
as severe as those of the first industrial revolution.
If so, our democratic institutions are going to be severely challenged. When
the Russians emerged from the deep freeze of authoritarianism, western
governments told them firmly that free market reforms and democracy must go
together, and instantly. Comfortable liberals applauded this double
prescription; but no one should have been surprised that both bits of it
have started badly.
As a matter of fact, the lesson of European history tells a different story.
The first industrial revolution, with all its attendant social miseries,
preceded full democracy in Britain by about 100 years. If the sequence of
events had been the other way round, the electorate might have had a word to
say about the social effects of the industrial revolution.
Now the wheel has come full circle. For the past 50 years, the heart of the
social compact has been that governments, on both sides of the political
divide, would deliver prosperity and jobs. Today, governments no longer dare
claim to be able to deliver these things. Instead they have a new message,
which remains discreetly subliminal: 'This is not our problem; this is a
matter which we simply must leave to the markets.' Unfortunately, the
corrosive effect of the free market is so powerful that it dissolves the
social compact.
Opposition parties are just as mute on this central issue as the
governments. In the UK, Mr John Smith's Labour party keeps such a low
profile that it is hard to imagine what his policies would be. In Germany,
the top priority of Mr Rudolf Scharping's Social Democratic party seems to
be to reassure the world that it is almost the same as the ruling CDU of Mr
Helmut Kohl. In France, the Gaullists swept to power on a tide of hope that
they must be able to do better for the economy than the Socialists. But a
year later those hopes are sinking, while the discredited Socialists are
still trying to think of something to say.
In other words, the new industrial revolution may involve a rewriting of the
agenda of government in western democracies. The global economy may mean
that national prosperity slips out of the grasp of national governments; so
what will political parties promise instead? Law and order, and repression
of unemployed criminal classes? Exclusion of foreigners and xenophobia?
Nationalist populism? Regional separatism? Patronage for their clients?
What is happening in Italy suggests that the answer to all these questions
is yes. But perhaps the liberal ideologues, who knew exactly what the
Russians ought to do, should turn their certainty to western problems. Let
them devise a party platform for a programme of national government in a
western country beset by the new industrial revolution; and while they are
about it, let them devise an alternative platform for a different programme
of government, since parliamentary democracy requires an opposition as well
as a government.
