FT  10 JAN 94 / The declining relevance of Europeans: America
As President Bill Clinton makes his first visit to Europe, it is perhaps
worth reflecting that the US is rapidly cutting loose from its European
roots. The point is not just that Pacific rim and western hemisphere
countries have become more important trading partners, it is that a
diminishing proportion of Americans have personal or ancestral links with
Europe.
Sharp changes in immigration patterns, magnified by differences in fertility
rates, are transforming the US into the world's first truly cosmopolitan
society. Demographic trends point in a direction that would have been
unthinkable to the founding fathers: by the second half of the 21st century,
Europeans and their descendants - the ethnic group that has dominated the US
for more than 200 years - may well be outnumbered by other racial groups.
In parts of the US this non-European future has arrived. Look at the
register of new home buyers in affluent Orange County, suggests Mr Peter
Morrison, a demographer at the Rand Corporation in California. The top four
surnames are Nguyen, Lee, Garcia and Kim. Miami, now jokingly referred to as
the 'capital of Latin America', is comparably diverse. As Time magazine
noted in a special report on 'multicultural' America, nearly 60 per cent of
Dade County residents speak a language other than English at home.
The US was set on its present multicultural path by a radical (but much
underrated) change in immigration policy in the mid-1960s. On humanitarian
grounds, strict limits on overall immigration were eased and rules
allocating quotas according to the existing population mix scrapped, ending
the bias in favour of northern European countries such as Germany, Ireland
and Britain. In 1940, 70 per cent of immigrants came from Europe. By 1992,
over 80 per cent were from Latin America, the Caribbean and Asia.
Immigration policy was revised three times in the 1980s. The net effect was
to relax entry controls further and reinforce the shift towards Asian and
Hispanic immigrants. Those entering as refugees were mainly Asian while the
beneficiaries of a generous amnesty were mostly Mexicans. The principle
governing legal immigration remains 'family unification'. But since only
recent immigrants seek to bring in family members, and since they are mainly
Asian or Hispanic, the effect is to magnify the new bias in favour of Asia
and Latin America.
So far there seems little risk of an outbreak of European-style xenophobia.
In multicultural America, gangs of skinheads do not amuse themselves by
beating up foreigners. But a nation that is composed of immigrants is
beginning to wonder whether present policies are not excessively liberal. In
the past 10 years, nearly 9m immigrants have entered the US legally - the
largest number since the turn of the century. A further 5m people are
reckoned to have evaded border patrols.
Signs of unease are multiplying. Polls suggest that nearly two-thirds of
voters now favour stricter controls on legal immigration (Americans
overwhelmingly support tougher curbs on illegal aliens). Politicians have
not hesitated to exploit the changing public mood. Mr Pete Wilson, the
Republican governor of California, boosted his popularity last year by
urging the repeal of laws giving automatic citizenship to the children of
illegal immigrants. And he shocked the liberal establishment by arguing that
illegal immigrants should be denied access to the state's over-subscribed
education, health and welfare services.
Some of the growing hostility towards immigrants can be put down to
temporary economic difficulties: when jobs are scarce and local budgets
under pressure, an influx of poor families is bound to be unpopular. The
fact that immigration is so regionally concentrated (in states such as
California, Florida and New York) only adds to the strains. California, in
particular, is inundated, having admitted more immigrants in the past decade
than in the preceding 50 years; 40 per cent of the population of Los Angeles
is foreign born. A third of legal and half of illegal immigrants settle in
the state.
But the fears about immigration run deeper. The underlying problem is that
the decision to loosen immigration policy and shift the mix towards Asians
and Hispanics was not the result of a vigorous public debate. Americans did
not consciously decide their country was under-populated and insufficiently
cosmopolitan. The big changes of recent decades have taken nearly everybody
by surprise.
As a result, the social and financial strains are proving severe.
Highly-educated northern Europeans were easily assimilated. Low- skilled
Hispanics and Asians are not. Yet the federal government does not properly
compensate cities such as Los Angeles for the huge costs of absorbing this
new class of immigrant. And many politicians seem bewildered by social and
educational changes under way - such as strident demands for a genuinely
multicultural curriculum - that are a direct result of their policies.
By global standards US immigration policy is benign. While narrow-minded
Europeans exploit 'guest workers', the US readily offers citizenship. While
the likes of Canada and Australia scoop up the cream of the immigration pool
by imposing strict educational and skill requirements, Uncle Sam remains
big-hearted enough to welcome the underprivileged. It is uplifting to see a
nation settled by Europeans erecting a multicultural tent large enough for
every race and creed. Yet it is troubling that so few Americans seem to
grasp what a bold and principled policy they have embarked upon.
