FT  22 DEC 94 / Chiapas rebellion: no blood, but no solution - Ted Bardacke
on continuing stalemate in Mexico
The new government of Mexico's President Ernesto Zedillo publicly blamed
Tuesday's devaluation on the continued trouble in the southern state of
Chiapas, site of an armed peasant uprising nearly one year ago. Easing the
pressure on the currency would give the government time to resolve the
violent conflict, officials say.
With tensions rising this week after a rebel 'offensive' and an army
'counter-attack' in which not one shot was fired, the government certainly
needs some space to manoeuvre. On Monday, facing no resistance from federal
troops, members of the rebel Zapatista army and some of their civilian
supporters took over the town of Simojovel and other nearby villages beyond
the military cordon that had been hemming them.
On Tuesday, federal troops took back Simojovel, with the Zapatistas offering
no resistance and heading back into the surrounding jungle.
But although both sides shied away from resuming violence, a long-lasting
settlement in the state is as remote as ever. If anything, the stalemate
that has prevailed since the initial violence of the January rebellion has
deepened.
The Zapatistas, who launched their rebellion demanding increased rights for
indigenous people and greater democracy, have been joined by a plethora of
other groups inspired by or reacting against the uprising.
They range from armed peasants, now nominally allied with the Zapatistas,
specialising in land takeovers, to mercenary armies paid by the state's
powerful ranchers. The federal government, in a sometimes successful attempt
to keep the state's problems out of the national spotlight, has generally
tolerated the actions of these groups.
The unarmed middle of the political spectrum has also become crowded.
Chiapas now has two governors - Mr Eduardo Robledo, the official governor,
and Mr Amado Avendano, a 'parallel' governor recognised by the Zapatistas
and the leftist Democratic Revolutionary party.
Mr Avendano, who claims Mr Robledo won the governorship fraudulently for the
ruling Institutional Revolutionary party in last August's election, has set
up an alternative government which claims the support of between 34 and 58
of the state's 110 municipalities and the military backing of the
Zapatistas.
Both Mr Robledo and Mr Avendano are bent on unilaterally implementing reform
programs in areas controlled by their respective constituencies.
The arrival of new forces in the conflict makes the government's task of
reopening negotiations difficult. 'It feels like Lebanon,' says a European
diplomat. 'So many groups, tiny as they may be, legitimately deserve a place
at the negotiating table. I'm not sure the government can construct a table
big enough and the longer the stalemate is allowed to fester, the bigger the
table is going to have to be.'
Apart from the Zapatistas, at least three other armed peasant groups are
active in the state. They say they will join the Zapatistas if full-scale
war breaks out and have taken over large areas of land.
In response, ranchers have hired mercenaries, some reported to be veterans
of nearby Central American wars, to take back the land, leading to numerous
deadly clashes in both the central and southern parts of the state.
Demobilising these groups will be difficult, as political institutions in
the state are barely functioning. Mr Robledo has adopted an opposition
agenda and promised a new constitution and electoral law, agrarian reform
and respect for indigenous autonomy. He has also offered to resign from his
post as part of a successful negotiated settlement with the rebels.
The response from the opposition has been hostile. In the short term, Mr
Avendano can do little except continue to reject government proposals. He
has no money, announcing on his first day in 'office' that he was going to
lead a government of democratic transition 'as soon as I can find a desk and
chair'.
However, Mr Avendano and his supporters have made one crucial promise - that
everyone in areas adhering to his government will have enough to eat - that
further threatens the stability of the impoverished state.
Since he took office on December 1, Mr Zedillo has unsuccessfully tried
various formulas for opening peace negotiations.
The Zapatistas say that for talks to begin three conditions must be met: Mr
Robledo must resign; Mr Avendano must be recognised as governor; and Bishop
Samule Ruiz, a campaigner for peace in Chiapas, must be the mediator. Each
of these conditions will be difficult for the government to concede,
especially when they guarantee only the opening of negotiations, not their
completion.
