FT  13 OCT 94 / International Company News: Bankers Trust hits back in
derivatives case
Bankers Trust yesterday hit out against a claim that it was responsible for
losses of Dollars 20m suffered by a customer arising from derivative
instruments.
In papers filed in the district court in Cincinnati, the US bank claimed it
had fully briefed executives of the company, Gibson Greetings, on the risks
associated with the instruments.
Gibson, which lost Dollars 20m on interest rate swap contracts it bought
from Bankers Trust, claimed in a suit filed last month that the bank had
misled it about the risks.
The bank said yesterday that Gibson had bought the derivatives with full
knowledge of how they would behave if the markets moved against the company.
Gibson rejected offers from Bankers Trust on 10 separate occasions to end
the contracts, a move which would have limited the company's losses, the
bank added.
The case is seen as a test of whether corporate treasurers can claim to have
been unsuspecting victims when complex financial instruments they bought
turn sour. Procter &amp; Gamble, which earlier this year lost Dollars 157m on
interest rate swaps it bought from Bankers Trust, has yet to file a suit but
is watching the Gibson case with interest.
Bankers Trust said it had not acted as an adviser to Gibson, and the company
had made its own decisions about the risks it was running when buying the
swaps. The bank said it had been informed that Mr William Flaherty, the
company's chief financial officer, had consulted Gibson's board before
entering the two swap contracts which the company is now trying to
repudiate.
'Gibson knew that it was taking a position as to the direction that interest
rates might move and that (it) would suffer losses if its predictions were
wrong,' according to the court papers. The losses arose as US interest rates
rose, rather than falling as Gibson had expected.
Gibson came under attack yesterday from accountants Arthur Andersen, sacked
as the company's auditor last month. Andersen said there had been a
'deliberate attempt' by Cleo, a Gibson subsidiary, to inflate pre-tax income
by overstating the value of inventory. The company was not immediately
available for comment.
Derivatives, Page 32
