FT  11 JUN 94 / Books: Alliance of spiritual and secular gain
WE BELIEVE by Monsignor Gilbey Bellew Publishing Pounds 14.94, 260 pages
It is one of the best-known, most often-quoted tenets of the New Testament:
it is impossible to serve both God and Mammon. For millennia, that
scriptural dictum has spurred God-fearing money men to fill Church coffers
and cough up charitable donations - convinced, all the while, that their
burgeoning bank accounts barred access to the moral high ground. How
gratifying, then, for these proverbial camels seeking to pass through the
eye of a needle, to witness the alliance of spiritual and secular gain in
the one-man publishing phenomenon that is Mgr Gilbey.
The frock-coated monsignor, scion of the gin-producing Gilbeys and, at 93,
still a passionate beagler, has been a cult figure among young fogeys
(disciples include chief secretary of the Treasury Michael Portillo) since
his days as Catholic chaplain at Cambridge. His vision of a tradition-bound
Church and society wherein the ancient hierarchical code is respected, and
indeed enforced, by men and women committed to a definable and transcendent
authority, has struck a chord in those who bemoan the present moral and
social confusion. While politicians pay lip service to the ethical until
their peccadilloes are uncovered; and the chattering classes try to
marginalise the moral in a collective rush for the fool's gold of relative
values, Gilbey has raised a lone voice in our moral wilderness. He calls for
a top-to-bottom revisionism and his views are enthusing a growing number of
men and women disenchanted with the status quo.
His increasing popularity has been the happy discovery of the publisher who
has collected, genie-in-the-bottle style, Mgr Gilbey's pronouncements - on
everything from favourite authors to sins of the flesh.
Journalist-turned-publisher Glenys Roberts knows she is on to a good thing
with the traditionalist monsignor: first with the Commonplace Book and now
with We Believe - the hard-back re-issuing of Gilbey's ABCs of the Catholic
faith - Roberts has watched her cleric's groupies turn his books into cult
classics. The Commonplace Book is now in its third reprint, and advance
orders for We Believe look set to compete with the first.
Timing, of course, is of the essence. Mgr Gilbey's philosophy of life -
based on a revulsion at egalitarianism as the enemy of promise, and at
collectivism as the foe of individual achievement - makes a great deal of
sense in a society that, having renounced hierarchy as an oppressive force,
finds itself drowning in mediocrity. For Gilbey, a dramatic renewal could
take place if everyone - Catholic and non-Catholic alike - were to pledge
allegiance to a well-defined authority and accept a place within the
structure that bolstered it; this, in the Gilbey cosmology, finds
socio-political translation in a nostalgia for the ancien regime.
Both roots and reins are necessary to our sense of well-being, argues
Gilbey, echoing Thomas Aquinas. But where the good Doctor of the Church
limited himself to the spiritual realm, Mgr Gilbey stretches his argument to
cover our secular world: a pecking order that pigeonholes us provides an
important sense of identity; a check-list of civic dos and don'ts must
accompany the spiritual guidelines set out in the Commandments and detailed
in the catechism (Mgr Gilbey does a line by line exegesis of the traditional
catechism; the latest version, out last month, will probably warrant a new
appendix). In essence, for our collective welfare we must harness the
nation's energy to reinstate the trinity of religion, authority and
tradition.
Unlike the great majority of his fellow Christian clerics, Mgr Gilbey does
not regard capitalism as the seedbed of social evil. Liberation theology,
the preferential option for the poor, and the Christian Socialism preached
by the late Labour leader John Smith and his probable successor Tony Blair -
all receive the thumbs down from the well-bred Mgr. When Christ enjoined the
young man to give up all his belongings and follow him, he was not issuing a
commandment but a counsel - setting up a goal which we should only strive
for if we want to be ideal Christians. For those of us who are content to be
merely good Christians, there is no need to forgo worldly goods. Phew.
What Mgr Gilbey campaigns for is a society built upon a firm and clearly
defined structure and bleached of political correctness and wishy-washy
liberalism. He teaches that spiritual and civic rules are necessary and
should not be breached, for they establish a context within which we can
operate and, hopefully, flourish. To some this will sound like the
fist-thumping speech of a tooth-brush moustacheoed spiritual dictator, whose
loyal followers will goose-step behind him towards the City of God. But for
many, Mgr Gilbey has called our 20th century bluff and points to a golden
future based on an idyllic past.
The reviewer is the editor of the Catholic Herald
