FT  17 JUN 94 / FT Guide to World Cup Football (19): Group D - Argentina
Over the last four years the national team of Argentina has often looked
like a perverse joke at the expense of football. Don't say it too loud,
though, because Argentinians take their football seriously, perhaps too
seriously.
In Italy in 1990, Argentina squeaked into the second round as one of the
best third-place teams. They beat a more talented Brazilian side as well as
Yugoslavia and Italy (both these on penalties) to reach the final.
In the Copa America last year Ecuador, Colombia, Mexico and Brazil all
played dazzling attacking football but Argentina won the tournament,
eliminating Brazil on penalties and defending for most of the final against
Mexico before winning 2-1. - Argentina qualified for the US the hard way.
They lost their last group match in Buenos Aires 5-0 to Colombia, to
surrender an automatic place in the final. They then ground out a 2-1
aggregate win in their two-leg play-off against Australia. - So here they
are again: the black hats of football, threatening to spoil the party. Diego
Maradona and Claudio Caniggia are back from their cocaine bans. Maradona,
even fatter and unfitter than four years ago, his knees and his attitude
worse than ever, is more of a talisman than a genuine force. But he just has
to shake a magical boot over the ball and world class defences quake in
superstitious terror. - Argentina will again put their faith in defence in
depth backed by the miraculous goalkeeping of Sergio Goyocochea. But there
is a difference. Four years ago the unreliable Caniggia was their sole
attacking threat. Now he is the third choice behind Abel Balbo (Roma) and
Gabriel Batistuta (Fiorentina). Batistuta scored two brilliant goals that
beat Mexico last summer. - The three points for a win in the group stage was
introduced to discourage the defensive, draw-oriented strategy which carried
Argentina to the final in 1990. But they are now equipped to win games. The
joke is likely to be on Greece and Bulgaria.
