FT  03 MAY 94 / South African Elections: 'South Africans are now free' - FW
de Klerk
The following are excerpts from the speech by President FW de Klerk
conceding defeat to Mr Nelson Mandela.
Four years and three months ago I said in parliament that the time had come
for us to break out of the cycle of conflict, tension and violent struggle
in which we had been embroiled for decades.
During the past week we have seen the realisation of that vision. After so
many centuries, we will finally have a government which represents all South
Africans. All South Africans are now free.
During the past four years Mr Mandela has played. . . a leading and an
honourable role. I thank him and congratulate him. He deserves the
congratulations, good wishes and prayers of all South Africans.
During the past four years we have proved we can work together. Despite our
differences, our relationship has become a symbol of the ability of South
Africans from widely different backgrounds to co-operate in the national
interest. This spirit will be essential to the success of the government of
national unity.
Mr Mandela has walked a long road and now stands at the top of the hill. A
traveller would sit down and admire the view. But a man of destiny knows
that beyond this hill lies another and another. The journey is never
complete. As he contemplates the next hill I hold out my hand in friendship
and in co-operation.
As far as my own position is concerned, I should like to make clear that I
believe that my political task is just beginning. Everything that we have
done so far - the four years of difficult and often frustrating
negotiations, the problems and the crises - have been simply a preparation
for the work that lies ahead.
The greatest challenge which we will face in the government of national
unity will be to defend and nurture our new constitution. Our greatest task
will be to ensure our young and vulnerable democracy will take root and
flourish.
I will be in a good position in the government of national unity. I will not
be there at the whim of any person or any party, but in my own right as the
representative of many millions of South Africans.
Just as we could not rule South Africa effectively without the support of
the ANC and its supporters, no government will be able to rule South Africa
effectively without the support of the people and the institutions that I
represent.
I enthusiastically pledge that support in the spirit of national
reconciliation.
The National party has. . . the recipe for the future and. . . one day we
shall be the largest party in the country. Our objective will be to prove
this at the polls in five years' time.
This is an important milestone in the history of our country - perhaps the
most important that we will ever see.
Next Tuesday I shall lay down my responsibilities as state president, secure
in the knowledge that we have achieved what we set out to achieve four years
and three months ago.
I shall be handing over the presidency to Mr Mandela, but I shall not be
leaving government. I shall be surrendering power, not to the majority of
the moment, but to the South African people.
A power greater than man has given South Africa the spirit, the chance to go
forward in peace. God almighty has been kind to us. Now it is up to the
political leaders to join together for the good of our people and complete
the task of healing and reconciliation. God bless South Africa. Nkosi
sikelel i'Afrika.
