FT  13 AUG 94 / European Commission rejects Portillo's stance on disabled
Mr Michael Portillo, the employment secretary, was yesterday accused of
putting the jobs of thousands of disabled workers at risk to boost his
credentials on the Conservative right wing.
And European Commission officials denied his department's claim that a
European Union directive made it necessary to withdraw government contracts
which provide work for workshops staffed by the disabled.
The commission said it had 'never asked the UK to take this action and is
surprised that it has done so in such an abrupt fashion rather than trying
to get around it at community level'.
It said that in the unlikely event of a legal challenge to the British
scheme the commission would have sought a compromise to allow it to continue
in some form.
Mr Tony Lloyd, Labour employment spokesman, accused Mr Portillo of acting on
purely ideological grounds to strengthen his support among 'extreme
rightwing Conservative MPs'.
In a letter to the minister Mr Lloyd says he has been assured that the
European Commission made it clear that new rules on public procurement did
not require the withdrawal of such contracts.
He adds that the directive 'was certainly not designed to destroy jobs for
people with disabilities'.
Mr Lloyd calls for a 'very clear statement' on the reasons for a ministerial
decision which could only add to the difficulties of a disadvantaged group
of workers.
He urges Mr Portillo to discuss with the European Commission how the
priority supplies scheme which enabled sheltered workshops to provide jobs
for disabled people could be reactivated. If this could not be done Mr
Portillo should announce the steps he proposed to protect the jobs
threatened by his action.
Mr Phillip Oppenheim, the employment minister, said his department was
seeking confirmation that the commission did not regard the directive as
applying to government contracts with supported workshops and factories.
'This conflicts with firm legal advice previously received from the
government's own advisers,' he said.
