FT  03 DEC 94 / Food &amp; Drink: Food fit for the 90s
Nearly three centuries ago a German art historian called Karl Friedrich von
Rumohr launched an attack on the elaborate cooking styles of the French
court.
He proposed that we return to the simplicity of the ancient Greeks and take
a keen look at the way food is prepared in Italy. Today we are all Rumohrs.
We talk of healthy eating or the Mediterranean diet. We have become so used
to talking about the latter that we are now convinced that such a thing
actually exists. There are now even Frenchmen north of the Loire who spurn
butter, cream and eggs and who cook their meals in a style more reminiscent
of Alice Waters than Escoffier.
A much-simplified view of Italy provides the new model. All those fiercely
independent regions are run together to create the ideal diet of the 1990s.
Much of Italy refuses to conform to the picture at all, but there is one
region which fits it exactly: Apulia.
Apulia deserves to be better known, and not just for the food. The only
visitors who come in bulk are members of the Club Mediterranee. I suspect
they are little driven by dietary considerations, nor do they stray far from
their forbidding-looking camps on the coast.
They miss out on the lovely old cities of Ostuni and Lecce with their
baroque churches, and the curious beehive dwellings around the towns of
Alberobello and Locorotondo.
Food is in the purest modern idiom: bunches of wrinkled tomatoes are
suspended from the rafters, drying, not so much in the sun as from the heat
of the kitchen; chillies add their fire to the pot; then there is garlic and
oregano, basil and rocket, and olive oil with simply everything. On the
coast you subsist on fish. Meat is scarce. Local pasta omits eggs while
vegetables assume a role all of their own: mostly aubergines, courgettes and
bell peppers generally dressed up with plenty of tomatoes.
How to handle these ingredients and to transform them into the sunny dishes
of Apulia is the message behind Susanna Gelmetti's Apulian Cookery Weeks.
These take place in May, June and September. In July and August it is simply
too hot and Susanna and her team move north to her other school in Umbria.
In Apulia she is assisted by Tonino Punzi, joint owner of the Borgo Antico
restaurant in the magnificent whitewashed-walled city of Ostuni.
The courses take place a few miles away from Ostuni in a lovely old
masseria, a noble farmhouse surrounded by venerable olive trees often many
centuries old.
The participants are lodged in two-room apartments created out of the fabric
of the old building while the courses are held in a temple-like building at
the end of a formal garden.
In the course of a week we learnt more than a dozen local dishes and one or
two that were not. A tiella di verdure al forno was a sort of layer cake of
southern vegetables bound together with gooey cheese and pancetta. A dish of
stuffed vegetables produced a different stuffing for each in order to
highlight the various flavours.
Mashed potatoes were transformed with chopped basil and olive oil. Broad
beans and wild rocket were blended into a rich emulsion with the consistency
of hummus. The similarity is hardly surprising with Greece just across the
Adriatic.
One of my favourites was stuffed mussels. We made the filling from soft
bread and Parmesan and garlic and baked them in the oven. We made pasta and
stuffed it with fish; rolled involtini from swordfish and veal. The latter
was stuffed with raisins and pine nuts: a recipe which derived something
from the North African coast, a few miles to the south.
We made a sort of Apulian cottage pie with lamb, potatoes and Parmesan
cheese and made plenty of cakes which went down well with the local passito
wines, and the sweet Primitivos, made from a close cousin of the Californian
Zinfandel.
Cookery weeks are also holidays and there was plenty to do besides cooking.
The coast is 10 minutes away, and mercifully untrammelled by sinister
holiday camps. Ostuni was 10 minutes in the opposite direction and little
excursions took us to both Lecce and Alberobello.
Nor did we feel cut off in the masseria. The house becomes a restaurant at
weekends and many important local functions are held there. After midnight
in particular, the place seems to spring to life as a host of curious
characters emerges and takes up positions around the tempietto.
Pietro the balladeer took a particular interest in Australian women (Devo
pizzicare Matilda]). Lilo, the night watchman, liked to mix himself a
midnight snack of acqua sala a mixture of dry bread, red onions, olive oil
and sea water, and just as nasty as it sounds.
The local carabinieri were also regular attendants at these nocturnal revels
along with a bevy of lesser players. I have not had such an enjoyable week
in years.
Information. Details are available from Susanna Gelmetti on 081-208 0112.
The price is Pounds 995 for the week inclusive of flights and full board and
lodging. Extras are Pounds 12 travel insurance and the price of a cheap meal
in Ostuni or Lecce.
