FT  14 MAR 94 / International press review
MADRID
Spain's Socialist government has found itself in a role it wanted badly to
avoid - as the villain of the piece, or as they say in Spanish 'the bad guy
in the film', over enlargement of the European Union. But by evoking
'national interests' it has ensured a broad front of support from the
country's press.
Most editorialists gave less importance to the wrangle with Norway over
fishing rights than Spain's demands for minority blocking votes in the
future 16-member EU. The leading Madrid daily El Pais described Spain's
decision to dig its heels in as 'unfortunate, but right'.
At stake was Spain's ability to prevent decisions on crucial issues being
imposed on it. The argument boiled down to 'a struggle to prevent Europe's
centre of gravity being definitively shifted northwards'. It recognised the
quandary this represented for Spain's ostensibly pro-European leaders.
'For some negotiators it is hard to resist the pressure and criticism from
friends, partners and allies. But in this instance there is no other way for
Spain, which favours enlargement, to defend interests of the first
magnitude.'
The right-wing daily ABC said the government's firmness was backed by all
political parties. But the government itelf was partly to blame for the
'terrible' way it negotiated Spain's entry eight years ago, leaving the
country 'in many sectors defenceless against a decision by Brussels.' As for
Norwegian cod, it hoped for 'a logical outcome which would cater for Spain's
legitimate demands without imposing intolerable conditions on Norway.'
The conservative Barcelona newspaper La Vanguardia commented: 'Anyone
shocked by Spain's attitude should also be shocked by the attitude of those
opposing its demands.' Norway, it conceded, was 'perfectly entitled to
defend its interests.' The difference was that the Norwegians were on the
outside trying to get in.
PARIS
Air France's request for FFr20bn (Pounds 2.3bn) in state aid, and the fact
that it accounted for half the losses made by all the world's airlines last
year, occupied much space - but provoked relatively little editorial comment
 -in the French press.
One exception, however, was La Tribune, the business daily, which said that
some would find it 'scandalous that the French taxpayer was having to dig
into his pocket again' to save Air France, and Bull the computer company,
and others 'would reckon that the bills presented by the new bosses of these
companies were a bit steep, even indecent, at a time when private companies
were having to take the risk of going to the markets for new money'.
The distortion of competition was too flagrant not to be noticed, said La
Tribune in language that could have come - and undoubtedly will - out of a
British Airways press release on the Air France aid request.
But the real problem, La Tribune said, was that Air France and Bull had
simply always lived sheltered lives, protected from the market and winds of
competition. Their recent history was a tale of 'money lost, energies wasted
and employees disappointed'.
However, Ouest France, produced in Bordeaux but with the largest circulation
in France, struck a more upbeat note. Mr Christian Blanc, Air France's new
boss had a record of solving knotty problems like the New Caledonian crisis
in the 1980s, and other French companies like Citroen had been able to pull
themselves rapidly together. But it said Air France's problem was that it
essentially lacked a business culture, and 'that will not be settled by a
cheque'.
SANTIAGO
Weekend papers were glowing in their accounts of the presidential handover,
a 'fiesta of democracy' in which Eduardo Frei, in the words of La Nacion,
'arrived in Valparaiso (home to Congress) as a common citizen and returned
to Santiago as president'.
For the most part, editors forgot their political differences and treated
the event as pageant. This was, after all, as La Epoca pointed out, the
first time in nearly 25 years that power had been transferred from one
democratically elected president to another. The last time was in 1970 when
Eduardo Frei's father handed the presidential sash to Salvador Allende.
The man responsible for breaking that sequence, General Augusto Pinochet,
attended Frei's inauguration in his capacity as commander-in-chief of the
armed forces. According to El Mercurio, the general's entrance 'was received
with loud and prolonged applause'. La Epoca noticed that, after the
ceremony, the general did not exit through the front door, but left 'via the
car parks'.
There was much praise for outgoing president Patricio Aylwin, though an
opinion piece in La Tercera thought his government had not properly
administered 'what it had received from its (military) predecessor'.
El Mercurio said that - discounting financial scandal at state copper
company Codelco, and a lax attitude towards crime - Aylwin's presidency 'had
been one of the most auspicious in the country's history'. It hoped
President Frei, a fellow Christian Democrat, would show the same
'moderation'.
La Nacion was less cautious. In a piece headlined 'Four unforgettable years'
it said: 'The historical merit of Aylwin is that he taught us to live in a
democracy once again.' Now that Chileans were not fighting for basic
political freedoms, they could concentrate on social problems, it said.
'Four years ago, it was not like that.'
Contributions from: David White, Madrid; David Buchan, Paris; David Pilling,
Santiago.
