FT  26 MAY 94 / Survey of Brazil (3): Shrinking trade share is likely to
reverse - Export and import links
Brazil is still one of the world's most hermetic economies. In spite of the
reforms of disgraced president Fernando Collor, which aimed to prise open
the country after years of import substitution, Brazil's trade with the
outside world is less, proportionally, than a decade ago.
In 1983, total trade constituted 16.6 per cent of gross domestic product, an
already small proportion that slipped to 15.5 per cent last year when
combined imports and exports reached Dollars 64bn. Chile trades about 60 per
cent of its GDP.
'Brazil's presence in the world market is smaller than it was 10 years ago.
We are shrinking,' says Mr Eduardo Gianetti da Fonseca, an economist at the
University of Sao Paulo. This trend is, however, likely to reverse as
Collor's reforms dig in, domestic demand picks up and industry - deprived of
its once captive, highly protected market - looks abroad for opportunity.
'There is a consensus in Brazil that the country must participate more in
international trade,' says Mr Tullo Vigevani, professor of political science
at Sao Paulo university.
Last year, exports rose by 7.7 per cent against 1992, a creditable
performance given weak international demand. Imports surged by nearly a
quarter in response to domestic growth of 4.9 per cent. In 1993, Brazil ran
a trade surplus of Dollars 13.3bn, down on the Dollars 15.5bn of the
previous year, but still one of the largest in the world.
Average tariffs, at 14 per cent, are now near Latin American norms, allowing
a rapid rise in imports of intermediary and capital goods. Many economists
say manufacturers are importing machinery in order to raise productivity,
which should feed into future exports.
Imports of consumer goods, on which tariffs are still relatively high, grew
less rapidly, although there were sharp increases in imported cars and
electronic equipment. In the medium term, consumer imports are likely to
rise significantly, but Brazil's diversified production base is fairly
well-equipped to compete and has made important productivity gains in recent
years.
'Tariffs have gone down substantially and yet industrial output is growing,'
says Mr Guilherme Leite da Silva Dias, director of the Institute of Economic
Research. Domestic manufacturers, he says, are holding their own against
foreign producers in contrast with some less-sophisticated Latin American
economies whose industries have struggled to compete.
Even so, Brazil's huge surpluses - necessary for financing foreign
obligations following the debt crisis of 1982 - are likely to shrink
further. In 1994, the first-quarter surplus was down by nearly a third on
1993, and is likely to be around Dollars 10bn by year-end; about half its
1988 peak.
Mr Simao Davi Silber, a Sao Paulo trade specialist, says it is both
desirable and feasible for Brazil to double the amount of its international
trade relative to GDP. Mr Gianetti agrees that successful domestic
restructuring requires far greater commercial interchange than today's
'ridiculously low' levels.
The North American Free Trade Agreement and the economic integration of
Europe may limit access to Brazil's traditionally strongest export markets.
Mr Silber says there is further room for expanding trade with Latin America
which now accounts for 20 per cent of Brazilian commerce against 14 per cent
in 1985. Brazil has proposed a South American free trade bloc.
Argentina, fellow member of the Mercosul free trade zone with Brazil,
Uruguay and Paraguay, accounts for much of that increase in continental
trade; Brazilian shipments there soared from 2.9 per cent of total exports
in 1988 to 9.4 per cent last year. However, Mr Silber says that, given
different exchange rate policies and concern in Buenos Aires over
consistently high trade deficits with Brazil, there may be restraints to
further big increases.
Another way to accelerate commercial integration, he says, lies with rapidly
expanding Asian markets where Brazil is under-represented. Greater Latin
American co-operation should facilitate better access to Pacific ports.
Before Brazil can launch itself upon the world in earnest, Mr Silber says,
it must tackle the plethora of indirect taxes which bloat the price of
exports by up to 15 per cent. 'At the moment we are exporting taxes,' he
says.
As nations begin to huddle into trading blocs, some Brazilian industrialists
fear they will be isolated. It seems likely, for example, that Nafta will
diminish access to the US of Brazilian orange juice concentrate and pulp,
both of which can be produced in Mexico.
Mr Silber says that Brazilian exports - metallurgical products, vehicles and
chemicals, as well as commodities such as soya, coffee and mineral ores -
are sufficiently diversified to withstand isolated difficulties in
particular markets.
Of more concern to many analysts is the possibility of fresh efforts within
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to exclude exports from countries
such as Brazil under environmental or social dumping provisions.
'I think this is really a potential menace,' says Mr Silber. 'It's a strong
instrument that you could use against everything. We will have to see what
happens.'
