FT  27 JAN 94 / Pressure on Hurd over Malaysia dam deal
The government was under increasing pressure to disclose more about its
controversial donation of aid to Malaysia in the late 1980s after a powerful
House of Commons committee decided to launch a new investigation yesterday.
The all-party select committee on foreign affairs said it would investigate
the Thatcher government's decision to give Malaysia Pounds 234m to build a
hydroelectric dam on the Pergau river. The decision was opposed by a top
Whitehall official.
The committee's announcement came as ministers disclosed for the first time
that the offer of aid had been linked to sales of Pounds 1bn of defence
equipment to the Malaysian government. Labour MPs said last night such a
linkage might be illegal.
There were also growing signs that Britain's aid contribution had been used
on other construction contracts, including 12 hospitals.
In a parliamentary written answer, Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary,
said there had been a link between the general offer of aid to Malaysia and
the signing of a Pounds 1bn arms deal.
He said that on a visit to Kuala Lumpur in 1988, Lord Youngerof Prestwick -
then Mr George Younger, defence secretary, had signed a protocol in which
the Malaysian government had set out its intention to buy defence equipment
from the UK.
According to Mr Hurd: 'The protocol included a reference to 'aid in support
of non-military aspects under this programme'.'
Mr Hurd emphasised that 'after consultation with ministerial colleagues in
London' the link was later officially denied. Lord Younger wrote to the
Malaysian minister of finance in June that year to say that aid could not be
linked to defence sales.
'As a result, the issue was not taken up in the memorandum of understanding
on defence procurement which the British and Malaysian PMs signed in
September 1988,' Mr Hurd said.
However, Mr Hurd's comments run counter to Lord Younger's recent claims that
there had only been a 'verbal' linkage of arms and aid. It is also
understood that Mrs Thatcher was forced to write a toughly worded memorandum
to ministers, outlining her concern that the aid deal should not be linked
to arms sales. The foreign affairs committee should be able to summon Mr
Hurd to its hearings to answer questions. Foreign Office officials said
committee members might be allowed to see the documents relating to the
case.
However, the officials thought that any link of overseas aid with defence
contracts would not be technically illegal.
The unusual nature of the Pergau deal was further underlined last night when
the government admitted it was the only project over which Mr Hurd had
intervened with Overseas Development Administration officials while foreign
secretary.
Mr Mark Lennox-Boyd, foreign office minister, said in a parliamentary
written answer that Mr Hurd had 'given a ministerial direction to ODA's
accounting officer on one occasion, in respect of the Pergau hydro-electric
project in Malaysia'.
