FT  26 JAN 94 / Clinton vows to press ahead with welfare reforms
President Bill Clinton last night vowed to 'continue the journey of renewal'
in the reform of the US domestic infrastructure, making clear he would press
ahead with both healthcare and welfare changes this year.
In his first formal State of the Union address, he also said he would send
Congress next month one of the toughest budgets in recent memory with tight
caps on spending.
The president squashed speculation that he would not propose significant
changes to the welfare system this year so as to clear the decks in Congress
for the overriding priority of healthcare reform. It was, he said,
'inevitable and imperative' that both be tackled at the same time.
But White House aides stressed that the welfare proposals would not be
revealed until the spring when it is hoped healthcare will have passed some
initial congressional hurdles.
Nevertheless, the president explicitly linked the two. 'Until we solve the
healthcare problem, we will not solve the welfare problem,' he said.
Addressing criticism in Congress and in parts of the medical and insurance
professions, he emphasised that his healthcare plan guaranteed the provision
of private, not state, insurance.
But he also insisted that an improving economy did not mean that an overhaul
of the healthcare system could be ducked. Without it, he said, Americans
would be faced with 'less care, fewer choices and higher bills'.
His renewed commitment to welfare reform must be seen as a concession to the
criticism of Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat, who is
also chairman of the Senate finance committee and who has threatened to make
trouble for healthcare if welfare were put on the back burner.
State of the Union messages always have much symbolism and this was present
last night. In the House gallery Mrs Hillary Clinton was seated next to Mr
Lane Kirkland, the union leader, and Mr Jack Smith, chairman of General
Motors. Mr Clinton opened his speech with a tribute to Mr Tip O'Neill, the
former House Speaker, who died recently, and then applauded Mr James Brady,
the former Reagan press secretary who has lobbied for a gun control bill
that became law last November.
He made much of the economic recovery, particularly the projected reduction
to Dollars 180bn in the upcoming fiscal year of a federal budget deficit
estimated when he took office to remain in the Dollars 300bn range. Mr
Clinton said: 'We should be proud of the early results but everyone should
acknowledge there is more to do.' For this reason he intended to pursue
tight spending ceilings in next month's budget.
Mr Clinton endorsed a number of measures designed to attack the crime wave,
which is the dominant national concern according to opinion polls. These
include a bill putting 100,000 more policemen on the streets and the
establishment of quasi-military 'boot camps' for young non-violent
offenders.
In a similar vein, designed to appeal to the conservative element in
Congress, he said next month's budget 'draws the line against further
defence cuts and fully protects the readiness and quality of our forces'.
US confidence grows, Page 3
Editorial Comment, Page 21
