FT  04 MAY 94 / Northern Rock plans merger: Latest building society sector
shake-up expected today
The building societies sector is set to face a further shake-up as Northern
Rock, the UK's eleventh largest building society, is today expected to
announce plans to merge with another society.
Northern Rock has called a press conference for this morning to make a
statement about its future. The society would not comment yesterday on what
its plans were.
The announcement comes less than two weeks after Lloyds Bank offered Pounds
1.8bn for Cheltenham &amp; Gloucester, the UK's sixth largest society. This
offer sparked expectations of a restructuring of the financial services
industry, and sharpened the interests of banks and other organisations in
acquiring societies.
However, in the wake of the Lloyds/C&amp;G deal, Mr Chris Sharp, Northern Rock
managing director, re-emphasised his commitment to mutuality.
Northern Rock is an ambitious society, which has made clear its
determination to grow both organically and by acquisition. Mr Sharp has
previously said that Northern Rock wants to be among the 10 largest
societies. By the end of last year, Northern Rock's assets had grown to
Pounds 7.3bn, narrowing the gap with Bristol &amp; West, the 10th largest
society with assets of Pounds 8.14bn.
Some society chief executives commented that the Lloyds' bid would signal
the end of the 'traditional' building society merger, because of the cash
payments of up to Pounds 10,000 which the deal offered each member.
Mergers between societies do not produce such significant windfalls because
ownership of the new organisation remains with its members. They must
approve any plans for a merger, takeover or conversion to plc status, and
the proposed pay-out to C&amp;G members was thought to sour the prospects for
other societies of winning their members' consent to a deal that would not
yield such an immediate cash benefit.
One medium-sized society which was planning a merger is thought to have
shelved this move for the moment.
Earlier this year, Northern Rock reported a 29 per cent rise in pre-tax
profits, from Pounds 69m to Pounds 89.3m.
There was also substantial balance sheet growth, despite a year in which
societies faced fierce competition for mortgage lending and retail savings.
The last big merger plans within the societies sector were announced last
summer by Leeds Permanent, the fifth largest society, and National &amp;
Provincial, the eighth largest. That merger foundered in the autumn over a
clash of management styles.
