FT  19 APR 94 / Berlusconi looks to centre for support
Italy's right-wing Freedom Alliance, victorious in last month's general
election, has turned to the centre parties to broaden its parliamentary
support and widen the choice in forming a government.
The outcome of these talks, which began last weekend, will determine the
complexion of the next government and the fate of the two small centre
parties. Initial reactions suggest the centre is deeply divided on the
issue; there are also reservations about the move within the Freedom
Alliance.
The charm offensive is being conducted by Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the media
magnate and likely next prime minister. It is being directed at the Popular
party (PPI), formed in January from the mainstream of the former Christian
Democrats, and the Pact for Italy of reformist Mr Mario Segni, who is also
an ex-Christian Democrat.
These two parties were the chief victims of the new first-past-the-post
voting system in the election. They were squeezed between the Freedom
Alliance on their right and the Progressive Alliance, headed by the former
communist Party of the Democratic Left (PDS), on the left.
Mr Berlusconi's offer is based on three considerations. He is mainly
concerned to ensure the stability of his prospective government by having a
clear majority in the senate. At present the Freedom Alliance - composed of
Mr Berlusconi's Forza Italia, the populist Northern League, the neo-fascist
MSI/National Alliance and the Christian Democrat Centre - is at least six
seats short of a majority there.
Since both houses perform duplicate functions, a Freedom Alliance government
permanently risks legislation not passing through the senate. This situation
was underlined by the tense vote electing Mr Carlo Scognamiglio as speaker.
He won on Saturday by one vote on the fourth round against Mr Giovanni
Spadolini, the outgoing speaker.
A second consideration is Mr Berlusconi's desire to pull his government more
towards the centre and so soften the impact of having the MSI on board. His
original overtures, even before he formally entered politics in January,
were towards the Christian Democrats and Mr Segni.
Only after both rejected him did he forge deals first with Mr Umberto
Bossi's League and then with Mr Gianfranco Fini's MSI. He was also able to
pick up the small right wing of the Christian Democrats who reformed into
the Christian Democrat Centre.
Linked to this opening to the centre is a desire to balance the
unpredictable presence of the League. From previous experience, Mr Bossi is
likely to use the threat of withdrawing his support as a way to increase
political leverage.
The final reason is to expand the reservoir of people on whom Mr Berlusconi
can draw to form a government.
