FT  18 MAR 94 / Treasury gives Bank greater autonomy over gilts
The Treasury yesterday announced it was giving the Bank of England greater
freedom to operate in the government bond market. Once annual guidelines on
funding policy have been set by the Treasury, the bank will be effectively
free to choose the timing and nature of gilt issues.
The change is another step towards giving the bank control over 'technical'
matters of financial policy with the Treasury retaining the power to decide
strategy. It follows the announcement last year by Mr Kenneth Clarke, the
chancellor, that the bank would have control of the timing of interest rate
cuts.
Analysts stressed the bank always had the main responsibility for the timing
of gilt issues and the announcement was unlikely to make much difference to
funding policy. Nevertheless, Mr Don Smith, UK economist at Midland Global
Markets, said: 'This move puts the Bank of England further along the road to
independence.'
Mr Simon Briscoe, UK economist at SG Warburg Securities, described the
change as 'a further important step towards bank freedom and towards a more
orderly market'.
Both the bank and the Treasury emphasised that the new structure is designed
to be more efficient.
In a statement, the Treasury said: 'In the past, individual decisions on
funding were taken after discussion between Treasury ministers, Treasury
officials, and the Bank of England. In future, any operations the bank
proposes that fall within the remit and the guidelines will normally be
approved by Treasury officials.'
A formal remit for the bank will be set out by the Treasury at the start of
the financial year, which will reveal the expected gross issues of gilts
needed to fund the borrowing requirement. Previously, gilts traders had been
forced to estimate this.
The bank set out its policy for the 1994-95 financial year yesterday. It
said the likely gross sales of gilts would be Pounds 37bn, and it would
continue to fund via a combination of monthly gilt auctions and sales of
stock 'on tap' in the secondary market. Individual auctions will be for
between Pounds 2bn and Pounds 4bn of stock and will normally be held on the
last Wednesday of the month.
The bank has called a meeting at 4pm today to discuss the new structure with
marketmakers, but the City welcomed the move. Mr John Shepperd, chief
economist at Yamaichi International Europe, said: 'This is a useful step in
terms of the transparency of the bank's operations.'
Bonds, Page 31
