FT  01 DEC 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Soyabean patent breeds
discontent - Geoff Tansey reports on latest moves in the battle for control
of tomorrow's seeds
The battle over who will control tomorrow's seeds enters another round today
when a Canadian public interest group makes a European challenge to an
attempt to gain monopoly control of all genetically-engineered soyabean
seeds and plants.
The Rural Advancement Foundation International is supported by 17 other
non-governmental organisations from all over the world. It is opposing a
patent application at the European Patent Office by Agracetus, a
wholly-owned biotechnology subsidiary company of US multinational WR Grace &amp;
Company, the world's largest speciality chemicals company with 1993 sales
exceeding Dollars 4.4bn. Only just over 1m acres (400,000ha) of soyabeans
are grown in the European Union, but the worldwide total is about 130m
acres, nearly half in the US. The crop's value is around Dollars 27bn
annually.
The controversial patent covers all forms of genetically engineered soyabean
plants and seeds, irrespective of the genes used or the transformation
technology employed. 'A patent granting a single corporation monopoly
control over genetic research on one of the world's most important food
crops - soyabeans - is a threat to world food security, and demonstrates
that the patent system is recklessly out-of-control,' claims Patrick Mooney,
executive director of RAFI.
'The soyabean patent is technically flawed and morally unacceptable - and it
must be revoked.'
The notice of opposition, filed just days before the deadline, claims that
the patent does not meet the necessary technical criteria. RAFI argues that
it is neither novel nor non-obvious and that it contains insufficient
disclosure. It also argues on ethical and moral grounds that no company
should be given such broad-ranging monopoly rights over a plant species.
Seed companies share RAFI's concern. 'I believe it is ethically wrong,' says
Ed Dart, research and development director of Zeneca Seeds, about the
species-wide patent. 'If they have got a transformation method then they
should get a patent for that method,' he says, but not for others not
invented.
Agracetus 'intends to make non-exclusive licences broadly available at
reasonable terms', according to a company statement. It will also offer free
licences to academic or government researchers to 'ensure that publicly
funded research will proceed unaffected by this patent'. No licences have
been requested up to now according to Russ Smestad, vice-president of
Agracetus.
Dr Geoff Hawtin, director of the Rome-based International Plant Genetic
Resources Institute, is highly sceptical of such claims about the impact on
research. He is gravely concerned about species-wide patents, fearing that
they could put a stranglehold on the future development of the species
involved. Other companies or researchers would be discouraged, not just in
soyabean research, but in other crops. 'One danger I see,' he says, 'is that
investments made in genetic engineering by companies and countries through
public research will count for nothing when this type of patent is awarded.'
Such awards are likely to discourage research unless the researcher is sure
to be able to get the patent, he believes.
Mr Smestad rejects such fears, drawing a parallel with the development of
hybrid seeds, beginning with maize in the 1920s and 1930s. This helped
catalyse the conversion from a seed industry largely supported by public
breeding programmes to one supported by major, private seed companies, but
it did not stop research, he argues.
Although the initial effects of species-wide patents are likely to be felt
first in the seed industry of the developed countries, Dr Hawtin expects
them to affect developing countries too. Many of these have not recognised
patents so far but the new Gatt settlement means that many countries will
have to recognise them, he warns.
Under patent law, say RAFI, 'it is illegal for farmers to save transgenic
soyabean seed harvested on their land for replanting'. They may have to make
royalty payments. Moreover, since many developed countries prevent import of
products infringing a patent, 'in the case of transgenic soyabeans,
signatory states to the EPC (European Patent Convention) would be legally
permitted to block imports of transgenic soyabeans, or even products derived
from soyabeans (such as oil or animal feeds containing transgenic soya) if
they originated in countries that fail to recognise the patent', RAFI argues
in its opposition statement.
Agracetus counters that it is simply following similar patent strategies to
the rest of the biotechnology community. It wants patent coverage as broad
as the patent laws allow.
Overall WR Grace sees patent protection as the key stimulus to global
scientific advance and innovation. 'In countries with weak patent
protection, companies will be reluctant to invest in research and
development at the risk of having their intellectual property pirated,' said
a company official.
Agracetus has also applied for a similar soyabean patent in Canada and the
US and received a wide-ranging patent in Australia in 1992.
Opposition appears to be mounting, however, to species-wide patents. An
earlier Agracetus patent on transgenic cotton is being challenged by the US
Department of Agriculture and another, anonymous, party in the US. The
Indian government has also announced its intention of revoking the company's
cotton patent and, in Canada, RAFI is challenging the soyabean patent.
