FT  28 SEP 94 / International Company News: Telecom Italia's first-half
Dollars 1.4bn eases way for sale
Telecom Italia, the main asset in Italy's state-owned telecommunications
sector, yesterday reported strong first-half results, easing the way for the
long-awaited privatisation of Stet, its parent company.
Indecision about the telecoms sell-off has cast a pall of uncertainty over
the immediate future of the two companies. Directors of IRI, the state
holding company which controls 65 per cent of Stet, indicated yesterday that
privatisation could take place before the middle of 1995, but the decision
lay with the government.
Telecom Italia made a profit of L2,175bn (Dollars 1.4bn) before tax in the
first half of 1994. However, the results are difficult to compare with
previous figures because the company was only formed earlier this year,
following a merger between Sip, the main telecoms operator, and four other
state telecoms companies. In the first half of 1993, a profit of L991.6bn
was reported by Sip, which accounts for nearly 90 per cent of the new group.
Telecom Italia forecast that further rationalisation would allow the group
to report full-year results 'clearly better' than those of 1993. Telecom
Italia forecast a reinforcement of its balance sheet, and an improvement in
income, which increased to L14,276bn in the first half.
Mr Francesco Chirichigno, managing director of Telecom Italia, said the
results showed it was a force among Italian and international companies.
Telecom Italia and Stet, which owns about 60 per cent of Telecom Italia as
well as other telecoms operations, are quoted on the Milan stock exchange.
In terms of overall market capitalisation they are bigger than Fiat, the
largest private-sector industrial company.
Before Stet can be privatised, the government must establish a regulatory
authority for the sector, and decide how to carry out the sale. Politicians
have talked about a merger between Telecom Italia and Stet, which would
simplify the structure of the telecoms sector, but take time to achieve.
In the first half, Telecom Italia cut financial charges to L757.7bn, against
L1,225bn for Sip in the equivalent period, thanks to a reduction in debt and
lowering of interest rates. Cash flow improved 41 per cent to L6,625bn
compared with the first half of 1993.
Investment spending was L3,680bn which Telecom Italia claims is the highest
in absolute terms in the European telecoms sector.
