FT  27 JUL 94 / High price of dallying: The world should not have to
improvise a response to each crisis
'They are asking the wrong question,' says an unnamed aid official in
London, quoted in this week's Sunday Telegraph. 'It is not 'what went
wrong?' (in Rwanda) but 'what can we do now?'.'
Actually, it is vital to ask both questions. Many things can and must be
done now, but for hundreds of thousands of people the effort comes too late.
Even restoring the survivors to their homes, health and happiness is a task
beyond the powers of the so-called international community. It is vital to
ask whether, and how, this tragedy could have been averted if we are to have
any hope of averting any others like it.
And there are further questions which must be asked. What are the obstacles
that prevent us from responding adequately to the current crisis? And what
must we do to ensure that, next time, we can do better? In each great
disaster a terrible price is paid because the response has to be improvised.
The supplies and equipment needed are always somewhere, but precious weeks
are lost while they are located and transported to the place where they are
needed.
On the humanitarian side, things have improved in this respect. The
Department of Humanitarian Affairs (DHA) at the UN in New York has, for the
first time, been able to play its assigned role of co-ordinator among the
different bits of the UN system and the voluntary relief agencies, and it
has drawn on the emergency 'rolling fund' set up to enable the system to go
straight into action. But this fund is only Dollars 50m - not adequate for a
disaster on the Rwandan scale, for which the UN last week requested Dollars
435m in donations from member countries.
The main shortcomings of the UN system, however, are clearly in the
politico-military area. Humanitarian action is impotent in conditions of
raging war, such as prevailed in Rwanda from April to June this year. The
DHA opened its office in Kigali on April 23, but the staff were pinned down
in shelters, unable to move.
Since then, the exodus of the Hutu population has created problems on the
Rwanda-Zaire frontier which cannot and should not be tackled by humanitarian
means alone. It seems appallingly callous to say so, but the epidemic of
cholera now sweeping through the refugees has its positive side, since it is
persuading many of them that the risk of returning home may be less than the
risk of staying where they are. But such ghastly means of 'persuasion'
should not be necessary. The task of repatriating the population is, above
all, a question of security and confidence - in other words, a political
task with a military component.
All accounts agree that a key role in urging the Hutus to flee, as
previously in egging them on to genocide against the Tutsis, was played by
the nominally independent Radio-Television Libre des Mille Collines. It was
urging the population to flee for their lives, and promising that the
Rwandan armed forces would launch a war of 'reconquest' once they had a
chance to regroup on Zairean territory - until last week, when it went off
the air, possibly closed down by the French.
These broadcasts should have been jammed long ago, and the UN should have
been in a position to put out counter-broadcasts, giving the population a
clear account of what was actually happening. It did this with great success
in Cambodia. Member states should endow it with the capacity to set up an
objective public information service as the first priority in any conflict
or potential conflict in which it gets involved. The existing press and
information department in New York, which spends its money inviting
journalists from well-heeled western newspapers on 'fact-finding' tours of
the Middle East and elsewhere, should be closed down.
It is futile for member states to blame the UN for not acting quickly or
effectively enough in Rwanda-type crises when they do not give it the
resources to do so. Once again the UN is very close to bankruptcy, with
Dollars 3.2bn outstanding in members' contributions. But it is not only a
question of money. Back in May the Security Council decided to send a force
of 5,500 troops to Rwanda. At most, half that number will be in place by
mid-August, and even then they will have no proper equipment unless the
French can be persuaded to leave theirs behind.
Rich white countries are less and less willing to put their forces under UN
command. At most they will undertake quick in-and-out operations,
'authorised' by the Security Council, within their own sphere of influence -
France in Rwanda, Russia in Georgia, the US in Haiti. For the long haul,
poorer countries are expected to provide the manpower. But they have no
equipment - and it is no good fobbing them off with unserviceable armoured
personnel carriers left lying around in Europe since the end of the cold
war.
The UN needs a reserve of ready-to-use military equipment, just as it needs
a larger emergency fund to pay for humanitarian supplies. Ideally, it should
also have a reserve of volunteer manpower, perhaps a 5,000-strong brigade,
trained and ready to fly to any crisis point to which the Security Council
decides to send it, to hold the line until member states assemble the force
needed for a longer-term commitment.
Members of the Security Council are said to be angry with the secretary
general for proposing this week that the UN force in Bosnia should be
withdrawn. They should, instead, be grateful to him for drawing attention to
the gap between the task they keep assigning to the UN and the resources
they are willing to give it.
