FT  28 MAY 94 / Travel: Island's subtle thrills - Alan Ponsford flies from
New York to Block Island for an uncrowded, unspoilt gentle holiday weekend
We did not have to rent an aircraft. We had been going to pop down Madison
Avenue, nip over to Penn Station, take a train to New London and hop on a
ferry.
But our friend Jonathan is like that. By the time he drew up at the Mark
Hotel, squeezing through Manhattan's get-out-of-town Friday evening traffic,
he had switched to plan B. It had been a tough week; we would do it the easy
way - by air.
As we were swept across the Hudson in his chauffeur-driven car to New
Jersey's Teterboro airport, suspicions stirred: perhaps we had needlessly
wallowed the day away amid the Mark's elegant luxuries, especially its
renowned marble bathrooms, in anticipation of deprivations ahead.
But Jonathan's invitation for the Columbus Day weekend had, after all, been
to his wooden hide-away on Block Island. And Block Island, it seemed, was a
no-socks spot - more natural, basic, casual and unsophisticated than the
fashionable retreats of southern Long Island and off-shore Massachu-setts.
The whole New York metropolitan area was switching its lights on as our
little Piper Cherokee buzzed over the George Washington bridge, pointed at
Montauk on the eastern tip of Long Island. Fifteen miles farther north east,
Block Island was catching the day's final, faint glow as we landed.
In the terminal hut, Jonathan stretched across a rough counter, fished in a
hidden cigar box and extracted the keys of a car. A few bumpy minutes in the
old Subaru exposed the hide-away as an impressive, ample residence, with
huge sun-catching windows and multiple bathrooms. But his synopsis of the
island had been less sardonic.
These 11 square miles of the state of Rhode Island are a weekend and summer
playground for discerning escapists, a base and haven for east coast
yachtspeople and a second home for a few hundred mainlanders prepared to
expend more time, trouble and money than it takes to reach the more
conventional refuges.
Block Island does not flaunt the fruits of old money like the mansions of
Southampton, or indulge the extravagances of East Hampton's smart set. It
lacks the gay community of the more recently affluent and famous of Fire
Island. Strollers on Main Street do not nudge the shoulders of the sort of
celebrities who grace Nantucket and Martha's Vineyard. But then they would
not want to. The thrills they seek are more subtle.
The island's unspoilt character is nurtured by a small, caring community.
They defend its beauty and character, not least for - and against - the
multitudes by whom they are mobbed for nine or 10 summer weeks. They are
proud that nature conservancy organisations own a fifth of the land,
including a wildlife sanctuary.
Typically, a public subscription has enabled them to move the long-disused
southern lighthouse back from the eroding Mohegan Bluffs. At the other end
of the island, North Light has been restored as a maritime museum complete
with working light.
The invading torrent had slowed to a trickle well before out arrival in
early October. After Labour Day, as in spring, the island is a gentle place,
its natural attractions better appreciated. Migrating birds drop in for a
rest, raising their population to 100 species. Monarch butterflies stop by
en route to Brazil. Fishermen can cast into the surf in peace after striped
bass and bluefish. The miles of excellent beaches see few swimmers.
Walking is a delight over the bluffs and dunes and along the narrow roads,
defined by low stone walls, nearly bereft of seasonal flocks of mopeds and
bikes. Save for a few Japanese black pines, most of Block Island's once
prolific trees long ago lost the battle with tearing Atlantic winds. The
remaining low scrub and pasture glow with honeysuckle, wild roses, viburnum
and Queen Anne's lace at their appointed times.
Many impressions of a colourful history survive. Names recall the early
settlement of Manissee Indians and the invading Mohegans; that of the island
itself was taken from Adriaen Block, a Dutch fur trader and navigator, who
landed in 1614.
Rocky coast, tall cliffs and old lighthouses suggest the piracy, smuggling
and shipwrecks of the 18th and 19th centuries. And the handsome legacy of
Victorian days, when the island became a fashionable resort for the wealthy,
are the imposing, prim hotels and inns that boarded them. Still thriving
around Old Harbor, they display the distinctive architecture of that era,
touched with the flavour of New England in wrap-around porches for
rocking-chair views of the passing scene.
At the poshest of them, a room with bath costs at least Dollars 150 (Pounds
100) a night in high season. But there are plenty of much cheaper boarding
houses and B &amp; Bs.
On Saturday morning's excursion into New Shoreham, the only town, trade was
slack in the crafts and souvenir shops and boutiques, but among hammocks,
brass lamps and sailbags in The Boat Works store we found honey mustard and
wildflower honey to take home.
We watched the car ferry from Point Judith, Rhode Island, tie up at State
Pier. It comes all year in about an hour (passengers: Dollars 6.60 one way).
The ferries from New London, Connecticut, and Newport and Providence, RI,
take longer and do not operate in winter.
The summer ferry from Montauk berths at New Harbor, within the
nearly-land-locked Great Salt Pond, so named by early settlers, which
provides anchorage for up to 2,000 sailboats at peak weekends. Alone among
deserted moorings, Jonathan's cat-boat bobbed, forlorn, awaiting his guests.
Alas, lunch with his Saturday cronies proved too convivial. Anchored on
barstools at The Beachead, a jostling yet laid-back establishment across the
road from a sandy shoreline, we indulged excessively in the luscious local
seafood, which is the mainstay of the varied, all low-key, restaurants.
The Americans drank near-frozen Bass, the Brits martinis. Among the former,
extolling the simple life, Joe from deepest Connecticut struck me as an
artist - until he identified himself as a dealer in coffee futures and in
search of someone to buy a half share in his private aircraft. Even Block
Island must defer to the real world.
The train fare from New York to New London is Dollars 64 return. A chartered
aircraft from Teterboro costs Dollars 400; from the nearest mainland points:
Dollars 40 per person, minimum Dollars 80.
