FT  16 DEC 94 / Work scheme 'misses short-term jobless'
A government pilot scheme aimed at helping find jobs for those out of work
for more than two years is at the expense of the short-term unemployed, a
report by the Institute for Employment Studies has found.
The report found just under half of the employers who participated in the
scheme - which has been on trial since last year in Tyneside, Devon and
Cornwall, east Kent and south-west London - hired a long-term unemployed
person when previously they would have recruited someone out of work for
less than two years.
The Workstart scheme, which is run by the Employment Service and training
and enterprise councils, provides a subsidy of Pounds 60 a week for 26 weeks
and Pounds 30 a week for a further 26 weeks for each candidate hired.
Before participating in the programme, 77 per cent of the 399 Workstart
employers surveyed said they had not recruited anyone who had been
unemployed for more than two years.
Without the scheme, 45 per cent of those polled said they would not hire a
long-term unemployed candidate.
The report found that 17 per cent of the jobs filled by Workstart recruits
were created as a result of the subsidy. In a further 27 per cent of the
jobs, the scheme had a positive influence on the positions offered, by
increasing the working time or the duration of the job, or by leading to the
creation of a larger number of vacancies.
However, in London only 7 per cent of the jobs given to Workstart candidates
were created because of the scheme. The report said this could be due to the
restriction of eligibility in the London trial to those unemployed for more
than four years. It said London employers were more likely to use the
subsidy for existing and hard-to-fill vacancies.
The trial was most successful among smaller, private companies in the
service sector. Two-thirds of those polled had fewer than 10 full-time
employees.
Employers were satisfied with their new recruits, with 80 per cent saying
that the employees met their expectations. Almost all of the employers said
they expected to keep on the recruit after the subsidy expired and
two-thirds said they would be more likely to recruit long-term unemployed
people in the future.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, announced in the Budget that Workstart
would receive Pounds 7.5m funding for a further 5,000 job opportunities in
new trials around the country.
