FT  21 OCT 94 / Technology: Equipped for the battle ahead - Barclays Bank is
using new software to help it make lending decisions / Financial services IT
innovation
Considering the importance that Barclays places on its new software for
guiding managers' lending decisions, the man in charge has a modest
description of what it means to customers. 'It's like a very sophisticated
cigarette packet,' says David Weymouth, the project director for Lending
Advisor.
Rather than company directors having to make hasty sums on scraps of paper
to work out their financing needs, they can be shown them on personal
computer screens. The Pounds 10m system is to be installed in 300 UK
branches by the end of this year for use in lending to companies with
turnover of at least Pounds 250,000.
Yet this is only one of Lending Advisor's purposes. Another is to ensure
that Barclays never again allows a mass of lending to weak and volatile
companies during periods of rapid economic growth. This was a factor behind
the bad debts that led to Barclays making a Pounds 242m loss two years ago.
The use of computers to guide decisions made until now by managers alone is
controversial. Martin Taylor, Barclays' chief executive, was criticised
earlier this year for saying that customers were not willing to pay enough
to spend time with 'the old-fashioned bank manager of myth'.
Lending Advisor does not automate the credit decision in the way credit
scoring does for unsecured personal lending. Barclays is working on credit
scoring of lending for small business start-ups, but Weymouth says the
approach is inapproriate for more sophisticated companies.
The cash flows and creditworthiness of large companies are much harder to
monitor, requiring human interpretation. On the other hand, small businesses
that are financed by second mortgages on homes, and run through a single
account, can be monitored - and so credit-scored - relatively easily.
Furthermore, company directors do not want the bank manager sitting in front
of them merely to be a mouthpiece for a centralised or automated decision on
whether they will be lent money.
'Our customers tell us that they want to come and talk to a manager who has
authority,' says Weymouth.
Given these factors, Barclays could simply have chosen to carry on with the
traditional system of allowing managers who are trained in lending to carry
on making individual decisions within centrally laid-down guidelines. But
Weymouth argues that Lending Advisor offers a number of advantages:
It gives managers easy access to central guidelines. Rather than managers
having to 'scurry around' searching for files on lending policy for
companies in particular industries, such policies are automatically
displayed on the computer screen when the industrial classification is
entered.
It speeds up the decision-making process. If a local manager has to seek a
sanction for a loan from a regional or national office, the details can be
sent through electronically rather than by forwarding paper. Similarly,
future applications can be processed using information already stored.
For the first time, Barclays will have a central database of information on
up to 75,000 companies which can be analysed and used to formulate lending
policy. 'It is not just having the information, it is having it in a form
you can use that is not scattered around 300 offices,' says Weymouth.
The system runs from Barclays' Gloucester computing centre, using IBM
transaction processing software, and two databases. The software is based on
proprietory software developed by the software company Syntelligence in the
US. It was based on earlier software used to guide insurance underwriting.
Basic balance sheet, profit and loss and cashflow data for a company is
entered centrally, leaving the local manager to fill in other details at a
terminal. They include assessments of a company's management, its
competitive position in the local industry, and projections of likely
growth.
The system compares the company's performance with others of similar size in
the same industry, rating things such as its gearing and operating margins
on a series of seven-point scales. Managers can use it to show customers
their future financing requirements given various rates of growth.
At the heart of the system is a 'sanctions screen' which provides an overall
credit rating on a nine-point scale. Managers have the final decision on
whether to lend, but they know that there will be a stronger onus on them to
explain a decision to lend to a poorly-rated company.
Weymouth argues that this credit rating simply helps to add 'rigour and
discipline' to lending decisions. 'If a firm has a poor rating, a manager
should look carefully at the loan price, and the security. We want that in
an unautomated world, but we do not always achieve it,' he says.
In future, Barclays might be able to use Lending Advisor in a more
prescriptive way. By using the data it will collect to analyse the actual
risks of lending to companies that have different ratings, it could work out
what margins it should charge, telling managers through Lending Advisor.
This would fit with Barclays' long-term aim of being able to allocate
capital according to 'risk-adjusted' returns. Yet it would also raise
questions about how much true autonomy a manager would retain. Weymouth
emphasises that managers will retain freedom of manoeuvre, within limits.
He also argues that Lending Advisor could actually help to increase the
amount of autonomy a manager enjoys, if it gives the bank more reliable data
from branches. 'If you are more confident in information flows to the
centre, you may be more confident in the discretions you can give,' he says.
Yet Lending Advisor - for which 1,200 managers have been prepared with a
five-day training course - gives Barclays the potential for tighter control
as well as access to better data. Weymouth says the bank could hardly have
carried on relying on the old ways.
'It is like some early battles of the Boer War. People had not quite
realised that if you advanced in serried ranks with rifles raised, it was a
highly dangerous manoeuvre,' he says. Barclays hopes that in the lending
battles to come, its managers now have rather better equipment to wield.
