FT  02 DEC 94 / A star yet to shine: A look at plans to boost the UK's
private finance initiative
The UK government's private finance initiative has yet to become the talk of
the town, even in business circles. But Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor,
gave it star billing in this week's Budget, signalling ministerial
determination that the private sector take over a large slice of the
government's investment and service delivery responsibilities.
'Privatisation and private finance are rapidly becoming the chosen method
for raising the quality of public services,' declared Mr Clarke. The Tory
vision is for central and local government to become essentially the
regulator and standard-setter for private providers of public services, from
roads and prisons to hospitals and swimming pools.
Private operators may recover revenue directly from consumers, as with the
Channel tunnel link, or in the form of grants from government departments or
public-sector institutions such as universities. Hybrid schemes are also
envisaged, notably public/private consortia at local council level.
When launched two years ago, the private finance initiative (PFI) was
greeted with a large dose of scepticism by private industry. With good
reason. So far, most departments have launched only a handful of projects.
Even the Pounds 5bn programme of projects for 1995 announced by Mr Clarke
this week is not as significant as it seems, against a backdrop of overall
cuts in state infrastructure spending. More than half that figure is
accounted for by one project: the Channel tunnel rail link, not due to be
finished until 2002.
However, privatisation started small in the early 1980s, not gathering
critical momentum until the sale of British Telecommunications in 1984. The
PFI could follow the same pattern.
Sir George Young, the Treasury minister directly responsible for PFI, told a
packed conference of industrialists and public-sector executives last week
that the 'build-up period' was now drawing to a close, with take-off
imminent. He and a succession of cabinet ministers stressed 'imagination' as
a central theme.
However, imagination is not enough. The crucial test is the readiness of
private companies to tender for projects on the government's terms.
Ministers believe that the transfer of risk to the private sector has to be
'genuine'. However, as Mr Stan Webster, a partner at Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the
accountancy firm, told last week's conference, 'transfer of controllable
risks will improve value for money, notably where they relate to design,
construction and operation. But transfer of risks outside the direct control
of the private sector - which could include planning and market risk - is
likely to damage value for money. And in extreme cases an unrealistic
approach could make projects unbankable, damaging the credibility of the
exercise in the eyes of potential operators and funders.'
Another problem has been defining the scope of the PFI, said Mr Douglas
Hogg, a member of the private finance panel established last year to act as
a catalyst for new projects. Over the next year, private finance will cover
almost all sectors, with only areas such as weapons systems and real tolling
projects, where the motorist pays directly, excluded. Even schools may now
be eligible, following recent changes which have made it easier for councils
to engage in joint venture projects.
The principal of a further education college told last week's conference
there was a 'vast market' for projects in education infrastructure, but that
agreement with government officials about the distribution of risk was
holding up progress.
Transport projects offer the largest immediate field for private industry,
and so a test of the imagination and enthusiasm of companies for the PFI.
Headed by the Channel tunnel rail link costing an estimated Pounds 2.7bn,
transport accounts for more than 80 per cent of the Pounds 5.26bn-Pounds
5.49bn worth of contracts which the government hopes to award in 1995.
No fewer than 11 consortia comprising construction companies, banks and
civil engineering consultancies put in bids for the four road schemes -
valued at Pounds 380m - to be built under the 'design, build, finance,
operate' programme. The winning bidder will build the road and manage it for
up to 25 years, in return for 'shadow tolls' paid by the government
reflecting traffic volumes and the efficiency of the maintenance and
management.
The attraction of these schemes is that they allow construction companies to
even out the fluctuations of the building cycle with relatively steady
revenues from the roads they manage. Dragados, a Spanish member of one of
the five winning consortia, currently makes 15 per cent of its profits from
road management in Spain and Latin America, but expects this figure to rise
to 30 per cent within a few years.
Rail schemes such as the Channel tunnel rail link, for which four bidding
consortia have been shortlisted, also offer the opportunity to break into a
sector with good growth prospects. With increasing environmental pressures
on road building programmes, the prospects of an upsurge in railway
construction appear good.
If there was an aspect of the chancellor's Budget remarks on the PFI which
disappointed the City and the civil engineering industry, it was his failure
to announce any new schemes - though these may come in ministerial
announcements over the next few weeks.
'Progress has been slow and there is no guarantee that any of the schemes
being included in the PFI will be built within a reasonable timescale,' said
the Institution of Civil Engineers. Sir George Young attributed these delays
to 'the problems of marrying two diverse cultures: the public sector with
its emphasis on accountability for taxpayers' money and the fleet-footed
private sector'.
Companies bidding for contracts are undoubtedly driven by declining
public-sector investment in infrastructure projects. That pressure can only
intensify.
However, none of the transport schemes under consideration has yet reached
the stage of detailed contract agreement, which leaves unresolved the
question of whether contracts can be fashioned to provide private-sector
returns commensurate with the transfer of risk involved.
 ------------------------------------------------------------
PRIVATE FINANCE INITIATIVE: BUILDING BLOCKS
 ------------------------------------------------------------
PFI contracts expected in 1995                       (Pounds)
 ------------------------------------------------------------
Northern Line modernisation                              400m
Computerisation of National Insurance records            250m
Two prisons                                              150m
Four 'design, build, finance, operate' road schemes      380m
Scottish air traffic control centre                      200m
Channel tunnel rail link                                2.7bn
Docklands Light Railway Lewisham extension          100m-130m
West Coast Main Line modernisation                   800m-1bn
Computerisation of Post Offices counters                 130m
Fifty small health centre projects                       100m
Two Scottish sewage treatment works                       50m
 ------------------------------------------------------------
Total                                           5.26bn-5.49bn
 ------------------------------------------------------------
These amounts refer to capital spending (some contracts would
involve follow-up spending on maintenance or operations). The
fgures represent total values of projects and include public
as well as private finance.
 ------------------------------------------------------------
