FT  09 FEB 94 / World Trade News: EU agrees to scrap 4,700 cheap import
quotas
The European Union yesterday reached agreement on a comprehensive overhaul
of its import regime coupled with a strengthening of its commercial defence
weaponry.
EU foreign ministers meeting in Brussels agreed to scrap some 4,700 national
quotas on cheap imports which have existed for the past 30 years, mainly
against so-called state-trading countries such as China and North Korea.
A new EU-wide quota will cover a limited number of textile products as well
as seven categories of Chinese imports, including crockery, kitchen
ceramics, gloves, low-cost footwear, and transistors.
Despite continuing objections from the UK, ministers agreed to make it
easier for the EU to take action against unfair traders. The main difference
is that the Council of Ministers will retain the power to impose definitive
anti-dumping or countervailing duties, but these will now be decided by a
simple majority only.
This change reverses the earlier position whereby a UK-led free trade bloc,
usually including Germany, Denmark and the Netherlands, blocked anti-dumping
duties through a qualified minority. The reform was agreed in principle last
December as part of the price France demanded for supporting an agreement in
the Gatt world talks.
Sir Leon Brittan, chief EU trade negotiator, said the new import regime and
the streamlined operation of trade weapons would offer business more
certainty and transparency.
'I don't regard this as a contradiction to open trade. Open trade means
trade according to rules. If rules are broken by other people, it is no use
having (just) the right to defend oneself. You have to have the capacity to
defend yourself.'
On China, ministers agreed to raise the quota on cheap plastic shoes from
22.6m to 35m pairs. Other quotas on low-cost leather shoes remain at around
60m pairs. The quotas do not apply to so-called high-tech running shoes,
according to Brussels officials.
Mr David Heathcoat-Amory, UK foreign minister, said the new rules did not
amount to a great blow to free trade. But the UK believed it was important
in the follow-up to the Gatt negotiations concluded last year to stand up
for free trade. 'We don't want, post Uruguay Round, to resume
protectionism.'
