FT  11 MAR 94 / Whitbread sells holdings in regional brewers
Whitbread, the UK brewer, yesterday unloaded the bulk of its portfolio of
regional brewing shares in a deal worth Pounds 225m. The stakes, ranging as
high as 21 per cent in a total of eight companies, were sold almost entirely
to institutional investors.
The move is partly in compliance with government orders requiring Whitbread
to reduce its holdings to a maximum of 15 per cent on competition grounds.
However, Whitbread's decision to sell almost all its holdings came as a
surprise to the market.
Mr Alan Perelman, finance director, said 'the sale has released capital for
use in funding the organic expansion of Whitbread's business'. Including
share stakes in larger companies sold earlier this year, Whitbread has now
raised a total of Pounds 300m, bringing its net borrowings almost to zero.
Through BZW, the stockbroker, Whitbread has sold its entire holdings in
Boddington (20 per cent), Greene King (10 per cent), Marston (21 per cent),
Morland (11 per cent), Vaux (7 per cent) and Greenalls (3 per cent). It has
also reduced its holding in Fullers from 18 per cent to 8 per cent, and has
reduced its holding in Breakspear to just below 15 per cent, with Breakspear
the purchaser.
Besides the remaining Fuller and Breakspear shares, Whitbread's holdings in
other drinks companies now comprise 4 per cent of Joseph Holt, 5 per cent of
Hardys and Hanson, 3 per cent of George Gale and 5 per cent of the
cidermaker Bulmer.
The sale marks the final demise of the so-called 'Whitbread umbrella', a
historic arrangement by which Whitbread took shares in regional brewers to
protect them against takeover. However, some companies covered by the
umbrella ended up as part of the Whitbread empire.
By the close of trading yesterday, nearly all the stock was thought to have
been successfully sold. Drinks analysts, who moved quickly to upgrade profit
forecasts for the group yesterday, were unanimous in approving the Whitbread
move. 'This puts the group in a very strong position,' said Mr Geoff Collyer
at NatWest Securities. 'Whitbread can now hit the acquisition trail and we
would expect them to use their ungeared financial position to move further
away from brewing.'
There was widespread agreement that Whitbread's action removes one of the
biggest uncertainties hanging over the domestic drinks sector. With such
large stakes known to be up for sale, speculation had been rife over the
possibility of predators moving in.
LSE, Back Page
