FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (13): Of mice and menus, with
help from icons - Max Wilkinson considers the PC's place in his own life, in
the context of a new book about the development of the Mac, the only
significant rival to IBM in personal computing / Personal computers
Insanely Great: The Life and Times of Macintosh,
the Computer that Changed Everything
by Stephen Levy
Viking, Pounds 15
292 pages
I was counting the other day the number of computers I own. I think it is
about a dozen: at least two in the car, one in the CD player, the video
recorder, the washing machine; even the little portable radio. But only one
looks like a computer, staring back at me as I write: about the size of a
telephone directory, it opens up into the familiar keyboard and a 17cm flat
screen.
All the other computers in the house perform their tasks like a staff of
unobtrusive servants, making sure the water is just hot enough, that an
orchestra will play exactly when I require, and that my carriage will convey
me swift as imagination or . . . well, at 70 miles an hour, anyway. They are
so efficient that we have forgotten that they exist, and we certainly do not
care to have anything to do with them.
By contrast, the superior class of computers that take our letters, check
our spelling, keep our diaries, play games with us and verify our accounts
have become, in the last decade, important parts of our lives, in the
office, and recently at home too.
When personal computers first appeared, they were not much liked. They were
surly and slow; they would communicate only in a stilted and unnatural
language which required one to memorise codes; and if one gave a slightly
wrong instruction they would look completely blank, or answer back with the
insolent word: 'ERROR]'.
But a revolution has taken place; its significance is often not understood,
even by the millions who are discovering that computers have become friendly
(even obsequious), helpful, clever and fun. Screens are covered with little
pictures (Icons, in computerspeak). Mice, pushed around the table, shift a
pointer to the desired picture, and at the press of a button, a little world
of information or computer application, jumps into life in a 'window' on the
screen.
The revolution began in 1984, with the birth of the Apple Macintosh
computer, after a fraught conception and traumatic delivery at the company's
headquarters in Cupertino, California. It was an 'insanely great' idea, said
Steve Jobs, Apple's founder, who inspired and maddened his team of young
engineers. They wore tee-shirts and sneakers and were steeped in the
alternative culture of California of the 1970s. Their mission was no less
than to topple International Business Machines from its dominance of the
personal computer market, by producing a machine, no longer an alien
processor of digits, but an extension of human intellect and creativity.
They failed. The first Apple Mac, introduced to the world with a fanfare of
aspiration, was flawed by inadequate power, some rickety programming and
Jobs's misreading of the market. The team that expected to change the world
collapsed in exhaustion and despair, and then dispersed. Jobs left Apple,
and John Sculley, an apparently more conventional manager whom Jobs had
enticed from Pepsi-Cola, took complete charge.
Slowly, the fortunes of the Mac improved. It found an important niche in the
publishing world, and remains the only significant rival to IBM in personal
computing. But the real revolution is that the Mac personality, based on
menus, mice and icons has been cloned in the IBM world.
Stephen Levy, a computer journalist, tells this story with lively
intelligence, pace and a good dose of personal anecdote. Although a
committed believer in the Macintosh vision, he does not mind exposing its
faults, and gives a lively picture of the mismanagement and extraordinary
pockets of anarchy which flawed Apple for some of this period. He also
offers a well observed portrait of Jobs, who emerges as 'insanely great',
rude, arrogant, self-absorbed and sometimes fatally inattentive to detail or
the work of others.
Yet Jobs was also as a kind of prophet. He absorbed and implemented a vision
of the machine as a true servant of the human intellect, an idea proposed as
far back as 1945 by Vannevar Bush, a former vice-president of the
Massachussetts Institute of Technology.
This historical context enables Levy to project the recent revolution in
personal computing into the future, without degenerating into science
fiction. If we can now point at pictures and trace connections between
millions of words, images and figures stored in a friendly gadget, how long
will it be before we talk to it and accept as perfectly natural that it will
answer back? Will computers really become part of our psyche?
Those who doubt it will find this an interesting story, well written in the
American journalist's style and refreshingly free from jargon.
