FT  09 NOV 94 / Survey of Finland (8): Liberal who may be next prime
minister / Profile of Paavo Lipponen
If the opinion polls prove correct, Finland's next prime minister will be Mr
Paavo Lipponen, the personable and pragmatic leader of the Social Democratic
party (SDP).
The Social Democrats were the losers in the last general election in 1991,
winning just 22 per cent of the national vote. The government was formed by
the Centre party led by Mr Esko Aho, now prime minister, which surged ahead
to win 25 per cent of the vote and forged a coalition with the Conservative
party - which had been in coalition with the SDP - and the small Swedish
People's party and the Christian League.
But under the leadership of Mr Lipponen, who took over from Mr Ulf Sundqvist
as party leader last year, the SDP has consolidated a rebound in the polls
which has shown the party winning well over 30 per cent support throughout
this year.
With the incumbent government, suffering in popularity because of the deep
recession and high unemployment, the Social Democrats are now widely
expected to lead the new government after the election due in March next
year. At this stage, the party is reluctant to speculate on the shape of an
SDP-led coalition - which could include either or both the Centre and
Conservative parties. But the one certainty is that it would be headed by Mr
Lipponen.
A political scientist and journalist by profession, 53-year old Mr Lipponen
is a Social Democrat who, like many of his left-of-centre colleagues in
Europe, has moved his party significantly away from old-style western
European socialism to embrace market reforms to achieve a 'citizen's
society'. A keen advocate of Finnish membership of the European Union, he
summed up his position in an article published during the EU referendum
campaign.
'An efficient market economy adhering within the context of the EU to the
basic values of Nordic welfare states will produce a better society of
citizens in Finland,' he wrote.
In an interview for this survey, Mr Lipponen explained his approach further.
'I am a liberal in the sense that I believe people have really suffered
because of a lack of competition. We need a real paradigm change. Ours has
been an economy of big companies, big co-operatives, big banks, big
wholesale companies and, if you like, big government. There hasn't been a
role for a citizen's society.'
His remedy for unemployment, the country's biggest political and social
problem, is therefore unequivocally reformist. He readily accepts that his
aim is to foster a more entrepreneurial climate in Finland. 'Yes,
absolutely,' he says. 'It is a question of getting unemployment down. The
public sector cannot employ more people and the export sector is already
efficient. So it is mainly in the small service companies that future
employment will come. We have to get more flexibility and reduce labour
costs - and social security costs.'
But if Mr Lipponen's message contains elements more familiar from the
right-of-centre in recent years, he still offers a distinct policy change
from the present government. He is especially critical of the coalition's
record on unemployment, saying the failure to provide training schemes for
more than one-fifth of the almost 500,000 unemployed has been a 'waste of
human capital'.
He attacks the government's protection of Finland's highly subsidised
farmers and the maintainance of subsidies to industry - especially the big
and once again profitable forestry industry. These are areas where he
believes savings can be made to help trim Finland's budget deficit and
control a state debt set to reach the equivalent of 70 per cent of gross
domestic policy next year.
His approach is also to defend the basic structure of the country's welfare
system which, like those of neighbouring Sweden and Norway, far exceeds most
in Europe in the extent of benefits it offers. His intention is to carry
vital interest groups such as the trade unions with him when it comes to
reforms by involving them in the changes. 'I'm sure the elected members of
the trade unions know what is needed. It is just that they need to feel the
policies are fair and just.'
As prime minister, Mr Lipponen would play a key role - along with President
Martti Ahtisaari - in framing Finland's positions in the EU's vital 1996
Intergovernmental Conference on the future shape of the union. A former head
of the Finnish Institute of International Affairs, he is at ease - but
cautious - in discussing such tricky topics.
'Finland should not take any dogmatic line in the debate between the
federalists and the anti-federalists. That way we would lose our influence,'
he says. 'European Monetary Union has to come sooner or later and if it
comes you need greater political integration. But there is a need to
guarantee the influence of national parliaments. Subsidiarity should be made
to work.'
