FT  08 SEP 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: EU harvest in line with reform
This year's grain harvest in the European Union is expected to be around
160m tonnes, well below the trend prior to the 1992 reforms of the Common
Agricultural Policy, according to Mr Rene Steichen, the EU agriculture
commissioner.
The anticipated fall in the harvest, from about 164m tonnes last year and
185m tonnes in 1991, was a sign the MacSharry reforms were working well, Mr
Steichen said.
'In the cereals sector, there's really no need to go further,' he said.
Mr Steichen was responding to sceptics who argue that EU grain production
will remain too high to satisfy the requirements of the Uruguay Round world
trade agreement. This called for a 21 per cent cut in the volume of
subsidised EU exports by the end of the decade.
The sceptics argue that the European Commission has underestimated the
likely rise in cereal yields and overestimated EU cereal consumption. They
say farmers are likely to face further cuts in price support over and above
the 30 per cent reduction of the MacSharry reforms.
Mr Steichen said changes still needed to be made to unreformed sectors such
as wine, fruit and vegetables and sugar. 'If all that we conclude in the
next months and years works well, I don't think there's a need to change the
CAP,' he said. But he added that further 'minor adjustments' were possible.
Pointing to the success of the reforms to date, he said the EU cereal
mountain had been reduced from 33m tonnes a year ago to 16m tonnes and
intervention stocks of beef had fallen from 1.1m tonnes to less than 250,000
tonnes.
EU consumption of home-grown cereals for animal feed, which the Commission
hoped would have risen by 11m tonnes a year by 1996 as a result of falling
prices, already increased by 5m tonnes last year.
He added that further reforms had been agreed this year to contain beef
production. The Commission fears production could increase again for
cyclical reasons by the end of the decade. The number of special support
payments available to farmers for male beef animals had been cut from 11.5m
to 10.25m.
Mr Steichen said that, contrary to expectations, EU farmers had generally
benefited from the reforms. Indeed he said one flaw in the reforms was that
large cereal farmers received too much in compensation for 'setting aside',
or leaving fallow, 15 per cent of their land.
In the UK, public opinion has been offended by direct payments of hundreds
of thousands of pounds to prosperous landowners in East Anglia and other
intensively farmed arable regions.
Mr Steichen pointed out that the original MacSharry proposals limited the
amount of set-aside land for which farmers received compensation to 7.5ha.
This ceiling had been removed under pressure from Mr John Gummer, the then
UK agriculture minister.
