FT  20 JUL 94 / Government Bonds: Hopes of German rate cut lift European
prices
European bonds edged higher again yesterday, buoyed by hopes that slowing
money supply growth in Germany could pave the way for further interest rate
cuts by the Bundesbank in the short-term.
Italian bonds surged strongly yesterday on the news that Prime Minister
Silvio Berlusconi had averted a clash with his coalition partners and so
ended the latest bout of political uncertainty in Italy.
Italian bond futures ended at 104.21 in after-hours trading on Liffe
yesterday, up more than a point on the previous day's close.
However, the market is still waiting for details of the government's fiscal
package on Thursday. 'There is still plenty of room for the market to move
in either direction,' said one analyst.
The UK gilts market ended only fractionally higher, having absorbed the
details of next week's gilts auction.
The news that the Bank of England plans to auction Pounds 2bn, the smallest
amount it can issue, at the July 27 auction was welcomed by traders.
In fact, because the stock chosen by the Bank - a 6 1/4 per cent 16-year
gilt - trades substantially below par, the net amount raised will be well
below Pounds 2bn.
'The Bank clearly feels confident about the market because it has been
issuing taps,' said Mr Simon Briscoe, an economist at S. G. Warburg. This
has also helped buoy market sentiment, he added.
Ahead of the auction, the market is likely to trade within a relatively
narrow range.
In the meantime, traders are focusing on today's retail sales data for June.
The market held up yesterday despite the fact that the Confederation of
British Industry report showed very strong retail sales in June, but traders
are hoping for weaker government figures today.
German bonds ended a busy day about  1/4 point higher, lifted by evidence
that M3 money supply growth continued to slow in June. A warm reception for
the government's latest 10-year bond issue and speculation over a possible
cut in official interest rates at tomorrow's Bundesbank Council meeting also
lent support.
German M3 money supply grew at an annualised rate of 11.3 per cent in June
after a 13.4 per cent rise in May. This is still well above the Bundesbank's
M3 target of 4 to 6 per cent, which will be reviewed at tomorrow's Council
meeting.
The German government issued DM3bn of 6.75 per cent bunds due 2004 to the
bond consortium and is expected to raise another DM3bn - DM4bn of the stock
at today's US-style auction. Including the Bundesbank's market-tending
allotment, the issue is expected to total DM10bn. It is the first new bund
the government has issued since last September.
However, while some dealers reported healthy investor demand - partly helped
by the paper's rarity value - others said that most of the paper appeared to
have gone into professional hands. 'We saw no retail demand whatsoever,'
said one bund dealer.
US Treasury bonds staged a moderate advance yesterday as the market
anticipated today's congressional testimony by the Federal Reserve chairman.
Late in the session, the 30-year government bond was  13/32 better at 85
21/32 , with the yield slipping to 7.458 per cent. The two-year note was
1/8 ahead at 100 5/32 , to yield 5.894 per cent.
The quiet confidence prevailing in the fixed-income markets since the end of
last week held fast throughout the day. In the morning, prices drifted
higher, with many traders convinced that the economy had slowed enough to
allow the Fed to delay a further increase in short-term interest rates until
after its next policy-making session on August 16.
Mr Alan Greenspan, the central bank's chairman, was expected to confirm such
suspicions this morning, when he will appear before a Senate committee to
give his semi-annual Humphrey-Hawkins economic briefing.
Still, activity was restrained, with few traders willing to make substantial
new commitments ahead of Mr Greenspan's testimony.
Later in the afternoon, as the US currency picked up ground against the yen,
bonds extended their earlier gains and finished near their session highs.
