FT  01 JUN 94 / Brazil fails in bid to update constitution
Brazil's attempt to update its constitution ended largely in failure
yesterday, highlighting the weaknesses in the country's political system.
The constitutional revision process, under way in Congress since October,
has failed to make any of the important changes most analysts believe are
crucial for the government to regain control of the economy.
Reforms to the tax, social security and government spending regimes failed
to win congressional support. As a result, the country's next president -
due to take office in January - will continue to face serious problems
balancing the budget and tackling inflation.
Congress also failed to pass reforms opening the economy to foreign
investment and easing constraints on foreign companies in the mining sector.
The revision failed partly because of political corruption hearings last
year, which sometimes bought congressional business to a standstill. More
importantly, congressmen were not prepared to vote on controversial issues
in an election year.
Brazil also lacks an efficient party political system to force congressmen
to attend sessions. This led to delays in the revision process.
Mr Nelson Jobim, in charge of the revision process, said he was leaving
Congress after the elections, mainly because of disappointment at the
revision's failure.
Congress did make some changes to the constitution, which was adopted in
1988 in a backlash against two decades of military dictatorship, but has
since been criticised as highly idealistic. The most important change was
approval of a two-year emergency social fund, designed to bring short-term
relief to the government's finances. But without longer term reforms to the
tax and social security systems, the fund is very limited in scope.
A second change, reducing future presidential terms from five to four years,
again showed the depth of Brazil's political problems. Congress approved the
measure to make presidential terms the same as Congress. But a proposal to
allow presidents to seek re-election was rejected, mainly because Congress
and state governors fear any one party controlling government for eight
years.
As a result, future presidents will have only four years to carry out their
programmes, scarcely enough in Brazil's ponderous politics.
