FT  06 SEP 94 / Emancipation helps Tunisia to steady growth: A 'Personal
Status Code' has given women rights not enjoyed elsewhere in the Arab world
Amid all the controversy surrounding the United Nations Population
Conference in Cairo, the example of one small Moslem country, Tunisia,
traditionally tolerant and open to western influence, suggests the
emancipation of women has been a significant factor in reducing population
growth from 3.2 per cent a generation ago to 1.9 today.
Vastly improved standards of education and health care are other ingredients
which explain Tunisia's steady economic performance in recent years. Real
growth has averaged 5 per cent a year since 1989 and inflation is running at
a little over 3 per cent. Over two-thirds of all households own or are
buying a house or apartment.
The successful implementation of a structural readjustment programme has,
since 1987, won plaudits from both the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank, and contributed to the resilience of the economy in overcoming
the impact of the Gulf War and, last winter, a severe drought. The tourist
sector is attracting 2.5m Europeans this year and contributing an estimated
Dollars 1.2bn (Pounds 800m) to exports of goods and services.
Most striking is the coherence of the 'Personal Status Code', promulgated by
former president Habib Bourguiba in 1956, the year Tunisia gained
independence from France, which abolished polygamy and established all the
laws governing family planning, divorce and the education of women which
have given Tunisian women rights not enjoyed elsewhere in the Arab world.
In 1963, free prescriptions of the pill and free confidential advice on
contraception were made available to women, 10 years before France. The
programme spread to even the smallest village. The birth rate has declined
from 45 to 24.4 per 1,000, mortality from 15 to 6.1 per 1,000. Illiteracy
has been cut from 87.7 to 35 per cent, though the figure is higher among
women in poorer areas.
Women are increasingly visible in teaching, medicine and architecture, in
factories as workers, engineers and owners. The world of politics remains
very much a man's world, although the professional skills and sureness of
touch which Mrs Neziha Mezhoud, minister in charge of family issues, and a
growing number of other highly-articulate women bring to their jobs,
suggests it is only a matter of years before senior cabinet posts will go to
women.
Though leaders of the opposition Islamic al Nahda (Renaissance) party have
said they would accept many of Mr Bourguiba's policies, women are mindful of
the often violent record of some supporters of the party, notably the
throwing of acid in the faces of university students on the campus in Tunis.
Many Tunisian women are convinced radical Islam is not sympathetic to the
idea of equality between the sexes or to their presence in public places.
The laws on divorce and alimony are remarkably close to their European
counterparts. Indirectly, they allow women a far greater share of
inheritance than the Koran allows. To bolster these moves, the books of
people such as Hassan el Banna, the founder of modern fundamentalism, have
been withdrawn from schools and public libraries, and references to the
inferior status of women erased from all school books.
Women today have 25 per cent of all jobs in Tunisia, 35 per cent of all jobs
in industry, 22 per cent in the growing services sector and 40 per cent in
agriculture, where they manage 10 per cent of all farms. Ten per cent of all
new companies are created by women.
The cycle of emancipation, education, public presence, most notably in the
workplace, success in the professions and industry helps to explain why a
country of such slender natural resources has progressed so much faster, not
least economically, than many of its peers in the Middle East and Africa.
