FT  11 JAN 94 / Frenchman tipped as Eurotunnel chief
Mr Georges-Christian Chazot, a French industrialist with experience of the
service sector, has emerged as the leading candidate to take over as group
chief executive of Eurotunnel, the operator of the Channel rail link.
Eurotunnel said it expected to make an announcement concerning a new group
chief executive either this week or next week. The new appointee is expected
to take over from Sir Alastair Morton, who currently acts as chief executive
and who would revert to his position as co-chairman, along with Mr Andre
Benard.
Eurotunnel is keen to install a chief executive before commercial operations
start in March with freight services. Passenger services will start after
the official opening of the tunnel, due on May 6. Tariffs will be announced
today.
Mr Chazot, 54, worked until the beginning of this month at Adia, the Swiss
temporary employment group, where he was in charge of French operations.
During his 18-month stint, he helped reorganise the company's French
employment agencies.
Most of his career has been in industry. He has worked at several industrial
groups, including Alcatel, the Paris-based telecommunications group. He held
a number of positions, including heading its business systems division.
Before that he was chairman of Saft, Alcatel's batteries subsidiary.
Mr Chazot has a degree in electrical engineering and a diploma in marketing.
His appointment would tilt the balance of the board in favour of France.
Currently, it comprises seven Britons, seven Frenchmen, one Belgian and one
American.
One Paris banker involved in the Eurotunnel project welcomed Mr Chazot's
candidacy. 'He has experience of working in international companies and
seems to have a good technical background,' he said.
The new appointee will take over in the wake of a series of positive
developments at Eurotunnel. Last week, the company obtained approval from
its banks to raise an extra Pounds 1bn in funding which is necessary to
complete the project. The funding is expected to be divided equally between
a rights issue and a further Pounds 500m of bank loans.
Eurotunnel has also resolved legal disputes with the French and British
governments.
