FT  20 AUG 94 / Outdoors: These long dry spells can make you go grey -
Gardening / Robin Lane Fox enthuses over the advantages of grey and
silver-leafed plants, particularly for hot summers
The rain in southern England has stopped gardens from going grey. It has
also stopped me from going grey with them.
Long dry spells are horrible and for 10 weeks, we have had to look at burnt
sweet peas, brown phloxes and dead lower stems on those pillars of late
summer, the white-flowered Lysimachia Ephemerum and white veronicastrum.
Wherever I garden, the Good Lord makes it difficult. Six years ago, I
started to massacre Leyland Cypresses and to make a new garden over their
former home. Since then, we have had seriously dry weather in four of the
summers, sending me back to the old principle of suiting a new planting to
the soil and climate.
Even if it rains until October, I intend to think more in grey than in green
for the rest of the ground plan. Grey leaves like dry weather; they are
better in hot summers; they hold August together and this weekend, you can
save yourself a small fortune by multiplying them from cuttings, best rooted
now without any overhead watering or complicated equipment.
Grey and silver plants survive between two extremes: frost and damp. Some of
the most beautiful will not survive a serious winter; most of them hate a
wet soil or clay. The best guide to the extremes remains the late Mrs
Underwood's book, Grey and Silver Plants, first published by Collins in the
early 1970s.
I hesitate to call her an Essex girl, but she did grow, sell and select the
best of the greys and silvers in her nursery near Colchester and global
warming has yet to do anything to put her out of date. She grades the
possible plants on a scale of hardiness, but to the west of Oxford, I have
learnt to be less optimistic and add a further point to her grades, taking
no chances.
On the hardy side, new winners emerge as we all garden more sceptically. She
never fully discussed the silver oleasters, but they are the poor Briton's
substitute for those wonderful orchards of silver-grey olives which you are
envying or imagining this month in your Mediterranean dreams.
The Latin name for the family is Elaeagnus and it includes a superb
silver-leaved tree which is less familiar than the popular Silver Pear but
even prettier when the sun preys on its glistening leaves. The basic form is
Elaeagnus angustifolia, but nurseries have now selected one called
Quicksilver which is self-explanatory.
Its natural home is up in the extraordinary heat of the Caspian Sea area and
it will tolerate the awful stony and sandy soil of gardens near the seaside
or wherever I seem to settle. It is not a tree for screen and it is rather
bright. It is a feature which I would prefer towards a green boundary, but
it is an extremely good one.
In a smaller space, the best bet is the shrubby Elaeagnus commutata which
turns up as a centrepiece in artistic exhibits at Chelsea flower show. It
runs around by suckers and can be increased very easily by digging up a
rooted piece, it looks splendid on a dry bank, but its natural height is
slightly too tall for the middle of a normal border.
You can prune it, but you should do so after midsummer so that you do not
remove its particular delight - its scented little yellow flowers along the
joints of the stems in early June.
What other silver shrub flowers with a scent to equal a sharp lilac? This
small Oleaster has been one of the successes of this testing season and I
hope that many more gardeners will now try it, although it is not evergreen.
Among the smaller silver shrubs, I opt for the controversial curry plant.
Whenever you brush against it, it smells like an Indian dinner. Delhi
descends on the paved front garden and I am mentally transported to one of
those hot evenings, when the cows seem to have collapsed on the hillside and
their bones show through as if all air has been let out of their hides.
More prosaically, Helichrysum angustifolium is totally hardy, spreads to a
width of about two feet, covers itself in buds of an exquisite ivory-grey
and develops flowers of a strong mustard yellow which are somehow rather
sociable. I like the upright spiral of the young growth, the effect of
silver spires and and the dependability.
Curry-haters dislike it, but I put it first because it persists until the
outer edges of the bush go brown and it is time for very hard pruning after
flowering. It will multiply with ridiculous ease from cuttings.
Apply the two golden rules for propagation of almost every silver plant.
Pull off a stem which has hardened, rather than a soft little shoot from the
top of the bush. Take the cuttings now and leave them outdoors without
excessive watering.
They will root unless they become too damp, whereupon they rot. I find that
they are weekenders' easiest strike, because their owners are away from a
watering can for most of the week, allowing them to get on with it.
From the scent of India, I move westwards back to Greece. This month, one of
the few happy plants in the dust of the summer is the felted grey-green
Ballota with rounded leaves. It turns up in walls, on donkey tracks or on
bare landscapes by Aegean beaches. In Britain, it is surprisingly hardy in a
dry soil and I have kept plants of it since 1982.
Knowing gardeners nowadays chase after an apple-green form called All
Hallows Green, but I have left the stampede and am happy with the plain grey
pseudo dictamnus. It makes a bushy plant, especially if you clip it lightly
in early summer and it spreads charmingly in the front of any border,
improving as this summer has killed many of its companions.
The flowers and stems are a lovely accompaniment for small bunches of cut
pinks or summer flowers and they age gradually, becoming woody, rather than
dead. You can split them or root young growths with ease.
Nearer to the frost line, I must end with my star turn to date in this
difficult year. The silver-leaved Teucrium fruticans is not a certain
survivor in the open, but we have grown it in Oxford since 1983, where the
same old plants are flourishing in a dry bed against a south wall.
As a result, I recommend it wholeheartedly. It may look drab after a severe
winter, but you can cut it back in late April and it will regain its
elegance by midsummer and flower charmingly in a shade of pale blue which
persists on and off until autumn.
Be warned that the dark blue form is even more seductive, but markedly less
hardy. I like this shrub, up to 4ft high anywhere, but it has a particular
use which is invaluable. Usually, the windows of houses in the UK do not go
fully to the ground, and so we are left with a stretch of wall which is too
low for a serious climber.
Here, facing south or west, the Teucrium is in its element, although it has
the characteristic spread and slight untidiness which I value in parts of
the garden. If you are neat, smart and a perfectly-pressed sort of person,
you may find that it is too spreading if it survives for three or four
years.
If so, we disagree, because I believe that this wonderfully silver plant is
greatly under-used in southern England and in cities and that it is one of
the saving graces left to us after so long without serious rain.
