FT  31 JAN 94 / BR losses mount in non-link village
Losses of between 25 per cent and 30 per cent have been made on house sales
in the Kent village of South Darenth by Union Railways, the British Rail
subsidiary responsible for building the high-speed rail link to the Channel
tunnel.
Villagers are not in the least surprised that, as disclosed in the Commons
last week, BR has spent Pounds 135m on potential sections of the Channel
tunnel link which have been excluded from the route chosen by the
government.
BR spent about Pounds 40m buying up half South Darenth at the height of the
property price boom. The bill was even higher than BR expected because it
used out-of-date maps which failed to show a housing estate built in the
early 1980s.
The corporation continues to be haunted by its offer to buy for 'humane
reasons' all the property within a 240-metre 'blighted corridor' next to its
68-mile prefered route for the link. The purchases were intended to ease the
impact on locals who would have had to endure a much more heavily used rail
line.
But the prospect of the high-speed link also brought advantages. In the
1980s small cottages built for millworkers were selling at Pounds 80,000
with buyers encouraged by a line which might take them to Victoria station
in London in 30 minutes.
BR's main effort in South Darenth now is selling off the 370 houses it
bought in 1989. About 100 such properties have been sold in the past two
years, contributing towards the Pounds 30m BR has recouped.
Mrs Linda Green, a partner with her husband in a architects' practice in
South Darenth, recalls that BR's initial decision 'had a terrible impact on
the village'.
After the link plan was abandoned, BR agreed not to dump houses on the
market at distress-sale prices but to release them gradually. It has set up
a sales office in the village. Mrs Green says that, as more and more new
owner-occupiers move in, the village is at last getting back to normal.
Mr Sunil Chopra, owner of the village's combined pharmacy and sub-post
office, agrees. 'Village life was destroyed by BR but confidence is coming
back.'
