FT  21 NOV 94 / Survey of the World Nuclear Industry (3): Some challenges to
be weathered - Developments in France
France's formidable nuclear industry seems so far to be weathering a number
of challenges: the public debate over nuclear waste, the conundrum of the
future of the Superphenix breeder reactor, and pressure from Brussels for
liberalisation of the European energy market.
What had been billed as the big media event of the year turned out a
relative flop. This was the march in April and May against the Balladur
government's decision to re-start Superphenix as a research reactor. The
march began on April 8 south of Lyon at Creys-Malville, the site of
Superphenix, then wound east to take in part of Switzerland and Germany,
then - a month later - ended in Paris with no more than 1,500 demonstrators.
It was a far cry from tens of thousands, some of them from Switzerland and
Germany, who mobilised at Creys-Malville in the late 1970s against the
building of Superphenix, and a disappointment to the Greens whose chief goal
in the nuclear field had been to extend indefinitely the shut-down of
Superphenix ordered in mid-1990.
Superphenix, built as the world's largest breeder reactor to produce
electricity, has this autumn started a new life as a centre of research into
the burning of plutonium and other waste. The plant, which cost about
FFr27bn to build, must be the world's most expensive research reactor, but
mothballing it was not cheap either. Running the plant as a research reactor
will cost FFr100m a year, to be borne by the French Atomic Energy Commission
(CEA) and Electricite de France (EdF), the state-owned utility which owns 51
per cent of the reactor, although they may reap some marginal benefit from
sales of what electricity generates as a by-product.
Cogema, France's nuclear fuels agency, says that Superphenix's net
consumption - or elimination - of 100kg of plutonium a year will be useful,
but rather puny in relation to the 10 tonnes of plutonium that France's 56
reactors generate each year, along with nearly 80 per cent of the country's
electricity supply.
Cogema opened a new reprocessing plant in La Hague in August, specifically
to treat as much as 800 tonnes of EdF's nuclear waste each year.
This unit, named UP2, is akin to UP3 which started in 1990 and which is
designed to serve Cogema's 27 foreign clients.
Mr Jean-Louis Ricaud, Cogema's head of reprocessing, claims that both French
and foreigners have gained, because after having each paid out FFr 20bn for
their own reprocessing unit, they have been able to split the FFr 20bn extra
cost of installations common to the two reprocessing units.
For Cogema, as well as for British Nuclear Fuels, German utilities are an
important customer, accounting for 15 per cent of the French agency's total
business. However, as a result of a compromise earlier this year between the
government and the opposition Social Democrats, German utilities are no
longer required to reprocess their spent fuel, and now have the option of
stocking it.
German utilities are financing the preparation of a disposal site in the
Gorleben salt mines in Lower Saxony, but political objections have put this
well behind schedule. This seems to be why Mr Ricaud says he is 'extremely
confident that La Hague even in 15 years time will have a full load'.
Mr Ricaud, naturally, favours reprocessing rather than stocking spent fuel.
'Stocking would be like leaving old cars lying by the roadside; reprocessing
is like the sensible business of compressing all this spent steel into
something useful'. But even Cogema recognises that there is some waste -
about 200 cubic metres of long-lived and highly radioactive material, enough
to fill the average swimming pool - which cannot be re-used and which is
just piling up in a temporary silo at La Hague.
The general idea is to bury this waste. The government has now chosen four
possible underground sites, whose geology it is studying. In another year or
so, it will select two of these sites in which to sink underground research
laboratories costing costing some FFr1.5bn each.
Eventually, around the year 2006, it may decide on an eventual nuclear waste
storage site.
EdF, as the world's largest nuclear power generator, is closely identified
with the nuclear cause, but this does not tarnish its image, at least not at
home. According to a Louis Harris poll last year, 80 per cent of French had
'A good opinion' of EdF; not as high as France Telecom (84 per cent) but
higher than Gaz de France (77 per cent) or Elf-Aquitaine (58 per cent).
The opening of electricity markets in Europe and around the world,
particularly in fast-growing Asia, presents EdF with an enormous opportunity
which it appears to be seizing with both hands. It now exports 12 per cent
of its French-generated power to the UK, Switzerland, Italy, Germany, Spain
and Portugal. And it is also investing abroad, in Argentina, Slovakia and
most recently in Sweden.
At the same time, however, it has every intention of protecting its home
patch, menaced by Brussels. The European Commission has threatened court
action to get France and some others to drop their monopolies on the export
and import of energy.
EdF is not worried about imports, given the competitiveness of its
nuclear-generated electricity. It does not even mind too much about the
introduction of some competitive bidding by suppliers. But EdF draws the
line at 'third party access' which would see an end to EdF's distribution
monopoly.
It is this monopoly, says EdF,that gives it the ability to plan the heavy
long-term investments so characteristic of the nuclear industry.
