FT  03 MAY 94 / Survey of Romania (7): Convert to capitalist ways / Profile
of President Ion Iliescu
Romania has come a long way since it shed the Stalinist-style cult of
personality which characterised the Ceausescu regime
But the forces of continuity remain strong and the post-Ceausescu
constitution leaves many key powers in the hands of the president and
commander-in-chief, including the choice of a prime minister.
Ultimately, the buck still stops with the president, which for the last four
years has meant at the desk of Mr Ion Iliescu in Cotroceni, the former royal
palace on the outskirts of Bucharest.
Mr Iliescu, who is also the eminence grise behind the left-wing ruling
party, the recently re-named Party of Social Democracy of Romania(PSDR), is
a man with his emotional roots in the communist past.
Like many of his generation, however, he appears to have undergone an
intellectual conversion to the virtues of privatisation and capitalist
development as a more efficient and less damaging instrument for achieving
the social and political development which he once thought would be
delivered through Marxism.
Mr Iliescu's father Alexandru was a leading member of the communist youth
movement in Romania's small pre-war communist party, and the president
himself was a senior figure under Nicolae Ceausescu before being sidelined
in the early 1970s as the dictator rid himself of potential rivals.
After 18 years of semi-obscurity, latterly as the head of a state-owned
publishing house, Mr Iliescu re-emerged at the head of the self-appointed
National Salvation Front in December 1989 after angry crowds forced
Ceausescu to flee Bucharest in a doomed escape bid.
The re-emergence of a key figure from the distant communist past rather than
someone clearly identified as an opponent of the previous regime, still
rankles with many Romanians who hoped for a clearer break with the old
regime. But such was the degree of social and political control under
Ceausescu that few Romanians were untainted by some form of collaboration
with 'the power' and no-one else emerged to challenge the political skills
and back-up enjoyed by Mr Iliescu.
Since the chaotic early days of the post-Ceausescu period, Mr Iliescu has
consolidated his position and his legitimacy by winning two presidential
elections. He resembles his Ukrainian counterpart, President Leonid
Kravchuk, another professional politician trained in the hard school of
communist realpolitik.
His background gives him a shrewd grasp of the realities of power in a
country of great regional variation, ethnic and cultural complexity, and,
perhaps above all, a fragmented opposition and poorly developed civil
society. But Mr Iliescu's greatest good fortune is his 18-year estrangement
from power. This permits him to share the anger of millions of Romanians for
the humiliation and waste of the Ceausescu years.
Looking back on his predecessor he recalls 'an uneducated man who became
more and more suspicious', especially after his Asian tour in 1971 when he
became fascinated by Kim Il Sung (the North Korean dictator). Mr Iliescu,
who accompanied Ceausescu on his procession around Asia says: 'I opposed his
plans to emulate the Korean model, arguing that it was simply not possible
to treat human beings in this way, to suppress their humanity.'
But, looking back at the evolution of his split with Ceausescu, the
president concentrates on the mid-1960s, a time when Romania started taking
an foreign policy line independent from Moscow and, together with
Czechoslovakia, was in the forefront of moves to try and liberalise the
Stalinist economic and political model.
Mr Iliescu was an enthusiastic supporter of such reform in the 1960s, but he
draws a veil over the 1950s when he was picked out for rapid promotion by
Ceausescu, then in charge of party cadres, after ruthlessly conducting a
purge of politically and socially 'unreliable' university students.
In the 1950s, Stalinism and Stalinist methods were still universally
practised, even by the successors who partially debunked him. But Mr
Iliescu's track record as a 'reformist' in the years leading to the Prague
spring was known to the 'reform communists' surrounding Mikhail Gorbachev.
In the late 1980s Moscow sought to replace the old Brezhnevite leaders of
Warsaw Pact Europe with like-minded 'new men', before reluctantly coming to
the conclusion that such managed change was beyond the grasp of a weakened
and demoralised Soviet Union.
Mr Iliescu declines to be drawn into a discussion of whether 'the
revolution' of December 1989 was part of a planned neo-communist restoration
similar to that attempted, unsuccessfully, in east Germany. Asked whether
the events of 1989 were a revolution or a palace coup he replies that 'it
was a process determined by objective factors', before launching into a list
of reasons why perestroika failed in the Soviet Union.
It is likely that Romanians would have been spared much suffering and
indignity had Mr Ilisecu rather than the Ceausescu clan been in charge for a
quarter century. Romania would probably have developed along the lines
pioneered by Janos Kadar, the post-1956 leader of Hungary's 'goulash
communism'. But then Mr Iliescu would almost certainly have shared the fate
of other communist leaders in 1989 when the Soviet leadership lost its will
to retain the Red Army's wartime acquisitions in central Europe.
Instead, Mr Iliescu returned to the centre of power after the Ceausescus
were conveniently shot.
On several occasions since then Mr Iliescu has demonstrated his willingness
to employ the iron fist, notably when the Jiu valley coalminers were called
in to intimidate political opponents in June 1990 and September 1991.
Mostly, however, this mean streak is kept under wraps by a wily politician
whose sensitive antennae and smiling avuncular image allows him to appear as
the guarantor of stability in a potentially volatile environment.
After a lengthy period of indecision following the 1992 elections he
recently emerged as a supporter of the tough monetary and fiscal policies
required to gain the backing of financial institutions and foreign
investors.
In a long interview he underlined his support for economic policies which
satisfy the lending institutions but which have led to several potentially
threatening protest strikes in recent months. 'There is a danger that
people's patience will snap. Four years ago all applauded the return of
liberty, but standards of living have fallen, unemployment has risen and
many now question the value of democracy. But I think the worst is now
over,' he says.
'Last year we removed subsidies, introduced VAT and other taxes and
inflation soared to nearly 300 per cent. But inflation was down to 5-7 per
cent a month over the first two months and we are liberalising the foreign
exchange market.'
'Meanwhile the collapse of industrial production has been reversed, exports
are rising and this year we shall benefit from higher foreign investment and
new loans from the IMF, World Bank and other institutions,' he adds.
The president, like several of his ministers, criticises the international
institutions for dragging their heels. 'When we needed their help most they
were very reluctant and conservative. Now the situation is better and the
co-operation is excellent, but we would have preferred help when we needed
it most,' he says.
But those close to the World Bank - opposition critics like Mr Petre Roman
and Mr Adrian Severin and even economic advisers to the president himself -
blame the government's slow-down of privatisation, its failure to close or
downsize persistent heavy loss makers among the biggest state-owned
industries, and a general ambivalence about market reform for '18 wasted
months'.
Now, even the fiercest critics acknowledge that Romania again has an
opportunity to move ahead with economic reform amid thus far desultory
efforts to form a parliamentary pact between the ruling party and the
opposition so as to underpin the reform process.
The attempt to form a government of 'national unity' in Romania failed 18
months ago and the price has been a slowdown in the pace of reform which the
country can ill afford.
It remains to be seen whether better use will be made of the new window of
opportunity which has emerged with the evolution of an economic policy
framework acceptable to the international institutions, and relatively
encouraging for the private sector.
Mr. Iliescu was interviewed by Anthony Robinson, Virginia Marsh and Chrystia
Freeland.
