FT  09 APR 94 / Books: Enter a wimp, exit superman
LISTENING TO PROZAC by Peter D Kramer Fourth Estate Pounds 16, 409 pages
Prozac is a drug which, with few side-effects, transforms depressed or
anxious people, or those with low self-esteem or poor social skills, into
confident, quicker-thinking, more assertive and less inhibited achievers. It
is, in short, a 'psychopharmacological cosmetic', a safe chemical
personality enhancer; and it is raising a storm of debate.
Peter Kramer is a psychiatrist and one of Prozac's earliest prescribers and
most eloquent defenders. In this fascinating and sometimes disturbing book
he explores the dramatic questions it prompts about mind, selfhood and
ethics.
The real significance of Prozac lies not so much in its mind-brightening
effects as its safety. Other psychotherapeutic drugs carry risks. In
promising nearly costless relief from psychological problems - and not mere
relief, but enhancement - Prozac opens new possibilities. Is Prozac the
miracle drug that can make life easier and more successful for all?
The ethical dilemmas thus prompted come attached, as Kramer fascinatingly
shows, to other questions. The efficacy of psychotropic drugs suggests that
the argument between those who think of mind as a wholly physical entity,
and those who think it cannot be explained solely in such terms, is being
handsomely won by the former.
Among many other things, the success of the biological view suggests that
all mental illness reflects brain damage. Kramer argues that such damage,
whether caused by genetic factors or trauma, might be degenerative, so that
a present mild depression might augur major illness later in life; and that
chemical treatment of early signs is important.
Should anyone have Prozac who wants it? In effect Kramer says yes. His
answer is characteristically American. The stereotypical American assumes
that he has a right to a happy, feel-good life. If he has less he feels
short-changed. To be worried, or hesitant in speech, or shy; to feel tired,
or downhearted; to to have few friends, to be single; all this is failure.
Prozac solves the problem. One safe and simple pill a day, and where a wimp
entered the telephone box, superman flies out.
What is wrong with that? Nothing, except that to erase one's anxiety and
sense of struggle is to dull one's contact with reality, to forego the
possibility of emotional growth, to lessen one's ability to cope with major
grief when it comes, to be less sensitive to oneself and others, to reduce
one's autonomy by putting a chemical compound in the place of the
personality forged by experience and endeavour and to make one's creativity
less fully one's own.
To such points Kramer replies that Prozac simply gives people what they
would have had if they had enjoyed a 'more benign childhood' and other early
advantages. But this precisely exposes the flaw in the pro-Prozac case. You
have to make a large value judgment about what life 'should' be like, and
about our model of what a successful, flourishing person is, before you can
claim that Prozac provides it. Is the American feel-good model the highest
ideal of human existence?
If autonomy, endeavour, and full contact with the world and other people do
not much matter, there seems to be no barrier to following Aldous Huxley's
Brave New World suggestion, and adding Prozac to the water supply. Kramer
stops short of suggesting as much; but in coming close, he gives us an
absorbing insight into scientific and psychological questions that we
urgently need to resolve.
