FT  21 JUN 94 / Welcome back to Marlboro country: Miles's resignation at the
weekend is a victory for those who believe Philip Morris means cigarettes
Anyone wanting a simple explanation for Mr Michael Miles's abrupt departure
from the top job at Philip Morris, the US food and tobacco group, at the
weekend need look no further than the 40 per cent fall in the company's
share price in the last nine months. The heads of many a US corporate giant
have recently rolled for less.
But the greater significance of Mr Miles's resignation is that it marks a
triumph for those within the company who are set on keeping cigarette-making
as the group's core activity in defiance of the powerful US anti-smoking
lobby.
Just 10 years ago, cigarette-making accounted for the overwhelming majority
of Philip Morris's revenues. But faced with the prospect of a long-term
decline in smoking, it decided to use the cash-flow from its tobacco
operations to finance a diversification into the food industry.
Under its then chairman and chief executive, the charismatic Mr Hamish
Maxwell, it made a series of big acquisitions, including those of General
Foods in 1985, Kraft in 1988, and Jacobs Suchard in 1990. By last year the
food operations had grown to the size where they were contributing nearly 50
per cent of group turnover (though only 34 per cent of group operating
profits).
When Mr Miles took over from Mr Maxwell as chairman and chief executive in
1991, he was the first person from outside the tobacco industry to lead the
group. As the former chairman and chief executive of Kraft, he had risen to
the top from the food side of the business, and some analysts say the
non-smoking 54-year-old seemed ill at ease in the role of Marlboro man.
He was not made any more comfortable when Philip Morris's US
cigarette-making activities started to come under increasing pressure -
first, through a loss of market share to low-price competition and second,
from the outbreak of an unprecedented wave of opposition from the US
anti-smoking lobby.
Mr Miles's response to the first threat came in April last year on a day
remembered as Marlboro Friday, when he horrified shareholders by slashing
the price of Marlboro cigarettes and Philip Morris's other premium brands to
win back market share. The move succeeded in boosting sales, but prompted a
price war in the US cigarette market and contributed to a fall in the
company's after-tax profits from Dollars 4.9bn to Dollars 3.6bn last year.
Since then, US cigarette prices have crept up a little and Philip Morris
looks set to claw back some of its lost profits this year. But two months
ago the corporate boat was rocked again when the Financial Times disclosed
that its top managers were considering a plan to hive off the troublesome
tobacco operations into a separate company.
Some investors cautiously welcomed the idea as a way of relieving Philip
Morris's share price from the depressive effect of its controversial
association with cigarette-making. But to people who had spent years
building up the company in its present form as a food and tobacco
conglomerate - notably the retired Mr Maxwell, still a highly influential
member of Philip Morris's board - it was anathema.
Matters came to a head at a rancorous board meeting last month. After more
than six hours of debate - which ranged, it is said, over Mr Miles's
performance as chairman and chief executive as well as the merits and
demerits of the restructuring scheme - the plan was rejected. Instead, the
board promoted Mr William Murray from chief operating officer to vice
chairman for world-wide food, and Mr Geoffrey Bible from executive vice
president to vice chairman for world-wide tobacco.
The significance of this move was that, although both men had spent time on
the food side of Philip Morris, both had strong backgrounds in the tobacco
side of the business, having joined Philip Morris long before the expansion
into food began. As such, they were very much Mr Maxwell's proteges. Their
elevation must have made Mr Miles's position even more uncomfortable than it
already was.
Three weeks later, Mr Miles has gone and the two Maxwell proteges have been
promoted again - Mr Murray taking over Mr Miles's role as chairman and Mr
Bible becoming president and chief executive. Mr Miles put as brave face as
possible on the turn of events: he said he left 'with full confidence that
the difficult decisions made over the past two years will be proven right by
our results in 1994 and beyond', and added that the recovery of Philip
Morris's US tobacco business and the continued growth in international
tobacco meant it made sense for someone from the tobacco side to take
charge.
The triumph of the smoking faction at Philip Morris means that the notion
splitting off the tobacco side of the business is almost certainly dead. Yet
the US stock market reacted well to the change in management, lifting Philip
Morris's share price Dollars  1/2 to Dollars 50 7/8 at yesterday's close.
Why? Stock market analysts such as Mr Gary Black at Sanford C. Bernstein, a
Wall Street brokerage, say the trouble with Philip Morris was not so much
the difficulties it was experiencing with its cigarette operations in the US
as a lack of leadership and a decline in employee morale.
Mr Miles was a notoriously low-profile chairman and chief executive,
declining to face the press and rarely meeting analysts. Investors hope that
a new and more aggressive leadership will be better at explaining to
analysts and the financial media why gloom about the future profitability of
the tobacco operations is wildly overdone - and that this will do more to
enhance shareholder value than any break up of the business could hope to
achieve.
Lex, Page 20
