FT  21 JAN 94 / An outsider looking in: Turkey's hopes for closer European
ties
The joint visit to Ankara yesterday of Douglas Hurd and Klaus Kinkel,
foreign ministers of their respective countries, was an unprecedented
Anglo-German initiative.
It would be normal for either to visit Turkey alone or, in special
circumstances, for both to participate in a European Union mission. But the
latter would be formally led by the country occupying the presidency, which
since January 1 is Greece. In this case Greece was not only unrepresented,
but its absence was virtually the object of the exercise.
For different reasons both the UK and Germany see themselves as Turkey's
main friends and advocates within the EU; and even though British officials
insist no discourtesy to Greece is intended, both governments are anxious to
reassure the Turks that the six-month Greek presidency will not damage
EU-Turkish relations.
The Turks are delighted by the gesture, while Greece has denounced it as a
breach of the EU common foreign and security policy, supposedly in operation
since the Maastricht treaty came into force last November 1. The meeting
provides a potent reminder of the importance west European countries attach
to their relationship with Turkey - 'not a luxury but a necessity', Mr Hurd
said on Wednesday - and of their impatience with Greek efforts to block that
relationship in the hope of extorting Turkish concessions on Cyprus.
Greek-Turkish relations, seldom warm even before Turkey occupied two-fifths
of Cyprus and drove out the Greek-speaking population in 1974, have been
almost continuously tense since then. Their bilateral relations are also
envenomed by a long-running dispute about oil-exploration rights on the
continental shelf under the Aegean Sea - an issue which came close to
causing war in 1989, and which Greece now threatens to revive.
But in western Europe Turkey is increasingly seen as the political and
commercial hub of the eastern Mediterranean, as well as a potentially
stabilising influence in the Turkic-speaking republics of the former Soviet
Union. In Europe as in the US, Turkey is viewed as a regional power, a
secular democratic role model, and a buffer to Islamic expansion in the
Middle East.
Turkey, as one senior British official put it, is a 'trusted and valuable
interlocutor' in a range of trouble spots from the Balkans, to the Caucasus,
central Asia and the Middle East. But it may not stay that way, unless
Europe succeeds in complementing the defence aspects of the relationship
with stronger political and economic ties.
This month, Mr Jacques Delors, president of the European Commission, visited
Athens and appealed to Greece to adopt a 'realistic and strategic view of
Turkey's importance'.
Turkey is already smarting at the way its application for EU membership has
been politely shelved since 1989 - while Efta countries, and perhaps even
former communist satellites in central and eastern Europe, are allowed to
jump the queue. The latter prospect, clearly flagged by last year's
Copenhagen summit, is especially galling to the Turks who feel their record
as solid Nato allies since the mid 1950s, and their support for the west in
the Gulf war, entitle them to expect better treatment.
Many of the reservations about Turkey's qualifications for EU membership
expressed by the Commission in 1989 still stand: the problems presented by
Turkey's large population; its heavy dependence on agriculture for
employment; and perhaps most emphatically, its less than creditable human
rights record. A recent debate in the British House of Lords, strongly
critical of Turkish policy towards its Kurdish minority, was a salutary
reminder for Turkish officials of the difficulty the country faces in
improving its image in the west.
The next few months will provide a significant test for both the EU and the
Turkish government in their efforts to keep Turkey's European ambitions on
track. Barring upsets, a customs union between Turkey and the EU is due to
start in 1995. This will be the biggest change in Turkey's trading
conditions since it signed an association treaty with the European Community
in 1963, and the country has embarked on an ambitious programme of economic,
social and political reforms aimed at bringing its institutions into line
with those of its European partners.
At the same time the Turks are eagerly seeking clarification of the offer of
associate membership of the Western European Union - the EU's defence arm
and 'European pillar' of Nato - made to them last year, which they have yet
to put to their parliament for ratification.
During his visit, Mr Hurd tried to define a comprehensive agenda, aimed at
transforming the EU Turkish relationship: completion of the customs union on
time, a more intensive political dialogue on issues covered by the EU's
common foreign and security policy, and a deepening of the defence
relationship - while at the same time Turkey has to push ahead with legal
and human rights reforms at home.
The UK is also urging Turkey to make renewed efforts to reach an early
solution of the Cyprus problem, stressing that this has been an obstacle to
improved relations, not just with Greece, but with Europe as a whole and
indeed the US. It will not be easy, since the Turkish Cypriot leader Mr Rauf
Denktas is attached to his independent status, while the Greek Cypriot
president, Mr Glafkos Clerides, elected last year, is on the whole less
flexible than his predecessor. The latest war of words would suggest there
is still some way to go to create a climate of confidence to resolve the
issue.
In addition, the Greeks have until now used their veto powers to block EU
financial assistance due to Turkey under the so-called fourth financial
protocol, and have refused to approve the 'Matutes package', a programme of
support for Turkey prepared in the wake of the Commission's negative opinion
on the Turkish application for full membership.
Turkey's foreign minister, Mr Hikmet Cetin, has already thrown down the
challenge to his European partners. 'It is not that Turkey is in need of the
money,' he says. 'The issue is whether the Union has the will to overcome
the veto of just one of its members.' Mr Hurd's and Mr Kinkel's visit may
have partly reassured him but, coming in a week when the Turkish lira
collapsed as several key economic indicators diverged further from the
European norm, it should also have served to demonstrate that Turkey's
problems with the EU are by no means all of Greek origin.
