FT  04 MAY 94 / Brussels backs Pounds 61m UK aid for Ulster factory
A Pounds 61m package of UK state aid for a Northern Ireland textile plant
which could create up to 2,000 jobs was given the go-ahead yesterday by the
European Commission.
The Pounds 157m Belfast factory will be one of the largest investment
projects in Britain in recent years.
The aid was approved after the commission ruled that the factory, for the
Hualon company, would not seriously distort the European Union's textile
sector.
The decision follows a 10-month commission investigation into the state aid
package. It represents a considerable victory for the British government,
which has been lobbying hard for the project in the face of opposition from
some member states.
The government, which argues that the project is badly needed to alleviate
unemployment in Northern Ireland, had proposed providing the Pounds 61m
worth of aid, or 38 per cent of the total investment.
Although this level of state aid does not contravene European Union
regulations for regional assistance, some member states have complained that
the project would create an unfair distortion in the European textile market
which is facing increased pressure as a result of international trade
liberalisation and excess capacity.
With Northern Ireland's low cost manufacturing base apparently one of the
key attractions for Hualon, textile producers in South Europe have also
expressed fears that the investment could draw jobs away from the rest of
Europe in the sector.
However, the commission yesterday said in a statement that it had weighed
the positive regional impact of the aid against its effect on the EU textile
sector and decided the aid met exemptions in state aid rules.
Mr Karel Van Miert, EU competition commissioner, said: 'This project will be
of prime importance for a region particularly affected by unemployment.
'It will reinforce the competitiveness of the European industry and
considerably reduce the unemployment level in the Belfast area.'
The project, which will be carried out in four phases spread over a
seven-year period will centre on the weaving, dyeing and finish of
polyester, polyamide and cotton fabrics.
With the total industrial workforce in Northern Ireland currently standing
at about 100,000, the new factory, which will be based in the outskirts of
Belfast, could boost the workforce by 2 per cent.
A UK government spokesman said yesterday: 'This is very good news. It will
bring much needed jobs.'
