FT  24 MAY 94 / Arts: Cunningham's 'Ocean' - Ballet
The brand new Brussels Arts Festival is much concerned with new theatre and
new dance. Or new-ish, one must say, given that its choreographic coup is a
creation from the 75 year old Merce Cunningham. Ocean, whose first
performance I saw last Wednesday, is the realisation of a work planned by
Cunningham and his long-time associate, the composer John Cage.
Conceived a year before Cage's death in 1992, Ocean is a 90 minute piece
whose structure had fascinated Cage and Cunningham: dance in a circular
arena, surrounded by its audience who are in turn surrounded by musicians
whose sounds wash - ocean-like - over public and performers.
What better locale then for this experiment than Brussels' Cirque Royal? It
is a setting exactly suited to the Cunningham/Cage demands. It is, even so,
an inimical spot. Alps have dreamed of being as steep and unyielding as its
seating, and 90 minutes spent in this vertiginous Little-ease are no
inducement to sympathy with what is going on below.
The event was certainly curious because of the forces involved and their
deployment, but I cannot, hand on heart, declare them to have been of much
interest. The sound-track combined 112 musicians skied on the outer rim of
the Cirque's top seating, playing a score by Andrew Culver, its droning
ostinato interspersed with recordings of whales, dolphins and other denizens
of the deep, who contribute the whistlings and borborygmi of what must be
marine gastro-enteritis of a particularly virulent kind. Down below, on the
central area of the Cirque, Cunningham's dancers meet up with the score in
the usual degage fashion. (We have learned to view Cunningham's titles as
mere conveniences rather than as guides to anything that happens.)
Aleatory procedures, the I Ching, and chance in all its unpredictability -
though with Cunningham chance is the one predictable fact - shape the dance.
There are interminable notes in the programme-book to justify and extol the
style, but what it amounts to is that Cunningham, armed nowadays with
computer-generated ideas, will fill the arena with arbitrary motion. In
1987, the Cage/Cunningham Roaratorio was very similarly shown at the Albert
Hall as part of a memorable Prom: the dance was cogent in effect,
exhilarating. Movement blossomed in this setting, as it often has in
Cunningham's Events, where choreography is given in unexpected combination.
Ocean, in which 15 dancers come and go in various groupings, variously
costumed and lit, seemed to me diffuse, arid, formulaic. I suspect that it
will benefit from the focus and direction given by a proscenium, and its
performers will then look less blank. Yet viewed from above - and it surely
matters not where you see it from if Cunningham's rule applies to audience
as well as to dance - it lacked even the stimulation one may get from
watching a crowd. Red digital clocks at the dancers' entry-points marked the
passing of 90 minutes. How slowly time passes when the avant-garde is having
fun.
Ocean will be shown at the Holland Festival from June 27 - 30 at the
Muziektheater, Amsterdam.
