FT  09 JUN 94 / Japanese Diet passes budget 2 months late
The lower house of the Japanese parliament last night agreed the nation's
Y73,000bn (Pounds 461bn) budget for the current year, two months late
because of political infighting.
This will come as a relief to the business community, and enables the
embattled minority government of Mr Tsutomu Hata to open talks on a pact
with the opposition Social Democratic party, in an attempt to cling to
power.
The two main opposition groups, the Liberal Democratic party and the SDP,
had declared a political amnesty until passage of the budget, after the SDP
had left the government seven weeks ago.
Until recently, the two groups had planned to call a no-confidence vote
against the government soon after the budget's passage. But the SDP has
hinted over the past week it might rejoin the coalition. It wants Mr Hata to
resign and resubmit himself as prime minister to atone for the formation in
April of a centre-right group, called Kaishin (innovation), which appeared
to exclude the Socialists from policy making and prompted them to walk out.
Mr Wataru Kubo, SDP secretary general, has said the party would also insist
that Japan refuse to take sanctions against North Korea outside the aegis of
the United Nations. The Socialists also wish to discuss tax reform, where
they oppose government plans for an increase in consumption tax, and the
formation of policies - a reference to their distaste for Kaishin.
Negotiations between the coalition and the SDP are expected to begin in the
next week. SDP officials believe that rejoining the coalition might be the
party's only chance of returning to government, say political analysts in
Tokyo, The Socialists were in opposition for 47 years until joining the
coalition of former prime minister Morihiro Hosokawa last August.
The budget now goes to the upper house for debate until the end of June, a
formality. While the budget only calls for a 2.3 per cent rise in general
spending, the smallest increase in six years, the delay has prevented the
government from proposing additional expenditure.
Last night's accord was, however, earlier than many had expected because of
an agreement between the minority coalition and the opposition to delay
calling Mr Morihiro Hosokawa to testify before parliament on allegations of
financial impropriety.
He resigned in April after the LDP blocked the budget to apply pressure on
Mr Hosokawa to produce evidence to disprove allegations that he had
illicitly received cash from a trucking company and tried to conceal a share
sale for tax reasons.
