FT  15 JAN 94 / French press squeezed by falling sales and advertising: Two
tabloids are launched. But this does not hide high costs and declining
revenues elsewhere
The Paris news-seller glanced at the colourful front pages of InfoMatin and
Aujourd'hui, the new French tabloids. 'It's been a good week,' he said. 'My
customers have bought these new papers as well as their usual ones. But it
won't go on forever.'
So far, both InfoMatin, the morning paper launched on Monday by Le Monde,
and Aujourd'hui, which came out 10 days ago as the national version of Le
Parisien, the popular Paris tabloid, say their sales are above target. But
they are braced for a tough time once the novelty wears off.
The French newspaper industry is in crisis. The recession has caused a sharp
fall in advertising revenue and accelerated the long term sales decline of
national dailies, such as Le Monde and Le Figaro.
The industry is so secretive that it is difficult to assess the impact of
these problems. All the big titles are in private hands. The enigmatic Mr
Robert Hersant owns Le Figaro, the sensationalist France-Soir and a big
group of regional papers. Le Monde is controlled by a closed group of
shareholders, as is Liberation, the liberal-left daily. Le Parisien belongs
to the Armaury family.
But there are signs of strain. The Expansion group last year sold La Tribune
and L'Agefi, its financial dailies, to LVMH, the luxury goods company.
Expansion itself was this month rescued by CEP, an investment consortium. Le
Jour, a new daily launched last year, has closed. Some Hersant titles are
said to be up for sale including the loss-making France-Soir.
The worst problem is advertising. The recession has had a devastating effect
on classified advertising for recruitment and property. 'I know of papers
that have lost 80 per cent of their classified advertising in the past two
years,' says Mr Patrick Jousseaume, media analyst at Ferri, the Paris
stockbroker.
Display advertising has also declined as mainstream advertisers have trimmed
budgets. This problem has been aggravated by the impact of reform in the
advertising industry implemented by the old socialist government. The reform
was intended to erode the power of specialist media buying groups or
agencies. But by transferring responsibility for media buying from the
advertisers themselves, it has had the effect of concentrating spending on
fewer media: generally spending more on television and less on press.
National newspapers have borne the brunt of the decline. Industry estimates
suggest that their advertising revenue has fallen by 27 per cent in the past
two years and is set to fall by 10 per cent in 1994. The comparable figures
for the regional press are 14 per cent and 6 per cent.
The nationals' plight is due partly to the advertising reform and partly to
their dwindling sales. France's three biggest selling papers are regionals:
Ouest France with a 770,000 circulation, Le Progres in Lyon with 450,000 and
Le Parisien with 395,000. Le Figaro, the leading national, has seen its
sales fall from 432,000 to below 380,000 in the past five years. Le Parisien
has just ended its third year of growth.
One reason for the nationals' decline is increased competition from
television since the government's deregulation drive in the 1980s, which
shook up the old state-controlled system by launching new channels. 'People
still buy local papers because they provide news that isn't available on
television,' says Mr Pierre Flabbee, media analyst at Paribas. 'But they've
definitely cut down on the nationals.'
The newspapers have found it difficult to fight back. They are burdened by
high costs due to the power of the trade unions which has left them prey to
strikes and with relatively high staffing levels. As a result French
newspapers tend to be expensive. Le Monde costs FFr7 (80 pence). Even
downmarket France-Soir sells for FFr5. InfoMatin and Aujourd'hui have
tactically adopted lower prices of FFr3 and FFr3.50 respectively.
But there is little the new launches can do to counter the rigidity of the
distribution system, a monopoly controlled by Les Nouvelles Messageries de
la Presse Parisienne. The system is not only expensive but inflexible
thereby impeding the nationals' attempts to boost sales outside Paris.
Liberation still depends on the Paris region for half its sales.
These long term problems will impede the industry's efforts to overcome the
short term pressures of recession. Analysts do not expect the advertising
market to recover until next year.
In the meantime the casualties seem set to continue. The only consolation is
that there seems to be no shortage of potential rescuers as LVMH's recent
acquisitions illustrate.
