FT  19 MAY 94 / Technology: High hopes / A look at South Korea in a series
on collaborative research
A glittering array of jumbo-sized display screens and three-dimensional
films greeted visitors to the international science and technology
exposition in Taejon, South Korea, last autumn.
The 14m South Koreans - a third of the population - who visited the Taejon
Expo, were presented with a grand vision of a high-tech future on a site
next to the Taedok science town, the main research and development centre,
which houses 37 government and corporate research institutes.
The Taejon Expo was based on a similar fair held by Japan at its Tsukuba
science town in 1985. But while the Tsukuba Expo celebrated Japan's
membership of the advanced industrial world, Taejon only expressed Korea's
intention to do so. Most of the promising technology on display in Taejon
was borrowed from abroad. The Expo illustrated the considerable challenges
South Korea still faces in creating a thriving technological base and the
failure of its government so far to achieve smooth research co-operation
with industry.
The government has promised to rectify these shortcomings with its long-term
Highly Advanced National (Han) programme. The Won37,000bn (Dollars 46bn) Han
programme - Han is also the Korean word for Korea - launched in April 1992,
aims to promote increased R&amp;D activities in 14 industrial sectors until
2001. Projects range from the development of a 256-megabit semiconductor
chip and high-definition television to electric cars and advanced
telecommunications networks.
Officials believe that the blueprint will solve several problems that have
hampered the country's R&amp;D efforts.
One has been a shortage of funding. Government and private industry spent a
total of Won5,000bn on R&amp;D in 1992, the last year for which full figures are
available. This ranks at the top of developing countries in the amount and
percentage of GNP spent on R&amp;D. But it is only slightly bigger than the
annual R&amp;D budget for General Motors or IBM. The government wants to raise
R&amp;D spending to 5 per cent of GNP by the end of the decade from the present
2 per cent.
Although the government has shifted more of the R&amp;D burden to industry,
which now accounts for 82 per cent of the national R&amp;D budget, companies
have generally preferred to fund expansion rather than research. The Han
project is meant to force companies to spend more on R&amp;D by requiring them
to finance 80 per cent of the programme. The government also hopes to
co-ordinate corporate research on individual projects through Han and avoid
unnecessary duplication. Intense competition among government ministries,
companies and universities on research programmes has been blamed for
wasting the scarce capital resources devoted to R&amp;D.
But critics say Han will increase bureaucratic rivalry. The Ministry of
Industry, Trade and Energy, for example, is promoting its own research
programme with industry, which is meant to develop 24 core technologies,
including some areas that overlap with the Han project.
Many leading companies are increasingly resisting government dictates on
R&amp;D, which they regard as an example of the country's outmoded 'command
capitalism' economic structure under which the state plays a dominant role
in guiding industrial policy.
Instead of the government trying to pick winners and losers in advanced
industries, executives argue that companies should decide their own research
priorities.
The industry ministry, for example, wants several aerospace companies to
collaborate on the development of a medium-sized passenger aircraft. But
industry remains sceptical.
'The whole programme can be criticised as far as I'm concerned,' says Ted
Kim, executive adviser to Korean Air's aerospace division. 'Realistically,
it will be very difficult to sell this aircraft when there are already so
many other passenger aircraft in the 80-100 seat range. By the time we
develop it in seven to 10 years, the advanced airline companies will be
making more sophisticated aircraft that will be hard to compete against.'
The government's R&amp;D goals are seen as too ambitious. Critics say it is
spreading resources too thinly by trying to finance research in as many
advanced technology projects as possible.
Moreover, many companies are reluctant to co-operate with rivals on some of
the leading research projects, as demanded by the government. Samsung
Electronics, the nation's largest semiconductor maker, for example, is
resisting collaboration with Goldstar and Hyundai on the development of a
256-megabit chip.
'We believe we are far ahead of Goldstar and Hyundai on semiconductor
technology and we see no reason why we should share our knowledge with
them,' says one official with Samsung Electronics, the country's top
corporate investor in R&amp;D with a total of Won414bn in 1992.
Companies believe the government should give more state funding to risky and
long-term basic research, while allowing industry to pursue applied or
pre-competitive research with less government interference.
Scientists at the government research institutes in Taedok say they are
forced to conduct research projects with strong commercial applications at
the expense of basic research. 'The government is constantly on our backs to
produce a product, but biotechnology is not suitable to produce quick
results,' says one senior official at the state-run Genetic Engineering
Research Institute.
Bioengineering has become the latest goal for the government, which this
year launched a Won1,600bn 14-year project, Biotech 2000, to make Korea a
leader in the field. Officials hope the programme, which will receive
two-thirds of its funding from industry, will enable Korea to capture a
significant share of the global market for bioengineering products.
Frustration is creating a 'brain drain' as scientists abandon the institutes
for better paid jobs with industry. But the government says the emphasis on
applied research is necessary for South Korea to narrow the technology gap
with the advanced industrial world. The commercial orientation of Taedok is
also needed to persuade industry to continue financing the state-run
institutes, officials explain.
They point to Taedok's commercial successes, such as the TDX automatic
telephone exchange developed by the Electronics and Telecommunications
Research Institute and shared among leading equipment manufacturers.
But even at this institute there is criticism: 'Our great weakness is the
theoretical. Industry should take care of developing technology and we
should concentrate on basic research,' says a chief researcher.
Next week: Israel
