FT  30 JUN 94 / Bond rates rise in Athens reflects instability
Greece's Finance Ministry has signalled anxiety over meeting interest
payments on government debt by sharply raising interest rates on today's
issue of government bonds.
Interest rates on one-year treasury bills, the main instrument for financing
a rising public sector deficit, jumped from 18.5 per cent to 21.5 per cent.
The rise underlines the government's difficulties in raising funds following
last month's currency crisis, which was triggered by the abolition of
short-term capital controls under EU single market regulations. This month
the Finance Ministry must raise a total of Dr650bn (Pounds 1.7bn) to meet
debt servicing charges.
To protect the drachma against a devaluation, interbank rates were raised to
record levels, while interest rates on fixed-term repurchase agreements
soared to more than 40 per cent.
Last month, investors rushed to buy a one-month zero-coupon bond offered at
27 per cent and a three-month treasury bill at 25.5 per cent, while the
one-year bill at 18.5 per cent was ignored. This month, only six-month and
one-year bills are being issued.
Though liquidity has started returning to financial markets as interbank
rates decline, borrowing rates for working capital are still at more than 30
per cent.
Bankers predict that real interest rates on government paper will remain at
more than 10 per cent, as the government borrowing requirement is projected
to rise sharply later this year.
To meet interest payments from a debt rescheduling carried out two years
ago, a total of Dr2,000bn must be raised in September and October alone.
Total interest payments this year on government debt are estimated to equal
13.9 per cent of Greece's gross domestic product.
One banker said: 'Such a big leap in rates on treasury bills, coming at a
time when the government's stated policy is to bring interest rates down,
indicates that financial markets are still very unstable.'
Public debt, already equivalent to 110 per cent of GDP, is expected to rise
to 116 per cent of GDP before starting to decline in 1997, according to the
Economy Ministry. Because of the high inflation rate, which has edged up
from 10.2 to 11 per cent, the Finance Ministry has not been able to extend
the maturity of government debt. Issues of three- and five-year government
bonds carry floating interest rates linked to that of the one-year treasury
bill.
Amid clear signs of investor fatigue, there is growing concern among bankers
that the Finance Ministry may be forced to undertake a partial rescheduling
of the domestic debt later this year.
However, a rescheduling would affect debt held by Greek banks as part of
their reserve requirements, rather than treasury bills in the hands of
private Greek and international investors, analysts said.
