FT  16 APR 94 / Books: Spooks at large
THE NEW SPIES: EXPLORING THE FRONTIERS OF ESPIONAGE by James Adams
Hutchinson Pounds 17.99, 352 pages
In Le Carre's The Secret Pilgrim, an ageing George Smiley is quick to
reassure those student spooks who fear they have no future after the
collapse of the Berlin wall: 'With each new alignment, each rediscovery of
old identities and passions, with each erosion of the status quo, the spies
would be working round the clock.'
The New Spies, as identified by Sunday Times journalist James Adams in this
far less brilliantly written piece of non-fiction on the intelligence
community, are a motley collection. They include politically correct CIA
operatives, under orders from Clinton to keep an eye on environmental abuse;
reformed KGB apparatchiks, happy to throw open their files to western
academics; and a new breed of British spies who are making every effort to
convince the public what really decent folk they are.
These spies have one thing in common: an extraordinary capacity to reinvent
themselves when faced with the threat of political extinction. The new war
they are engaged in is not an ideological struggle between communism and
capitalism, but a concerted campaign to convince politicians and the public
that, without our spies, the world would be far more dangerous and
unhealthy.
In surveying the activities of the intelligence agencies in recent years,
Adams casts doubts over the sincerity, not to mention the efficiency, of
spies old and new, while never pushing the extreme case for the prosecution:
that the world would in fact be a much better place without them.
Adams rightly asserts that the image created by the ex-MI5 spycatcher, Peter
Wright, of a bunch of 'buggers and burglars' understates the complexities of
secret services world wide. Crookery and conspiracy form part of espionage,
but they are not the whole story. Too often intelligence failings have been
the result of higher political priorities and in-built systems of government
that ensure that warnings are ignored, and rival agencies spend more time
fighting each other than protecting the national interest.
Bureaucratic inertia and inter-service rivalries between US agencies is
mirrored in Adams' account of British intelligence in Northern Ireland.
Adams notes that the single factor setting Britain apart from international
counter terrorism is not the professionalism of the IRA, but 'the
incompetence of the counter-terrorist forces.'
As for the Russians, they remain duplicitous. The public face of the new
KGB, Yevgeny Primakov, appointed by Yeltsin in October 1991, tells Adams
that the organisation has repudiated the 'old ideological model' and is now
working exclusively 'in defence of the national interest'. In practice, this
has meant the Russians embarking on economic espionage and being
uncooperative with the West in providing information on its biological
warfare stockpile.
Moscow Centre is still influenced by a basic distrust of the US and British
intelligence agencies, both of which have set up an extensive network of
agents and controllers in the former soviet republics.
And yet the new Russia has still left the new spies having to justify their
budgets. The spooks' agenda has expanded to include cooperation against
Islamic fundamentalist terrorists, nuclear proliferation in the third world,
and drugs traffiking.
Meanwhile intelligence agencies have made some attempt to streamline their
organisations and make themselves more accountable. Adams concludes however
that the internal reform of the agencies has been too limited to meet the
challenges of a fast changing world.
His book is a noble attempt to shed light on a difficult subject but not a
definitive history. Although it pulls few punches when it comes to
identifying intelligence blunders, it is inexplicably restrained when
tackling some of the murkier episodes - such as the CIA's involvement in the
BCCI affair, and the British intelligence services' role in Iraqgate.
