FT  15 OCT 94 / Right on to the end of the road: Simon Hughes goes walking
with Ffyona Campbell
There has been a television series, a book, and countless articles written
about her. But there is a good chance you have got the wrong impression of
round-the-world walker Ffyona Campbell. Contrary to what you might have been
led to believe, she is perfectly pleasant.
But, as so often happens with people who stand out from the crowd, her image
has been reduced to that of a rancorous, scheming bitch.
Ffyona, who started her world walk 11 years ago and finished yesterday
morning, finds the label attached to her hurts - almost as much as her feet.
Beneath the iron will that drives her along there lies a sensitive soul.
Criticisms, wild arms-length judgments from people who have hardly met her,
have damped her spirit, but not crippled it. Conversely, the people at the
roadside wishing her well, friendly drivers stopping for autographs, elicit
flushes of satisfaction. 'Oh, thank you, thank you,' she said to a family
who pressed a Scottish pound into her hand.
At temporary rest points or primitive camp-sites she fusses around clumps of
exhausted bodies, draining their blisters, immersing their feet in salt
water and administering second skin from a plastic box.
She has limitless energy, gulping down her evening meal before disappearing
into a nearby tenpin bowling centre to be interviewed by TV presenter Janet
Street-Porter.
'Can I have a quick word with you, Janet?' I said when they had finished.
'No, sorry, I've had a long journey from Lancashire and I'm rather tired,'
she replied with unintentional irony.
'That's the problem with the media,' Ffyona said, as we marched briskly up a
farm track the following morning. 'None of them has been prepared to
experience what I endure. Only by sharing the pain I feel and the
exhilaration of seeing the van at the next stop can they really understand
what this is all about.'
During our eight-hour hike through the Scottish Highlands, she talked
incessantly. She was inquisitive, observant and reflective: 'I haven't
walked with people before and gradually I have become more patient. I
suppose I have matured.'
Her alleged irascibility was nowhere to be found. 'It upsets me when people
don't try,' she said, echoing the attitude of many top athletes.
'But look at her, she's brilliant,' she added, pointing at a woman teetering
downhill on tip-toe in obvious agony. 'Come on, Janice, keep going]' she
urged. 'That's it, not far.'
Some people collect stamps or coins or autographs. Ffyona Campbell collects
miles.
What makes people do these crazy things? It is an impossible question, but
we should not castigate people simply because we do not understand them.
Obviously they make promises to themselves that they feel obliged to keep.
Ultra-determined people can be fanatical about their goal - a trait which
can alienate others.
On Sunday night, Ffyona pored over the map of Monday's route, illuminated by
wood burning in an old oil drum. 'No, I don't do that]' she said, having
noticed a short ferry ride across the Cromarty Firth. 'We must use a road if
possible. If I don't walk every step I would never forgive myself.'
Attention to detail is evident in the placing of a stone at the day's end -
so she knows exactly where to start from in the morning.
