FT  04 OCT 94 / Italy's EU agricultural aid chief arrested
Police yesterday arrested Mr Filippo Galli, the director-general of Aima,
the state body controlling EU agricultural aid, on charges of abuse of
office as part of a year-long investigation into agricultural fraud.
Mr Galli's arrest concerns the receipt of an alleged L200m (Pounds 81,460)
bribe from Mr Franco Ambrosio, the so-called 'King of Grain', who runs his
Italgrani trading empire from Naples. Mr Ambrosio has already been
interrogated about Aima aid but yesterday denied he had made any payment to
Mr Galli.
The Galli arrest follows that of Mr Giuseppe Fugaro, the deputy head of
Aima, for alleged abuse of office related to favours provided to Mr Pasquale
Casillo, the owner of Foggia football club and the entrepreneur in the south
with the biggest business interests after Mr Ambrosio. Mr Casillo is alleged
to have benefited from EU support for fake and inflated third country sales
of agricultural produce.
Mr Casillo is believed to be still in jail. Naples magistrates are currently
assessing how to tackle the problems arising from the seizure of almost
L2,000bn worth of Mr Casillo's assets, including several grain trading
companies. Meanwhile, Aima has recently changed its name to Eima and the
government is considering its disbandment.
In a separate development yesterday in the corruption investigations, a
close confidant of Mr Bettino Craxi, the former Socialist leader and prime
minister, told a Milan court he had operated two secret Swiss banks for him
with funds totalling L30bn. The admission came from Mr Giorgio Tradati, who
was arrested last week on corruption charges relating to the receipt of a
L1bn bribe paid to the Socialists by the state-owned Ansaldo engineering
group.
His arrest followed evidence uncovered in Switzerland that bank accounts had
been opened in the early 1980s at SBS in Chiasso and American Express in
Geneva, by Mr Tradati as a front for Mr Craxi. Mr Tradati claimed Mr Craxi
had asked him to close the accounts when the corruption scandals began to
break but he refused. Mr Tradati said only L2bn of the L30bn had been
transferred to Italy, to help pay the Socialist party's debts and wages of
staff at L'Avenire, the party newspaper. The prosecution alleged the monies
had been kept secret in Switzerland largely for Mr Craxi's personal use.
This led Mr Craxi to send yet another of his many faxes from his
self-imposed exile in Tunisia, saying all the money in the accounts was for
party expenses. Mr Craxi is refusing to return to be interrogated, arguing
he cannot obtain a fair hearing.
