FT  08 OCT 94 / Plastic heart of a new age man of many parts: We have the
technology, we can rebuild the human body. Clive Cookson examines the latest
advances in medical science
My childhood science books used to portray the human body as a complicated
machine. This idea made me wonder why old people could not go to hospital to
have worn bits of their body replaced, in the same way as broken-down cars
were fixed in a garage. By the time I studied science at university in the
1970s, it was fashionable to look at the body as a whole biological system
rather than as a machine with separate parts.
Now, with the proportion of broken-down old people in the population
increasing rapidly, the machine analogy is making more sense again. One
reason is that modern medicine can indeed provide a wide range of spare
parts. Primitive implants are becoming available to replace many human
organs: ears, eyes and nose; bones and joints; skin and ligaments; hearts
and kidneys.
These implants are made from an astonishingly diverse range of materials:
hard metals and ceramics; soft plastics and foams; biological implants made
by 'tissue engineering' from living cells; even electronic circuits designed
to replace failed nerves.
Anyone fitted with all the different spare parts available today would
indeed be a bionic man or woman, but with a creaking performance far removed
from a sci-fi superhero. For no implant works as well as the original human
version.
Although the vast majority of implants have improved the lives of their
recipients, there are also failures - some of which leave patients with even
more pain and disability than they had before. Indeed suing manufacturers on
behalf of 'victims' is a lucrative sideline for the American legal
profession.
'The problem is that all current devices for all parts of the body have a
limited lifetime,' says Professor William Bonfield, head of the
Interdisciplinary Research Centre in Biomedical Materials at Queen Mary and
Westfield College, London. However, as scientists begin to understand which
chemical and physical properties of materials make them compatible with the
human body, the outlook for more permanent implants is becoming brighter.
'There has been a change of philosophy recently,' says Professor Chris
Wilkinson, a bio-engineering pioneer at Glasgow University. 'You used to try
to make your material as inert as possible - and you assumed your
engineering skills were better than the body's. Now we accept that the body
is more clever than us.'
Research today aims to produce implants that knit together with the body's
own tissues. The key factor here, according to Professor Colin Humphreys, a
biomaterials specialist at Cambridge University, is not so much the chemical
nature of the implant as its micro-structure. The material must have a shape
and texture that is compatible with living tissues on the scale of a few
nanometres - millionths of a millimetre. 'If it does not have the right
nano-structure, it will not work,' he says.
A good example of the new focus on micro-structure is Bonfield's project at
Queen Mary and Westfield College 'to design from scratch an artificial bone
that will fit as well as possible with the real thing.' His team has come up
with a composite material containing hydroxy-apatite, the main mineral in
bone, blended with plastic.
Although hydroxy-apatite has been used before, Bonfield believes his
material is the first with the same nano-crystalline structure as natural
bone. The result, when it is put next to osteoblasts (bone-producing cells),
is that tiny whiskers of bone grow cleanly into the implant. Clinical tests
of the material are showing that it can successfully repair the cheekbones
of people whose faces have been disfigured by disease or accident. Thirty
patients have already received the implants and 400 more are due to take
part in an extended clinical trial.
As with most researchers developing bio-materials, Bonfield's goal is to
move into hip joints - the biggest sector of the implant market. According
to Frost &amp; Sullivan, a Californian market research company, US sales of hip
implants will be worth Dollars 810m this year.
Artificial hips, introduced in the early 1960s, give new mobility to 500,000
people a year worldwide whose own joints have been ruined by arthritis and
other diseases. The natural hip is a ball-and-socket joint. Its replacement
involves cutting off the round head of the patient's thigh bone and
hammering in a metal spike to which a new ball is attached; at the same
time, the natural socket in the pelvis is cut out and replaced with an
artificial cup made from metal lined with plastic. Both components of the
artificial joint are conventionally cemented in place with a glue called
polymethyl methacrylate.
Total hip replacements have given good results in elderly patients, working
well for 10 to 15 years. But they last less well in people under 70, who are
more active and put more strain on their hips. Their new joints can fail
within five years - usually because the bone shrinks away from the implant,
which then works loose.
'The result is that a steadily increasing proportion of our patients are
undergoing 'revision' operations to replace artificial hips that have
already failed. Altogether about one-third of hip replacements are now
revisions,' says Richard Coombs, an orthopaedic surgeon at the Royal
Postgraduate Medical School, London. 'Our aim is the 30-year prosthesis, yet
today our youngest patients have a five to seven year revision rate.'
Repeated surgery to replace failed artificial joints is not only distressing
and risky for the patients but also expensive. The National Health Service
would save an estimated Pounds 80m a year if it did not have to carry out
second and subsequent hip replacements.
Much research into orthopaedic implants is aimed at giving the metal
components a porous surface coating - of hydroxy-apatite, for example -
which will encourage the patient's hip and thigh bones to bind naturally
with the implant. To stimulate the osteoblasts, the implant may also be
impregnated with natural chemicals called growth factors. This should give a
stronger bond than any synthetic glue.
Patience and dogged persistence are essential requirements for anyone
developing implant materials. Proving their safety and efficacy inevitably
takes many years. For example Bioglass, a ceramic bone substitute just
beginning to come into use in the US, was invented by Professor Larry Hench
at the University of Florida in 1969.
Professor Per-Ingvar Branemark of Gothenburg University, Sweden, also shows
the persistence required in bio-materials research. As a young medical
scientist working on laboratory animals in the 1950s, he discovered that
titanium, a light metal much favoured by the aerospace industry, could
secure implants firmly in living bone.
Branemark first used the system in 1965, to fix the most humble of implants
 -false teeth - with a titanium screw into a man's jaw bone. Twenty-nine
years later, that patient's dentures are still firmly in place, and 300,000
other people have had dental implants secured with the same system.
The weight of clinical evidence did not convince the world's dentists that
the Branemark system was safe and effective until the 1980s. And only in the
mid 1990s are orthopaedic and plastic surgeons beginning to take titanium
screws seriously, as a way to fix artificial joints and other body parts
permanently to patients.
'No one knows how and why the system works so well,' Branemark says, 'but
empirical findings like this are important in medicine.' Apparently, the
titanium surface is covered by a thin oxide layer whose crystalline
structure happens to be completely compatible with bone; at the same time it
contains no chemicals capable of triggering an adverse reaction from the
body's immune system.
Implant development is not only slow but may also be legally and financially
hazardous. The most spectacular demonstration of the dangers is the Dollars
4bn fund proposed by Dow Corning and other US manufacturers of silicone
breast implants, to settle litigation by thousands of women who were
allegedly harmed by the devices. Although the companies maintain that there
is no scientific evidence to link their products to the plaintiffs'
auto-immune diseases and other medical problems, some implant recipients
have undoubtedly suffered great pain - and their lawyers have successfully
portrayed them as innocent victims of corporate greed and negligence.
The silicone saga has frightened several companies off the whole implants
business. 'We have pulled out of making materials for medical implants
altogether, and a number of other companies have stopped developing medical
implants in the US because, with the potential (legal) liability, it is not
worth the risk,' says Dr Ralph Cook, Dow Corning medical director.
Another corporate victim of the implants business is Vitek, a Texan company
founded by Dr Charles Homsy to make implants out of a material called
Proplast which he has been developing for more than 20 years. Vitek went
bankrupt in 1990, crushed by the weight of lawsuits by patients who suffered
adverse reactions - including severe and intractable pain - after receiving
jaw implants containing Proplast.
Homsy believes that the fault did not lie with the material itself but
with the way it was used. He has shown his faith in it by joining a new
company in Switzerland, Promotus, to continue developing and marketing
Proplast (a porous matrix of Teflon plastic with hydroxy-apatite).
Surgeons in the Netherlands are carrying out a long-term trial of hip
implants coated with Proplast.
So much for passive implants to replace failed bones and joints. Research
into active implants, which substitute for nerves and muscles, is less
advanced but potentially more far-reaching in its implications. Already,
electronic devices are beginning to give some hearing to the deaf and
movement to the severely disabled.
Doctors have most experience with the 'cochlear implant', fitted surgically
into the bone behind the ear. It converts digitised sounds, transmitted from
a small external microphone, into electrical signals which stimulate the
auditory nerves inside the ear. These send impulses to the brain, which
interprets them as crude sounds.
Lord Ashley, the UK's best-known campaigner for the deaf, brought the
technology to public attention in Britain last year when he received a
cochlear implant. He spoke movingly of being able to hear his family again
after 25 years of silence. 'I can best describe what I hear as being like
listening to a croaking Dalek with laryngitis,' Ashley said, 'but compared
with total deafness it is a miracle.'
Devices to restore some hand movement to quadriplegic patients with broken
backs or necks are being developed at Case Western Reserve University in
Ohio. The system relies on the fact that most quadriplegics can shrug their
shoulders slightly. The movement controls a joy-stick which transmits
signals to an electronic unit under the wheelchair. This activates a
stimulator about the size of a heart pacemaker, implanted in the shoulder,
which sends electrical impulses down the arm to the paralysed hand muscles.
The experimental hand grasp system does not restore full finger movements
but it has enabled a dozen patients in the US to write, brush their hair and
teeth, hold a telephone, sew and paint. Now surgeons at Salisbury District
Hospital are preparing to test the system in the UK.
The only vital organ for which medical technology cannot yet offer any
assistance is the brain. Even that is only a matter of time. Humphreys
predicts that within 50 years it will be possible to implant memory chips to
boost our failing intellectual faculties.
'If we can design an interface between silicon chips and brain cells, the
first step will be a pre-programmed chip which the brain could read,'
Humphreys says. 'Ultimately we would like the brain not to notice the
implant and to treat it as another piece of brain tissue. Then we could get
the brain to record information on the silicon chip and read it when
necessary.'
Although Humphreys is more willing than his cautious colleagues to speculate
publicly about the future of biomedical technology, many scientists would
regard his vision as a reasonable extrapolation of current research. Most
would see brain-boosting implants - whether to extend human intelligence or
to treat diseases such as Alzheimer's - as a welcome development, not a
sci-fi nightmare.
There is an interesting paradox here. As medical scientists add increasingly
sophisticated implants to people, so robotics researchers will be giving
machines the mental and even anatomical features of humans. During the
coming Bionic Age, the distinction between human beings with implants and
humanised robots will become increasingly blurred.
