FT  13 DEC 94 / Arts: Focus on the figure - William Packer reviews the early
figurative work of Edward Burra together with more recent paintings and
drawings by Sergei Chepik and Patrick Procktor
Working from the figure is rather an issue these days. Should the life model
be available to the student and, if so, what kind of use should be made of
it? Should it be a focus of objective and technical study, or merely a
prompt for subjective interpretation and response? In the old days the
answer would have been taken as read, that of course it must be the first
alternative, for without such a fund of knowledge and practice, how could
one possibly move on usefully to the second?
By chance, several current London shows, and one in particular, make the
point. The Lefevre has had a number of shows lately of the work of that most
idiosyncratic of English surreal romantics, Edward Burra. The latest is of a
fascinating group of works on paper from his time as a student in the 1920s,
and his first years of independence.
Here is the mature artist in embryo, wearing his influences on his sleeve,
flirting with caricature and making his first moves towards the vigorous
mannerism and wicked imagery of cafe, low cabaret and hotel, that were soon
to mark him out. Nothing is inconsistent to the artist we know, for all that
the young Burra as cartoonist was looking to Lear, as illustrator to Rackham
and Dulac, as artist to the still-lifes, interiors and gardens of David
Jones and the brothers Nash. These last, views taken in and around Burra's
family home at Rye, are most beautiful drawings.
To declare an influence is never to betray oneself, if it is taken as
something direct, useful and unselfconscious. It is indeed the great paradox
of creativity that the artist is most himself when least concerned with
himself. This is nowhere more evident than in the life-drawings and figure
studies which punctuate this show. How typical of the period they are, with
that swift, incisive contour and judicious modelling through the form,
shades of Strang and Kennington and Randolph Schwabe, who taught him at the
Royal College.
But even so, Burra's personal inflexion always comes through, with just a
shift of an emphasis here, and an exaggeration there. Suddenly we see how
firm and knowing was the base that he had acquired in his study of the
figure, and how necessary it was to every graphic liberty he was
subsequently to take. It underpins, and validates, the entire oeuvre.
Next door, at Roy Miles, Sergei Chepik, a Russian painter now living in
Paris, is showing his latest work. Chepik, who had an orthodox academic
training in Leningrad, is evidently talented and prodigiously prolific. And
it is typical of the prolific that too often they do not know when to stop.
More to the point, so anxious are they to move on that too much is left
perfunctory and unresolved.
Chepik is prepared to work on an epic scale, and with epic themes, composing
and ordering them with remarkable vigour and invention. And these too often
lead him into the abyss of gothic fantasy, essentially literary and
sentimental, peopled by armies of ghouls and madmen, clowns and monsters,
all gesticulating with fearful histrionics. Someone should tell him quietly
that the white-faced clown, indeed any clown, is the first and final
disqualification for any serious regard.
And yet, as one recoils somewhat from the kitsch excess, one cannot but
acknowledge and even respect the artist buried beneath it all, who may yet
struggle free. For the more straightforward the work becomes, and the less
forced the symbolism and the portentousness, the better it is. A still-life,
a portrait or two, some compositions in the Russian illustrative tradition,
all offer much hope. The figurative skill and knowledge are there, and the
discipline too, though dormant. Perhaps Chepik should not try so hard.
Patrick Procktor, now at the Redfern with a mini-retrospective, is a painter
who in the past has seemed, perhaps, not to be trying hard enough. His
pictorial wit, his lightness of touch, his graphic sensibility and charm
were quite enough to carry us along, and not notice too unkindly that the
image was skimped and the painting perfunctory. But all is not always as it
seems, and this little show gives us pause for thought in adding some
retrospective substance to the work.
What is most useful is to see the latest paintings, of landscapes and
figures, against the figure painting of the early 1960s, when Procktor first
sprang upon an astonished world. That work was a sophisticated expressionism
founded in the old discipline of life painting, worked directly from the
model. And what we find is that while not so closely disciplined, this new
work marks a return to that richer surface and a closer selective working of
the paint within the looser general statement. And those more lightly stated
paintings in the interim, portraits, views of Venice and the like, they are
not so slight after all.
Edward Burra: The Formative Years 1923-27; the Lefevre Gallery 30 Bruton St,
W1 until December 21. Sergei Chepik: New Works; Roy Miles Gallery 29 Bruton
St, W1 until December 21. Patrick Procktor: paintings and drawings from the
1960s to the 90s: The Redfern Gallery, 20 Cork Street W1, until December 22.
