FT  23 NOV 94 / International Company News: Nasdaq strengthens its defences
 -Allegations of collusion have prompted action
The Nasdaq stock market has been under fire this year over allegations that
its dealers colluded to fix their prices so they could profit at the expense
of investors. Yet, until recently, the National Association of Securities
Dealers, which operates the market, was slow to defend itself and its
members, much to the unhappiness of some Nasdaq dealers.
Now, however, the NASD has brought out some big guns. Last week, the
association named a seven-strong select committee, headed by former US
senator Mr Warren Rudman, to conduct a review of the Nasdaq market, the
second largest in the US after the New York Stock Exchange.
The NASD hopes that the appointment of the blue-ribbon panel - which
includes well-known figures from the world of investing and market
regulation such as Mr Peter Lynch, the prominent fund manager, and Mr Irving
Pollack, a former head of market regulation at the Securities and Exchange
Commission - will appease those who say the association has not been taking
allegations of price fixing seriously enough.
Some critics, however, are still unhappy. They say the committee is packed
with too many industry insiders (one of the seven is a former NASD chairman
and two are former NASD governors) and are surprised that the panel has been
asked to review everything about the Nasdaq market except the allegations
that dealers broke anti-trust laws by fixing prices to maximise profits.
As one former top NASD official put it: 'Since they aren't allowed to look
at the trees, looking at the forest is going to be kind of hard.'
The NASD, however, says it would have been improper to ask the committee to
review matters which are the subject of more than two dozen class-action
lawsuits, as well as separate investigations by the Justice Department and
the SEC.
However, Mr Richard Ketchum, NASD chief operating officer, says the
committee will be free to examine the wider issue of how prices are
determined and how trades are executed on Nasdaq, and whether there is
genuine competition among the dealers.
Although Mr Rudman said this week that his committee did not want to get in
the way of the Justice Department's investigation, he gave an assurance that
they would 'look where we have to look', and that the panel would talk to
the two finance professors whose study of Nasdaq spreads sparked the
inquiries and lawsuits in the first place.
The study, by Mr William Christie of Vanderbilt University and Mr Paul
Schultz of Ohio State University, found that spreads between the buy and
sell prices quoted by Nasdaq dealers on stocks of many big companies were
unnecessarily wide. It concluded the only explanation was that dealers had
agreed to keep spreads wide to maximise their profits - even though it meant
denying investors the best possible price on each trade.
The study, and a second report by the professors which later appeared to
back up their initial findings, prompted scores of investors to file
lawsuits against Nasdaq dealers - including some of the biggest Wall Street
firms - claiming they had violated anti-trust laws by illegally fixing
prices.
Ever since the first study's findings were published, the NASD has
consistently denied that its dealers colluded to fix prices (the dealers
have remained quiet, pending the lawsuits). This week Mr Ketchum reiterated
the NASD's view on the matter. 'If there is anti-competitive activity going
on in the market . . . we would welcome anyone identifying it.' But, he
said, 'we don't believe the economic data in the two studies give any clear
evidence that there was anti-competitive activity going on in the
marketplace.'
Mr Ketchum points out that that the study focused only on price quotations,
rather than actual trades. The NASD claims that many trades are executed at
prices that are better than those advertised by dealers on the screens, and
they also say that wide spreads are necessary in some stocks to ensure there
is sufficient liquidity in the market to accommodate investor orders.
Amid the various investigations, inquiries, lawsuits and select committees,
the controversy over Nasdaq prices has raised broader questions about US
equity markets, and whether investors are best served by the current
structure of competing marketplaces offering investors the opportunity to
trade via different, and in most cases unconnected, trading systems.
Mr Junius Peake, professor of finance at the University of Northern Colorado
and an expert on the structure of US markets, says the problem of pricing on
Nasdaq is just one of many faults within the market infrastructure. 'The
iceberg has stuck its peak above the surface of the water.'
Mr Peake believes the controversy over price fixing highlights the
weaknesses inherent in a system that allows markets (not just the NASD, but
the NYSE and other exchanges) to regulate themselves. 'The incident
demonstrates the folly of combining self-regulation with the operation of a
commercial enterprise like a market.'
These are the sort of issues he believes will be addressed next year by
Congress, which in the wake of the price-fixing charges is likely to want to
take a close look not just at Nasdaq, but at all US markets. The central
problem, says Mr Peake, is relatively straightforward: 'The market
structures are not as protective of customers' interests as they ought to
be.'
