FT  05 OCT 94 / FT Exporter (9): Letters of credit: risks and rewards -
Credit watch / Jon Marks and Kevin Godier highlight the financial and
commercial risks of doing business in a range of key markets
Algeria, traditionally a big market for letter of credit financing, has
found obtaining confirmations extremely difficult in the past two years. An
agreement to reschedule its official debt with the Paris Club of creditor
governments and the implementation of an economic stabilisation and
refinancing package with the IMF and World Bank has eased the situation.
However, the country's political crisis and commercial banks' attempts to
reduce their Algerian exposure means that many exporters will continue to
experience severe problems obtaining letters of credit (l/cs).
Turkey's foreign exchange crisis of early 1994 shook business confidence.
The situation has improved since and, in July, Standard &amp; Poor's, the US
ratings agency, removed Turkey from its critical credit-watch list. But
relatively few banks are prepared to take on fresh Turkish risk and many
have closed existing credit lines.
Specialist trade financiers such as forfaiters (who buy an exporters' debt
at a discount, providing cash up-front to reduce the seller's risk to zero)
have been moving out of Turkey, which has been deemed to be no longer a good
risk for repayments.
Securing Turkish l/cs may also prove problematic and often depends on the
strength of the relationships between importers' and exporters' confirming
banks. Letters of credit cover more than 40 per cent of Turkish
transactions, with around 20 per cent of deals transacted on open account
terms.
Brazil and Argentina. Trade flows into Latin America are rising sharply, as
economies in the region continue their expansion. Increased use of export
credit agency services offers one option for capital goods exporters.
Standard letters of credit were the basic instrument when the payments
situation was less certain.
Methods available for capital equipment financing range from collateralised
pre-payment, through sight l/cs (payable at sight) to medium- and long-term
finance provided by commercial banks.
Thus, Barclays de Zoete Wedd (BZW) has signed a five-year facility worth
Dollars 38.25m for the Brazilian navy to finance goods supplied by UK
defence contractors in one of the first medium-term loans from a prime
lending institution since Brazil's Brady plan debt restructuring.
Clients in the region borrowing on a short-term basis generally receive
terms of 90-180 days, although 360-day structures are available for larger
deals.
Medium-term borrowing is usually on terms of between two and five years, and
in the fast expanding market for infrastructure equipment terms as long as
ten years have been quoted.
Lloyds Bank of the UK , reports that it has credit lines in place worth over
Dollars 1bn for Brazil alone, which continues to enjoy strong demand for
commodities. The bank is 'usually looking to take on more Brazilian
capacity,' according to Simon Sayer, assistant director in Lloyds' project
and trade finance group. Mr Sayer sees a trend away from l/c financed
trading - 'less than one half of our Brazilian deals is now done through
letters of credit,' he says.
Mr Sayer stresses the benefits of this trend given the expense to the
exporter of raising an l/c, the maturity of which can be considerably longer
than the duration of the actual deal, as with many commodity transactions.
An alternative, which is especially useful for clients purchasing
medium-sized capital equipment, involves the discounting of the paper debt -
a procedure akin to factoring or forfaiting.
In this case risk calculations are often based on the bank's confidence in
known buyers, where default risk is at a minimum.
Uruguay has promoted itself as a regional finance centre, and there is added
availability of trade credits through Montevideo's offshore financial
institutions. However, the maturities on Uruguayan payments remain broadly
in line with those of Argentina and Brazil.
London banks report a steady demand for UK equipment in the Uruguayan market
which is satisfied by a mix of letters of credit deals and avalised drafts.
Paraguay: In less attractive markets such as Paraguay, very short-term trade
finance remains the norm and is largely linked to the predominantly
agricultural economy, involving tractors and other farm equipment.
Peru, Bolivia and Ecuador: Much short-term financing involves deals of
around Dollars 5,000-Dollars 10,000, bankers report, with only financiers
very specialised in such markets offering l/cs on terms of up to 180 days.
But for these countries' limited number of blue chip borrowers and for
larger structured projects, medium-term financing may be available.
The following are among other recent trends noted by specialist trade
financiers:
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania are building new banking and commercial
relations, but sight l/cs and other very short-term instruments still
dominate. The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is
considering plans for a new trade finance facility for the Baltic states,
which would follow its ground-breaking deal for Macedonia.
Kazakhstan is gradually developing as the focus for trade finance activity
in Central Asia due to its potential to generate revenues for exports of oil
and other natural resources. Forfaiters, including Hungarian International
Bank, report some activity. But lack of capacity is a severe problem in a
market where buyers are seeking financing for contracts potentially worth
tens of millions of dollars.
A short-term market in l/cs of up to 180 days is emerging in Kazakhstan.
Business focuses on the multinationals setting up in Almaty with an eye to
the opportunities on offer now and especially when the legislative and
operating environment in Kazakhstan becomes clearer. (See also the case
study on page 24 of this issue of the FT Exporter).
Pakistan is increasingly using the morabaha (cost-plus financing) Islamic
financing instrument. Specialists, such as the Bahrain-based Faisal Islamic
Bank are arranging a steady flow of morabaha syndications for Pakistani
enterprises.
Western banks, including ANZ Grindlays Bank and Kleinwort Benson, are also
becoming established in the Islamic market for short-term transactions.
Analysts say that as the use of Islamic instruments matures they will
increasingly be used for larger and more long-term trade transactions.
Islamic banking: see feature, page 17
