FT  29 NOV 94 / KMT makes sure the party is not over: Taiwan's Nationalists
seek to continue enjoying fruits of power
Taiwan's long-ruling Nationalist party, the Kuomintang, fearing that the
opposition Democratic Progressive party may try to nationalise its vast
business empire should it come to power, is consolidating its assets,
converting them into more liquid form and investing profits offshore.
Accustomed to ruling by fist and fiat, the 100-year-old KMT has turned to
its extensive business interests to keep its grip on power through the
ballot box.
So far the strategy, while costly, appears to have worked. The KMT is
believed to have an edge over the opposition in elections to be held on
Saturday. However, the party, which has seen its mandate slip perilously
since the lifting of martial law in 1987, is scrambling to protect its
riches.
It is coming under increasing pressure to disclose the true extent and
origins of its assets. DPP legislators have drafted a law governing the
activities of political parties, but the KMT has obstructed attempts to put
the draft on the parliamentary agenda.
'There are a lot of unanswered questions about how the party became so rich
and how it started all its businesses,' says Professor Lu Ya-li, a political
scientist at National Taiwan University. 'The party's main concerns right
now are to make all the companies private so people will never know how rich
the KMT really is, and to move assets offshore, both for economic and
political reasons.'
The party is regarded as one of the island's biggest and most diverse
industrial conglomerates. Its seven holding companies have investments in
more than 100 enterprises spanning cement, electronics, finance,
petrochemicals, telecommunications, construction and trade. The total
registered assets of those businesses, of which perhaps a dozen are listed,
stood at TDollars 950bn (Pounds 23bn) and net assets at TDollars 240bn at
the end of 1992, the most recent figures available.
'The KMT has managed to gain control of a large part of Taiwan's economy and
accumulate a huge amount of party enterprises and assets, and through these
can also exert control over domestic politics,' says Prof Chen Shih-meng, an
economist at National Taiwan University and co-author of Dismantling
Party-state Capitalism, published in 1991. 'I doubt very much that President
Lee Teng-hui is trying to build a true democracy in Taiwan as long as he
wants to hold on to the party's wealth.'
In the last year, the party has begun to invest offshore, mainly across
south-east Asia where it ranks among the biggest foreign investors in
Vietnam and Indonesia. It has invested or considered investing in the US,
Japan, Hong Kong, Burma, Russia, Paraguay and even China, though through
circuitous channels as it officially bans investments in the Chinese
mainland.
As democracy threatens to erode the longstanding privileges of KMT
enterprises, the party's new policy is to list as many of its companies as
possible on the stock exchange. Last week Fuh-Hwa Securities Finance, whose
monopoly on finance for margin share trading is being broken down by
deregulation and is one of the party's biggest earners, went public.
According to a book just published by the party, The Evolution and Ideals of
the Kuomintang of China, the purpose behind listing KMT companies is 'so
that all the people may share in their success'.
Critics say it is so that the KMT can reap while they are still profitable.
'Through listing, the party will be able to cash in assets very quickly and
transfer them overseas if necessary,' says Prof Chang Ching-hsi, also an
economist and the other author of Dismantling Party-state Capitalism. 'That
way the party can also use its assets more flexibly before elections,' he
added in a reference to alleged vote-buying.
This weekend voters will for the first time elect mayors for Taipei and
Kaohsiung, the island's two largest cities, and a provincial governor in
what are the most important polls to date in Taiwan's political reform.
Municipal councils and a provincial assembly will also be elected.
A DPP victory would not pose an immediate threat to the KMT's empire.
Nonetheless a KMT loss would tilt the balance in favour of the opposition in
crucial parliamentary elections late next year and first ever presidential
elections slated for early 1996.
Critics say that the KMT built its empire through its privileged position.
The party bought land from the government at a fraction of market value,
enjoyed monopoly market positions in certain sectors and preferential access
to government contracts, they say.
KMT officials do not deny such charges but counter that party businesses
have contributed greatly to Taiwan's economic and cultural development and
moreover many of them are marginally profitable or even loss-making.
The advent of democracy has resulted in ever-tighter links among party
members, businessmen and politicians. 'Party discipline is now a major
problem for the KMT,' says Prof Lu. 'In the old days, party leaders could
impose their will on the rank and file but now they must use persuasion.
This has resulted in trading of favours and widespread corruption.'
In addition, says Prof Chen, there are many enterprises that are only
partially owned by the KMT 'but in fact are completely controlled by the
party, not in legal but in practical terms'.
Once transformation of its business empire is complete, the KMT should be
well positioned to withstand the rigours of democracy. Analysts estimate its
annual expenditures at Dollars 200m compared with Dollars 2m for the DPP.
The KMT's ability to out-finance the opposition in future elections looks
likely to be assured for some time.
