FT  02 APR 94 / Television: Satellite dominated by numbers - The gap between
Sky's valuation and its viewers
Sky Television launches what it grandly calls its Billion Dollar Preview
Weekend next Saturday, showing 24 films in two days free to anyone with a
satellite dish.
The films which collectively took more than Dollars 1bn at the box office
range from The Addams Family and Basic Instinct to Batman Returns and Alien
3.
The promotion is designed to show those who have satellite equipment but are
not paying for the scrambled movie channels what they are missing.
A simultaneous promotion is offering viewers satellite equipment installed
on a month's free trial. The hope is that consumers thinking of getting a
satellite dish will opt for the free trial now - and that once the dish is
fixed and holes drilled in the wall, they will not want the bother of having
it taken away - a clever piece of inertia selling.
And for Sky it is a no-risk deal: the cost of the free trial is being met by
manufacturers and retailers.
The history of satellite television in the UK suggests that people do not
queue to join the multi-channel revolution. They have to be cajoled by
special offers, heavy promotion and live sporting events.
Sky's top sport of the moment - the West Indian annihilation of the English
cricket team - is unlikely to generate many new sales, and so the promotions
on dishes and films appear well timed.
Five years after the launch of Sky Television the satellite business is
dominated by two sets of numbers - one extremely high, the other pretty low.
The high numbers are the values being attached to British Sky Broadcasting,
the Sky holding company, a consortium 50 per cent owned by Rupert Murdoch's
News Corporation. Pearson, owner of the Financial Times, owns 17.5 per cent,
as does Chargeurs of France, with the Granada group owning 13.5 per cent.
The small numbers are the viewing figures, as the audience spreads itself
across 20 channels. In a recent week the 10th rated programme on Sky One,
the most popular satellite channel, Star Trek The Next Generation won an
audience of 350,000. The 10th rated programme on ITV, an episode of The
Bill, pulled in 12.95m.
Yet this week, stockbroker Barclays de Zoete Wedd produced what analyst
Vighnesh Padiachy described as a conservative valuation for a company
notorious for its losses and the Pounds 1.6bn already invested. The
valuation was Pounds 4.6bn. This compared with a previous BZW valuation of
Pounds 2.5bn.
What bridges the gap between the valuations and the viewing figures is the
fact that 80 per cent of Sky's revenues come from subscription rather than
advertising, and the fact that the number of subscribers continues to rise.
Sky says 3.5m homes receive at least some of its services, together with
other offerings outside the Sky package, such as Ted Turner's CNN and
TNT/Cartoon Channel and Eurosport.
The company adds that 3.3m homes subscribe to at least one of the pay
channels and the total number of channel subscriptions to the sports channel
and the two movie channels has reached 7m - with many households accounting
for three subscriptions.
BZW says it is the exclusive rights to key programmes - films and sport -
which will drive the subscriber base forward: 'As critical mass is achieved
and additional advertising revenues obtained, the strong cash flow generated
will put the group in pole position to secure further sports rights and
renegotiate the movie contract which will in turn further stimulate
subscriber interest.'
So will it soon be impossible to watch live sport on television without
enriching Rupert Murdoch? The future will probably not be quite as bleak as
that. But it is clear that other sports events will go the way of the
Premier League football contract - to Sky.
Sky is planning a second sports channel next year - to give greater play to
the sports rights it already has, and also to introduce pay-per view. This
will enable Sky to buy the rights to a world boxing title fight, for
example, and charge perhaps Pounds 5 a time to watch.
Sky has also expressed an interest in the Wimbledon tennis championships but
it is likely, at least for the time being, to settle for access to play on
the outer courts.
But viewing of new channels in homes with cable and satellite is measured at
just 28 to 34 per cent of total television consumption - and that was before
the West Indies made cricket just too painful to watch.
