FT  27 AUG 94 / Private View: The oral culture of an Irish fast talker -
Michael D. Higgins is Ireland's first minister of culture. He tells
Christian Tyler what he is doing
Ireland's first-ever minister of culture is short, flamboyant and prickly.
He walks with slow, stiff self-importance but talks so fast that he must be
getting paid by the word.
Though a poet by inclination and an academic by profession, Michael D.
Higgins (the D is for Daniel) has a reputation for making things happen. As
Minister for Arts, Culture and the Irish language - 'with responsibility for
broadcasting, heritage and waterways', he added quickly - he has resurrected
the Irish film industry. Twelve films were made last year and there could be
even more this. Since his cabinet post was created in January 1993, a
sprinkling of Oscar and Grammy awards, not to mention a Booker Prize, have
added lustre to his halo.
An arts minister's job is easy to describe. He allocates subsidies and tax
concessions. But what is a ministry of culture - that is, outside a
totalitarian state?
When a company builds itself a gleaming skyscraper, they say it is time to
mark down the shares. When Ireland, historically one of the world's leading
exporters of culture, sets up a separately funded ministry should that be
interpreted as a sign of vigour, or of competitive weakness?
Like most politicians, Michael Higgins regards questions as opportunities
for a big speech. But, thinner-skinned than most, he treated my dissenting
questions almost as a personal affront. When things were going his way, he
was pinkly, almost flirtatiously enthusiastic. When crossed he turned an
angry, trembling white.
His central doctrine is something he calls The Cultural Space. 'I aim to put
works of imagination and creativity at the centre of things,' he said.
'Culture used to be seen as peripheral, dependent on economic growth. I have
challenged that and my thinking is beginning to prevail.'
It is a fine-sounding phrase, I said, but what is a cultural space?
'I was just going to explain it to you. It has to to with a theory of
culture that is democratic, participatory and inclusive. It is also one that
views culture as energising and positive. It's quite the opposite of the
theory of culture that is exclusive or elitist or residual or
concessionary.'
My heart sank.
Higgins continued: 'There is no need to say that because a person has lost a
job that they have lost their rights of cultural participation as well. If
you allow the cultural space to collapse you will get racism, anti-immigrant
feeling, alienation and so forth.
'This space is full of intellectual products based on imagination that could
re-energise the economic space.'
I detected a gap and jumped for it. Is this a complicated way of saying that
people will not be working in steel mills, farms or coal mines any longer
but in tourism or television?
'There's more to it than that.'
At this point an aide appeared to say that a radio interviewer was on the
telephone. The minister apologised, got up from the sofa and went to his
desk where, for 10 minutes or more, he poured a stream of words down the
line. In spite of the interruption, I felt sorry for the interviewer.
When Higgins returned I asked him if he was really another minister for
employment, but specialising in the leisure industries. He talked about
European unemployment and 'a lack of originality in intellectual structures
 -clapped-out thinking'.
We were coming down to earth. Better still, Higgins - who is after all, a
member of a left-wing government - began to drop clues about his political
feelings.
'People have wanted these things in little boxes. There is a view of society
that when economies go well shouldn't we go to the theatre once a year? And
people from a particular section of the social classes dressed up, they had
a little outing and they encountered culture, and went home.'
Do you come from the cultured classes yourself?
'No. I come from a very poor family. My father died in a poor house. But I
would argue for my father's culture in terms of his generosity of spirit in
being part of the Irish war of independence, his solidarity, the things that
he suffered. My mother, while poor, always had an interest in reading. The
house was full of books, and we had nothing else.'
Higgins was born in Limerick, in the west of Ireland, and at times one may
catch a Gaelic intonation (he both speaks and writes Irish) in the high,
sibilant voice. He was brought up in County Clare by an aunt and uncle when
his father fell ill. An academic career which has spanned English
literature, sociology, political science and economics took him from Galway,
to Indiana, to Manchester and Illinois. Higgins likes to remind his hearer
that he knows a few things.
I returned to the fray. Is this really an economic department with modern
art on the walls?
'It is a department of culture. It is a department that contributes
innovatively to the economic space of this country. We have created jobs.
'As to which are we, we never ask that question. I never ask that question.
I have a pre-Cartesian view of it. I live in my mind at a time before
compartmentalisation. I despise compartmentalisation.
Are you breaking even here?
'I'm in massive surplus.'
Having relaunched the film industry, Higgins is about to reorganise the
music business. He is studying interactive communications technology,
restoring canalboats and protecting wrecks. He wants to set up an
all-Ireland television channel for Gaelic-speakers and a European satellite
channel to show native Europrogrammes.
You may be able to create jobs by means of tax incentives, I said, but what
else can a minister of culture do?
Higgins yelped. 'I think that's a pathetic view of a minister of culture.'
How can you minister for culture? It's a contradiction in terms.
'Well, that is only a middle-class riddle. Now I agree that what I am doing
is controversial. I am not saying for example that everyone is a Picasso.
But I am saying that everyone has creativity, that is socially negotiated
and if I define . . .'
What on earth does socially negotiated mean?
'Yes. I can put it simply. If I lift my hand am I threatening you or giving
you a gesture of affection? You rely on the symbol that is involved. We
exchange symbols.
'But what a pathetic collapse it was to suggest that only people who had
come from a certain school background, standing in front of a picture, had
access to the appropriate symbols to make a literate comment . . . That kind
of nonsense was anti-democratic, destroyed general culture and if you read
Raymond Williams (the literary critic) you will see that it excluded, even
in Britain, the wonderful storytelling tradition and whatever.'
The minister was working himself into a rhetorical rage. But his mention of
storytelling was an opening. There is a caricature of the Irishman, I said -
and it is probably an Irish invention - which sees every man in a pub as an
Oscar Wilde in waiting. All you have to do is write down what he's saying
and you have literature. Was this what he meant by developing the cultural
space? If so, it sounded Utopian.
Higgins's exasperation was not feigned now. 'To whom does it sound Utopian?
We can't have the conversation if you ask questions to which you've already
given answers. Utopian to whom? You make statements in the question that you
put.
'Let me put it the other way to you. Do you want to continue with
traditional economic views, and just every now and again throw up your hands
quasi-politely and say 'isn't it a pity about unemployment?' Or are you
going to say 'maybe it is the economic model that has defects?''
Higgins refuses to accept that Ireland - or Europe - must eventually lose
the media market battle to US television and film makers. But he is not a
cultural protectionist, he insists. He will retaliate by encouraging Irish
talent to put rival 'product' into the market. In the same spirit, he sees
it as a proper government function to try and save the Irish language
against vastly superior market forces - in this case English.
'The market is an instrument that can be used for policy purposes, but the
market became an ideology. We do not live by the market alone.
'What I'm saying is you take the different components of the society,
including the cultural space and you draw from that and make it rich, so
that when you come to the marketplace you're neither frightened by it, nor
are you disabled from using it as a tool.
'What is really important is the quality of the total space. That's the area
I will go into when I finish.' It sounded like some post-modernist version
of Paradise.
If you lost office would you become a consultant?
'No, I'd probably go back to writing. I miss writing very, very much.'
You're not a businessman manque?
'No, though I know how to do it. I see so many missed opportunities. I
believe it is only narrow thinking and bureaucracy that is stopping us doing
wonderful things.'
The minister was restored to good humour. As I left the Ministry of Culture,
past a peat-and-bone sculpture hanging on the lobby wall, I thought: if
economic miracles could be talked into being, Michael D. Higgins would be
your man.
