FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (9): A
whole new shopping experience - Customers may one day don headsets for a
'virtual reality' armchair walk around their favourite stores
Imagine, 20 years from now, a couple want to hold a dinner party but cannot
decide what to cook.
They reach for a handset and call up some ideas from an electronic recipe
book on the high definition video screen in their living room. Unsure
whether one particular dish might be too difficult, they press a button for
a video recording of a chef showing how to prepare the meal step-by-step
Satisfied they can manage, they move on to the wine. Further clicks on the
remote control call up video recordings of winemakers wandering around their
vineyards, talking about their wines.
The choices made, the couple transmit an order via the handset to their
favourite food retailer. A few hours later, the ingredients and wine will be
delivered to a special hatch at their home. They may even be delivered at
the same time as the couple's regular, weekly shopping order.
Such a vision remains a fantasy. But retailers believe it could be a
reality, even a commonplace, by early in the next century. What will make it
possible is the conjunction of multi-media technology, allowing sound,
pictures, graphics and text to come together on one screen, with fibre-optic
technology, enabling huge amounts of information to be sent at high speed to
and from consumers' homes.
Technological advances in the past 20 years have revolutionised the way
retailers run their businesses, producing huge gains in operating
efficiency, but they have not fundamentally changed the shopping experience.
In the next 20 years, however, technology could revolutionise shopping
itself.
It will change the view of shops as simply repositories for goods to be sold
to the public. It is also likely to break down the barriers between
shopping, recreation, and even education.
The biggest growth area is expected to be TV shopping - already booming in
the US. The cable home shopping industry there - dominated by Home Shopping
Network and QVC (Quality, Value, Convenience) - where customers watch a
succession of products on screen and order by telephone, generated turnover
of Dollars 2.3bn last year. So-called 'infomercials', advertisements used to
sell products directly to the public, pulled in a further Dollars 700m.
On-line computer shopping services, in their infancy but expected to
mushroom, generated Dollars 200m.
Coopers &amp; Lybrand, which has just completed a year-long, Dollars 1.2m survey
with sponsors NCR, Telxon and Citicorp into Retailing in the 21st century,
says that as the number of available cable channels increases, conventional
shopping channels are expected to proliferate, probably targeted at
increasingly narrow age and interest groups.
Established retailers are already seizing upon TV shopping as a potent
selling force. Macy's, the US department store group, is launching a
shopping channel later this year.
The next stage, as more sophisticated communication networks are developed,
could be the grouping together of information providers, network operators
and transaction companies. That would enable customers to select purchases
and transmit orders to retailers via a remote control, as described above.
An essential part of the growth of such channels is likely to be fast,
secure delivery of products to consumers' homes, posing new challenges for
retailers.
However, shops as physical entities will not die out. Many consumers will
always want the opportunity to examine or try on products before they
purchase. Convenience stores for top-up and impulse purchases are likely to
remain indispensable - although they may become more specialised.
But stores will have to ensure they provide a 'value-added' shopping
experience and come up with new attractions to lure shoppers away from their
TV screens.
Technological advances are expected soon to make shopping, especially
grocery shopping, less onerous. One way will be to end queues at check-outs
by developing shopping trolleys that scan purchases as customers make them
and automatically deduct the cost from their credit or charge card.
Symbol Technologies and Videocard have already developed a trolley with a
blanket of laser beams across the top which can read barcodes of goods being
put into the trolley, from any angle. The trolleys are being trialled in the
Netherlands.
The next step may be using silicon chips or tags which can be read by a
radio beam on the trolley. A prototype system has been developed by the
South African Council for Scientific and Industrial Research in conjunction
with the British Technology Group.
Eventually, however, customers may not need to put goods into trolleys
themselves. Supermarkets - and other stores - may display just one example
of each product. Customers will walk around the shop and wave a wand across
a bar code on the shelf to order and pay for a product. Their order will be
assembled behind the scenes by staff.
Surplus selling space might be used instead for cooking classes and
demonstrations, or multi-media kiosks offering information.
For those who do not insist on seeing or handling every item, the process
could be taken further. Why walk around a supermarket when you could be,
say, enjoying a meal in a restaurant, making selections from an electronic
shopping catalogue and picking up your order when you have finished your
coffee?
As well as making shopping more enjoyable, advances in information and
communications technology will give customers more choice and control.
Stores may no longer stock products, but instead offer customers the
opportunity, assisted by knowledgeable staff or consultants, to customise or
even design their own merchandise - for example to choose the colour, fabric
and precise size they want items of clothing to be made in, with the order
transmitted instantaneously to a factory and the finished product despatched
the same day.
In the US, the Blockbuster retail chain in a venture with IBM is allowing
customers to select tracks for and record their own compact discs on the
spot.
Japan is experimenting with mobile production units in trucks or vans for
goods such as spectacles and contact lenses, which take orders by telephone
and deliver products rapidly to a customer's home or workplace.
Themed and 'experiential' stores, such as those operated by Disney and
Warner Brothers, are also expected to increase, using technology such as
virtual reality to sell goods.
In the long run, customers may not stare at video screens at home, but
instead - a prospect that still sounds like science fiction - don headsets
that allow them to wander around virtual reality stores, or even virtual
shopping malls.
Developments in virtual reality systems: page 17
