FT  08 APR 94 / Survey of East Kent (1): A move in the right direction -
Opportunities have been created to make East Kent one of the most promising
business locations in the UK. Bold plans are now under way to attract
further investment and jobs, as Richard Evans reports here
It has taken a long time for East Kent to get across the message that its
economic needs are more akin to those of deprived industrial areas in the
midlands and north of England than to the rest of the traditionally affluent
south-east - but a good start has been made.
The granting last summer of assisted area status for most of the coastal
strip of North and East Kent was a considerable achievement which should
help to attract investment and jobs. It marked a recognition by the
government that the area has specific problems that need urgent attention.
The problems stem from many complex factors - a decline in traditional jobs
such as agriculture, engineering and coal mining, changes in the pattern of
tourism in the coastal resorts, the impact of the single European market on
ports like Dover, and the rationalisation of cross channel ferry services to
compete with the channel tunnel.
A study in the late 1980s on the likely impact of the tunnel showed that
these structural and cyclical changes could leave the area short of 40,000
jobs by the turn of the century.
Local authorities and the private sector therefore decided jointly to launch
the East Kent Initiative to lobby for aid, and the campaign for assisted
area status has now been won. Sir Alastair Morton, chairman of the EKI and
of Eurotunnel, summed up local feelings: 'We have cracked the conventional
Whitehall and Tory Party wisdom that there is no depression or misery in
good, solid Tory south east England . . . the area has a stagnant economy, a
low skill base and poor infrastructure and was on a descending spiral.'
The task now is to make full use of assisted area status, he said - 'this
gives East Kent huge advantages in relocating companies. Now we have to
exploit that asset and tell business everywhere - in the UK, on the
continent and further afield - of the benefits we have to offer.'
Four travel-to-work areas, Dover and Deal, Shepway, Swale and Thanet secured
assisted area status, three as intermediate areas and Thanet as a
development area where higher levels of grant are available, including
access to categories of European aid.
The need to overcome the image problem East Kent faced from being part of
the south-east is evident from a drive around the Isle of Sheppey, through
the stranded former pit villages, and along the down-at-heel coastal
resorts, many of them with more social security bed-and-breakfast occupants
than holidaymakers. It can be a depressing experience on the sunniest of
days.
Thanet, one of the hardest hit, has an unemployment rate of 16.8 per cent,
making it the sixth worst blackspot in the country. The problems have been
caused by the decline in tourism as its traditional London visitors chose
the sunshine of the costas instead, and by tighter manning of the Ramsgate
ferries to meet competition from the tunnel.
Unemployment in Dover and Deal and in Folkestone has also been affected by
cutbacks in ferry manpower and by the loss of over 5,000 jobs among local
customs agents following the introduction of the single European market.
Dover, as the biggest cross channel operator, expects more job losses when
the tunnel opens. Swale, which includes the Isle of Sheppey and
Sittingbourne, has unemployment of over 14 per cent, but there are much
worse pockets in Sheerness.
The deep water port has a flourishing car and fresh fruit importing trade,
but new jobs are needed desperately. The Olau ferry line has recently
announced the curtailment of its Sheerness to Vlissingen, Holland, service
which is expected to lead directly and indirectly to the loss of several
hundred jobs.
Having achieved government help, the next move by the local authorities,
Kent Training and Enterprise Council, and private companies under the EKI
umbrella, is to capitalise on it.
The strategy is two-fold - to seek more infrastructure improvements and to
make sure there are suitable sites prepared for potential inward investors.
A number of infrastructure projects have already been made to improve access
to the more peripheral areas. The M20 motorway has been completed to
Folkestone and Dover and the tortuous Thanet Way linking Ramsgate and
Margate with the M2 is becoming dual carriageway.
The next crucial improvements are better rail services and stock on the
notorious north Kent line, and better access from the M2 to the Isle of
Sheppey and Sheerness.
A new crossing is not due to be started until 1997, even though the only
access at present is via a swing bridge which stops traffic for five minutes
in every hour.
The full impact of the channel tunnel on the local economy remains unclear.
Recent estimates suggest it could take 35 to 40 per cent of passenger
traffic and up to 20 per cent of the freight market when it is fully
operational.
It will obviously continue to affect the ferries, but they remain bullish
about their future provided they can retain competitiveness.
For the rest of the East Kent economy, much will depend on the imminent
decision on where to route the Ashford section of the high speed rail link
from the tunnel to London. There are three options, two of which would go
through the town and the Pounds 80m international passenger station now
being built, while the third would loop to the north, leaving only a spur
line into the town.
Local authorities and the East Kent business community argue it is essential
that the line should go through Ashford so that the town can fulfil its role
as a centre of expansion for the whole area.
Without the full use of the station they fear that parts of the area would
remain too peripheral and that the potential benefits of the tunnel would be
lost.
Ashford is the only part of East Kent that has fully fledged development
sites and business parks ready for early occupancy, and this is seen as a
top priority for the rest of the area.
A number of promising sites have been designated, including White Cliffs at
Dover, Kent International at Manston in Thanet and Cheriton Parc at
Folkestone but more infrastructure and access work needs to be done before
they become fully operational.
Mr Ken Welsh, seconded from Dover district council as the EKI's inward
investment manager, says: 'The keys to the future are inward investment and
marketing. We have many natural advantages as the closest part of the UK to
the continent and as a pleasant environment, and now we have the grants, but
we have to get our flagship business parks opened up so that we can welcome
new jobs.'
Mr Martin Hemingway, just returned to Eurotunnel after running EKI since its
launch in late 1991, sums up the general feeling: 'We have got to the point
where opportunities have been created to make East Kent one of the most
exciting business locations in the UK. The next stage is to take advantage
of those opportunities.'
