FT  19 NOV 94 / Railtrack sell-off plan to be announced shortly
The government is due to bring forward plans to sell off Railtrack, owner of
the rail network's infrastructure, and is expected to make the announcement
shortly, possibly next week.
The move, which would be one of the largest privatisations in recent times,
is expected to be announced by Mr Brian Mawhinney, the transport secretary,
in a parliamentary written answer.
It is understood Mr Mawhinney will give full details of the sell-off
timetable and a firm assurance that it will have been completed by the next
general election, due by spring 1997.
Industry experts had believed the privatisation might have been threatened
by the rail signal workers' strike and uncertainty over the charges
Railtrack will be allowed to levy on train operators.
However, a firm assurance of the privatisation would help the government
allay criticism from rightwing backbenchers that it had lost its ideological
cutting edge after abandoning plans to sell off the Post Office.
The Railtrack sale, which would be expected to yield between Pounds 3.3bn
and Pounds 4.3bn, could also help the government to announce tax cuts in its
1995 and 1996 Budgets.
The decision to make an early announcement came as British Rail and London
Underground announced fare increases of up to 5 per cent in the new year.
Passenger groups and opposition MPs condemned the rises.
Railtrack took over responsibility for BR's track and signalling operations
in April. BR will be further broken up into three leasing companies which
will own the rolling stock, and a large number of operating companies is
expected to bid for franchises to operate trains.
Railtrack controls 11,000 miles of former BR track, 2,500 stations and the
signalling network. Its revenues consist largely of Pounds 2.2bn of track
access charges paid by the operators of passenger trains. Additional revenue
will come from providing track for freight services. Most of these charges
will be met by government subsidy.
Railtrack's assets have been valued by the government at Pounds 6.5bn but a
more realistic estimate is about Pounds 4bn.
In the first City review of Railtrack's prospects to be published, Mr Chris
Tarry, an analyst with Kleinwort Benson, the merchant bank, calculated that
pre-tax profits in its first year would be Pounds 700m on an historic cost
basis.
Mr Michael Meacher, shadow transport secretary, said last night the
government was only announcing the sale 'to keep up its machismo over
privatisation'.
He added: 'If the announcement is made in a written answer it will be a
parliamentary outrage. It would throw into doubt the regulatory and safety
side of the railways and has been brought forward because of the abject
failure of the franchising process.'
However, Labour will not give a firm commitment to renationalise Railtrack
if the party comes to power.
Railtrack declined to comment last night.
BR to raise fares, Page 7
