FT  12 DEC 94 / Business Travel: Magic needed for Cinderella airports - UK
prospects outside London
When will Britain's regional airports lose their Cinderella status? Mr Brian
Mawhinney, UK transport secretary, has said they will be part of 'the
largest unilateral air transport liberalisation' programme Britain has seen
 -thrown open to any UK or US transatlantic carriers who want to use them.
Yet his announcement was greeted in areas such as Glasgow and Leeds with
only muted enthusiasm. 'Realistically,' says a spokesman for Glasgow
airport, 'I don't see a lot coming from Brian Mawhinney's changes.'
In order to expand and to offer the transatlantic or far eastern
destinations which would attract more passengers, the regional airports will
have to entice some cautious long-haul carriers to move to what, in aviation
terms, is the middle of nowhere.
The difficulty is that the carriers will not move until there is proven
demand outside London. And there will not be a proven demand until the
carriers offer the flights.
At present, many regional airports are able to offer only feeder flights
into London and limited services to the rest of Europe. Business travellers,
therefore, tend to see them as mere staging-posts, rather than useful in
their own right.
'Even when we've got the services,' says one airport operator despairingly,
'quite a lot of the time, the local business community doesn't know our
services exist.'
Changing travellers' perceptions could be tough. Leeds/Bradford airport,
which has just been granted permission to operate 24 hours a day from next
spring, has embarked on a Pounds 7m scheme to enlarge its facilities and
install all-weather landing equipment.
At present, only about 800,000 passengers a year pass through
Leeds/Bradford, taking scheduled flights to some 12 destinations - more than
half of them within the UK. A large proportion of its flights go to London
Heathrow or Gatwick. The number of passengers compares with 5.4m who use
Glasgow annually and 50m a year who pass through Heathrow.
A Leeds/Bradford airport spokesman admitted: 'Businessmen would still rather
put up with having to fly to a bigger airport and change, so as to have the
greater frequency of flights.'
Even at Glasgow, US airlines United Airlines and NorthWest recently
discontinued transatlantic services, because demand no longer justified the
expense of keeping them going.
However, prospects are not all gloomy for regional airports. American
Airlines, for example, plans a service to Chicago from Birmingham
international airport from next summer.
Birmingham has a lively expansion programme, called Vision 2005. It includes
new terminal capacity and a longer runway, and is intended to raise
passenger levels from 4.5m to 10.5m by 2000.
In this, Birmingham is fighting not only the London airports, but also a
regional rival: Manchester.
Indeed, Manchester is Britain's star regional airport, handling 13m
passengers annually, which puts it third in the league table of UK passenger
volumes after Heathrow and Gatwick. Also - crucially - it boasts daily
flights to New York (British Airways) and Chicago (American).
'We're lobbying hard for more transatlantic routes, with a possibility of
services to Miami and Detroit,' says a spokesman. 'We've also had
indications from far eastern airlines of interest in long-haul flights, but
we're waiting for Brian Mawhinney to announce the same open-skies policy for
the far east as he did for the US.' (Manchester already offers a regular
service to Hong Kong.)
Manchester also plans to build a second runway, giving it the same potential
capacity as Heathrow and raising passenger numbers to 30m in the next 10
years.
The tide may even be turning in Manchester's favour, as Heathrow finds
itself at the limits of its capacity, with no third runway in sight.
