FT  06 OCT 94 / London Stock Exchange: US rate fears prompt heavy setback in
shares - Market report
London had no choice but to follow the general setback across global stock
markets yesterday afternoon as the latest US economic data prompted fears of
a sharp rise in rates by the Federal Reserve, perhaps tomorrow when the
September payroll numbers are due.
Trading volumes were fairly modest in London, but share prices went almost
into freefall when Wall Street opened 40 Dow points off and yields on
Federal bonds moved towards 8 per cent following news that growth in US
factory orders and finished goods shipments had accelerated in August.
The FT-SE 100-share Index extended its fall by 25 points within an hour to
touch the day's low of 2,550.2. A modest rally set in as Wall Street halved
its early loss. The final reading put the FT-SE 100 at 2,956.3 for a drop on
the session of 45.5 points. The Footsie now stands at its lowest level since
early July and is barely 80 points above its low for the year.
Market confidence had been at a low ebb from the opening, as traders
digested the implications of Wall Street's heavy fall overnight. Also
discouraging was a prediction from James Capel, London's largest
institutional stockbroker, that the FT-SE 100 Index would close the year at
2,840. Many City analysts are still forecasting a Footsie year-end close in
the 3,400 to 3,600 range.
Conviction that US interest rates are about to be raised by a full
percentage point bore heavily on London because rates in the UK are
perceived to be the most vulnerable to pressures from across the Atlantic.
However, there were hopes that determined action by the Federal Reserve
might succeed in settling global bond markets down, a development regarded
as the necessary basis for any genuine recovery in equities. British
government bonds fared better than equities yesterday, giving some cause for
comfort in what was essentially a badly unnerved stock market.
With the December contract on the FT-SE 100 Index playing its usual leading
role, losses in equities were concentrated on the blue chip stocks. The
FT-SE Mid 250 Index, which takes in a broad range of Footsie and non-Footsie
shares, finished 26.1 points down at 3,429.2. Business in the non-Footsie
equities made up around 57 per cent of the day's Seaq total, once again
indicating reduced private investor interest.
The speed of the market's downturn in mid-afternoon virtually put an end to
serious business by the big investment institutions and, even after some
courageous bargain hunting towards the close, overall busines volume was not
particularly impressive. The day's Seaq total of 515.8m shares compared with
531.6m on Tuesday, when retail, or customer, business, worth Pounds 1.01bn,
remained around acceptable levels from the view point of market
profitability.
No sector of the market escaped from the overall setback. The US-influenced
blue chips suffered for their association with Wall Street, although
turnover in these stocks did not suggest significant selling pressure. Reed
Elsevier was a weak spot after debt ratings were questioned in the wake of a
Pounds 955m deal in the US.
Interest rate-related stocks, including the leading store groups, turned
easier but losses were fairly small in spite of fears that domestic base
rates could soon be under upward pressure if rates rise in the US. There
were further losses in the financials sector, where the woes of the UK stock
and bond markets have already hit profits at the merchant banks, which are
heavy players in these arenas and also hold portfolios which were being
devalued rapidly yesterday afternoon.
Traders said that the London market had clearly lost all confidence ahead of
Friday's announcement of the US payroll data.
