FT  07 MAY 94 / Books: Grounded flight of imagination - Brian Sewell
castigates the bumblings and pretensions of self-proclaimed installation
artists
INSTALLATION ART text by Michael Archer Thames and Hudson Pounds 28, 208
page
Turning these pages is to experience the tedium of scanning catalogues of
light fittings and office furniture, lift cages, sound-baffling materials
and air conditioning ducts. If this book is intended to excite our interest,
engage our sympathy, or at the very least to enter into reasonable
intellectual debate with those who find the installation risible as an art
form, then it is utterly defeated by the mannerisms and affectations of
design.
The brief introduction offers little enlightenment, its notions of hybrid
discipline, the questioning of autonomous art forms, the crossing of
frontiers, the activation of space, the specific influence of local sites,
are already commonplace in criticism and excuse - we all already know that a
bold band of critics believes and preaches that painting has descended from
the wall, that sculpture has stepped from the podium, that art is now
anything anywhere if anyone says so, and that Everyman is now an artist if
he thinks he is.
The text avoids the pitfalls of definition by declaring that the book's
compilers do not wish to confine the subject so, but only to set out 'a
series of markers', and only by the weary turning of pages do we learn that
anything from grand pianos, billiard tables and the racing car, to empty
rooms, shafts of light and the discarded jockstrap are now the stuff of art.
The Happening, that tiresome business of the late 1960s, of which the young
man who knelt in Grosvenor Square to shoot an imaginary arrow from an
imaginary bow at the eagle atop the American Embassy is an example, is (or
was), we learn, art as a process, not as an object - it was, it seems, more
important that Michelangelo should spend four years with a crick in his neck
and paint in his mouth, than that he should have left posterity the Sistine
Ceiling. Installation, we learn (and here; by chance, we have a definition
of sorts), is 'a method of art production', justified by Duchamp,
Schwitters, Dada and Surrealism, the development from Schwitters' pretty
little Merzbau (a thing of fairy tale fantasy) to the vast assemblages of
last year's forgotten art school graduates, seen as a match for the rise of
the Italian Renaissance from Masaccio's Brancacci Chapel frescoes to the
Sistine Ceiling.
The trouble with installation is that so little of it is by any stretch of
the imagination beautiful, and little of it now, post-Dada, post-Surrealism,
stretches the imagination, for we have become inured to shock and the
frisson of dismay. The vast enlargement of a tonguing kiss is merely a
trifle nasty, the functionless machine an old familiar, the inconsequential
conjunction of even the rolls of felt and grand piano of Joseph Beuys
already too homespun to be noticed.
Too many installations make the same demands as advertisements on hoardings,
and we close our eyes; too many have less to do with the arts of painting
and sculpture than with the illusions of the set for theatre, ballet, opera
and window dressing, television and the computer game - Indonesian shadow
puppets seem a prime influence. Some depend on sexual imagery, others on the
visual pun (excavating machines stationed in the forecourt of the British
Museum, for example), or on the sheer scale and number of the elements
involved, or on the contrast of hallowed setting and unhallowed, even
mischievous, intervention. Some incorporate printed texts for ready
exegesis, others consist only and entirely of printed texts of Sybilline
obscurity.
On the rare occasions when beauty plays a part, it is the beauty of material
and natural accident - a flooded crypt, a shaft of sunlight, the broken
stones of Richard Long's arrangements - all beautiful without an artist
there to tell us so; and sometimes it is the beauty touched on by the
discreet interior decorator - matters of placing and proportion, texture and
tone - but these can be seen a-plenty in the pages of The World of
Interiors, unblemished by the fumbling, bumbling and pretension of the
self-proclaimed installation artist.
This wretched book performs two unintended functions - it offers all the
assistance of an old-fashioned 'How to . . . ' book, so that we may make our
own installations from the detritus of the household - potato peelings and a
used condom, for example, should intrigue one's visitors  - and it reveals
the business to be, with rare exceptions in which political allusion or
autobiography play their part (usually with artists who have traditional
skills) - a shallow fraud.
