FT  06 AUG 94 / Deep burial 'best way' to rid Britain of N-waste: Extend
cooldown period for old stations, says report
Deep burial remains the government's preferred way of disposing of the
radioactive waste generated by Britain's nuclear power stations and research
installations.
In a consultation document on radioactive waste management policy released
yesterday, the Department of the Environment said this provided the safest,
and most economical, permanent solution to the more dangerous forms of
waste, such as spent fuel rods and contaminated equipment.
It also said that the period over which retired power stations are allowed
to cool down before final dismantling could be extended from 100 to 135
years, in some cases.
The document was welcomed by the nuclear power industry because it stressed
both commercial and safety factors at a time when the two state-owned
nuclear power generators, Nuclear Electric and Scottish Nuclear, are hoping
to be privatised. Mr Roger Hayes, director-general of the British Nuclear
Industry Forum, the trade group, said it showed the industry was on the
right track.
But it was quickly condemned by opposition parties and the environmental
movement for putting financial factors above environment and safety. Mr
Simon Hughes, Liberal Democrat environment spokesman, said the government
was 'trying to cut down the cost in order to get shot of the problem'.
The 100-page document forms part of the government's review of nuclear
policy. Although much of it reaffirms existing policies, the results will
have a key bearing on whether Britain builds any more nuclear power stations
as ageing reactors are shut down.
The government's preferred method of dealing with high level nuclear waste
from Britain's 30 nuclear sites is to use a process called 'vitrification'
to transform it into a kind of glass. It will then be left for 50 years to
cool before being consigned to a permanent deep store several thousand feet
underground. But the paper also says that nuclear operators can leave the
spent fuel to cool in a dry store, if it makes more commercial sense.
The main shift in policy hinted at in the document is allowing nuclear
operators to decommission spent power stations over a longer period. Both
Nuclear Electric and Scottish Nuclear have been pressing for this. Stations
could be left to cool down for 35 years after closure, and then left for
another 100 years before final removal, rather than doing the whole job in
100 years.
Cost vies with safety, Page 6
