FT  23 NOV 94 / Survey of Mexico (3): An uneven playing field - Elections
were far from fair, claim angry opposition parties
It came as a rude shock to the Mexican opposition that despite the cleanest
elections in the country's history and record voter turnout, they were still
far from dislodging the PRI's tenacious grip on power.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the debate following the August 21
contest has focused on the uneven playing field which gave the ruling party
an unbeatable advantage. The PRI's electoral machine far outspent its rivals
thanks to high campaign expenditure ceilings (Dollars 275m per party) set by
the government and the generous contributions of private businessmen to the
PRI's war chest.
Television and radio coverage of the elections was openly biased in favour
of the ruling party, to which private media companies owe their broadcasting
licenses. And in the timeless Mexican tradition, government officials, from
state governors down to the caciques (local bosses) of the smallest village,
continued to help PRI candidates, albeit with more discretion than in the
past.
As a result, both the right-of-centre Partido de Accion Nacional (PAN) and
the leftist Partido de la Revolucion Democratica (PRD) are refusing to
endorse the victory of the PRI presidential candidate, Mr Ernesto Zedillo as
fully legitimate. The PRD is challenging the results of 55 per cent of all
voting booths, claiming massive fraud.
While the PRD's complaints lack credibility - monitoring on election day was
tight - the opposition has nevertheless learned to exploit its underdog
image to maximum advantage. And the emerging consensus, from opposition
parties to civic action groups to the independent councillors who sit on the
Federal Electoral Institute, is that elections in Mexico may now be free,
but they remain far from fair.
Armed with 15m votes, the opposition is pressing for deeper political
reforms. The PRI, they say, must become a genuinely independent party rather
than the state's electoral arm. Realistic limits must be placed on the
expenditure of political parties during election campaigns, and these must
be scrutinised by independent auditors. The media should be more closely
monitored for political bias.
If Mr Zedillo's campaign pledges are to be believed, the government is
willing to listen. The first political reform likely to be negotiated by the
incoming administration would give greater autonomy to the Federal Electoral
Institute, which organises and oversees elections. At present, the institute
is headed by the interior minister. Six independent 'citizen councillors'
have a voting majority on the governing board, but the interior minister is
the only member of the council who can call board meetings, and he sets the
agenda, and appoints all the executive officials.
'If the government is serious about democracy,' says Mr Santiago Creel, one
of the citizen councillors on the governing board, 'it should withdraw from
the Federal Electoral Institute. The institute must become a truly
independent fourth estate.'
Mr Creel says the six citizen councillors will resign if their demands are
not met. He has received death threats for his outspoken views - once at
gun-point outside his house - in an unpleasant reminder of the powerful
vested interest aligned against further political reforms.
The onslaught against government, however, has thus far distracted
opposition parties from taking a hard look at their own failings.
Despite tripling its votes in the 1994 elections, the PAN's presidential
nominee, Mr Diego Fernandez de Cevallos, has been widely criticised for
failing to capitalise on his surge in popularity following Mexico's
first-ever televised debate between presidential candidates in June.
After the debate, his campaign appeared to fizzle out. He was the runner-up
on election night, polling about 27 per cent of the vote.
'We have achieved respectability, but we are not yet regarded as a credible
alternative to the ruling party,' admits Mr Felipe Calderon Hinojosa, the
PAN secretary-general.
More worrying still is the fact that the PAN lost heavily in the three
states were it holds state governorships. The PAN's greatest challenge is
how to grow into a party commensurate with the 9.2m votes it won in August.
The PRD's problems are more serious. The party's internal schisms - between
those who favour a nationwide dialogue to win incremental political reforms
and those who advocate a complete break with the 'system' - have become
deeper and more bitter since being relegated to third place in the 1994
presidential contest. The PRD's defeat came as a particularly heavy blow to
Mr Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, the presidential candidate who many believe was
robbed of victory during the much-disputed 1988 elections.
Some PRD activists admit they failed to read the cautious mood among the
electorate in a year which saw a peasant rebellion in Chiapas and the
assassination of the PRI's presidential nominee.
Above all, they did not perceive the growing popular support for results of
President Salinas' economic reforms - 'we were fighting yesterday's
battles,' says Congressman Adolfo Aguilar, who was Mr Cardenas' campaign
spokesman during the elections.
