FT  10 JUN 94 / Management: A better type of opinion survey - Catch-phrases
are the best clue to what people really think
Polls show the public to be hypocritical and contradictory in their
opinions.
In that possibly portentous BBC mini-saga To Play the King, the fictional
Prime Minister's rather-too-sexy 'adviser' pointed out that by subtle
wording of opinion-poll questions, one could always obtain the results one
wanted.
Managers increasingly commission climate and culture surveys that require
employees to agree or disagree with various statements about their
perception of the company. Can these questions be skilfully worded to give
the answers they want to hear? And how do employees react when they can 'see
through' the motives of the questionnaire and don't agree with its point of
view?
Consider opinion polls about tax. Almost everyone believes they are being
overtaxed and that taxation should be reduced; but at the same time everyone
wants more money spent on health, education and crime prevention.
One could argue that these ideas are not incompatible. For instance, the
government could increase indirect taxation as opposed to income tax, to
raise revenue while leaving people more discretion to spend as they wish.
Or one could argue that 'the rich' should be heavily taxed, but not oneself.
This 'politics-of-envy' thinking is very popular in Britain because whoever
you are, you never include yourself among those to be taxed more highly.
But alas the great British public - or any public for that matter - are not
so sophisticated. Various studies have shown that in opinion surveys people
are contradictory. For example, an American polling company reported that 63
per cent of people agreed with the view that: 'When 12,000 air-traffic
controllers are willing to sacrifice their careers and economic security,
and even go to jail, there must be some legitimate reasons for going on
strike'.
The same poll found that 69 per cent supported the opinion that: 'Since
every air-traffic controller took an oath not to strike, President Reagan
was right to fire them.' Obviously, a lot of people must have agreed with
both statements, revealing nothing about whether they supported the strike.
The writing of opinion items, then, is itself highly political and it is not
good science. So some psychologists have cast about for other approaches.
One solution was to reduce the item down to its central core, adopting a
familiar catch-phrase to represent the issue, and reserving all evaluation
for the response alternatives. The formula 'X is a good/bad thing
considering Y and Z' (agree or disagree?) was replaced by the simpler
formula: ''X' (good or bad?)'. This, they believed, would tap immediate
emotional reactions to controversial issues, and would be closer to actual
behavioural dispositions.
The technique is to abandon the propositional form of an item, and instead
simply present a list of brief labels or 'catch-phrases' representing
various familiar and controversial issues.
It is assumed that, in the course of previous conversation and argument
concerning these issues, the respondent has already placed himself/herself
in relation to the general population, and is able to indicate his/her
'position' immediately and simply.
It is easy to demonstrate. Ask a group to write 5,000-word essays on capital
punishment and have two judges to assess whether they are, on balance, 'for'
'uncertain', or 'against'. And ask the essay-writer also to complete the
catchphrase poll. The results are nearly identical, saving time and effort
in the lengthier approach. The former demands that the interviewee provide
instant appraisal of complex and authoritatively worded statements of
opinion: the latter is believed to tap immediate emotional reactions to
controversial issues and is closer to actual behaviour dispositions.
Furthermore, this technique overcomes many of the problems of grammatical
confusion and social desirability. Why not try it and see? I have
constructed a simple economic beliefs scale.
Which of the following do you favour or believe in? Circle Yes or No. If
absolutely uncertain, circle the question mark. There are no right or wrong
answers. Do not discuss them; just give your first reaction.
1 Nationalisation. YES NO ?
2 Self-sufficiency. YES NO ?
3 Socialism. YES NO ?
4 Free market. YES NO ?
5 Trade unions. YES NO ?
6 Saving. YES NO ?
7 Closed shops. YES NO ?
8 Monetarism. YES NO ?
9 Import controls. YES NO ?
10 Privatisation. YES NO ?
11 Strikes. YES NO ?
12 Informal black economy.
YES NO ?
13 Inheritance tax. YES NO ?
14 Insurance schemes.
YES NO ?
15 Council housing. YES NO ?
16 Private schools. YES NO ?
17 Child benefits. YES NO ?
18 Profit. YES NO ?
19 Wealth tax. YES NO ?
20 Public spending cuts.
YES NO ?
Scoring:
Odd items score Yes (3) ? (2) No (1)
Even items score Yes (1) ? (2) No (3)
Score 51 to 70 - you are what my father would call a 'dangerous pinko'.
Score 20 to 30 - you are what my students would call an 'economic fascist'.
Score 31 to 40 - you are probably a member of the entrepreneurial neo-right.
Score 41 to 50 - you are probably a supporter of the new post-Kinnock Labour
party.
Pedants, pollsters and politicians would probably object to this method. But
pundits and the public would welcome it because of its simplicity. Opinion
polling is not 'rocket-science', but it is a lot better than reading the
tea-leaves, or worse, horoscopes. They do have their uses and much of the
media are addicted to them. The catch-phrase method may indeed be superior
to and simpler than our more established methods.
The author is professor of psychology at University College London.
