FT  01 DEC 94 / Chile realigns its currency against dollar
The Chilean peso revalued by 3.5 per cent yesterday against the US dollar
after the central bank announced measures to realign the band in which the
currency is allowed to trade.
The new revaluation came on top of a effective appreciation of 13 per cent
in real terms already this year. The dollar was trading at 402-403 pesos
yesterday among banks - compared with Tuesday's 416.50, then its highest
permitted level.
The Chilean peso is allowed to fluctuate 10 per cent either side of a
reference rate and the central bank measures moved this reference rate to
about 418 pesos to the dollar, from 462.7 a day earlier. Bankers estimated
the new ceiling rate for the peso to be around 376 to the dollar.
Technically, the central bank adjusted the weightings of the three
currencies which are used to calculate the reference rate, with the dollar's
weighting reduced to 45 per cent from 50 per cent, the yen's rising to 25
per cent from 20 per cent, and the D-Mark unchanged at 30 per cent.
The peso had been at the top of its permitted range since the beginning of
November, despite repeated dollar purchases by the central bank calculated
by some bankers at well over Dollars 1bn (Pounds 637m). The central bank was
reported to have intervened again yesterday, after the peso opened at 396 to
the dollar.
This year has seen record inflows of capital, with more than a dozen Chilean
companies now trading on Wall Street after share issues in the New York
market. Direct foreign investment also rose by 60 per cent, to Dollars
2.2bn, the foreign investment committee announced yesterday.
In addition, export earnings have recovered as prices for several of Chile's
main exports, chiefly copper - which this week reached a record high - and
wood pulp, have improved strongly during the year. As a result the trade
balance is showing a Dollars 400m surplus, compared with an expected deficit
of Dollars 900m.
Bankers said more central bank dollar purchases would have worsened problems
in managing the money supply, and that the revaluation made it more likely
that Chilean inflation, which fell below 10 per cent this year, would remain
in single digits next year. The revaluation is likely to hurt exporters, and
benefit importers.
