FT  29 JUN 94 / Ground rules wanted: The big powers want global order, but
do not know how to enforce it
The 'mock G7 summit' staged by Italian television on Monday - in which the
seven countries were represented not by their actual leaders but by senior
figures who had been intimately involved in previous summits (including
Helmut Schmidt who dreamed up the G7 idea with Valery Giscard d'Estaing when
they were in power in Germany and France in the 1970s) - was realistic to
the point of tedium. Each country made a general statement of its views,
first on the world economy and then (after the introduction of a Russian
journalist, Alexei Khazov, to represent Yeltsin) on the world political
situation.
The second half of the programme had a bit more edge to it: several western
'leaders', while welcoming Russia to the fold, wanted to be reassured that
Moscow would abide by the rules of the international game. Khazov replied
with assurances as sweeping, and carrying as much conviction, as those the
real summit next week will no doubt get from Yeltsin.
Schmidt was worried that the west might be drifting into confrontation with
the world of Islam, and offered to circulate a draft statement on the need
for peace between cultures and civilisations for inclusion in the
communique. And Jean Francois-Poncet, once Giscard's foreign minister,
entered a passionate plea for the UN to meet the 'challenges to humanity'
posed by dramas such as those of the Iraqi Kurds, Bosnia and Rwanda. No one
mentioned Yemen.
'Can we stand idle, indifferent, when hundreds of thousands of human beings
are being slaughtered?' he asked. 'Is benign neglect acceptable in such
circumstances? My country says 'no'. It has sent 2,500 soldiers to Rwanda -
not to defend any national interest but out of a sense of responsibility
towards Africa - and has asked other countries to join. The response has
been one of utter reluctance. Does this mean that after Somalia we are no
longer willing to act when outright massacres happen in various parts of the
world?'
This challenge clearly did succeed in pricking his colleagues' conscience.
It led to quite a sharp exchange after the cameras were switched off, when
Michael Blumenthal, who was US treasury secretary under President Jimmy
Carter, described France's interest in Rwanda as 'nostalgic'. Admitting that
this word had 'scratched my skin', Francois-Poncet retorted, 'we can't
intervene where there is oil and not where there is not' - which in turn
provoked Blumenthal to complain of 'distortion' and to protest that the US
defines its national interest 'more broadly than any other nation'. Yet both
agreed that to leave the matter to be decided by individual governments'
assessment of their national interests, broad or narrow, was unsatisfactory.
What was needed was an agreed 'international regime' for deciding these
matters.
Four other speakers out of the eight - including Lord Lawson for Britain and
Kim Campbell, whose brief tenure as Canadian prime minister included last
year's G7 summit - named agreement to work out such a 'regime' or 'set of
ground rules' as one of the things they would most like to see emerge from
the real summit. But Hisashi Owada, who has been the Japanese 'sherpa' for
many G7 summits, expressed some scepticism. Much as he wished to see such a
regime, he doubted if the G7 was the right body to propose it.
It is hardly a coincidence that Owada is currently serving as his country's
ambassador to the UN. As such, he is more sensitive than most western
politicians and senior officials to the intense suspicion with which the G7
is regarded by many third world governments. The assumptions which the US
and France make about each other's motives for intervening in different
parts of the world - that behind moral or humanitarian rhetoric lurks
colonial nostalgia or greed for oil - are taken as self-evident in the third
world, not only about those two countries but about rich and powerful
industrial states in general. Any set of rules for intervention drawn up by
the G7 would be denounced in the General Assembly, and probably vetoed by
China in the Security Council, as nothing more than a code by which great
powers would endow themselves with a collective right to use force against
small nations.
There is already a regime, or 'set of ground rules', governing the use of
force for the maintenance of international peace and security. It is called
the UN Charter, and it assigns special responsibilities to the five
permanent members of the Security Council, four of which attend the G7
summit (now, for political purposes, the G8 with the inclusion of Russia).
In practice they have been selective about exercising those
responsibilities, tending increasingly to invoke national interest as a
reason for risking the lives of their soldiers in one place rather than
another. Nothing in the Charter authorises such selectivity, and France is
right to denounce it. But Blumenthal was no doubt also right to say that
France would have been less likely to intervene in a country with which it
had fewer ties, such as Paraguay.
There would be a case for amending the UN Charter to allow more explicitly
for international intervention in a state's internal affairs in cases of
genocide or other extreme humanitarian emergency. But in the present
atmosphere it is unlikely that the necessary two-thirds majority in the
General Assembly for such an amendment could be obtained. Until it can, the
Security Council will no doubt continue to decide, when it believes the
situation in any country is so bad as to merit intervention, that that
situation constitutes a 'threat to international peace and security'.
