FT  01 AUG 94 / Machine tools find favour in Japan
A machine-tool builder has achieved a rare success in the industry's
equivalent of carrying coals to Newcastle - selling general purpose
machining centres to Japan, the world's largest producer.
Helped by the strong yen and by recent productivity and manufacturing
improvements, Birmingham-based Cincinnati Milacron UK is undercutting
Japanese rivals in their home market with its low-cost Arrow 500 machining
centres - multi-function machine tools.
The Birmingham company is owned by Cincinnati Milacron of the US but the
Arrow, along with its larger counterparts the Sabre and Lancer, was
developed and designed in the UK and is being made solely at Birmingham for
markets worldwide.
The Arrow 500 was launched earlier this year in Japan at a price of Y7.8m
(Pounds 52,000) which is understood to be at least 20 per cent cheaper than
rival Japanese machines.
Mr Mike Colvin, the UK company's export sales and marketing manager, said
several machines had already been sold in Japan. He had been astounded at
the response from big names and smaller engineering companies.
Trade between the UK and Japan in machine tools is normally a one-way
affair. Japan was the biggest exporter of machine tools to the UK last year
with sales of Pounds 90m, down 35 per cent on 1992, but UK exports the other
way were just Pounds 4m, down 45 per cent.
Last year Japan was only the 21st biggest export market for UK machine
tools.
Milacron has had some success selling its plastics machinery and more
specialised products in Japan but it is believed to be years since it sold a
general purpose machining centre there.
Mr John Bloxham, managing director of the UK company, said the Arrow had
been a 'mindblowing' success since its launch. The machine was first shown
at an exhibition in Germany a year ago.
Overall production of machining centres at Birmingham would double this year
to more than 1,000 units, he said. Arrows will account for about 40 per
cent. The company is taking on more than 40 new employees, lifting its
workforce to 360.
