FT  29 NOV 94 / Survey of Bristol (12): A transformation - Bristol port and
Severnside
Motorists surging down the M5 motorway towards Somerset can hardly fail to
notice, as they drive past the Avonmouth industrial complex beside the
Bristol Channel, that something big is happening.
While the steel structures and vapour clouds of large-scale chemical
processes are still evident, there are also gleaming white buildings, the
size of aircraft hangars, next to acres upon acres of parked new cars.
The transformation is caused by the expansion of Bristol port since it was
privatised three years ago. Its success 'is the best thing that has happened
to Bristol in 50 years,' says Mr St John Hartnell, chairman of property
consultant Hartnell Taylor Cook, which manages the docks' estate of 2,500
acres.
While Mr Hartnell would declare an interest, others have been equally
impressed. The port, together with the second Severn bridge which is under
construction, has become a catalyst for development plans around Avonmouth.
The biggest scheme, being promoted by ICI, covers no fewer than 1,500 acres,
an area stretching for more than 4km.
Even before the new bridge opens in 1996, the docks have the benefit of
direct access to the M5 motorway, near to its junction with the M4, and of a
recently-upgraded link to a main-line railway. 'It is a very well-placed
strategic port,' says Mr Hartnell.
The port, which straddles the river Avon, took over from the old city-centre
docks, where commercial trade died because of the difficulties of navigating
the river and restrictions on the size of vessel.
On the north side of the river is Avonmouth dock, which is used by container
and general cargo ships, and where Bell Lines opened a Pounds 3.5m container
terminal in December last year.
On the south side is Royal Portbury, completed as a deep-water dock in 1978
and capable of handling ships up to 130,000 dwt.
Bristol city council, the then owner, was burdened with debt by its
construction and could not win enough trade to be profitable.
In consequence, the council sold the port in 1991 for Pounds 36m, free of
debt, on a 150-year lease to First Corporate Shipping, a private company run
by Mr Terence Mordaunt and Mr David Ord. They are chairman and managing
director of the operating subsidiary, Bristol Port Company. The council
retains a 12.5 per cent preferential stake and has a seat on the board.
Since the takeover, Pounds 150m has been invested by the port and joint
venture partners in new facilities.
'Everything that happens here, happens at break-neck speed,' says Mrs Julie
Gough, of Bristol Port Company, which has a permanent workforce of 172
including apprentices. Since 1991, tonnage has increased by 2m tonnes to
6.6m tonnes and profits have risen each year. Revenue in the last financial
year grew from Pounds 21.6m to Pounds 32.7m.
To date, most of the expansion has been at Royal Portbury which has become,
after Sheerness, the second-biggest UK port for car imports and exports.
These have doubled in three years to about 300,000 vehicles.
Honda, Mitsubishi, Proton, Rover, Toyota and the Fiat company Walon have
parking space which totals 282 acres. Computerised systems enable a car's
arrival to be processed in less than 40 seconds.
In May last year, an Pounds 80m investment in a bulk handling terminal was
made by a joint venture with National Power. Although in its first year the
terminal only handled about 1m tonnes of coal, compared with a capacity of
5m, it is a common-use facility which also carries fertilisers, aggregates
and grain derivatives.
This year, Agricultural Bulk Services, a joint venture between the port and
United Molasses, invested Pounds 6.5m in doubling storage for animal feeds ,
only a year after the facility opened at Royal Portbury. New sheds have been
built for a forest products terminal. Lafarge Plasterboard imports gypsum
for a factory which it opened at the port in 1989.
On the dock estate, infrastructure is nearly completed for Portbury West, a
joint venture with Bryant Properties for a 30-acre distribution park,
intended eventually to have more than 1m sq ft of industrial space. Further
south, Woodspring council has given approval for a 52-acre business park
near Weston-super-Mare and outline consent for a 1.6m sq ft business park at
Weston airfield.
North of the river Avon, another distribution park called Severn Gate is
being developed on a 60-acre green-field site by AMEC Developments and RTZ
Estates.
RTZ is promoting a scheme to build nearby an intermodal rail-freight
terminal which would link to the Channel tunnel.
At Severnside, north of Avonmouth, ICI intends to develop 1,500 acres around
its fertiliser works and Avlon plant, owned by Zeneca since the demerger. At
present, tenant farmers use the land for grazing, but the land has been held
as a strategic reserve and ICI has had outline planning consent since 1957
for industrial and commercial use.
ICI has realised it will never require the land itself although the
fertiliser plant, where 230 people work, remains open and Zeneca is keeping
some acreage for planned expansion. Instead, it has decided the time has
come to unlock its value.
That value, it believes, is enhanced not only by the port but also the M49
approach road to the second Severn bridge, which crosses the land. ICI is
applying for an intersection to give direct access.
One hitch is that agreement has yet to be reached with the highway
authorities for the siting of the slip roads, which will be partly funded by
the private sector. In consequence, the junction is unlikely to be ready
when the new bridge opens.
ICI, with King Sturge as property adviser and planning consultant, has begun
to market the land under the name Western Approaches and is holding meetings
with local people on mitigating the environmental impact.
Planning consent is being sought for a first phase - a distribution park of
2.3m sq ft of warehousing on 130 acres of a landscaped 200-acre site. Future
development could be a mixture of distribution space, industry including
high-tech and research activity, and possibly a leisure complex and some
housing.
The company estimates that over a 15-year period, between 5,000 and 7,000
jobs could be created.
'The capacity for economic development is enormous,' says Mr Andrew Sturt,
ICI's group property manager.
'It will be a major contribution to the industrial and employment base of
the region.'
