FT  06 OCT 94 / International Company News: Molson confirms plan to export
beer to China
Molson, the Canadian brewing, retailing and speciality chemicals group,
confirmed it was entering the Chinese beer market with direct exports from
its Canadian breweries.
Molson Breweries, the brewing unit owned 40 per cent by Molson, 40 per cent
by Foster's of Australia and 20 per cent by Miller of the US, will start by
exporting Molson 'Ice' beer, a premium brand already selling successfully
throughout North America, the UK and Aus-tralia.
The distributor will be American Beverage.
Mr Marshall Cohen, Molson chairman, said: 'The move creates a beachhead for
us in the world's second-biggest beer market, now growing at 20 per cent a
year. We will be well positioned to take up further opportunities.'
Molson did not confirm speculation that it would participate in a joint
venture announced last June by Foster's and Wheelock of Hong Kong to build
breweries in China.
John Labatt, Molson's Canadian rival, has also been examining the Chinese
beer market. The group recently bought part of a Mexican brewer for CDollars
720m (USDollars 537.3m).
The Chinese market has proved extremely attractive to foreign brewery
companies. China boasts some 800, mostly tiny, breweries, but there are no
identifiable national brands with the possible exception of Tsingtao, which
has just 2.5 per cent of the market.
Since 1984 China has jumped from seventh place to second behind the US as a
beer producer with output in 1993 of 12.25m tonnes. The number of breweries
in that time has doubled. Mr John Smith, General Motors president, yesterday
announced the creation of a new post to oversee the company's operations in
China, AP reports from Paris.
Mr Rudolph Schlais will be based in Beijing as president of GM China
Operations, co-ordinating vehicle and component businesses, Mr Smith said.
'It's a huge, developing market and we've got to bring more resources into
it,' Mr Smith told journalists at the Paris Motor Show.
