FT  08 SEP 94 / International Company News: Riding out a hazardous recovery
 -Growth in Brazil is shaking up Autolatina
Autolatina, holding company for the joint operations of Volkswagen and Ford
in Brazil, should, on the face of it, be humming along. Last year Brazil
became the world's fastest growing big market for cars, due to a combination
of factors including tax cuts and a return to economic growth.
However, Autolatina and its rivals can see hazards looming. The market's
growth, combined with falling tariffs, is forcing domestic manufacturers to
compete against a rising tide of imports.
Furthermore, if the market continues to expand, other world producers may
start up operations in Brazil.
In this changing environment, Autolatina's structure is looking increasingly
out of date.
The original aim of the venture in 1987 was to establish economies of scale
in a stagnating, low-investment industry. VW and Ford pooled resources in
areas such as administration and finances, and made similar-looking vehicles
from the same platforms.
Last week the companies announced an important change in strategy: they will
abandon the joint use of production platforms and switch to the platforms of
their parent companies. They have, however, denied a complete divorce.
Mr Pierre Alain de Smedt, Autolatina chairman, says: 'In 1987 Brazil was a
closed economy, but the market has changed, and moving to world platforms is
a normal evolution.'
Brazil started to open its economy from 1990. Until then, the main
manufacturers - which, apart from Autolatina, included General Motors and
Fiat - had seen sales stagnate at between 800,000 and 900,000 vehicles a
year.
The government cut car import duties from 60 per cent in 1991 to about 35
per cent last year, a move which helped push imports - particularly of
Japanese and German luxury cars - from 15,000 to around 120,000 this year.
Imports are expected to account for 10 per cent of the market this year.
Although the tariff reductions were important, what really made the
difference were agreements between the government, companies and unions to
try to kick-start the market. The measures involved cutting vehicle taxes
and profit margins and controlling wage claims.
Taxes have fallen by 22 per cent on average, helping prices to tumble. This
has been particularly true for 1,000cc cars, known as 'carros populares',
where the tax reductions have been most marked. These now account for half
of all sales, against 10 per cent in 1990. A 1,000cc VW Gol, for example,
costs just over Dollars 7,000 today, compared with Dollars 13,000 three
years ago, says Mr de Smedt.
The result was a 40 per cent production increase last year, to nearly 1.4m
vehicles. This increase made Brazil the 10th-biggest producer worldwide,
ahead of Italy and Mexico, and the figure is expected to approach 1.6m
vehicles this year.
The growth has helped spur productivity gains, which have averaged 17 per
cent a year since 1990. According to a report by consultants Booz-Allen
earlier this year, increases in volume have accounted for more than half the
productivity gains, with the rest due to restructuring.
Quality has also improved, according to Autolatina, which reported car
defects down by 50 per cent since 1990.
However, problems remain. In spite of productivity gains, the gap with
foreign competitors has actually widened since 1990, according to
Booz-Allen. They note that even with labour costs as low as Dollars 8 an
hour, compared with about Dollars 20 in Europe, Brazil's car industry is
still 10 per cent less productive.
Mr Pacifico Paoli, chief executive of Fiat in Brazil, says the advantages of
cheap labour and raw materials in Brazil are offset by an unsatisfactory
transport infrastructure, a poor educational system and economic
considerations such as high interest rates.
Furthermore, although taxes have been cut, they are still much higher than
abroad, says Mr Paoli, who points out that tax accounts for one-third of the
price of a standard saloon car and 17 per cent of a small vehicle.
The tax structure, however, could change under a new sector agreement,
possible by the end of this year, and each company is pushing for a regime
which favours its own production mix.
Fiat's 1,000cc Uno has made it the fastest-growing company. It has increased
capacity and doubled sales of the model in the first half of the year, to
91,000, helping it widen its lead over General Motors.
However, a new agreement could change the tax mix to benefit larger models,
so weakening Fiat's position and improving that of companies such as GM.
While Ford and GM were left behind by the 'carro popular' growth, GM was the
first to respond. Demand for its 1,000cc Corsa has been high, and the
company is trebling production from 3,500 at its March launch to 10,500 by
the end of the year, according to vice-president Mr Jose Carlos Pinheiro. It
also plans to build a plant with capacity of 100,000 vehicles a year.
Ford, whose market share has fallen by half to about 12 per cent in recent
years, intends to produce Fiesta models in Brazil by the second half of next
year, while VW is betting on the continued success of its Gol, which
accounts for more than half its sales.
However, industry experts believe that if the market remains attractive,
international competitors will set up factories in Brazil. Companies such as
Toyota and Nissan, for example, are rumoured to be planning investments.
The reaction of local manufacturers to the threat of imports has been to
call for quotas. The government has refused, and Mr Fernando Henrique
Cardoso, the favourite to win presidential elections this year, has not
supported the claims.
The priority, according to Mr de Smedt, is to continue modernising and
improving productivity. 'We can't relax. We must make the same level of
gains in the next five years to be able to compete internationally.'
