FT  19 MAR 94 / Ukraine 'plans to restart third Chernobyl unit'
Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk has signed an order to start up
Chernobyl reactor number 2, widely regarded as unsafe and closed since a
devastating fire in 1991, according to environmental activists.
Ukraine is under enormous pressure to find new energy sources to reduce
reliance on its main energy supplier, Russia. Relations with its neighbour
have been difficult since the break-up of the Soviet Union.
The republic has a Dollars 3.2bn oil and gas debt to Russia. It must settle
Dollars 900m of this debt by April 10 or Russian gas supplies will be cut
off. A partial cut-off this month has led to factories being ordered to
halve energy consumption. There are fears there will not be enough energy
for spring planting this year.
According to Greenpeace, in Kiev, reactor number 2 will be restarted in 1995
under a decree signed on February 23. Two other reactors at Chernobyl remain
in operation, although reactor number 4, where the infamous Chernobyl
explosion took place in 1986, remains shut down, encased in a concrete
shell.
Last October, the Ukrainian parliament passed a controversial resolution to
continue energy production at the power plant, reversing its 1991 decision
to shut it down by the end of last year. Administration officials refused to
confirm or deny the existence of the February 23 order, but did say that its
existence was 'possible'.
Western experts and Ukrainian scientists have criticised the Soviet design
of the Chernobyl-style RBMK reactors and have urged that they be scrapped
immediately. The notorious graphite-core RBMKs are liable to speed up
nuclear reaction and get hotter as water intended for cooling turns to
steam.
In addition, Ukraine's nuclear industry, which supplies 40 per cent of the
country's electricity, has suffered recurring technical problems and safety
violations. Automatic safety systems are periodically switched off to boost
power production. Just yesterday, a fire broke out at Ukraine's Khmeltnisky
nuclear power station and last week, there was a fire at the Zaporizha
station.
