FT  11 OCT 94 / The Conservatives in Bournemouth: Lilley to offer benefit
inducement to jobless
Mr Peter Lilley, social security secretary, is expected tomorrow to unveil
an innovative reform of the benefit system to encourage more of the
long-term unemployed back into the labour market through part-time jobs.
In his address to the Conservative party conference in Bournemouth he will
propose a 'claim and save' system for unemployed people who take part-time
jobs but remain on benefit.
Any money now earned by an unemployed person above Pounds 5 a week is clawed
back from the benefit they receive. Under the 'claim and save' system the
money would still be clawed back, but it would go into a fund which would be
paid to the person when he or she took a full-time job and left the benefit
system.
The Lilley scheme is similar to one called Action Credit with which there
were experiments in the late 1980s. It was the brainchild of Mr Peter Ashby,
head of the lobby organisation Full Employment UK, but was introduced just
as unemployment started to rise and was not regarded as a success.
The 'claim and save' scheme acknowledges that many of the long-term
unemployed are working in the hidden economy, but it says that with the
right incentives they could be lured back into formal employment.
It is based on the assumption that a brief spell of employment, even
part-time employment, is the best way of making the long-term unemployed
more attractive to employers.
By providing a lump-sum payment on returning to work it also solves the
difficulty faced by many unemployed people in coping with the initial costs
of working before they have received a pay cheque.
Labour market experts in Whitehall have long been interested in using
part-time jobs as a stepping stone into full-time work, but there has been
strong resistance from the Treasury to tampering with the earnings
'disregards' which limit the amount it is possible to earn before claimants
lose benefit pound-for-pound.
Many of the 'claim and save' scheme's details have yet to be worked out,
including the period over which money can be accumulated in a fund and the
way in which that money will be treated by the tax and benefit system.
Mr Michael Portillo, employment secretary, who will also speak tomorrow, is
expected to spell out more of the detail of the Jobseekers' Allowance which
merges unemployment benefit and income support. There will be a white paper
on the JSA next month and it is expected to be implemented in 1996.
Mr Portillo will stress that receiving benefit depends on the recipient
signing a new agreement with the Employment Service and taking jobs which
are offered.
