FT  20 SEP 94 / Lies, statistics and Spanish phone tariffs
If Spain's struggle to contain rising prices was not difficult enough, a
public row between two cabinet ministers about how the national statistics
institute does its inflation sums is proving equally embarrasing to the
government.
Financial markets were shocked last week when the statistics institute, the
INE, reported that prices in August had jumped 0.6 per cent to give a
year-on-year headline inflation rise of 4.8 per cent and an accumulated one
of 4.3 per cent.
But the jitters among bond traders paled against the raw nerves that
surfaced in government circles.
The economy and finance minister, Mr Pedro Solbes, is embarrassed because
his 3.5 per cent inflation target for the end of this year is now well
beyond reach and the transport and communications minister, Mr Jose Borrell,
is furious because a change in telephone charges, which he had ordered
before the summer, was blamed for the rise.
Mr Borrell, a mathematician who takes pride in his numeracy, claims that the
inflation effect of a July telephone tariff revision that cheapened the
price of long distance calls and made local ones more expensive was
'neutral' and contributed a mere 0.02 per cent to August's inflation.
The statistics institute, however, appears convinced that most Spaniards use
the phone to chat to their next door neighbours.
The institute insists that the overall cost to consumers of the tariff
revision was 14 per cent and that the new charges pushed the consumer price
index up by 0.2 per cent.
'If we wanted to look like a banana republic, we couldn't be going about it
better,' said a senior economist at one of the major domestic banks. 'Here
nobody knows what to believe because we have lies, statistics and telephone
tariffs.'
Vowing that 'heads will roll' over the row and that he will change the
telephone charges again if they turn out to be so inflationary, Mr Borrell
wants the INE, which is controlled by the economy and finance ministry, to
reveal how it assessed the impact of the tariff revision.
The transport minister was nevertheless rebuffed yesterday when the
institute said it had used the revised tariffs supplied by the national
telecommunications company and that its use of the data was 'a statistical
secret'.
Mr Solbes, who is both worried about the credibility of Spain's
macro-economics figures and highly concerned that high inflation will derail
his attempts to cut government spending, is understood to be torn between
upholding the professionalism of his statisticians and wishing that their
computations gave him a rosier bottom line.
