FT  30 SEP 94 / Survey of World Economy and Finance - World's Economies -
Developing Countries (58): New realism among leaders - Middle East
Progress towards a lasting settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict and the
price of oil are the two most obvious factors likely to influence the
performance of Middle East economies in the year ahead. However, neither is
susceptible to accurate forecasting, and both can be severely affected by
the invariably unpleasant political shocks for which the Middle East has
become rightly notorious.
The chain of events set in motion by first, the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq
in August 1990, and second, by the outline peace accord signed by Israel and
the Palestine Liberation Organisation in September 1993, is still being
played out. The Gulf war and the putative Arab-Israeli peace agreement has
prompted some western leaders and their advisers to conclude that the
implications of the Soviet Union's departure from the Middle East political
equation has finally been understood and has provoked a new realism among
leaders in the region.
This argument suggests that the overwhelming superiority of US and Israeli
military forces is obvious even to the most militant. President Saddam
Hussein of Iraq has been cowed, and the radical clerics in Iran have been
contained. Col Muammer Gadaffi of Libya is a shadow of his former
provocative self, while Yassir Arafat, chairman of the PLO, is now a welcome
guest at the White House, and may be followed, perhaps before too long, by
President Hafez al-Assad of Syria.
There is a strong body of opinion within the US State Department that
believes the peace process is now irreversible, whatever the short-term
difficulties. 'The fundamentals for a lasting peace are almost all in place,
in large part because the key players have run out of alternatives,' said a
senior official recently. 'Negotiations, especially between Israel and Syria
will be very hard, but both sides are now fully committed to the process.'
Less cheerfully, there also appears to be a broad measure of agreement that
the economic dividends flowing from the peace process will be slow to
emerge. International investors will initially be cautious, while more
fruitful regional co-operation will almost certainly have to await the
actual signing of peace treaties. Tourism could be an early beneficiary, as
could related transport projects involving shared airports and ports on the
Israel-Jordanian border. But fear of Israeli economic domination will make
Arab governments hesitant about larger-scale projects, and there is little
political enthusiasm for lifting the primary boycott against Israel despite
its slow erosion. Within the Palestinian territories from which Israel has
already withdrawn, progress in utilising the Dollars 2.4bn aid committed for
the next five years is proving painfully slow.
The emergence of stronger inflationary pressures in Israel has prompted
successive interest rate rises this year which has led to a scaling down of
growth forecasts. But Israel's longer-term prospects of more sustained
export-led growth can only have been enhanced by the new markets which have
opened up as a consequence of the peace process. In the medium term,
however, there seems little prospect of reducing the heavy arms spending
burden on the national budget, with Israel determined to enhance the
technological advantage it enjoys over its Arab neighbours.
The same military expenditure pattern is being repeated in the Gulf where
the fears and suspicions created by the eight-year Iraq-Iran conflict and
the subsequent Gulf war have only partially subsided. Despite a worsening
budget deficit, which this year prompted an attempt to cut official spending
by 20 per cent, Saudi Arabia continues to give precedence to strengthening
its defences.
The government has been forced to negotiate a slowdown in payments on
military aircraft purchases from the US, but the overall procurement
programme remains largely untouched.
The effects are being most sharply felt by civil contractors and other
government suppliers who complain of steadily worsening payments delays.
While this may contribute to an apparent narrowing of the budget deficit at
the end of the financial year, the warning bells sounded by the IMF in 1993
have not been silenced. The danger of the total government debt rising as a
percentage of gross domestic product from the present level of about 58 per
cent to 80 per cent by 1997 has not receded. And in the absence of a
sustained rise in the price of oil, a squeeze on commercial banks' liquidity
as a result of official borrowing could yet harm the development of the
private sector which is supposed to act as the main motor of economic
growth.
The widening fiscal gap created by static or falling government revenues,
and rising recurrent and capital expenditure, goes to the core of the
problem facing the Arab Gulf states. Slowly, governments are being forced to
accept that the all-embracing welfare state cannot be financed indefinitely.
Deeper cuts will have to be made and issues of taxation addressed. The
reluctance of governments to grasp this particular nettle indicates the
impact such reforms may have on political stability.
More immediate concerns in the Gulf are focused on Iran and Iraq, and
particularly when the UN will decide that Baghdad has met the conditions
imposed by Security Council resolutions. The consequent resumption of Iraqi
oil exports has obvious implications for oil prices, and it will also open
the door for international companies already seeking business in Iraq.
Demands for war reparations and the payment of substantial debt arrears are
certain to amount to well over Dollars 150bn and to take many years to
resolve.
Iran will be in the forefront of those countries seeking compensation for
the damage inflicted during its eight-year war with Iraq. Declining oil
revenues and a ballooning international debt have exacerbated Tehran's
reconstruction problems while continued political rivalries have blocked
most attempts at introducing market-oriented reforms. Iran continues to be a
valuable market for Europe and Japan, but the combination of US hostility
and poor economic management suggests that in the absence of significantly
higher oil prices there is little chance of real growth.
Among the brighter spots in a generally lacklustre Middle East, Morocco and
Tunisia stand out as countries which are addressing their structural
problems while aiming to promote export-led growth through a closer
association with the European Union. But they, too, are forced to keep a
wary eye on neighbouring Algeria where the impact of Islam as a political
force provides another potent example of the dangers which arise when inept
governments fail to tackle the the most basic needs of their populations.
