FT  17 DEC 94 / Race to escape the juggernaut: President Clinton is fighting
back against attempts by the Republicans to marginalise him
It has come down to this. When the Democratic president of the US goes on
national television for what is universally agreed to be a very important
speech, as Bill Clinton did on Thursday night, the Republican party does not
even bother to field a heavy hitter to deliver its statutory response.
Instead of a Dole, a Gingrich or a Gramm, it offers the country Fred Dalton
Thompson.
In fact, Mr Thompson, elected to the Senate from Tennessee last month in the
Republican midterm landslide, is a familiar face on TV, mostly because he
was an actor. He therefore delivered his lines well and one sentence said it
all: 'From what we heard tonight, the president's vision of the future now
looks a lot like what Republicans just campaigned for - at least until we
start looking at the details.'
Earlier in the day, Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, who is enough of a
Republican heavyweight that he will soon declare his presidential candidacy,
had dispensed with even the pretence of politesse. Whatever Mr Clinton
proposed would be 'a non-starter', he intoned, as he outlined his party's
minimum tax cut positions.
On Wednesday, Senator Robert Dole and Congressman Newt Gingrich,
respectively majority leader and Speaker in the next Congress, wrote to the
president, not only presuming to tell him what he ought to say but also
warning him of the consequences of not signing up to the Republican agenda.
'The American people aren't the only ones watching,' they said. 'So is the
world and its young democracies emerging from generations of government
oppression.'
The game now afoot in Washington is the attempted marginalisation of the
chief executive by the suddenly ascendant Republican majority. It is a
high-risk strategy, conducted with a mixture of boldness, arrogance and
certitude that goes far beyond even the sweeping ambitions of the early
years of Ronald Reagan's presidency, tempered as they were by the fact that
at least the Democrats still ran the powerful House of Representatives.
It is predicated on the conviction, as yet untested by time, that an angry
and bitter country has run out of sympathy with Bill Clinton and fallen head
over heels for the new conservative orthodoxy. The latest piece of evidence
was a New York Times public opinion poll this week which found a far greater
inclination to trust Congress with the nation's affairs than the president,
whose approval rating was below 40 per cent.
The poll also revealed much ignorance about the Republican 'Contract with
America' (and even about Mr Gingrich himself) and less enthusiasm for some
of its more extreme propositions, but that message was for the moment
secondary.
In fairness, Mr Clinton has not been in hiding since his electoral debacle.
He has attended three summits - two of which (the Asian one in Jakarta and
the American version in Miami) may be deemed successful, while the failure
of the third (in Budapest about eastern Europe) was hardly his fault. He led
the fight last month for congressional passage of the Gatt trade treaty.
Yet, allowing for dutiful media coverage of the above, the real headlines
have been culled from every syllable dropped from the non-stop lips of
Messrs Gingrich, Dole and Gramm and their acolytes.
This has led to the powerful perception of a president on the ropes. As RW
Apple put it in the New York Times this week, 'he has been dangerously
silent until now. He has left the initiative to Republicans . . . their
confidence and audacity has deepened the Democrats' demoralisation; a
Democratic senator said this week: 'it's hard to see how we escape from this
wilderness''.
His own party has turned on him. Dave McCurdy, the overweeningly ambitious
ex-congressman from Oklahoma still smarting from his own defeat for the
Senate, described his old colleague-in-arms in the struggle for the
Democratic middle ground as 'a transitional figure'. This week, Richard
Gephardt, the new minority leader in the House, rose from a sickbed to
present his own middle-class tax cut proposals without waiting for his
president, thus staking out the independence of the congressional party from
the administration. A Los Angeles Times poll found two-thirds of Democrats
hoping Mr Clinton would be challenged for the party presidential nomination
in 1996. With friends like these, the president hardly needs Republican
enemies.
But real friends have been deserting him, too. It was no secret that Lloyd
Bentsen wanted to leave the Treasury after two hard and successful years,
but even his departure somehow could not wait until the dog days of
Christmas. Equally David Gergen, all-round counsellor, was known to be
going, though, typically, he departed with some ambiguous comments about the
president's soul. Yesterday Dee Dee Myers, the first woman White House press
secretary, confirmed that she, too, would be out by the end of the year.
Less easy to explain is the speed with which Mr Clinton ditched Dr Joycelyn
Elders, his surgeon general. Black, outspoken and from Arkansas, she has
long figured at the top of the conservative hit list for her blunt
discourses on Aids, drugs and sex. She went after saying during a speech at
the UN that masturbation was properly a part of sex education; her comments
went unreported at the time, but the White House sacked her once it came out
that a news magazine was about to make a retrospective meal out of the
incident.
This left the impression that just about everybody close to or distant from
the president was now fair game and that he would do little to protect them.
George Stephanopoulos, the trusted presidential adviser, is in the
Republican gunsights as a symbol of outdated liberalism. Rumours persist
that Jim Woolsey, head of the troubled CIA, and Tony Lake, national security
adviser, are living on borrowed time.
A midterm reshuffle of portfolios is normal, but this one, when it comes,
will also have to run a Republican gauntlet in Congress (though Robert
Rubin, Treasury secretary-designate, should be safe). Each appointment up
for confirmation will be turned into a debate on political and social
principles, no light prospect for a president accused of lacking core
beliefs.
No subject now consumes the media more than the political soul of Bill
Clinton, especially in contrast to the certitudes of Mr Gingrich. Much like
John Major in Britain, the president has few defenders in the fourth estate,
the difference in the commentary of the two countries lying more in the
degree of venom directed at the person and character of Mr Clinton. A
popular Washington talk radio programme after the speech on Thursday night
was consumed by the most demeaning criticisms ('he's just a scared boy,' one
caller said, with no demur from the hosts).
A thoughtful article by Adam Gopnik in a recent New Yorker magazine
accurately noted that 'however you feel about Bill Clinton, no other
American president since the 1870s has been hung up by his thumbs so soon
and left there to hang for so long'. The author found the fault to lie
mostly in the media, consumed with instant judgments, appearances over
substance and lacking any real political convictions of its own, beyond a
spurious pretence of objectivity. Even William Safire, the conservative but
never predictable New York Times columnist, suggested this week that a
closer reading of some of Mr Clinton's overlooked recent remarks proved he
was 'alive and well and living in the White House' and ready for the
Republican challenge.
But more typical of the prevailing media mood was a column by Meg
Greenfield, the influential editorial page editor of the notionally liberal
Washington Post. She wrote that it would be as dangerous for liberals to
underestimate Newt Gingrich as they once had Ronald Reagan ('if they just
holler and mock and talk about Hitler and relevant things like that,
Gingrich wins'). Her article could be read as an overture to the new Speaker
that could lead to an editorial kindness comparable to that her newspaper
used to bestow on Mr Reagan.
Mr Clinton himself recognised the mood of the times in his speech by calling
for an end to 'the politics of personal destruction and demonisation that
have dominated too much of our debate'. Yet the contemporary reality may be
that he will have to bite back himself to survive in these shark-infested
waters.
In this respect the new Republican hierarchy presents some tempting targets,
with Mr Gingrich particularly prone to shoot off his mouth. It is, for
example, far from clear that America is ready for the recreation of
orphanages on a grand scale as an antidote to collapsed family structures.
Nothing would unite disaffected liberals (and thoughtful conservatives) so
much as his proposed elimination of federal funding for public,
non-commercial broadcasting. Nor would there appear to be much appetite for
his proposal to bomb the Bosnian Serbs back into the Stone Age. The New York
Times poll found little enthusiasm for restoring prayer in schools or
eviscerating the welfare state.
Other Republicans, too, seem consumed with the hubris of the moment and the
defensiveness of Mr Clinton, forgetting that the fault lines in a party
without a favoured presidential contender have in no way been reduced by its
electoral triumph. Mr Clinton may look vulnerable against any Republican,
but as soon as that candidate takes a human shape, different calculations
may be made.
Thus the fairest, if not the instantly popular, interpretation of Mr
Clinton's first significant response to the new political climate is not to
see it as a one-shot attempt at redemption but as the first step in a long
campaign to climb out of the political abyss. He offered a few modest tax
cuts that may not survive the light of day and a short homily on America's
crisis of confidence, all wrapped up in 10 minutes and in sum hardly
amounting to Lincoln's Gettysburg address, which was also very short.
But if the Republicans are playing the game hard, Mr Clinton must also play
it long. If and when Fred Thompson ceases to be the opposition's designated
hitter, then the notoriously unpredictable political pendulum, forecasts of
which are a mug's game these days, may be swinging back again.
