FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of Slovakia (10): Austerity begins to pay dividends -
Heavy industries enjoy happier days as the tide of recovery starts to flow
Slovakia's smokestack industries were in the doldrums when the country
became independent two years ago. But many are now experiencing a rapid and
profitable revival on the back of rising world demand for steel, chemicals
and other basic industrial products.
As a result this year has seen a remarkable turnaround in the country's
financial health from a state of near crisis during Mr Vladimir Meciar's
first year as prime minister.
The outgoing government led by Mr Jozef Moravcik came to power last March
with a commitment to restart privatisation and cut public expenditure.
The austerity policies were painful but are beginning to pay dividends.
Inflation this year should be well within the target range of 10 to 13 per
cent set by the National Bank of Slovakia (NBS), and is expected to finish
the year at the lower end of the range. This compares with 25.1 per cent
last year when prices were boosted by the introduction of Value Added Tax
and the costs of setting up the new state.
Above all, growth has resumed. Gross domestic product rose by 4.4 per cent
in the first half of 1994 and by 3.7 per cent in the third quarter, from the
deeply depressed levels of a a year ago, and should increase by three per
cent for the year as a whole.
This is the first sign of growth after a 32 per cent decline in GDP over the
previous four years. The decline was exacerbated by the divorce from the
Czechs in January 1993 but was mainly due to the collapse of the Comecon
markets. This exposed the structural weaknesses of an economy orientated
towards steel, chemicals, arms and other heavy engineering products as well
as cheap textiles and shoes for the Soviet market.
The clearest indication of recovering economic health can be seen in
Slovakia's soaring foreign reserves. Official reserves, including gold, have
surged from Dollars 470m at the end of 1993 to Dollars 2bn on November 9.
Total foreign reserves in the banking system on the same date amounted to
Dollars 3.4bn.
The reserves have grown much faster than expected. The IMF set a target of
Dollars 1.3bn for currency reserves, excluding gold, by the end of 1995. In
practice this component has already risen to Dollars 1.65bn, mainly due to
exports which rose 8.5 per cent over the first half of the year. Steel and
chemicals in particular are reaping the benefits of greater efficiency and a
global upturn in those sectors.
The recovery has been underpinned by three main factors: a tight monetary
policy imposed by an increasingly assertive NBS; International Monetary
Fund-inspired fiscal discipline; and recovery in the international economy.
Foreign investors remain cautious.
The new republic has received Dollars 408m in direct investment to date,
according to the Slovak national agency for foreign Investment and
development. Much of it is small scale investment from neighbouring Austria.
The big European multinationals such as Volkswagen, Siemens, Tetrapak and
Rhone-Poulenc are present, as is Whirlpool of the US. But investments are
still small.
Slovakia's overall financial standing was improved in July last year after
pressure on the currency forced a 10 per cent devaluation of the koruna on
July 10. On the next day Nomura Securities announced a Yen254bn (Dollars
250m) five year bond issue. In September this year Nomura reaffirmed its
confidence in the country's economic future when it bought a 29 per cent
stake in VUB Kupon, Slovakia's biggest investment fund.
Export-led growth started in the last quarter of 1993 and Mr Vladimir Masar,
governor of the NBS, believes that healthy economic growth should continue
in 1995. The incoming government is expected to be constrained by central
bank prudence and the conditions attached to IMF loans. Despite the rhetoric
of the general election, the reform process, and the mass privatisation
programme will continue. 'There is no choice,' Mr Masar says.
Much remains to be done by the incoming government, however. In particular,
a radical restructuring of the banking sector has not yet been implemented,
though Ms Brigita Schmognerova, deputy prime minister in charge of the
economy, says a lot of work has been done on it.
The plan aims to tackle the problem of inter-enterprise and
enterprise-to-bank debt. The former is estimated at around SKK90bn, an
enormous burden that mainly afflicts the huge state-owned concerns,
especially arms and machinery producers. But, says Ms Schmognerova, 'even
good enterprises can be in secondary insolvency' as a result of debtors'
inability to pay.
The plan also calls for removing the government from any supervisory role in
the sector, leaving it in the hands of the NBS. The capital market is
largely unregulated at present, with banks, pension funds, investment funds
and stock markets operating in a void.
The government and the NBS are acutely conscious of the danger of bank
failures, and have been warned by this year's collapse of three banks in the
Czech Republic. 'We haven't had any big problems yet, but it is only a
matter of time,' Ms Schmognerova says. 'I hope the new government
understands the necessity of building these institutions.'
The key to more growth next year is whether the new government continues
with the privatisation programme restarted by the outgoing administration.
Next year's budget is dependent on SKK18bn of revenues from the National
Property Fund, the body that administers privatisation. This money has been
earmarked for debt servicing. If it is not forthcoming the budget deficit
will be higher.
Mr Meciar's attitude to the new budget will hold the answers to some of the
questions being asked of his incoming government. Mr Moravcik says the draft
budget assumes GDP growth of 2 per cent 'at least' and inflation below 10
per cent. It also aims for a budget deficit of 2 per cent of GDP, and
unemployment of not more than 15 per cent (it is currently 14.5 per cent).
Those targets, he says, 'cannot be met without privatisation'. Mr Meciar may
be as aware of the need for a tight budget as Mr Moravcik but has so far not
committed his Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) and its allies in
parliament to supporting the planned budget.
Observers say this could be a ploy. Mr Meciar may well support the budget in
parliament, they say, and if things begin to go wrong during his
administration he can always blame 'somebody else's budget' for his
difficulties. Mr Moravcik says: 'what we have done could be undone, but
there is an element within HZDS that may not allow it.'
The next few weeks will show whether he is right.
