FT  11 JUN 94 / Books: Secret lives and private passions - Fiction
THE FOLDING STAR by Alan Hollinghurst Chatto &amp; Windus Pounds 15.99, 422
pages
Imagine a gay erotic fantasy offered on video. Could it not convincingly run
like this? Thirty three year old Edward Manners may wear spectacles and be
more than a touch overweight, but when it comes to sex the hottest guys just
cannot keep their hands off him. No wonder that when he arrives in an
ancient Flemish city to teach 17-year-old, big-bottomed blond Luc, who has
just been expelled from school after being found drinking with sailors,
Edward's thoughts soon stray from strict tutorial matters. Of course it is
not that long before he is regularly stealing Luc's Y-fronts and wearing
them as his own. And when the long delayed climax comes, his pupil gladly
ends up giving into Edward's wild desires.
This may seem a disgracefully prejudiced form of reductionism. Madame Bovary
or Anthony and Cleopatra, if stripped to their bare sexual essentials, might
be similarly made to seem derisorily crude. But Alan Hollinghurst's most
disturbing second novel, following on six years after his historic debut
with the impressive The Swimming Pool Library, seems morally vacuous in
comparison.
Its account of an obsessive, mainly unspoken passion, as filtered through
the first person narrative of Edward's highly intelligent and eloquent mind,
discloses a disquieting gulf between adult responsibility and erotic
reverie. It is as if Edward reduces people to the status of cherishable
sexual objects.
This may of course be precisely Hollinghurst's point, but in The Swimming
Pool Library its hero, the rich hedonistic lay about and lay-anything-sexy
hero, Will Beckwith is subjected to a devastating comeupence. In the novel's
process Hollinghurst sets gay English life in an early and mid-20th century
context of persecution, ostracism and furtive enjoyment and he contrasts
these periods with the early 1980s pursuit of sexual plenty, seeing it as a
joyful response to earlier repressions.
But times have horribly changed since 1983, the date in which the romping
pleasures of The Swimming Pool Library were placed. And yesterday's
freelance sexual opportunism has been qualified by Aids. Yet Hollinghurst's
hero, apart from a glancing reference to his HIV negative status and the
death of an earlier lover who had Aids, apparently inhabitants a condomless
world, the virus out of sight and mind.
Edward would justify his prying, spying obsession with Luc as the symptoms
for his love. The cliched expression of his longings indicate, however, a
considerable unease over such desires.
Nothing in the tone of the narrator's pedantic and pomped-up voice suggests
more than the spur of thoroughgoing lust in pursuit of its objects.
Buildings and places, to which Edward's roving eye are constantly drawn,
seem far more compassionately viewed.
Hollinghurst's thematic business, despatched in what could be termed a
cliff-hanger, is not just concerned with the nuances of obsession. His
concern is with the exploration of what lies concealed or buried behind
human and pictorial facades. Edward's search for the real Luc - though that
seems pretty clear, sexually speaking - runs in parallel to his
investigation of the dead symbolist painter Edgard Orst, and a case of
homosexual concealment and betrayal when the Nazis were barbarically rampant
in Europe.
You may appreciate and succumb to Hollinghurst's artful and most eloquent
composition of a triptych of passionate concealment and secret distresses,
and the impact of revelation but I doubt that the relationship between the
parts is that luminous or significant, for at the heart of the novel with
its chilly elusive core is a strange sense of homosexuals, whether today or
in the earlier 20th century, as men in whom conscience or morality looms
small.
The first person narrative can be a form in which the author veils his own
motives and beliefs. So I cannot therefore directly accuse Hollinghurst's
novel of indicting or impugning homosexuals. But I am mightily suspicious
that he makes just such a partial and sweeping case.
