FT  14 JAN 94 / Survey of Drax - The Big Clean-up (7): Waste is recycled for
building industry - The gypsum market
At Drax, the flue gas desulphurisation (FGD) plants will leave up to 1m
tonnes a year of white powder as a byproduct. Instead of being dumped, this
waste material is about to be recycled in the form of products for the
building industry.
The byproduct of Drax, known as desulpho gypsum, will be used as a
substitute for natural gypsum, a widely occurring rock which is employed in
the manufacture of plaster and plasterboard, used for lining virtually all
internal walls and ceilings in homes and offices.
In the FGD process, a mixture of water and powdered limestone is sprayed as
a highly dense mist through which the spent gases from the generators is
forced. The spray reacts chemically with the SO and removes it from the
waste gas. Additional treatments remove impurities such as chlorides. A
liquid sludge of calcium sulphite (CaSO) is left and this is oxidised by
passing air through it to produce a water-based form of calcium sulphate
(CaSO). When this is dried, a white powder remains: gypsum.
The main use of gypsum used to be bagged plaster, which is mixed with water
and smeared on walls to form a smooth, hard skin when dried. Increasingly,
plaster is being replaced by plasterboard - a sandwich of a hardened plaster
core within two sheets of heavy grade paper - which is quicker and easier to
apply.
In 1990, British Gypsum, a subsidiary of UK-based BPB Industries, Europe's
largest plasterboard manufacturer with a turnover of Pounds 1.1bn, outbid
its two main rivals German producer Knauf and French group Lafarge - then
involved in a bitter three-way price war throughout Europe - to win
exclusive rights to gypsum from Drax.
Shortly afterwards, the company - which has approximately a 60 per cent
share of the UK plasterboard market - gained a similar concession from
Powergen's Ratcliffe-on-Soar FGD station in Nottinghamshire.
Neither BG nor National Power will say what was paid for the 15-year deal at
Drax. But the generator says it will only make a small contribution to the
Pounds 680m capital cost of the FGD plant. Mr Alan Turner, BPB chairman,
says the price will make the cost of desulpho gypsum equal on average with
extracting the natural material from BG's extensive mines at East Leake and
Barrow. Processed natural gypsum costs on average Pounds 15-Pounds 20 a
tonne - about 10 per cent of the cost of finished plasterboard.
Industry commentators say BG's motives were partly a spoiling tactic to stop
Knauf and Lafarge gaining local supplies of gypsum. Knauf and Lafarge have
to import all their raw material by ship, adding to costs. Mr Turner says
that winning both concessions was 'part of our strategy to remain the lowest
cost producer in the UK'.
Knauf, however, recently secured a deal with ICI which is building a flue
gas plant at its paint factory near the privately-owned German company's
Humberside works. This will produce gypsum by an equivalent process, which
strips toxins from the ICI factory's emissions.
Because it is a high-bulk, low-value material, transport costs are critical
to the economics of gypsum production. Road haulage costs about Pounds 5 a
tonne for each 100 miles. Rail costs are approximately half. BG could not be
luckier: East Leake, the largest of its four factories, is virtually next
door to Ratcliffe and two other plants are within easy reach of Drax.
Knauf, meanwhile says it pays about Pounds 6.50 a tonne for shipping
desulpho gypsum from Germany, while Lafarge imports quarried rock from
Spain.
Because BG has to take all the material from both stations, industry sources
say supplies may outstrip the company's demands. With Drax running at near
to full generating capacity and all six of the FGD units installed, gypsum
output will be 800,000-1.1m tonnes a year and from Ratcliffe roughly half
this range.
The amount of gypsum produced is dependent on two main factors: the
electricity output of the station and the proportion of sulphur in the coal.
National Power says it plans to run Drax at 'base load' - at or near to 24
hours a day, throughout the year - while using smaller stations
intermittently to boost the grid when national demand is highest. But the
sulphur level of the British coal it buys is relatively low, meaning less
desulphurisation will be required. Output is therefore likely to be at the
low end of the predicted range.
A tonne of gypsum is needed to produce 100 sq m of plasterboard. If the
combined output of Drax and Ratcliffe is 1.2m tonnes a year, this will be
enough to produce 120m sq m of plasterboard. Demand for boards in the UK is
forecast by NatWest Securities to grow from 150m sq m in 1994 to more than
180m in 1999.
Mr Turner says BG, which has four plants, intends to use desulpho gypsum in
a third to half of its board production and a smaller amount in its bagged
product, mixed with the ground natural rock. But if its 60 per cent of
market share remains the same, the company's sales of board will be less
than 110m sq m by the end of the decade, according to NatWest's predictions.
Even if BG decides to use 100 per cent desulpho gypsum in its boards, if
there is another deep recession in the building industry the company could
be left with very large stockpiles of gypsum on its hands. One industry
commentator suggests that BG would have to dump the material in its own used
mineshafts. But Mr Turner says BG can cope with 150m tonnes a year. The
company is developing new uses for the material, benefiting from the group's
experience in Germany where BPB has a market share of almost 50 per cent.
New uses of the material, that Mr Turner is prepared to disclose, include
ingredients in concrete flooring screeds and an additive to control the
setting time of cement. There are other, undisclosed, possibilities that
BPB's researchers are also investigating, he says.
The author is the features editor of Building magazine.
