FT  16 FEB 94 / Leading Article: Obstacles to Mideast peace
It must be tempting for world leaders, and especially President Bill
Clinton, to believe that a peace settlement in the Middle East is only a
matter of time.
The portents have been undeniably positive. The Madrid conference in October
1991 brought all the warring parties to the negotiating table on the
internationally agreed basis of UN security council resolutions 242 and 338,
which call for Israel to withdraw from the occupied territories in return
for a full peace. Then, just over five months ago, Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organisation went a step further by signing a declaration of
principles, designed to chart a course towards some form of Palestinian
self-determination.
The handshake between Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's prime minister, and Mr
Yassir Arafat, the PLO chairman, on the lawn of the White House symbolised a
widespread assumption that, whatever the subsequent setbacks, the two sides
had accepted that there was no alternative to a negotiated settlement.
The assumption may still be valid, but it would be dangerous for western
leaders to become too persuaded by symbolism when, on the ground in the
Middle East, virtually nothing has changed in the past 2 1/2 years. The
Israeli military occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip has not been
eased, Jewish settlements continue to expand, violent clashes continue, and
popular support for the peace process is being relentlessly eroded on both
sides of the divide.
No 'sacred dates'
According to the agreement signed in Washington, Israel was supposed to have
begun withdrawing its forces from Gaza and the West Bank town of Jericho on
December 13. Not only has it felt unable to do so, but Mr Rabin has chosen
to state, repeatedly, that for him there are no 'sacred dates' for
implementing the timetable set out in the Washington accord. He would prefer
a belated implementation to an accord in which there was still room for
differing interpretations, especially on any issues relating to security.
Mr Arafat, for his part, has been anxious to acquire whatever symbols he
can, however minor, to demonstrate to his critics that he remains pledged to
the goal of an independent Palestinian state. While progress has been made,
the fundamentally different objectives of the two negotiating teams, and the
deliberate ambiguities of the Washington agreement, have led to
time-consuming haggling over the smallest details, such as whether the
Palestinian flag at border crossing points should be fixed to a wall or
flown from a pole. As both sides would acknowledge, the possibilities for
further prevarication are almost endless. And with perceived prevarication
comes the suspicion that one side or the other is less fully committed to
the peace process than had been assumed.
Lost momentum
Those suspicions, particularly strongly felt in the occupied territories,
need to be urgently checked if lost momentum is to be restored. Israel,
while justifiably concerned about its security, is negotiating from a
position of considerable strength. Mr Rabin, whether he intends it or not,
is increasingly seen by Palestinian leaders as less enthusiastic about the
Washington agreement than Mr Shimon Peres, his foreign minister, who
negotiated it.
While Mr Rabin may fairly argue that it is not his role to sustain the
leader of the PLO, he must also recognise that Mr Arafat was probably the
only Palestinian who could have made the Washington agreement and, whatever
his shortcomings, the only one who is politically capable of overseeing its
implementation. Israeli leaders have only to listen to the mounting chorus
of criticism faced by Mr Arafat from within the Palestinian community to
appreciate how much more difficult it would be to negotiate a settlement
with any likely combination of successors.
President Clinton and European leaders, having welcomed Mr Arafat to their
capitals after shunning him for so long, should not repeat the mistake. Like
him or loathe him, Mr Arafat is the only Palestinian leader who might
currently be able to deliver the sort of Middle East peace they desire. A
strong word in Mr Rabin's ear would not go amiss.
