FT  11 MAY 94 / Survey of Spain (6): Hard choices on welfare - Whether the
public sector can provide all the solutions
Spain is by no means alone in the European Union in having an increasing
deficit problem, but its budget shortfall is bigger and has grown more
quickly than elsewhere, and it looks a lot tougher to control.
At the root of Spain's problem are the accelerated creation, within a short
time, of what western society understands as cradle-to-grave welfare and the
onset of the most severe economic recession in living memory, just when
social spending had reached record levels.
Between 1982 when it came to power and last year when it won a fourth
election, the governing Socialist party spent lavishly on education, health
care, pensions and unemployment benefits. Idealistic (and certainly youthful
in the early 1980s), Mr Felipe Gonzalez's cabinet set out to redress what it
perceived to be glaring social injustices.
Milestones in the welfare drive have included:
Raising the school leaving age to 16; doubling the university student
population; a big schools building programme and greatly increased budgets
for teacher training;
The extension of the health service and of pension rights to the entire
population - regardless of whether individuals had or had not paid social
security contributions;
The creation - virtually from scratch - of a nationwide unemployment benefit
scheme and enormous injections of cash to provide dole money for the
lengthening queues of job seekers.
Mr Gonzalez's governments added a social democratic spin on what was already
a drift towards greater welfare allocations in the aftermath of General
Franco's death and the restoration of democracy in Spain. All in all, social
spending has risen from 27 per cent of GDP in 1977, when Spain staged its
first free elections, to its present level of more than 50 per cent.
The government's welfare commitments hit trouble last year, when GDP shrank
by 1.1 per cent and the rising cost of social spending ran well ahead of
what proved to be sharply diminishing revenues. A planned budget deficit of
3.5 per cent of GDP for 1993 was revised upwards to 4.5 per cent and ended
up as a 7.2 per cent shortfall.
For Mr Pedro Solbes, finance minister, the time for a sombre reckoning as to
where and how can costs be contained and, if possible, reduced, is overdue.
It is a reflection of the magnitude of his task that Mr Solbes has all but
abandoned the EU's economic and monetary union convergence target of a 3 per
cent deficit in 1997 and has circulated draft documents to the cabinet
suggesting that the deficit will stand at 'about' 4 per cent by that date.
To bring the deficit down at all, let alone by three points, the government
will have to jettison much of the social democrat culture it has practised
in the past.
The Socialist party recognised as much last March, when it held its first
national congress in more than three years. It adopted a key resolution
entitled Towards a New Social Democrat Model, which asserted that free
markets and competition were no longer 'obstacles to the construction of
socialism' but 'simple data of existing reality'. The resolution said the
party had to 'abandon a culture' which was 'excessively weighted' towards
the state and which had 'the public sector providing solutions for
everything'.
The choices facing the government, as it turns such principles into
policies, are difficult - and could have unpleasant consequences. University
fees, for example, will have to be substantially increased, which may bring
students out in force on to the streets. (At present 85 per cent of the cost
of a student's education is picked up by the tax payer.)
Much more controversial is the need for a radical overhaul of the state
pension scheme. The present system, which features pensions based on 100 per
cent of average earnings during the eight years previous to retirement, is
more generous than in richer EU countries, where a lifetime's average
earnings is often the norm. More importantly, it is unsustainable.
Spending on pensions represented Pta1,596bn (Dollars 11.4bn) in 1982 and
grew to 9.8 per cent of GDP - Pta5,758bn - in 1992. There are now 5.3m
Spaniards over the age of 65 - more than double the total 30 years earlier.
In 1993 the average age of new pensioners was 63, two years below the
official retirement age, reflecting the increasing number of employees who
had opted for voluntary redundancies and early retirement.
Mr Joaquin Almunia, a former cabinet minister who now chairs a parliamentary
committee examining the future of the social security system, argues that
the mandatory retirement age of 65 for civil servants should be raised to
70; that incentives should be introduced for those who choose to continue
working after the age of 65; and that pensions themselves should be based on
a longer earnings time scale.
Unless such reforms are introduced, Spain will not be able to pay pensions
in 2025-2020 - the decade when the domestic baby boomers - there was a high
Spanish birth rate between 1955-1965 - are due to retire.
The problem is made more difficult now by the collapse of Spain's birth
rate. The fertility rate - the average number of children per woman of
child-bearing age - has dropped from 2.6 per cent in 1977 and 2.2 per cent
in 1980 to 1.2 per cent, one of the lowest in Europe.
Mr Almunia suggests that the shrinking youth population means that Spain
will have to import labour in the coming years. Spanish society will thus be
facing for the first time the problems which can accompany a large immigrant
population.
Nonetheless, the biggest immediate problems - insofar as they are most
directly responsible for the growing deficit - are the health care and, in
particular, the unemployment welfare systems. Current spending on
unemployment represents 4 per cent of GDP - one of the highest ratios in the
EU. Proportionally, Spain has by far the highest number of registered
unemployed.
The government is now reducing the number of pharmaceutical products
available free under the health care system and is negotiating lower costs
with drug producers. On the unemployment front, it is increasing its
inspections of unemployment fraud.
But tougher decisions are required. These range from deregulating the
stranglehold which pharmacies exert over the health care sector, to bringing
the spendthrift employment institute, the INEM, under direct control of the
treasury.
Along with thorough-going reforms, two things have to happen before Spain's
public finances pick themselves up off the floor. First, the economy must
recover - and recover strongly. Second, the limitations of a welfare system
must be properly understood by politicians and by voters.
