FT  02 JUL 94 / Al Fresco Living: Eating out-of-doors
Oh, the delights of eating out-of-doors] Whether it be having a drink and
snack on the patio, or heading into the hills for a full-scale picnic,
eating outdoors is a quintessential English rite, says Lucia van der Post.
From Ratty and Mole, Wind In the Willows characters, to diarist Francis
Kilvert and author Somerset Maugham, the British have always responded to
the celebratory nature of outdoor food. (Remember Ratty's sublime
incantation: 'coldtonguecold hambeefpickledgherkinssalad
frenchrollscressandwiches pottedmeatgingerbeerlemon adesodawater' which sent
Mole into ecstasies?).
In spite of often dire weather, it is a pleasure the British refuse to give
up. As Georgina Battiscombe says in her book on English picnics: 'A picnic
is the Englishman's grand gesture, his final defiance flung in the face of
fate. No climate in the world is less propitious to picnics than the climate
of England yet, with a recklessness which is almost sublime, the English
rush out of doors to eat a meal on every possible and impossible occasion.'
Quite.
Although some are satisfied with a sandwich, for others, such as the
Duchesse d'Uzes in Somerset Maugham's The Razor's Edge: 'You can't have a
picnic without pate de foie gras.'
Although one can buy sophisticated equipment for outdoor cooking, it is also
possible to improvise simple barbecues. Huck and Tom Sawyer cooked up a
memorable meal with just some broad oak or hickory leaves, a frying pan and
some freshly-caught perch.
Keith Floyd, the peripatetic chef, in his latest book Floyd on Italy
(Michael Joseph, Pounds 16.99, 191 pages), is photographed enjoying the most
delicious of all breakfasts - freshly caught lake perch, washed and gutted,
and grilled with sprigs of rosemary, lemon juice, salt and pepper with some
country bread and a glass of red wine - all done on a very simple metal grid
placed over an olive wood fire.
Certainly the best outdoor cooked food I have eaten required no elaborate
equipment at all. On a Spanish hillside a friend used local wood, thyme and
rosemary to grill fresh sardines.
Those who like the spontaneity of barbecuing need portable equipment and
should go for something simple and, obviously, not too large. Graham &amp; Green
of 7 &amp; 10 Elgin Crescent, London W11 (tel: 071-727 4594) has a very simple
galvanised tin model from Greece. It would be ideal for sausages, seafood or
small pieces of meat. It is light to move around, easy to clean and costs
just Pounds 45.95.
For those who eat outdoors at home, and are looking for an unusual piece of
barbecuing equipment, German company Heibi Birmann has produced a barbecue
which has a choice of a wok pan top, and a conventional grill. Simple to
use, it runs on charcoal but is special to look at: Pounds 660 from Harrods
of Knightsbridge, London SW1.
A much smaller table-top piece of equipment is the Chaudier, or Table Grill,
by Le Creuset, costing Pounds 69. It runs on gel fuel, which is included in
the purchase price. Replacements can be bought from Le Creuset stockists.
