FT  24 FEB 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: EU official warns of German
threat to Gatt deal
Restoration of the costly 'switchover' mechanism for European farm prices
could jeopardise the peace clause agreed in the December Gatt deal, a senior
European Commission official said yesterday.
The commission is strongly resisting German pressure to resurrect the
mechanism, part of the 'green money' system which translates Ecu-based
support prices into national currencies. With switchover, every realignment
of currencies pushes up farm prices in all member states in line with the
rise in the strongest currency, usually the D-Mark.
The German government wants the mechanism, in abeyance since last August, to
be restored to protect its farmers from losing income when the D-Mark is
revalued. The future of the farm currency system will be decided under the
German presidency of the EU in the second half of the year.
Mr Jim Cloos, chef de cabinet to Mr Rene Steichen, the agriculture
commissioner, said the cost and inflationary impact of switchover 'run
counter to the main thrust of the (common agricultural policy) reform, that
is, a reduction of production.'
'They also have a damaging effect on our competitiveness, reduce our margin
of manoeuvre as regards internal support and could impair the application of
the peace clause,' he told a conference organised by Agra Europe (London)
entitled 'Outlook '94'.
The peace clause prevents Gatt signatories from challenging each other's
agricultural systems, such as the CAP, for nine years from the start of the
deal next year.
Mr Cloos said the Gatt agreement would not require 'any significant
additional efforts' by European farmers over and above the 1992 common
agricultural policy reform, provided reform remained on track. The 'green'
currency question was one of the major threats to the reform, he said.
'It is understandable that governments want to protect their farmers from
the full thrust of currency fluctuations. It is less so to totally insulate
them from monetary realities which impose themselves on all other sectors of
the economy.'
Addressing Europe's commitments under the six-year Gatt deal, Mr Cloos said
the reduction in subsidised cereals exports to 25.9m tonnes in 2000 might
cause constraints. Projections put the exportable surplus of cereals close
to 25m tonnes at that date, he said. But this assumes 1 per cent annual
growth in yields, which some experts think is too low.
Mr Brian Gardner, managing director of EPA Associates, a Brussels-based food
consultancy, told the conference CAP reform was unlikely to reduce budgetary
expenditure, given that the profitability of most European farming depended
on continuing compensation for cuts in support prices.
'If agricultural expenditure continues to exceed the budgetary limits, there
is a likelihood that there could be a concerted attempt to cut back on the
compensatory payments in the later years of a Gatt agreement,' he said.
Mr Cloos said the Commission was investigating two payment schemes to French
pig producers, not just one, as Mrs Gillian Shephard, UK agriculture
minister, asserted earlier this week. Britain has complained about the
payments, saying they amount to unfair state aid which is damaging the UK
pig industry.
