FT  10 JUN 94 / Walker 'kept figures from manager'
A former manager of Brent Walker's film division was always denied access to
the company's accounts, in spite of his requests to see them, he told the
Old Bailey yesterday.
Mr Jonathan Davies, a prosecution witness, was giving evidence during the
trial of Mr George Walker, former chairman and chief executive of the
property and leisure group.
The prosecution alleges Mr Walker and Mr Wilfred Aquilina, the group's
former finance director, fraudulently inflated the profits of both the film
division and the Brent Walker parent company to mislead investors and
creditors.
Mr Davies, general manager of the film division, said he had expected to be
shown at least its sales, turnover, overheads and profit and loss figures.
Although he had requested these management accounts he was never allowed to
see them, he told the court.
He had a number of meetings with Mr Walker to discuss his concerns about the
film division which he thought was failing to fulfil its potential by not
acquiring enough programme material in the then burgeoning market.
Mr Walker was the 'ultimate arbiter' of what he could or could not do.
Before Mr Davies resigned in July 1986, he had been told by Mr Walker not to
conclude any contracts for the sale of film rights.
The prosecution alleges that claims that the division had sold film rights,
when the transactions were ultimately funded by Brent Walker itself, were at
the centre of the fraud.
Mr Davies resigned from Brent Walker after the appointment of Mr John
Quested as managing director of the division. This had led to a conflict of
responsibilities, he said.
The prosecution alleges that Mr Quested also conspired to falsify the Brent
Walker profits. A company he controlled, Universal Talent Management, was
one apparent buyer in the bogus film rights transactions, it claims.
Mr Walker denies the theft of Pounds 17m from Brent Walker, false accounting
and conspiring to falsify the company's accounts. Mr Aquilina denies charges
of theft, false accounting and conspiracy to falsify the accounts.
The trial continues today.
