FT  04 NOV 94 / International Bonds: Strong demand for DM300m 10-year offer
from the IADB
The euromarkets saw few issues yesterday, continuing the trend of recent
weeks.
The Inter-American Development Bank brought a DM300m 10-year deal which lead
manager Deutsche Bank Frankfurt said was launched at 2.30pm and when
syndicate broke 20 minutes later held steady at 20 basis points over the
government bond.
Deutsche also said this was the first time the IADB had brought a deal using
the fixed-price re-offer system, and the first time it had used competitive
negotiation to decide on a lead manager.
Demand was good, with 30 per cent coming from Germany, 20 per cent from
Swiss retail, 5 per cent from Asia and the rest from the UK and the Benelux
countries.
Bayerische Hypobank came with a four-year Ecu100m offering via BZW, which
followed a five-year Ecu deal last week. BZW said there had been good
demand, mostly from retail investors in Europe attracted by the name.
BZW also brought a convertible bond for Teco Electric &amp; Machinery, the
Taiwan industrial group, which came at a 3 per cent premium.
BNG came with a Ecu150m deal with a four-year maturity through SBC shortly
after the BZW deal for Bayerische Hypobank. SBC, which was yesterday named
with Goldman Sachs to handle the Republic of South Africa's global dollar
issue likely to come to market early next year, said demand for the BNG deal
was strong.
Societe General Acceptance brought a zero-coupon Dollars 250m deal with a
three-year maturity via Lehman Brothers and Societe Generale Strauss
Turnbull, which was targeted at European retail demand.
The Instituto Nacional de Industria, Spain's state-owned industrial holding
company, is poised to issue a Y30bn bond later this month, providing a
further boost to the popular yen sector.
The issue, part of a Dollars 2bn euro medium-term note programme, follows a
Dollars 150m five-year FRN offering in May and a Dollars 650m fixed-rate
issue in November.
INI, Spain's largest borrower on the euromarkets after the government, had
originally intended to raise Ecu funding but changed tack in the summer.
It expects to raise up to 70 per cent of the funds from Japanese investors
and will swap the proceeds into a range of European currencies including
pesetas.
Merrill Lynch and Banco Argentaria de Negocios, the investment bank in which
the government has a majority stake, will co-lead the issue, with Merrill as
book-runner.
Maturity is still undecided but the pricing is expected to be tight. INI
typically pays between 5 and 10 basis points more than the Kingdom of Spain
in the euromarkets, a disparity which is due to the smaller size of its
borrowing, according to officials.
Only 30 per cent of the Pta700bn debt owed by the INI holding group is held
by overseas creditors, with that percentage much smaller when all the
group's 600 companies are taken into account.
