FT  03 FEB 94 / District councils turn against Banham review
Several district councils yesterday rejected attempts by their own umbrella
organisation to organise a national lobbying campaign against Sir John
Banham's review of local government.
The Association of District Councils has urged all district councils to fax
government ministers to say that the revised review process was working and
encourage the government to stand firm.
But some refused. Mr Malcolm Fletcher, chief executive of Erewash District
Council in Derbyshire, said: 'There's a growing feeling in Derbyshire that
the review should be abandoned altogether.'
Mr Geoffrey Woods, leader of North Hertfordshire District Council, also
refused, saying that on preliminary indications his county would be best
served by the status quo.
Meanwhile Ryedale District Council announced that it would mount a court
challenge to the Local Government Commission's plans to abolish North
Yorkshire County Council and replace it with unitary authorities. Ryedale,
controlled by independents and Liberal Democrats, said it saw no need to
change the two-tier system and said the only improvements needed involved
the positioning of council offices.
Mr Ken Binks, chairman of Ryedale, said: 'Why abolish something that works,
for a vast, costly and impossible exercise of political gerrymandering?'
Opposition to the review has so far come almost exclusively from county
councils, but now Labour has demanded a Commons statement. Mr Doug
Henderson, Labour local government spokesman, said: 'The procedure has
fallen into complete chaos now and that the government have to make a
complete statement.'
Downing Street dismissed suggestions that ministers are considering ways of
modifying or abandoning the reform process. A senior government official
said Mr John Major, the prime minister, was aware of concern among Tory MPs
and councillors. But he said rumours that Mr Major had met Mr John Gummer,
environment secretary, and Mr Richard Ryder, chief whip, to discuss a
climbdown were incorrect.
