FT  03 DEC 94 / Sport: Olympic legacies - Winter Sport / How venues fare
after the Games have gone
On the eve of the 1984 Sarajevo Games, ice skaters Jayne Torvill and
Christopher Dean were preparing their 'Bolero' routine in the Zetra stadium.
Involuntarily, the British contingent assembled - skiers, bobbers,
journalists - all determined to view the UK's one world-class entry.
When they arrived, the pair virtually ignored each other. They pumped around
that empty, echoing stadium, first forward, then reverse, with the
metronomic concentration of athletes working every muscle in their body.
This was what world-class athleticism meant.
Detail followed. Who did what, where and when. Temperament flared. Small
battles over line and movement were briefly disputed then dropped, the
maternal Betty Calloway sometimes intervening, sometimes not. It was voyeur
stuff for us onlookers: an old, slightly battered 'married' relationship
going through important motions.
'We've seen what makes champions,' said Elspeth Crossley-Cooke, the British
ski team chief, and we agreed.
But today, UN armoured personnel carriers are parked where the ice-skating
rink once was. The Zetra stadium is in ruins from Serbian bombardment and
next to the ruins is a training ground that has been converted into a
cemetery.
Also ruined are the cobbled-together multi-storey flats in which the press
corps stayed. And the ski areas of Bjelasnica where Bill Johnson won the
US's first men's downhill gold, or Jahorina, the women's centre, are gun
sites used to maintain the siege of Sarajevo, with the ski lodges housing
Bosnian Serb troops.
Early this year, the Bosnian Serbs staged races in a cynical attempt at an
anniversary but no one was fooled.
Sarajevo's Olympics did present us with sporting experiences we will not
forget, but the summing-up of Juan Antonio Samaranch, president of the
International Olympic Committee - 'the best organised Games in history' -
was clearly far-fetched.
Since then, Lillehammer in Norway (this year), Albertville in France (1992),
and Calgary in Canada (1988) have found their amenities much expanded by the
wheeling and dealing of a successful bid - mostly due to television revenue,
particularly American TV proceeds.
Calgary's Dollars 309m deal with ABC for North American rights was a
watershed. The Dollars 226m share for the organisation committee - the rest
went to the IOC - was essential lubrication for start-up and running costs
for the 16-day Games. The city's acknowledged profit was Dollars 32m with
new or updated sports and civic facilities worth Dollars 400m.
The permanent additions included a new ski area based on artificial snow at
Nakiska, 90 and 70-metre ski jumps, an indoor speed skating rink, bob and
luge runs and much updated city amenities. Nakiska, however, was one of the
lesser successes. Its icy slopes, cut rather too narrowly through trees,
brought accidents.
The ABC Calgary deal, Dollars 79m more than Los Angeles received for the
1984 summer games, and Dollars 100m more than Seoul, was exceptional. The
IOC permitted the programme to be bumped up to three weekends and the number
of events was boosted from 90 to 128 with the help of three demonstration
sports - freestyle skiing, curling and short-course speed skating.
Albertville and Lillehammer retained freestyle and short-course skating,
much to British pleasure. At Lillehammer, Richard Cobbing in the skiing and
Wilf O'Reilly and Nicky Gooch in the skating, represented a challenge,
though only Gooch got as far as a medal, a bronze.
Each Winter Olympic Games organising committee must make its report at the
following event, and for Albertville its president, Jean-Claude Killy, was
pleased to report at Lillehammer a loss of only FFr280m (Pounds 35m) in a
budget of FFr3.9bn, against a huge update of Savoie facilities. New roads
and rail links, and new snow and ice amenities, benefited an area of 1,600
sq kms and 13 centres.
The athletes disliked it for its lack of Olympic feel. So did journalists,
reduced to watching most of it on television at satellite press centres. But
after early squabbles, with one resort fighting another for events and
primacy, Courchevel, Meribel, Val d'Isere, Tignes and the rest confessed it
a good thing.
Killy was at pains to point out at Lillehammer that unlike Grenoble in 1968,
which had the backing of the Gaullist government, the Savoie was a
regionally inspired Games and there would be no white elephants. After 1968,
Alpe d'Huez restored one of its sunnier ski slopes by knocking down the
bobsleigh course, while the ski jump at St Nizier was left to rot, and a
speed skating track at Grenoble closed for lack of support. The Chamrousse
ski area where Killy won his three gold medals has remained a backwater.
Albertville, in spite of Killy's word, is still not in the clear. The small
village of Brides-les-Bain, built specifically for the Games, was still
FFr200m in debt last season and local taxes have doubled.
And Val d'Isere's steep and costly downhill run on the north-east face of
Bellevarde was roundly criticised by Patrick Ortlieb, the Austrian who won
it. Built for the Olympic TV cameras, it is unlikely to be used for a major
downhill ever again. Similarly, La Plagne's FFr270m bobsleigh run serves
fewer than 200 French bobbers, and casual use can never cover its running
costs.
Lillehammer Development has the task of ensuring that the facilities
lavished on it and the neighbouring town of Hamar are now properly
exploited. 'Albertville's goal was better infrastructure. Ours concentrated
on future tourism opportunities,' said the organising committee.
Most Norwegians deemed the Games a huge success but an outlay of Pounds
750m, mostly funded by the state, has to be justified.
The skiing venues of Kvitfjell and Hafjell have newly built chalet sites
hopeful of attracting double the number of visitors by 1997. The runs are as
good as any in Norway - the Kvitfjell downhill course was rated one of the
best and fairest of recent times - and its links with Oslo should be a
travelling bonus.
Tour operator Crystal has this season introduced the resorts of Geilo and
Hemsedal, on the railway line between Oslo and Bergen, into its brochure.
Will Lillehammer be next?
John Samuel has reported on nine of the 18 Winter Olympic Games.
