FT  06 SEP 94 / Translation traps trigger diplomatic divisions
Linguistic traps are complicating the attempts of 182 countries at the Cairo
population conference to draw up a final text of United Nations policy on
population and family planning. The euphemisms, metaphors and abstractions
of the debate are proving so tricky in translation that they are triggering
serious diplomatic divisions, some delegates claim.
The Al Ahram Centre for Journalism, a research group attached to one of
Egypt's leading newspapers, has published an analysis of poor translations
in the Arabic version of the official UN text, which have potentially
inflammatory connotations in Moslem societies, it says.
The conference's emphasis on women's rights, a marked departure from
previous UN meetings which have focused on demographic projections and
contraceptive techniques, is responsible for much of the difficulty.
Arabic and Chinese translators said yesterday they were having particular
trouble with 'reproductive rights' and 'empowerment of women', the two
central principles of the draft policy document, drawn up at the UN in New
York.
'In Arabic, the closest we can get to 'empowerment' is 'enabling', but then
you have to specify what you were enabling women to do,' one translator said
 -a level of precision which the conference has not attempted.
UN translators and the Al Ahram centre both seize on 'single-parent
households' as another pitfall. According to the centre, the phrase should
have been translated as 'households which are financially supported by one
person', so that it explicitly included wives who had been divorced or
widowed. Otherwise, the phrase implies that all 'single' parents are those
who have had children outside marriage, it suggests.
The centre also criticises the way that 'breast-feeding' was translated into
Arabic using the word 'breast' instead of the term normally used, 'natural
feeding'. 'Breast', it says, has unwelcome sexual connotations which it
describes as Freudian. Chinese translators also invoke Sigmund Freud in
explaining the problems of translating 'human sensuality' from English into
Chinese. 'In Chinese this comes across as 'sexual life' ..but this does not
catch the implication in the English version that sexuality is a fundamental
characteristic of human behaviour,' one said.
UN Arabic translators also argued that delegations may be seizing on
linguistic difficulties to escape the real philosophical and political
differences between countries. The disputes 'aren't just the fault of
translations, unless the Pope has also been working from the Arabic text,'
one said, referring to the alliance of the Vatican and conservative Moslem
religious leaders on some of the conference's thorniest issues.
Cultural differences have surfaced in countries' differing reactions to the
declaration that controlling fertility is a 'right of individuals'. Several
delegates comment that the notion of 'individual rights' is drawn from the
relationship between an individual and the state in western democracies and
is foreign to many other societies.
But according to one translator, 'the debate over rights shows that the
problems are not all a matter of comprehension. People know perfectly well
what rights are, it's just a question of whether governments want to give
them to women.'
