FT  23 FEB 94 / People: Dawson to step down from F&amp;C
Foreign &amp; Colonial Management, whose funds under management have grown from
Pounds 2bn to Pounds 10.5bn in the space of five years, has looked outside
to replace its chief investment officer, Oliver Dawson, 63, who is stepping
down within nine months.
James Ogilvy, F&amp;C's chief executive, purposely employed an American firm of
headhunters to find Chilton 'Tony' Thomson who had been chief investment
officer at Bankers Trust Global Assets Investment Management.
'We needed someone who could pull the whole thing together,' Ogilvy
explains. 'We are contrarians and we are very good at stock-picking. But we
are now a very much bigger business. Without abandoning the bottom-up
approach, we need a well-structured asset-allocation strategy and hence
someone with slightly different qualifications from Oliver.'
F&amp;C has just appointed its first chief operating officer, which Ogilvy sees
as another reflection of the sort of infrastructure demanded by a larger
operation.
Dawson, whom Ogilvy describes as a 'brilliant academic', had been senior
partner of Buckmaster &amp; Moore before joining F&amp;C in 1980. He stepped down as
chairman of F&amp;C Management in October 1992. He will however continue, pro
tem, to manage the roughly Pounds 600m of funds under management from some
Cambridge colleges, business that he brought with him to F&amp;C.
Thomson, a 51-year-old American who has lived in the UK for many years and
is married to an Englishwoman, had worked on the asset management side at
Morgan Guaranty and American Express before joining Gartmore in 1989. He
left there for Bankers three years later.
Ogilvy defends Thomson's somewhat peripatetic career. 'His one mistake,
certainly financially, was to go to Bankers.' While Gartmore has in the
meantime been floated, Bankers decided recently to try and pull its
international investment management business back to the US. Thomson was
offered the chance to move to New York.
F&amp;C, Britain's oldest investment trust, has 16 nationalities on the staff -
'mostly on the emerging markets side', according to Ogilvy  - but Thomson
will be only the second American. (See Observer)
