FT  30 NOV 94 / Yeltsin issues ultimatum to Chechnya: Russian leader
threatens breakaway Caucasian republic as civil war intensifies
The Russian authorities yesterday sharply raised the stakes in the civil war
in the north Caucasian republic of Chechnya - which has broken away from
Russia - by threatening to use 'all means at the disposal of the state' to
quell the conflict if the republic's government did not disband its forces,
hand over all weapons and release Russian prisoners.
President Boris Yeltsin said yesterday the hope of an independent solution
had been exhausted. He gave the Chechen authorities until 6am tomorrow to
comply with the conditions.
In an interview with the RIA Novosti news agency, President Dzhokar Dudayev
of Chechnya - who has claimed independent status for the republic since the
end of 1991 - said the conflict which brought opposition forces to the doors
of his palace in the capital, Grozny, on Sunday had been quelled. He said
that no 'repressive action' would be taken against Russian soldiers captured
in the fighting - which Chechen sources put at 70 but which independent
sources say number no more than 12.
The Chechen authorities have claimed that Russia is supplying weapons and
men to the opposition forces, one of whose leaders is Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov,
former speaker of the Russian Supreme Soviet until its suppression by
President Yeltsin last October.
President Dudayev said that there were no forces to disband - but that
'there is only the people with weapons, and only the people can give an
answer to Yeltsin's statement'. The Chechen foreign minister, Mr Shamsedin
Yusef, rubbed the point home by saying: 'Moscow is nobody now, but it wants
to have another Afghanistan ..I think Yeltsin was drunk when he said this.'
However, most of the signs pointed to a cautious policy on Russia's part.
Though General Pavel Grachev, the defence minister, said Grozny could be
taken 'by a battalion of parachutists', he added that a solution should be
found through negotiation. The Interfax news agency, citing 'reliable
sources' in the defence ministry, reported that no troops were being sent to
the area.
Western diplomats in Moscow say any Russian move against General Dudayev,
long a thorn in the Russian flesh, would not attract any international
condemnation unless it was attended by atrocities or was of long duration.
They also do not believe it would have immediate consequences in other
Caucasian republics - except possibly in the Abkhazian region of Georgia,
where Russian units are already engaged in controlling a ceasefire and the
return of refugees.
