FT  04 OCT 94 / Survey of World Car Industry (1): Car producers race for
global presence - Kevin Done finds that, as the existing order begins to
disintegrate, vehicle producers are being forced to embark on radical
restructuring of their operations
The US will overtake Japan this year to become the world's top vehicle
producing nation for the first time since 1979. The existing order is
changing rapidly, and the world's carmakers are having to cope with an era
of unprecedented upheaval, as the auto industry becomes a truly global
business.
Japanese vehicle output has declined under the impact of three successive
years of recession in the domestic market, falling from 13.5m in 1990 to
11.2m last year.
At the same time US production has grown from 8.8m in 1991 to 10.9m last
year in response to the strong recovery in North American new vehicle
demand. The diverging trends have continued this year.
Alongside the changing fortunes of the two leading producing countries,
however, another important development is taking place.
Japanese vehicle manufacturers have transferred more and more production out
of Japan during the past decade, first to North America, and more recently
to Europe and to south-east Asia, contributing to a significant shift of
production capacity. The new ascendancy of the US as a vehicle production
force owes much to the Japanese vehicle makers themselves.
The Big Three US car producers General Motors, Ford and Chrysler have
themselves restructured in drastic fashion in recent years to regain world
competitiveness. Their fortunes have revived, but their domestic hegemony is
under challenge. About 15 per cent of US vehicle production is now coming
from Japanese carmakers' plants (either wholly-owned or in joint ventures)
compared with none little more than a decade ago.
Japanese carmakers now operate 11 assembly plants and three engine plants in
North America. Honda is one of the main US car exporters. Since the early
1980s the Japanese have built in the US an auto industry larger than that of
Britain Italy or Spain and almost the size of the French industry. Similar
developments are under way in Europe. Japanese producers currently account
for about a quarter of UK car production. Last year Nissan became the
leading UK car exporter.
Economic pressures and the appreciation of the yen are hastening the
Japanese expansion overseas, and in recent weeks both Toyota and Honda have
announced plans to expand further their production bases in North America.
Honda is increasing its car assembly capacity in the US and Canada from
610,000 to 720,000 a year by 1997, and it will begin assembly in Mexico next
year. It is planning to increase its exports from the US and Canada to more
than 150,000 a year by 1999.
It is already unchallenged as the leading US car exporter to Japan, selling
four times more US-built cars in Japan than its nearest American rival, GM,
in the first seven months this year. Honda does not disclose the cost
differences between its Japanese and its US-built cars, but it admitted
recently that 'at the current exchange rate the North American vehicles are
far more profitable'.
The race for global scale in the auto industry has been engaged in earnest,
and the challenge is eliciting dynamic and surprising responses, that are
breaking accepted moulds in the world industry.
Ford, the world's second largest vehicle maker, has embarked this year on a
sweeping restructuring of its global organisation in the most radical
shake-up in its 91-year history. By the end of December it plans to have
merged its European and North American automotive operations and its
automotive components group into a single operating unit, Ford Automotive
Operations.
The restructuring is aimed at optimising Ford's resources, at eliminating
the duplication of effort in Europe and in North America and at preparing
for future growth. The group is seeking to achieve 'the lowest possible
coefficient of bureaucratic drag,' says Alex Trotman, Ford chairman and
chief executive. He claims that the simplification of engineering,
purchasing, and technical and other processes will substantially reduce
operating costs and could lead to savings of at least Dollars 2bn-Dollars
3bn a year by the end of the decade.
The Volkswagen group, Europe's biggest vehicle maker, is also going through
corporate turmoil, as it seeks to staunch record losses and to shed its
unenviable position as the highest cost producer in Europe.
In a radical restructuring of its new car development and engineering
operations it is planning to reduce the number of basic chassis platforms -
from which all its car ranges are derived - from a present total of 16 to
only four by the early years of the next decade in order to cut costs and
simplify its global manufacturing activities.
The strategy will embrace all four makes in the group, Volkswagen, Audi,
Seat and Skoda, and will eventually have a big impact on its global
manufacturing operations from Germany to Spain, the Czech Republic, Brazil,
Mexico, China and South Africa.
Mercedes-Benz, perhaps the world's most prestigious maker of luxury cars,
has embarked on a fundamental re-alignment of its new product strategy. By
the late 1990s the company will have launched a range of vehicles into new
segments of the world market including a four-wheel drive sport/utility
vehicle to be assembled in a new plant in the US, a small family car, sized
between a Volkswagen Golf and a Ford Fiesta, and most surprisingly a micro
compact car, a two-seater car for urban commuting that it is developing in a
joint venture with SMH, the Swiss maker of Swatch watches.
Inevitably the restructuring in the world auto industry is also leading to
new alliances and mergers, although the progress is not always smooth.
In a further concentration of the European auto industry BMW of Germany took
over the Rover group, the leading UK vehicle maker, from British Aerospace
earlier this year in an Pounds 800m deal, which has doubled its production
volume. The much-heralded alliance of Renault, the French state-owned
carmaker, and Volvo of Sweden collapsed, however, leaving both companies to
look for other partners.
In the scramble for global position the world's leading carmakers are also
having to fight to establish a presence in the world's newly emerging
markets.
The industry is united in the view that the Asia Pacific region holds the
brightest prospects, and automotive sales in Asia (excluding Japan) are
expected to triple during the next 15 years.
According to Mr Trotman around 80 per cent of the world's population lives
outside the traditional automotive markets of west Europe, North America and
Japan, but the number of cars and trucks sold in these regions represents
only about 8 per cent of the world's total.
For a long time the US vehicle makers - as well as the Europeans - neglected
Asian markets allowing them to become largely the preserve of their Japanese
rivals, but belatedly they are seeking to regain lost ground.
General Motors of the US, the world's leading vehicle maker, for example, is
using Opel, its German subsidiary to spearhead its expansion into
international car markets outside North America and in particular into Asia.
Assembly of Opel cars began in Taiwan last year, production has started in
Indonesia this year and will begin in India in the third quarter of 1995.
The world's leading vehicle makers are queueing up to establish assembly
projects in China, where Volkswagen of Germany and the PSA Peugeot Citroen
group of France have stolen a lead. In general, the European car industry
has been far more parochial and dependent on its home market than its US and
Japanese rivals, but it, too, is now on the move with new production
projects under development in the US, Latin America and Asia.
For now, it is the Big Three US carmakers, GM, Ford and Chrysler that are
earning record profits, while their European and Japanese rivals struggle to
emerge from losses and recession. Behind the fluctuating trade cycles and
volatile financial returns, however, all three regions' carmakers are
struggling with the same issue of how to build a global presence in the
world car market.
