FT  13 AUG 94 / Railtrack prepares to bypass union: Managers may seek swift
end to dispute with direct appeal to signalling workers
Railtrack is finalising a strategy aimed at encouraging signalling staff to
defy their union's strike calls and bring a swift end to the nine-week
dispute.
Managers at the state-owned group are preparing to approach workers
individually and offer a substantial pay rise in return for accepting
flexible working practices.
The proposed shift in strategy emerged at the beginning of five days of
disruption on the rail network. Yesterday's one-day strike will be followed
by stoppages on Monday and Tuesday. Another 24-hour strike is due from noon
on Monday August 22.
Mr David Armstrong, Railtrack's industrial relations director, said
yesterday: 'The prospect of getting the RMT to make an agreement with us
while the signalling staff are still on strike is very slim indeed. Only
when the union leadership are given a clear message that the men want the
strikes to end will they return to the bargaining table.'
Mr Armstrong said he was reluctantly preparing an alternative strategy to
negotiating with the RMT which would involve putting the restructuring and
pay rise package to each individual signal worker for approval.
He would not be pressed on when the company would take such a step, but said
he thought time was 'running out fast'.
A similar strategy was adopted by British Rail in 1991 when, after failing
to secure the RMT's backing for a restructuring package for its signalling
and telecom engineers, BR went over the heads of the union and signed up 80
per cent of the workforce before the union finally agreed to accept the
deal.
Mr Armstrong said he was encouraged by the responses Railtrack had been
receiving from signalling staff on the company's telephone 'hotlines'. He
said: 'A significant number of workers want restructuring. Some would like
to take our package.'
Railtrack was not trying to precipitate a showdown with its signalling
workers, Mr Armstrong said. If they went on strike again they would not be
sacked and replaced. 'We don't want 4,500 unemployed signal staff. We want
them all back at work.'
In 1981, President Reagan was able to fire striking US civil air traffic
controllers because he could call on trained military air traffic
controllers to take over.
Such action was not possible on the British railway network, Mr Armstrong
said. It would take from eight to 13 weeks to train new signal staff and in
that time most of the network would have to be shut down.
However, he said there was no shortage of recruits willing to become signal
workers. 'We had two vacancies in the north-east recently and had over 2,000
applications,' he said.
'So much for the low pay and poor conditions of signal workers,' he added.
Railtrack will spend about Pounds 100,000 this weekend on full-page national
newspaper advertisements to make a direct appeal for public support in the
dispute.
The expense was immediately criticised by Mr Jimmy Knapp, rail union leader,
as 'a huge waste of money which would be better utilised trying to solve the
dispute'.
Earlier, Mr Knapp said that there was no need for a fresh ballot of signal
workers and accused Railtrack managers of 'sitting back in their bunker'.
Timetable for route out of an impasse, Page 7
