FT  22 JUL 94 / Israel closer to giving up Golan: Syria gets strong signals
as Christopher heads for Damascus
Israel yesterday sent further strong signals to Syria that it was preparing
Israeli public opinion for returning the occupied Golan Heights, as Mr
Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, prepared to fly to Damascus
during his current Middle East mission.
Mr Yossi Sarid, the Israeli environment minister, who has played an
important role in Arab-Israeli peace talks, said Israel would have to make a
'deep and painful' withdrawal from the Golan in return for security, peace
and normal relations.
Mr Sarid also said he believed an Israeli-Syrian declaration of principles
for peace would be concluded this year.
Mr Sarid's comments underlined the shift in Israel's negotiating position
since Mr Shimon Peres, Israeli foreign minister, said last week Israel now
recognised Syrian sovereignty over the entire strategic Heights. Mr Peres
also referred to a 1967 secret cabinet resolution calling for negotiations
with Syria on the basis of the international border of 1967.
Until last week Israel had refused to commit itself in public to a full
withdrawal from all the Golan land seized in the 1967 Arab-Israeli war,
although privately many senior politicians have said they fully understand
that President Hafez al-Assad of Syria would not settle for anything less.
Several Labour party politicians close to Mr Peres are now seeking to annul
the 1981 law which annexed the Golan Heights.
Mr Peres sought to reinforce overtures to Damascus yesterday during a trip
to Cairo to brief President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt on recent peace
developments. 'It is essential for Israel to have peace with Syria. . . We
cannot leave any open wounds,' he said.
Mr Christopher yesterday met Mr Yassir Arafat, Chairman of the PLO, in Gaza
to stress the importance of transparency and accountability in the release
of hundreds of millions of dollars of aid to the embryonic Palestinian
self-rule authority.
Mr Christopher's visit has been marked by a flurry of Arab-Israeli diplomacy
with meetings between Israel and Jordan before the summit on Monday in
Washington between King Hussein of Jordan and Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israeli
prime minister.
The Israeli-Jordanian meetings decided continuous bilateral negotiations
over borders, water and security in Jordan and in Israel; monthly summits at
foreign minister level; accelerated joint economic projects ahead of a
formal peace treaty and an undertaking by Jordan to prepare for the
suspension of the boycott of Israeli goods and companies.
A Riviera to replace the razor wire, Page 6
