FT  16 SEP 94 / Lloyd's pursues Names for Pounds 1.3bn of debt
Lloyd's of London yesterday unveiled details of a new tough commercial
approach designed to recover more than Pounds 1.3bn in debt owed by its
lossmaking Names, the individuals whose assets support the insurance market.
The initiative was announced last month following the news - in line with
Lloyd's three year accounting system - of losses of some Pounds 2bn for
1991, the fourth successive year of loss.
A new financial recovery department will handle negotiations with more than
14,000 Names who owe money. Names unable to pay their debts will still be
offered financial support by Lloyd's, under so-called hardship arrangements.
But the hardship committee, chaired by Lady Archer, is to be abolished at
the end of the year and its functions assumed by the new department. Under
hardship, Names who could otherwise face bankruptcy resign from the market
but are allowed to retain a modest home (valued up to about Pounds 150,000
in London) and an income, typically in the region of some Pounds 17,500 a
year for a couple.
Although the market is now trading profitably, losses since 1988 amount to
more than Pounds 7bn.
'Lloyd's duty to all its members, especially to those who have promptly
settled their debts, is fairly but firmly to pursue those who have not,'
said Mr David Rowland, chairman of Lloyd's.
Lloyd's has collected about Pounds 1bn over the past three months, mostly
from some 17,000 Names who continue to underwrite, reducing the amount of
outstanding debt from Pounds 2.3bn to Pounds 1.3bn. Separately the market
has additional declared losses of some Pounds 2bn, which Lloyd's has still
to 'call' from Names.
The new approach was condemned by lossmakers as 'a switch to pressure
tactics and deals'.
'The object is to extract as much cash from names as they can be persuaded
to part with as quickly as possible,' said Mr Christopher Stockwell,
chairman of the Lloyd's Names Associations' Working Party, an alliance of
hard-hit Names.
Mr Philip Holden, a partner with solicitors Dibb Lupton Broomhead, who will
head the financial recovery department, said Lloyd's wanted to 'open a
dialogue' with debtors and would deal on a case by case basis. The approach
would be more flexible, he hinted.
Mr Rowland said Lloyd's had had to take into account the value of some
Pounds 290m in central assets, including its headquarters, to pass one of
the annual solvency tests which assesses its ability to continue trading.
Liberty Mutual to invest in Lloyd's, Page 20
