FT  27 MAY 94 / City fears unwelcome Budget changes to dividend tax
Concern is growing in the City that unfavourable changes in dividend
taxation in the next Budget may emerge from the Treasury's review of savings
and investment.
The National Association of Pension Funds will soon send a report to Mr
Stephen Dorrell, the financial secretary to the Treasury who is conducting
the review, arguing that there is no evidence to suggest that high dividend
payouts restrict corporate investment.
Mr Dorrell said in a speech to the Confederation of British Industry council
last week that dividend payouts, which have risen substantially since 1979,
may have become too high and inflexible.
The issue was also raised in the context of this week's white paper on
competitiveness, when Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, said the new
cabinet committee on competitiveness would look closely at dividend payouts.
City analysts have already started to respond to the government's arguments.
Mr Mark Brown of Hoare Govett has published an eight-page note arguing that
excessive target rates of return - rather than high dividends - have
restricted corporate investment.
Mr Geoff Lindey, chairman of the association's investment committee, also
points out that the rise in payouts after 1979 partly reflected a response
to the lifting of dividend controls imposed in the 1970s.
Government statements on the dividend issue have increased nervousness in
the equity market when traders are already concerned about trends in
European interest rates. Any change in dividend taxation could hit income
received by pension funds, the largest group of investors in UK equities.
Mr Norman Lamont's 1993 Budget cut the rate of advance corporation tax from
25 per cent to 20 per cent which reduced the tax credit available to pension
funds and other non-taxpayers by 6.25 per cent.
Some in the City fear the next Budget might see a further cut in the credit
to, say, 15 per cent. 'When Lamont made the change, it was in the context of
a move towards a 20 per cent basic rate of income tax. Any move below 20 per
cent would be seen as a step on the road to total abolition,' said Mr Adrian
Cooper, UK economist at James Capel.
Such a move might badly affect the equity market. Mr Edmond Warner, head of
strategy and economics at Kleinwort Benson said: 'When Norman Lamont changed
dividend taxation, the market mood was positive as Britain emerged from
recession. Now the market is in a different stage, and valuations are quite
full.'
