FT  09 SEP 94 / Management: How to turn signals into knowledge
From Peter Drucker to Alvin Toffler, most western business sages have been
arguing for the past few years that information and knowledge have replaced
capital, labour and other physical resources as the key differentiators in
global competition.
In simple English, that means companies need to grow much more adept at
creating innovative products and services ahead of their rivals. To do so,
they must become better at detecting external information which is relevant
to them, and adding value to it internally. That, in turn, requires them to
become 'learning organisations'. This is a tough task for any sizeable
company, but especially for a multinational with far-flung operations around
the globe.
The trouble is that most western managers suffer from rampant confusion
about the nature of information. So they fail to use knowledge effectively,
and are wrong-footed in the market by their more aware Asian rivals.
In a brave bid to rectify this deficiency, the research arm of PE
International, a UK management consultancy, has just published a useful
report called Understanding Information*. It examines the nature of
information, the mental processes by which it develops growing levels of
meaning, and how individuals and organisations can become better at adding
commercial value to it.
The report suggests that the creation of information is sparked by a series
of raw 'signals' of various kinds, including visual, verbal and tactile
ones. This raw data is then transformed into information by being sieved
through each individual's 'mental model' - the implicit attitudes,
experience and view of the world that most people's minds take for granted.
A more conscious form of processing then establishes the significance of
that information to the individual, who acts on it accordingly. Feedback
from the results of that action then sets the learning cycle in train again.
Good users of information understand their mental models, make their
assumptions explicit, and have effective feedback and learning mechanisms,
says the report.
The problem with this picture is twofold. First, few western individuals or
organisations are as effective learners as that. Second, it assumes that
most information is either already explicit, or can quickly be made so. In a
phrase, it deals better with the way information is processed and used than
with how it is created.
For a deeper understanding of that we must turn to Ikujiro Nonaka and
Hirotaka Takeuchi, two Japanese professors who are writing a book, to be
published next year, called The Knowledge-Creating Company**.
In a fascinating preliminary paper presented this summer at an international
symposium of academics organised by the Stockholm School of Economics, the
duo argued that the global success of Japanese companies has been due, above
all, to their ability to create new knowledge, to disseminate it throughout
the organisation, and to embody it into products, services and systems.
There is a simple reason, say Nonaka and Takeuchi, why western writers and
managers tend not to address the question of how to create organisational
knowledge: that they have a deep-set view of organisations as machines for
processing existing information.
This view, argue the professors, is ingrained in a century of western
management thought. It sees knowledge as necessarily explicit - something
formal and systematic, which can be expressed in words and numbers, and
easily communicated and shared.
Japanese companies, says the duo, have a very different perception. They
recognise that the knowledge expressed in words and numbers represents only
the tip of an iceberg. They view knowledge as primarily 'tacit' - rooted
deeply in the action and experience of individuals, and not easily visible.
It is hard to express, to formalise, and to communicate.
Nonaka and Takeuchi's analysis becomes particularly helpful when, using
practical examples from Japanese industry, they distinguish between various
ways in which tacit knowledge can be mobilised.
First - and most surprising at first sight - they show that it can sometimes
be transferred between individuals without becoming explicit. Honda and
parts of Matsushita are particularly adept at doing this, they claim.
But the key to knowledge creation is the conversion of tacit knowledge into
the explicit variety. This is far from easy, given that possessors of tacit
knowledge may not always 'know what they know', so to speak. The academics
show how Canon, Honda and Matsushita accomplish this transfer process by
encouraging teams to use metaphor and analogy to loosen up their thinking.
In their discussion of how organisations can stimulate what they call a
'knowledge spiral', Nonaka and Takeuchi also draw on research within NEC,
Fuji-Xerox, Nissan and other companies. Among other points, they stress the
importance of creative chaos, or 'reflection in action'; the need for
employees to have constant access to information that may in the short term
seem redundant or irrelevant; and the importance of flat and flexible
organisation structures which foster collaboration between people of diverse
disciplines and ways of thinking.
To the western mind trained to seek maximum simplicity, this may all seem
like theoretical overload. It is not. By combining psychological analysis
with practical managerial research, the two academics paint a vivid picture
of the complexities of life inside vibrant, creative organisational systems
of the kind that more western company must become if they are to survive in
the knowledge society.
* From The IT Management Programme. fax (UK) 0784-476530.
** Oxford University Press (US).
