FT  02 NOV 94 / Islamists spurn poll offer as Algerian impasse deepens
The pledge by Algerian President Liamine Zeroual to hold presidential
elections before the end of next year was yesterday dismissed as meaningless
by Islamic fundamentalists who pledged that their battle to overthrow the
regime would continue.
General Zeroual's statement on Monday night came amid worsening violence and
just 48 hours after he had publicly acknowledged that the attempts to
conduct a dialogue with the principal opposition group, the outlawed Islamic
Salvation Front (FIS), had come to nothing.
The admission that the talks had failed was made only six weeks after Mr
Abassi Madani and Mr Ali Benhadj, the two paramount FIS leaders, were freed
from prison and put under house arrest in an attempt to improve the
atmosphere for negotiations. However, it seems that protagonists on both
sides had done all in their power to sabotage any hint of progress.
General Mohammed Lamari, described locally as a hardline 'eradicator', was
last weekend promoted to the rank of general de corps d'armee. Gen Lamari
had warned in the latest issue of the army's monthly magazine that the fight
against the 'obscurantist and retrograde forces, traitors to their nation
and Islam' would continue 'to the very end, whatever the price and
sacrifices that would have to be paid'.
Gen Zeroual meanwhile said that the FIS's Mr Madani had refused to endorse a
call to end all violence. He also claimed that Mr Benhadj had sent two
letters to his supporters since he was put under house arrest, urging them
to 'intensify their terrorist acts'. In response Mr Rabah Khabir, spokesman
of the FIS abroad, denounced the 'threats and appeals to terror' made by the
'criminal General Lamari' and advised the head of state to resign.
The stage thus appears to be set for a further twist to the spiral of
violence which, according to western and Algerian observers has, since the
elections the now banned FIS was expected to win in January 1992, cost an
estimated 30,000 lives.
Underscoring the violence, bombs exploded in two of the nation's cemeteries
yesterday which on November 1 attract thousands of Algerians who go to
honour those who died in the eight-year-long struggle against the French
army. One blast killed five children and wounded 17 people in the western
town of Mostaganem, the official news agency APS said.
In a report last week, the human rights organisation Amnesty International
accused the Algerian security forces and armed Islamic groups of behaving
with 'total disregard of international and humanitarian law.'
Torture, which had been virtually eradicated between 1989 and 1991, 'has
become widespread in police, and gendarmerie stations and military and
security centres,' said the report. Trials had been unfair at every stage of
the proceedings and violated the most fundamental requirements of
international law.
Many observers have doubted all along that a clear line could be drawn at
this stage of the confrontation between 'moderates' and 'radicals'. Even
while agreeing on the principle of free elections, FIS leaders have always
insisted that Islamic law must prevail, something which most Algerians would
probably find unacceptable.
Algeria increasingly presents to the outside world the tragic face it did in
the late 1950s - one of blood, torture and anarchy, which no rational force
within the country seems capable of ending.
Neighbouring Morocco and Tunisia are watching the mounting violence with
ill-concealed anxiety as are Spain, Italy and France. However, whatever
their political persuasion, those outside Algeria appear to have no better
idea than Algerians themselves for a solution to the turmoil.
