FT  16 SEP 94 / Opposition to nuclear treaty grows
An indefinite extension of the nuclear non-proliferation treaty, desired by
most western nations and four of the five nuclear powers, has run into
stronger-than-expected Third World opposition.
Mr Isaac Ayewah of Nigeria, chairman of a meeting in Geneva to prepare for
the NPT extension conference next spring said yesterday that a majority of
states appeared to favour only a limited extension of the treaty,
accompanied by clear moves by the five declared nuclear-weapons states
towards nuclear disarmament.
This was later refuted by Mr Thomas Graham, head of the US delegation, who
said about 60 countries were committed to making the NPT permanent while the
remainder of the treaty's 164 members had yet to make up their minds.
However, he admitted that the prospects of indefinite extension, while
'reasonably good', were 'not assured.
Among the nuclear powers the US, Russia, France and Britain support
indefinite extension. China has not declared its position.
A decision to extend the NPT requires a simple majority of treaty members
and can be taken only once. The options are an indefinite extension, or
extension for one or more fixed periods after which the treaty lapses.
The West argues that the NPT has been crucial in curbing nuclear
proliferation. Opponents of indefinite extension say the treaty unfairly
discriminates against non-nuclear weapons states and does not provide
adequate means to tackle new proliferation concerns.
Critics single out what they see as the failure of the nuclear powers to
abide by their NPT obligations to enter 'good faith' negotiations to end the
nuclear arms race and work for eventual elimination of nuclear weapons.
A number of developing nations this week called for a strengthening of the
non-proliferation regime, to include a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty
(CTBT), a prohibition on production of fissile materials for weapons
purposes and a dismantling of stockpiles, guarantees to non-nuclear weapon
states that nuclear weapons will never be used against them, and a
commitment by the nuclear powers to negotiate the elimination of nuclear
arms within a fixed time-frame.
A CTBT is being negotiated in Geneva under the auspices of the United
Nations disarmament conference, but is unlikely to be ready in time for the
NPT extension conference.
