FT  08 JUL 94 / Markets Report: No Buba rate move
The decision yesterday by the Bundesbank council to leave official German
interest rates unchanged removed another prop from beneath the US dollar,
writes Philip Gawith.
Dollar bulls had hoped that lower German rates would lend support to the US
currency, which nevertheless closed firmer in London at Y99.015 from Y98.125
and DM1.5745 from DM1.5685. In New York it ended at Y98.60 and DM1.5715.
The Bundesbank left the discount rate at 4.5 per cent and the Lombard
emergency financing rate at 6 per cent.
The market is increasingly convinced that no dollar support package will be
forthcoming, though some observers are becoming concerned that the pat
consensus is playing into the hands of the central banks.
The flip side of dollar weakness continues to be a strong D-Mark and weak
sterling. The pound fell further to DM2.4246 from DM2.4303. In Italy,
meanwhile, lira weakness persisted, the Italian currency finishing at L997.1
against the D-Mark from L995.5, amid rumours of ministers resigning.
The South African financial rand recovered some ground after the shock
resignation of Mr Derek Keys, finance minister, earlier this week. It closed
at R4.765 per dollar from R4.84.
Traders said activity in the market was fairly quiet ahead of today's US
labour market data, and the G7 summit that starts in Naples.
The main development was the persistence of the string of G7 officials
downplaying the current dollar weakness. Joining the list of those
apparently unconcerned by the dollar, or at least not expecting it to be
discussed in Naples, were Japanese and British officials, as well as Mr
Silvio Berlusconi, the Italian prime minister.
Mr Robin Marshall, chief economist at Chase Manhattan in London, commented:
'People are slowly pricing in the realisation that nothing much is coming
out of this G7 meeting. The dollar is a long way down the agenda at Naples.'
Mr Adrian Cunningham, senior international economist at UBS in London, said
this consensus 'increased the scope for the authorities to do something'.
But he said he was not convinced that the market was yet short enough (of
dollars) for intervention alone to achieve anything, or that the G7 would
provide other policy signals, such as concerted rate changes, that would
complement intervention.
'If we come in on Monday to an innocuous communique, the market will
interpret that as a signal to sell the dollar again,' said Mr Cunningham.
Some observers believe, however, that the central banks have played their
hand well this week, and thus limited the downside for the US currency.
Expectations have now been so downplayed that no action on Monday will
hardly be cause for surprise or disappointment.
On the other hand, if the G7 did come up with a policy of co-ordinated rate
moves and intervention this weekend, 'the market would be totally
shell-shocked', in the words of an economist at a leading European bank. He
said he was 'very suspicious' of the long string of officials downplaying
dollar weakness and had advised clients to cover their short dollar
positions.
Another factor becoming an issue is the strength of the D-Mark. Although the
Bundesbank's reluctance to participate in the last round of intervention to
support the dollar is a poorly kept secret, the weakness of the lira,
Swedish krona and French franc is probably starting to cause concern.
So while it may be true that DM1.57 to the dollar is probably not, in
itself, a level that need concern the authorities, the ramifications of this
may be more serious. One analyst went so far as to say that the market was
'not far from a mini-ERM crisis'.
Italian financial markets were buffeted by rumours about tensions in the
government, and market disappointment that the cabinet made no announcement
about measures to curb the budget deficit, running above 10 per cent of GDP,
with the stock of debt equivalent to 120 per cent of GDP.
Rumours of ministerial resignations were emphatically denied by Mr
Berlusconi, who is hosting the G7 summit. A cabinet official also said that
deficit projections would be available next week, after the G7 meeting.
The Swedish krona regained some ground against the D-Mark to end at
SKr4.979, from SKr5.004 on Wednesday, but Belgium, also seen as a high debt
country, saw its currency slip further to BFr20.70 from BFr20.67 per D-Mark.
In the money markets, German call money eased to about 4.84/4.95 per cent
from about 5 per cent, ahead of the Bundesbank council meeting. Money
conditions were fairly easy and some traders thought there might be a cut in
official rates.
In the UK the Bank of England supplied Pounds 724m liquidity to the money
markets after forecasting a Pounds 700m shortage. Overnight money traded
between 1 1/2 and 5 1/4 per cent.
Volumes in the futures markets were better than in recent days, with the
December Eurosterling contract trading 25,580 lots, to settle four basis
points lower at 93.63. The December Euromark contract ended at 94.95, from
94.97, on volume of 25,804 lots.
