FT  22 OCT 94 / Monuments for the millennium: We asked readers how Britain
should celebrate. Antony Thorncroft received hundreds of ideas
The Millennium Commission is seeking your ideas on how the nation can best
celebrate the end of the second millennium. The Government has set aside a
fifth of the proceeds from the national lottery - a possible Pounds 1.6bn -
to ensure the party will be worth remembering. We asked our readers to help
out the commission with suggestions.
We obviously touched a nerve - the response was tremendous, producing
hundreds of ideas. Many shared the same vision: that the money should be
devoted to nature - to more parks, trees, flowers along every highway, the
greening of the land.
Many had a more 21st-century vision, pushing for information highways,
science parks, a computer terminal for every home.
Many more wanted the money to go, not on buildings or objects, but to the
poor, in improving health care and housing estates, a view summed up by
Cessna Vaz who suggested a ticker-tape extravaganza, pouring money down on
the needy.
There was an enthusiastic lobby for a national virtual-reality centre (Sam
Briddes suggested the old Paddington goods yard as the site) to which the
whole nation could tune with their Millennium computers. Peter Howe even
suggested a virtual-reality monarch to take the strain off the Queen.
Past national celebrations have focused on buildings - the Crystal Palace in
1851, the Festival Hall a century later - but, apart from the brave idea of
a North Sea Tunnel linking eastern England to Scandinavia, there was no
great support for a 2001 monument.
+++++++ End of Leg 2 +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
Among the ideas were a gigantic national museum built of titanium ; a
matching obelisk for Cleopatra's Needle; a rocket-shaped skyscraper topped
with telescopes; and, on a humbler plane, Lt Col Colin McVean produced very
specific plans for a sundial which could be attached to existing structures
like Nelson's Column, or to village maypoles, allowing the nation to keep
time during the Third Millennium.
Some suggestions seemed rather self-serving - King's Jazz Review wanted a
traditional jazz Jazzitoria; others were universal, like RS Osmaston who
wanted every 18-year-old in 2000 to be given Pounds 1,000 if they had no
criminal record.
There were the idiosyncratic - like Andrew Seed's plea for a vast gambling
centre, a British Las Vegas sited near Manchester; plans to build a new town
that looked exactly like Elizabethan London; to dismantle hydroelectric dams
in Scotland to restore beauty to the Highlands; or allocate a Scottish
island, perhaps Arran, for the Chinese wanting to leave Hong Kong in 1996.
There was a big transport lobby, wanting cycle lanes traversing the land;
off-street parking for every vehicle; free cycles for all; bullet trains; a
Peace Ship 2000, with concert areas and exhibition space; and 2,000 barges
sailing down the Thames. It was only matched by advocates of more national
parks; lungs for cities; and banning cars.
There were supporters for exploiting the potential in hydrogen; advocates
for harnessing tidal power; for making more use of water, from the ocean
resources to reclaiming deserts. There were those who wanted a university
for the 50-plus generation and many suggestions for a grand new national
museum, perhaps a 21st-century Crystal Palace, reflecting the past but also
looking towards the future, forming the greatest scientific resource centre
in the world, or, in the words of William MacKay a 'World Millennium
University'.
For the winners I was divided by the most imaginative ideas and the most
comprehensive lists of sensible suggestions. Among the latter, John Clink
supplied 15 including such novelties as a Peace Prize for Britons and a
British attempt to capture every Guinness record; TP Butler costed a range
of ideas and came up with the wheeze of investing much of the Millennium
Fund in the stock markets and real estate of Asia so that the revenues last
for ever; while N. May was practical, with free calls to one specific number
(to a son or daugher) for over 60s; free electricity in 2000; and a birthday
present of a block of Premium Bonds for everyone, not cashable for three
years.
Among the imaginative ideas Tony Sanderson of Oxford thought big. He wanted
to recover much of the North Sea and the Wash, thus extending the land of
the nation. He also envisaged a mountain range on the Welsh borders and
ideal for skiing and walking. It would give the Midlands warmer summers. The
bulk would come from the waste of industrial cities.
But the winner is Darren Ross of Sunderland who envisages 2000 stone
monuments erected around the coastline of Britain. Not amazing in itself but
Mr Ross imagines a carving on every stone, a poem, a legend, a picture,
telling the visitor about the locality. Each stone could contain sundials,
compasses, maps, optical illusions. It could have a transmitter sending out
a poem, a song, a description. The stones should be of human height and
imaginatively carved. And at the height of the Millennial celebrations a
laser could link every stone, encasing the nation in a uniting thread of
light. It is imaginative, practical, and charming, and well worth a crate of
champagne.
