FT  09 SEP 94 / Balladur details plans for tighter defence network:
Solidarity seen with eastern states
French prime minister Edouard Balladur yesterday issued detailed proposals
for improved defence co-operation among members of the European Union, which
he also suggested should negotiate a common security doctrine with
forthcoming EU members in central Europe.
In a speech to France's Institute of Higher Defence Studies, the prime
minister said a white paper on European defence could be prepared for a
future EU summit to which leaders of central European states could be
invited. Such a white paper would be 'a first manifestation of the new
solidarity' between the EU and its eastern neighbours.
But he said existing EU states should, in any case, push on with reinforcing
co-operation within the Western European Union organisation, particularly in
planning joint operations and in developing 'a true European system' of
space-based spy satellites.
As the European state with the strongest ambition in the defence field,
France is now at the centre of a web of arrangements with different WEU
partners.
Mr Balladur cited France's joint Eurocorps with Germany, Belgium, Spain and
Luxembourg, its 'rapid reaction force' project with Italy and Spain, and its
'more embryonic' discussions with Britain on joint air force planning. But,
echoing the wider debate over EU integration, he suggested the time might
come for a WEU summit to consolidate the organisation as 'the central core'
of European defence.
In the shorter term, he called on the WEU to use its new planning cell in
Brussels to prepare for joint military-humanitarian operations more
effectively than it had done in the case of Rwanda. He also called for a
European observation satellite system, similar to the satellite photo
interpretation system the WEU had set up in Spain. France is already working
on the Helios optic and infra-red satellites with Spain and Italy, but Mr
Balladur said he was 'counting a lot' on getting German financial support.
France by itself could not maintain military technology and hardware across
the board, he told his military officers, and therefore greater
collaboration with other Europeans was essential.
There is anxiety in the French government about the UK government's imminent
choice between joining the project for a new European military transport
aircraft or sticking with Lockheed of the US to fulfil its military
transport needs.
On the problem of stemming the spread of nuclear weapons, Mr Balladur said
the United Nations Security Council should be given a more permanent and
active role in checking nuclear proliferation. He said that giving the
United Nations this role had worked well in Iraq and that North Korea showed
the need for repeated vigilance.
'We believe the Security Council should have at its direct disposal
intelligence assets and expertise concerning such weapons.' Until Europe
acquired such assets, however, they would have to come from the US.
France appears on the verge of clinching a long-awaited sale of eight fast
patrol boats to Kuwait for Dollars 280m-Dollars 470m, its first big defence
sale to the emirate since the Gulf war. It is also discussing sales of
missiles and radar.
Editorial Comment, Page 13
