FT  03 SEP 94 / Property: Dutch build to provide more room at the top -
Ronald van de Krol reports on a remarkable switch of emphasis
It is inconceivable that cities like New York, with its penthouse Central
Park properties, or London, with its Belgravia or Chelsea neighbourhoods,
would ever complain about the lack of expensive, luxury flats to house
high-earning expatriates. But Amsterdam, and the Netherlands generally, are
different. While there is still a commitment to providing affordable housing
for the lowest paid, there is also growing concern about a shortage of
properties at the upper ends of the market.
Indeed, the Dutch capital, reversing decades of emphasis on social housing,
has increasingly started to approve developers' plans for housing that are
aimed at either wealthy home-buyers or rich renters. This conversion is
remarkable, and also controversial, not least because it is taking place in
a city that remains a bastion of the Labour party in a country that is
self-consciously egalitarian.
One sign of the times is a complex of 40 apartments due to be built in the
outlying neighbourhood of Buitenveldert. The project, financed in part by
the pension fund of the Philips electronic group, is a direct result of the
financial community's drive since the late 1980s to boost Amsterdam's
standing in the international banking world.
The fear was that the city, although having plenty of handsome flats on
picturesque canals, was not really able to attract financial high-flyers to
work at Dutch banks because the housing market did not cater to their needs.
'Business people moving here from big cities like New York will not get
doormen or underground parking garages for their cars,' says Jan
Steinhauser, a former deputy director of the Dutch central bank who ran the
financial community's campaign to promote Amsterdam.
The apartment complex planned for Buitenveldert will fill that need. The
flats will also rent for Fl 5,000 (Pounds 1,550) a month, nearly 10 times
the national average.
The development is an extreme example of a much wider trend towards building
more expensive housing in the Netherlands. Even average earners are
struggling to find the next rung up on the housing ladder.
According to figures compiled by the Netherlands Estate Agents Association
(NVM), the most sought-after houses and flats are those selling for around
Fl 300,000, one or two steps up from the average home which sells for Fl
229,200. In both cases, the homes will, almost inevitably, be terraced
properties, reflecting the constraints on space in a crowded country.
With the trend towards higher housing prices almost inexorable - prices rose
by 11 per cent in the 1994 first half, prompting warnings of 'overheating' -
it might seem attractive for expatriates in the Netherlands to buy rather
than rent. This is especially true because the Dutch tax system allows
owners to deduct all mortgage interest payments from their taxable income,
with no upper limit imposed.
At the same time, property prices are relatively low, especially for
newcomers used to London or Paris. A two-bedroom, canal-side apartment right
in the centre of Amsterdam will sell for Fl 450,000 and higher, with the
price determined in part by the prestige of the canal and, crucially, on the
number of windows overlooking the water.
A two to three-window view is average, while a six-window 'frontage' will
immediately put the property into the luxurious category above Fl 600,000.
Most expatriates in the Netherlands on temporary assignments rent rather
than buy, though. 'The vast majority of people who are going to be here for
less than three or four years rent,' says Rosalind Paterson. She is the
British co-director of Formula Two Relocations in Amsterdam, which
specialises in helping to settle expatriate staff in the Netherlands.
Buying is complicated for someone new to the country, especially for
families with properties overseas, but there are exceptions. 'We had one
family recently who consciously bought for investment purposes because they
liked the Netherlands. A good rental property will always find renters,'
Paterson says.
Expatriate business people without children will often choose to live in an
Amsterdam apartment. Those with families tend to go to the 'Gooi', a wealthy
suburban belt between Amsterdam and Amersfoort; or to Wassenaar, an
exclusive suburb of The Hague which is home to many diplomats as well as to
the American School.
Although the Netherlands sounds like a country waiting for a house price
boom, there are factors weighing against speculative purchases. For one
thing, the Dutch view houses as homes, not investments, and simply will not
put themselves heavily in debt in order to get the homes of their dreams.
The advent of two-salary couples has helped to push up house prices, but
most families can still afford to buy an average home on one salary. This,
perhaps, helps to explain why the percentage of Dutch women in the work
force is nearly as low as that of Portugal and Ireland.
The one time in recent history when Dutch housing prices shot up sharply in
a speculative spiral - the late 1970s - ended badly: the second oil crisis
of 1979, and the recession of 1981, caused a severe housing slump. The burst
bubble left many owners with negative equity, and memories of this have
helped to keep a lid on any surge in prices.
Despite a tax system that is kind to owners, the division between rented and
owner-occupied accommodation is roughly 50:50. This is due partly to the
fact that the average rent is still only Fl 539 per month, although the
government is trying to nudge up rents by allowing landlords in the
controlled sector to raise them by 5 per cent a year - about double the rate
of inflation.
Social housing, provided both by municipal authorities and non-profit
housing associations, is of a high standard and its availability is not
limited to those on low wages. From time to time, calls are heard for means
testing that would encourage the better-off to move out of their rented
flats and buy, making room for others. But Dutch people who are lucky enough
to find themselves in a pleasant, rent-protected flat will not be budged.
