FT  12 JUL 94 / Survey of France (2): Up off the floor - John Ridding
reviews an economy on the mend
The French economy is on the mend.
A stream of industrial production and consumption data over the past few
months, and a 0.5 per cent increase in first quarter Gross Domestic Product,
show that recession has now been left behind. But the statistics also reveal
a pattern of hesitant recovery, struggling to find momentum.
Not surprisingly, the government has been quick to welcome the emergence of
green shoots. 'Our predictions of recovery from the beginning of the year
have been proved correct,' says one official at the economy ministry. Mr
Edmond Alphandery, the economics minister, greeted the first quarter results
with a prediction of faster growth to come.
Many private sector economists have also revised upwards their forecasts for
the French economy.
Beginning of year estimates that GDP would expand by about 1 per cent have
been edged up nearer the 2 per cent mark. Mr Bernard Godement, chief
economist at the Nomura Research Institute in Paris, is predicting growth of
1.9 per cent this year, and just under 3 per cent in 1995. Mr Alphandery has
indicated that he is likely to raise the government's own forecast from 1.4
per cent for 1994.
If there is consensus, however, that recovery is under way, there is less
agreement on the composition and quality of growth and on progress towards
resolving the structural problems of the economy. Of particular importance
are actions to reduce the budget deficit and the level of unemployment
which, at a rate of 12.7 per cent, is one of the highest among
industrialised economies.
The government has argued that recovery will be based on a rise in exports,
investment and consumption. But the economy has yet to fire on all
cylinders. 'We have moved from a phase of deterioration in the economy to
one of improvement,' says Mr Ernest Antoine Selliere, vice president of the
Patronat employers' organisation, 'but recovery is slow, partial and
fragile.'
Consumption has shown improvement, partly because of special fiscal or
budgetary incentives. In February, for example, car owners who traded in
vehicles more than 10 years old to buy new ones received FFr5,000 of
assistance from the government. Car sales boomed, providing a boost to
consumption and industrial production statistics.
Such measures are temporary and, in the case of the car bonuses, have
already weakened significantly. But further fiscal measures, such as tax
cuts which take effect in the summer, should maintain the upward trend in
spending.
So far, revival is less clear with respect to investment. Mr Jean-Francois
Mercier, economist at Salomon Bros, points out that while first quarter
growth was increased by a sharp reduction in stocks, there is still little
evidence of a substantial pick-up in new investment.
Exports, which resisted the impact of recession relatively well, have been
sluggish. 'There is some improvement in exports if you take a rolling
average,' says Ms Esther Baroudy, senior economist at Credit Lyonnais
Capital Markets. 'But at the moment we are not experiencing a strong
export-led recovery.' Economists at Insee, the French national statistics
office, report a healthy increase in export orders in the second quarter,
but the contribution to GDP growth could be offset by rising imports.
Despite such caution, there are grounds for optimism.
With unemployment expected to stabilise at its current level, and to start
falling from the end of this year, consumers will be more inclined to spend
without the carrot of government incentives.
Mr Patrick Artus, chief economist at the Caisse des Depots et Consignations,
the powerful state financial institution, argues that the strong financial
situation of the corporate sector, which is currently a significant net
lender, will help stimulate investment. For most economists, this increase
in investment spending will gather strength from the second half of this
year.
But whether France achieves a sustained recovery will depend partly on
factors outside its control, and on its own success in tackling deep-rooted
structural problems.
On the first count, the most direct effect will come from recovery in its
economic partners, and in particular from Germany, its largest trading
partner. Stronger growth across the Rhine will combine with recovery in the
US and Britain to support French exporters.
But the international environment also gives cause for concern. In
particular, the turmoil in international bond markets over the past few
months has prompted a rise in long term interest rates.
Since the beginning of this year, yields on 10-year French bonds have
climbed steadily upwards, from about 5 per cent, to breach the 7 per cent
level.
During last summer's exchange rate crisis, which shattered the narrow bands
of the European exchange rate mechanism, French monetary and economic
officials provided a stream of arguments to the effect that it is long term
interest rates, rather than the short term rates with which the markets were
then obsessed, that dictate the health of the French economy. Recent
movements on the yield curve would suggest, therefore, that there are
grounds for concern.
Mr Alphandery, along with officials from the newly independent Bank of
France, have sought to play down the threat to French growth from the bond
markets. They argue that with inflation running at a meagre annual rate of
less than 2 per cent there is little justification for the pressure on long
term yields and that the markets will stabilise. That may be true. But a
sustained rise in long term yields, combined with a fall in the dollar,
could dampen recovery.
In the longer term, it is structural considerations whichloom largest. Mr
Balladur has sought to increase the flexibility of the labour market through
measures to encourage training and reduce the costs of employment.
He has had some success. The first quarter of this year saw the first growth
in employment since 1990. But other initiatives, such as an attempt to
reduce the minimum wage for young apprentices, have been abandoned in the
face of strong protests. Without further reforms, there is a danger that the
underlying rate of unemployment will again rise through the economic cycle.
Equally important is the task of curbing the public sector deficit. Mr
Balladur's administration has set itself a five-year plan to reduce the
deficit, and so far it is on target. Mr Nicolas Sarkozy, the budget
minister, believes the central budget deficit can be brought below FFr300bn
this year, compared to the FFr317bn recorded last year.
Of greater concern, however, are the deficits on social security expenditure
and local government finance. Taking these items into account, the total
public sector deficit is equivalent to about 6 per cent of GDP.
With the approach of presidential elections, scheduled to be held next
spring, fiscal rigour may be increasingly hard to maintain. Mr Balladur says
he is committed to bringing the public finances into line - an objective
which will be facilitated by broader economic recovery. But failure to
implement structural reforms, from the labour market to the establishment of
a private pensions fund system, would mean that recovery may only mask the
economy's ills.
