FT  02 FEB 94 / Old-fashioned gala looks to the future: Broader support may
save a historic event
The survival prospects for the Durham Miners' Gala, once one of the biggest
and most evocative annual working class demonstrations, are to be thrashed
out by miners' leaders today.
The demise of the Durham coalfield, which now has no working deep mines, has
forced an examination of the future of the gala.
First held in 1871 as an act of solidarity by the Durham Miners Association,
now responsible for the welfare of retired miners and their widows, the gala
became a focal point for the Labour movement.
The roll-call of speakers at the gala includes Keir Hardie, Ramsay
MacDonald, Ernest Bevin, Clement Attlee, Aneurin Bevan and Harold Wilson.
But with the bitter 1984-85 pit strike and the rightward shift of the Labour
party, the assumption of unity between the Durham miners and the Labour
leadership has been severely shaken.
In 1988 Mr Neil Kinnock broke with tradition by becoming the first Labour
leader not to attend: since then, gala speakers have stood well to the left.
Ironically, it now looks as if the event's survival will depend on whether
the broader Labour movement will offer financial and practical support
without seeking to change the gala's political stance.
Association executive members, meeting today in Durham, are likely to decide
that this July's gala, the 110th, can go ahead only if other unions help
organise and pay for it.
Such a decision would be partly financial - the association's income has
come under pressure as a result of the pit closures, and the National Union
of Mineworkers, which organises the gala, is scaling down to only two
north-east employees. Mr Davy Guy, president of the association and of the
north-east NUM, stresses the need to appeal to a wider audience: 'To get
your message across you need a base, you need somewhere you're coming from.
That's one of the reasons for trying to extend it to the wider movement.'
However, the association is determined that the gala's leftwing radicalism,
its role as a rally for the working class and the involvement of Durham
miners must be protected. Its brass bands and banners winding through
Durham's streets are sacrosanct, too.
And, stresses Mr Guy, its political content must not be interfered with. 'We
don't want to see that tradition diluted at all.'
