FT  08 JUN 94 / Deep-sea find spotlights Cinderellas of shipping
The government came under pressure yesterday to reopen the public inquiry
into the loss of the bulk carrier Derbyshire following the discovery of
wreckage in the area where it went down.
The 189,000-tonne vessel became the largest British vessel to be lost at sea
when it sank in a typhoon off Japan in 1980 with the loss of all of its 44
crew.
Parts of a wreck have been found nearly three miles down by a survey vessel
chartered by the International Transport Workers' Federation.
Mr Jimmy Knapp, general secretary of the RMT transport union, called
yesterday for the government to hold a public inquiry and to fund the
continued search for wreckage. 'We have argued for over 13 years that our
members perished because their ship sank as a result of the vessel having
inherent structural design faults,' he said.
The transport department said it would consider any new evidence.
A public inquiry held in 1987-1988 found that the vessel had probably been
overwhelmed by the forces of nature, and that the possibility of structural
weakness was low. Families of the crew and marine experts were dissatisfied
with these findings.
The Derbyshire may have been the largest vessel of its type to sink but it
was not the only one. Dry bulk carriers have a poor safety record - at least
64 were lost between 1991 and 1993. A survey by the International
Association of Dry Cargo Shipowners published in February found that human
error was the most common cause of vessels going down.
Dry bulk carriers are the workhorses of the marine world with more than
5,000 in service carrying cargoes such as coal and ores.
They frequently receive rough treatment in harbour with heavy cargoes being
dropped into their holds and pneumatic hammers being used to clean hold
sides.
'They are the Cinderellas of the shipping industry,' said Mr Chris Horrocks,
secretary general of the International Chamber of Shipping.
'They do not carry passengers. Unlike tankers they have no major pollution
potential. It is a question of being out of sight, out of mind.'
