FT  22 OCT 94 / Israel shells guerrillas in Lebanon
Israel shelled suspected Islamic guerrilla positions in south Lebanon
yesterday after a wave of rocket attacks struck northern Israel.
Mr Uri Lubrani, Israel's co-ordinator for Lebanon, said there was no
evidence to suggest a co-ordinated military operation between Hamas, the
group responsible for Wednesday's bus bombing in Tel Aviv, and Lebanon's
Iranian-backed Hizbollah or Party of God, which sent five waves of
Soviet-made missiles into Israel. The missile attacks forced residents of
northern areas into bomb shelters. There were no reports of casualties.
Mr Lubrani said there was a union of purpose between the two groups and
Tehran to strike terror in the heart of Israel and derail efforts at Middle
East peace. 'They are a tumour - a malignant tumour - which pollutes Islam
and they are dedicated to the destruction of the peace process,' he said.
Amid escalating violence between Israel and its Islamic opponents inside and
outside the Holy Land, a senior Iranian spiritual leader said yesterday the
Hamas bus bomb which killed 21 people in Tel Aviv showed that peace pacts
between Israel and Arab leaders could not solve the Palestinian problem.
Ayatollah Ahmad Janati said peace agreements had no impact on the continuing
struggle between Israel and 'the Moslem people' and he attacked the
Palestine Liberation Organisation for arresting Hamas activists. The PLO, he
said, 'has turned into an Israeli tool to suppress the Moslems'.
In Israel signs of the deep social divisions left after this week's bus
attack were apparent as right-wing Israelis shouting 'Death to Arabs'
clashed with peace supporters holding a vigil at the site of the attack in
the commercial centre of Tel Aviv.
Police had to separate the two groups after several peace demonstrators were
beaten up.
Despite the violence Israel reaffirmed yesterday it would continue peace
talks with the PLO.
Mr Shimon Peres, the foreign minister, is to meet PLO representatives in
Cairo tomorrow. Officials said the two sides would discuss recent attacks by
Hamas guerrillas and ways to ensure progress in stalled talks over the long
delayed transfer of power from Israeli to Palestinian hands in the occupied
West Bank.
Discussions will also centre on plans to hold Palestinian elections.
The talks will be marred by Israel's closure of the Gaza Strip and West Bank
and its recent talk of tough security measures against Hamas.
While an opinion poll showed yesterday that 80 per cent of Israelis favour a
permanent closure and stringent security measures against Hamas, some
Israelis believe the government must adopt a political rather than military
strategy.
Mr Alon Ben-Meir, professor of international relations at New York
University, criticised Israel yesterday for trying to exclude Hamas from
Palestinian elections. In an article in the Jerusalem Post, Prof Ben-Meir
said Hamas represented Palestinians with genuine political grievances which
needed a political solution.
