FT  09 DEC 94 / Management: Mouthwatering multiple found in Kiev - The
challenges faced by two new business schools
Bohdan Hawrylyshyn, chairman of the board of International Management
Institute of Kiev, and Andrew Masiuk, director general, know all about
starting a business school in the old eastern bloc.
Established in 1989 as a joint venture between the then International
Management Institute in Geneva (now merged into IMD of Lausanne) and the
Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, IMI-Kiev claims to have been the first
institution in the former Soviet Union to offer an MBA based on the western
model. 'Izvestia carried an article in 1990 saying that if you want to learn
about management you need to go to Kiev,' says Hawrylyshyn, a Canadian who
is also adviser to the Ukrainian president.
Hawrylyshyn and Masiuk are in London this week, in part to try to drum up
more support from British companies and promote the attractions of Ukraine
in the wake of recent economic reforms.
Backed with Ecu2.3m (Pounds 1.8m) of grants from the European Union,
IMI-Kiev has developed consultancy links with the likes of Gaz de France,
Credit Lyonnais and General Electric of the Netherlands.
But apart from British Petroleum, which subscribed to the school's initial
Dollars 400,000 (Pounds 270,000) of capital, it has so far drawn a blank in
the UK.
Masiuk says the school 'started out very much teaching the core MBA courses
which would be found in Europe and the US' - despite the shortage of
successful new businesses as case studies it soon added sessions on local
economic developments. 'In management you need to teach what is universally
valid, what is transferable and what is culturally specific,' he adds.
Both men acknowledge the challenge of teaching management in a country such
as Ukraine, which is why only 20 per cent of the course is devoted to
knowledge transfer, 30 per cent to skills development, 'and the rest to
encouraging a new way of thinking, new values and new beliefs'. Hence the
need for external consulting partners to give students team-based
experience.
Fees at IMI-Kiev are steep by local standards but Hawrylyshyn claims
students who arrive earning Dollars 10 per month have been recruited into
jobs paying Dollars 1,000 per month - a mouthwatering multiple for western
MBAs more than happy these days to increase their market worth by 50 per
cent.
Of the 160 alumni, whose number includes Roman Shpek, the Ukrainian minister
of economics, the vast majority have stayed at home setting up new
businesses or working for foreign joint ventures.
IMI-Kiev's so far positive experience contrasts with the mostly
disappointing attempts by western business schools to export management
education to the east.
'They have mostly done virtually nothing,' scoffs Hawrylyshyn. 'Very few
people knew anything about eastern Europe, while their interest coincided
with the economic crisis and tight budgets.'
