FT  18 MAY 94 / UN agrees new Rwandan force
The United Nations security council yesterday agreed unanimously to send up
to 5,500 peace-keeping troops to Rwanda, reversing a resolution last month
that withdrew most of a UN force of little more than half that number.
But the question last night was where the bulk of the troops would come
from, since no western country, including the US, appears willing to commit
contingents.
Furthermore, diplomats acknowledged that the force was unlikely to make much
impact on what the council's resolution termed the 'mindless violence and
carnage engulfing Rwanda'.
Estimates of deaths in 10 weeks of bloody conflict between Hutu and Tutsis
range from 200,000 to as many as 1m.
The US held up a council decision until the last minute, arguing that the
parties to the conflict had indicated no readiness to call a ceasefire or
even to agree to the UN operation.
These reservations, shared by some other western members, were a clear
backlash after the experience in Somalia which has coloured the Clinton
administration's response to all subsequent UN appeals for help. However,
the US is expected to provide some logistical support for what at best is
likely to be a mostly African army.
Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN secretary general, has asked 40 African
states to provide troops. Ghana is considering whether to return 500 men it
evacuated from Rwanda last month at the height of the ethnic slaughter.
Nigeria and Tanzania are understood to have offered troops, and Senegal and
Zambia are reported to be considering whether to send soldiers.
In deference to the US, the council will review the situation in Rwanda
after the first deployment phase is completed, including sending in 150
military observers.
Pentagon specialists have warned UN officials that the organisation was
under intense scrutiny by the US Congress and that another failure, such as
that in Somalia, would severely discredit the UN as a peace-keeper.
Under an expanded mandate, the UN force must try to protect displaced
civilians at risk, including refugees and displaced persons, establish and
maintain secure humanitarian areas and secure and support relief operations.
