FT  07 MAR 94 / Survey of Azerbaijan (3): Oil and bribery lubricate the
wheels - Vitality and stagnation are the hall-mark of the post-Communist
economy
Azerbaijan looks to oil as the mainspring of its economic future and of
closer relations with the capitalist world.
In the meantime, its first post-Soviet governments have done little in the
way of economic reform. However, this has not prevented the emergence of the
liveliest trading climate on the southern fringe of the former Soviet Union,
after Kazakhstan, the economic leader in the Caucasus and Central Asia.
The people of Baku have access to a wide range of products from processed
foods to electrical appliances.
The influx has been generated by enterprising merchants who have made a
fortune exporting relatively cheap Russian or local scrap iron, rare metals
and other resources in exchange for consumer goods.
This activity has been vital in preventing Azerbaijan from slipping further
into the economic swamp that has engulfed neighbouring Armenia and Georgia.
However, although it has kept the economy ticking over, this trading has not
really altered Azerbaijan's general standard of living.
Over the last two years, the economy has contracted by 40 per cent and there
has been 1,000 per cent annual inflation. Azeri economists complain that,
while making their quick profits, businessmen have failed to start creating
the fundamental infrastructure and industrial investment that the republic
desperately needs.
'Instead of investing and waiting to earn profit after two years, they
prefer to buy junk from Tajikistan or Russia, resell it to Turkey or Iran,
and make a fortune,' said Mr Bajram Mamed Rzajev, an official in the
Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations. 'It's easy to become a Rockefeller
here.'
Most Azerbaijan officials still think in Soviet economic terms, and
President Heydar Aliev would face bureaucratic obstacles to market reforms.
In any case, the economic reforms discussed by all six governments over the
past two years have been paralysed by the six year-old war with Armenia.
A third of Azerbaijan's agricultural production - which accounts for 26 per
cent of the economy - comes from areas caught up in the fighting. In
addition, the conflict has also prevented Azerbaijan from being helped by
international institutions such as the International Monetary Fund.
Heavy industry, such as steel and oil equipment, has also been paralysed by
the rupture of trade links with other ex-Soviet nations. The 14 oil
equipment plants, for example, used to supply two-thirds of the Soviet
Union's needs.
In January, Azerbaijan's industrial output fell by 11.3 per cent compared
with a year earlier, due largely to lack of raw materials from other former
Soviet republics.
In spite of these problems, Mr Aliev has given no priority to economic
affairs. Senior positions in the taxation and foreign economic affairs
ministries remain unfilled. 'How can you leave these key ministries empty?'
asked a senior western diplomat, interviewed in Baku. 'These are vital to
the economy.'
There are many more complaints. Corruption is so common that western
diplomats and businessmen judge officials not according to whether they take
bribes but whether, having received them, they will still block necessary
market reforms or licence applications.
Another key problem, seen in other ex-Soviet republics, is the banking
sector. Although about 180 private banks are registered in Baku, corruption
and the war in Nagorno-Karabakh have rendered them ineffective for the
purposes of investment.
The banks' main function is to lend money to traders for a month so that
they can buy and sell commodities at a steep profit and repay their loans at
100 per cent interest.
'I don't think anyone here is interested in investment in any industrial
project. If they happen to be interested in long-term credit, it's probably
for trade,' said a senior western diplomat. 'Since inflation is so high,
traders are happy to pay 100 per cent interest. They would be willing to pay
several times that to get credit.'
The government has hard currency reserves, estimated at more than Dollars
300m. But it is not sure of their exact value because state enterprises are
discouraged from repatriating their profits.
The government requires 85 per cent of hard currency earned from the sale of
'strategic goods' to be surrendered to the state in exchange for the local
currency, the manat. Almost 75 per cent of all traded goods fall into this
category. When factories earn cash from exports, therefore, they often do
their utmost to bank the proceeds abroad.
Mahmud Mamedov, a dentist during Soviet times, is one of Baku's wealthiest
traders. He earned his first big money in the kind of rapid trading now
practised by many new entrepreneurs in Baku. Mr Mamedov, who sports gold
jewelry and a check sportsjacket, did so well that he now owns a bank, a
television station, a newspaper and one of Baku's top two hotels, which he
says he is refurbishing to international standards.
Mr Mamedov is scathing, sarcastic and somewhat patronising towards
government bureaucrats who he believes are mishandling the economy. But he
is a past master at dodging obstacles raised by the officials.
'You can't blame them. They lived for 70 years with the old system,' he
said. 'The ministers are accustomed only to taking bribes.  .. Until real
businessmen come to power, I don't expect a real economic plan.'
