FT  09 AUG 94 / Technology: Explosive growth in infection stalks Asia -
International Aids Conference / Paul Abrahams highlights the most recent
findings
The terrifying epidemiological context of the 10th International Conference
on Aids, which yesterday had its first full day, was set out by Michael
Merson, executive director of the World Health Organisation's global
programme on Aids.
In spite of the efforts of governments and agencies, 3m people worldwide
were infected with HIV during the last 12 months, said Merson. By
conservative estimates that makes 17m people.
Nearly 60 per cent of all infections - more than 10m - were in sub-Saharan
Africa, he said. In the Masaka district of Uganda, Aids accounts for nearly
half of all deaths. In young adults under 35, only one death in 10 is not
HIV-related.
In Asia the rate of growth of HIV prevalence was alarming, Merson said.
Since the Aids conference in Berlin last year, more than 1m people have been
infected by HIV in south and south-east Asia alone.
In Thailand, infections had increased tenfold since 1990. About 4 per cent
of all military recruits in that country are infected and 1.5 per cent of
women attending ante-natal clinics. In Chiang Rai, northern Thailand, 20 per
cent of young men and 8 per cent of women are infected.
As for the disease rather than infection, 1m cases had been reported in 190
countries. Merson said that was an underestimate. He estimated that about 4m
had developed the disease by June this year - an increase of 60 per cent on
the same period last year. He warned that the World Health Organisation
expected the cumulative total to reach 10m people by the end of the decade.
Merson warned that governments should not use costs as an excuse for
inaction. 'Implementing basic prevention programmes in Asia would cost
between Dollars 750m (Pounds 484m) and Dollars 1.5bn and could prevent 5m
infections by 2000.
'The economic benefit that could result from prevention on such a scale is
difficult to estimate, but it is massive in comparison with the investment
needed. For Thailand alone the cost of Aids and HIV will be Dollars 11bn,'
said Merson.
Public health campaigns have had an effect. In Thailand such programmes were
achieving impressive results. A sharp rise in the use of condoms had led to
a 77 per cent fall in reports of sexually transmitted disease between 1986
and 1993. Efforts in Harare, Zimbabwe's capital, had led to a 63 per cent
fall between 1990 and 1993.
With the Aids epidemic gathering pace - 10 years after the discovery of HIV
and its role in Aids - there was a rising pessimism among patients and
frustration among scientists about how to defeat the virus, said Bob Gallo
of the US National Cancer Insti-tute.
Present therapies are clearly inadequate. The difficulties of treating HIV
with anti-retrovirals, the only drugs licensed for HIV, such as Wellcome's
AZT and Bristol-Myers Squibb's ddI, were outlined by Stefano Vella of the
Instituto Superiore Di Saneta in Italy.
Vella explained the advantages of treating HIV-positive individuals before
they developed Aids symptoms. Although most infected individuals show no
symptoms, the latent disease nevertheless continues to destroy the lymph
system.
The problem, Vella explained, was that the Anglo-French Concorde study and
more recently the ACTG 019 trial showed that the long-term benefit of using
anti-retrovirals such as AZT was at best transient.
The pessimism surrounding AZT was similar to that which surrounded
streptomycin, a tuberculosis drug, in the early 1950s. One medical journal
argued that the drug was ineffective; in fact it worked but needed to be
used in combination with others.
'We are now turning to combination therapy for HIV and Aids. That is the
obvious future for treatment. It's obvious today; it wasn't a few years
ago,' Vella said.
Preliminary results from a study, called ACTG 229, showed that AZT when used
with Roche's ddC and another Roche drug Saquinavir, was more effective than
therapies using one or two drugs.
Such triple therapy should be given early, and preferably to patients who
had not had AZT before and so had not built up resistance to the drug, said
Vella. When patients had had no previous therapy, the amount of virus in the
blood fell to zero, and the patient's CD4 count - a measure of the
performance of the immune system - rose.
Most importantly, by combining the drugs there appeared to be a delay in the
ability of the virus to build up resistance to AZT and Saquinavir. Vella
stressed the data was preliminary, but encouraging.
These theories and possible treatments remain far beyond the financial means
of the vast majority of HIV-positive individuals.
An example of the plight of such people was given by Mohamed Hasan, chairman
of the Arab International Centre for Fighting Aids in Cairo.
His paper Sexual behaviour of inhabitants of cemeteries in Cairo was a model
of its kind. He interviewed 930 adolescents and young adults living in the
small cemetery courtyards of Cairo. Hasan found 42 per cent of girls were
sexually active by the age of 14. About 5 per cent were HIV-positive. For
them any progress in high-tech retrovirals announced this week will simply
be academic.
