FT  10 NOV 94 / Hanoi set for Dollars 2bn pledges in foreign aid
Vietnam is likely to receive pledges of some Dollars 2bn (Pounds 1.2bn) in
foreign aid at a donors' meeting in Paris next week and wants about Dollars
10bn by the end of the decade to fund its economic reform programme,
Vietnamese government officials and foreign donors say.
Both sides are confident the 'consultative group' of 18 countries and 15
international organisations, chaired by the World Bank on Tuesday and
Wednesday, will at least match the Dollars 1.86bn pledged at the first such
meeting last year. Japan is again expected to be the biggest bilateral
donor.
Donors are pleased by Vietnam's performance as it moves from a centrally
planned to a market economy with annual growth rates in excess of 8 per
cent, but they are also concerned by delays in implementation of aid
projects. The UN says that only an estimated Dollars 300m in aid has been
disbursed this year.
'The most important issue will be how to use ODA (official development
assistance) in Vietnam, not how to attract ODA,' said Mr Do Duc Dinh, a
Vietnamese economist.
One reason for slow disbursement is that much of the aid is directed at big
infrastructure projects involving roads and ports, for example, which take
many months to implement. Some delays are caused by a cumbersome bureaucracy
slow to adopt free market policies.
'With the actual disbursements of ODA, things are not flowing as freely as
we would have hoped,' said Mr Roy Morey, representative in Vietnam for the
UN Development Programme. 'The institutional apparatus is the same as the
country has had for 25 years, and there's a kind of lag between policy
formulation and policy implementation.'
In its latest report on Vietnam, the World Bank urges Hanoi to scrap central
control of decision making (on the grounds that this causes bottlenecks and
encourages corruption in an increasingly complex economy), by decentralising
some tax and investment decisions to local authorities.
The World Bank admits this suggestion is controversial (local Communist
party authorities in some areas are accused of rampant corruption) but
believes it would allow the government to take on its proper role of
establishing an economic framework within which individuals and companies
could work.
'Vietnam is moving from relatively easy price liberalisation to more
difficult structural reforms, such as restructuring state-owned banks,
privatising public companies, and streamlining the trade regime,' the World
Bank report says.
