FT  02 MAR 94 / EU to grow as Sweden, Finland and Austria agree entry terms
Sweden, Finland and Austria agreed terms to join the European Union
yesterday after five days and three nights of arduous talks, putting
pressure on Norway, too, to settle its negotiations.
The EU and Austria clinched a deal last night when they agreed on
restrictions on pollution-generating EU lorries using Austrian Alpine roads.
Sweden set the bandwagon rolling after all-night talks nearly collapsed at
dawn yesterday. By lunchtime the Swedes had settled, helped by strong German
pressure on its EU partners to get a deal done. Finland and Austria followed
suit with their separate agreements.
Hopes grew that Norway, which has been resisting EC access to its rich
fishing grounds, could make a final decision when EU foreign ministers meet
in Brussels next Monday.
Sweden's terms for EU membership were welcomed by the main government and
opposition parties, as well as industrial and business organisations.
'On all points the EU has taken into account our interests,' said Mr Carl
Bildt, the prime minister. Mr Ingvar Carlsson, leader of the opposition
Social Democratic party, said: 'In most areas we have reached a good or a
very good result.'
But opponents of Swedish membership, currently ahead of the Yes camp in
opinion polls, served notice they would campaign hard against joining the EU
in a referendum later this year. The accession agreement 'means we cannot
preserve our neutrality and that we accept the EU's economic policy', said
Mr Hans Lindquist, leader of the No to Europe organisation.
Mr Esko Aho, Finnish prime minister, was more restrained than Mr Bildt. He
said the deal 'is of course not such a one that we aimed at . . . but if the
details of the agreement prove to be such as we assume I do not find it
impossible to live with this agreement'. He added: 'One should not jump for
joy.'
The breakthrough came after the EU agreed to phase in Swedish contributions
to the Brussels budget. The EU raised the value of the sweeteners it offered
all four applicants from Ecu2.8bn to Ecu3.6bn (Pounds 2.8bn) over four
years, mostly to cushion the impact of the cut in applicant countries' farm
prices to EU levels.
The prospect of at least a 15-member EU depends not only on referendums in
the applicant countries but on the current 12 member states' ability to
resolve an internal row over how to adjust voting rules to accommodate the
newcomers.
EU officials said phone contacts were taking place between Chancellor Helmut
Kohl of Germany, President Francois Mitterrand of France and Mr Felipe
Gonzalez, Spanish premier, to try to resolve this dispute, which could hold
up the newcomers' planned entry next January.
In its deal, Austria got EU blessing to continue restricting EU trucks using
its Alpine passes until 2001, three years less than Vienna wanted.
But if pollution levels have not fallen then by at least 40 per cent, the
curbs will run for a further three years. By then, both sides hope much of
this traffic will have moved onto the railways - possibly assisted by EU
funding.
The European Parliament has to approve the accession treaty by May 4 to make
the 1995 entry date possible.
Cash carries the day, Page 2
Observer, Page 23
