FT  23 MAY 94 / Management (Desert Island Manager): Peter Middleton
A spell on a desert island is probably the last thing Peter Middleton, chief
executive of Lloyd's of London, needs as he battles to take the insurance
market through the worst losses of its 300-year history. But Middleton, who
last week announced losses of Pounds 2.05bn for the 1991 year, is confident
he could survive. 'I'd be all right on my own. That would not be a problem,'
says the man who once trained as a monk.
What would you need, apart from fax and telephone, to carry on your
business?
'A small alarm clock and calculator. I would want a structured programme. I
think it would be important not to let the environment let you drift into
losing discipline. I would use the telephone to conduct a series of planned
meetings during the day and the fax to systematically receive information
from the market at night. I'd need the calculator to speed up financial
analysis. I wouldn't want to work out various ratios, such as Lloyd's
expenditure as a percentage of premium income, on my fingers.'
How would you keep your sanity? What would you read?
'Given the circumstances, I would take Saul Bellow's Mr Sammler's Planet, a
novel written shortly after the successful US space mission to the moon in
1969. The inspiration of the work is a man looking at his life on earth as
if he were on another planet. On a desert island you'd clearly see your life
differently. Principia Mathematica by Bertrand Russell and Alfred Whitehead
is another possibility. I've been battling my brain with that for 30 years.'
How important would music be?
'I can't go through a day without listening to half an hour or an hour of
good music. It is the easiest way of breaking off completely from Lloyd's. I
don't have any appetite for atonal music. Mozart, which always sounds so
fresh, would be an obvious choice. If it was only one compact disc it would
be Shostakovich's 7th symphony, a great achievement of telling a story
through music.'
Which film?
'Easy choice. In the Heat of the Night, starring Rod Steiger and Sidney
Poitier. Steiger's performance and the film's exposure of racism are both
attractive features. A brilliant film. Seen it five or six times.'
What about food and drink?
'I am addicted to lemonade; drink cans of it a day. But it's not enough. So
I'd definitely go for a stock of good burgundy to accompany as large a steak
as can fit on a plate. I like an occasional glass of beer. Because I have
not got Sky TV, I sometimes find myself going to a pub to watch football.'
How would you occupy yourself?
'I would make a serious effort to keep fit (Middleton, once an Olympic-class
runner, runs three times a week). But I would need to take about 10,000
cigarettes. There is no way I would use the opportunity to give up smoking.'
Which person would you like to accompany you?
'There are two quite different approaches. One would be a historical figure.
It would have to be Napoleon. Everybody concentrates on the military aspects
and forgets that in his spare time he devised the whole of the civil code in
France. As for a living person, absolutely not a politician. I'd prefer it
to be an ordinary man or woman from a culture I knew little about, from a
remote part of China or Latin America, for example.'
