FT  26 MAR 94 / M&amp;S withholds lottery endorsement: Branson foundation must
wait until result of bidding is announced
Mr Richard Branson's Lottery Foundation has failed to win a formal
endorsement from Marks and Spencer before the winner of the race to run the
National Lottery is announced.
Mr Branson, who has launched the lottery bid with Lord Young, the former
trade and industry secretary, hoped the retail group would back the bid
because, unlike the other seven bidders, the foundation plans to hand all
the profits to charity.
When the bids were submitted in February, Mr Branson said M &amp; S was
'inclined to support' his bid and would decide in March whether to put
foundation computer terminals in its stores. This would have been a coup for
the foundation. The impression was given that M &amp; S might refuse to get
involved with other bidders.
In fact M &amp; S has decided not to endorse any bidder and will wait until the
Office of the National Lottery has chosen the winner in May. The store chain
 -which has said it is interested in the Branson/Young approach to running
the National Lottery - will then have talks with the winner to see whether
the company is interested in getting involved.
Meanwhile Rainbow, the consortium put together by Sir Patrick Sheehy,
chairman of BAT Industries, has submitted a detailed contract to the lottery
office on how its proposal would work.
Although Rainbow has bid for the main operator's licence, it intends to
subcontract the main part of the lottery - the on-line network of computer
terminals - to one of its rivals. Rainbow would concentrate on the instant
part of the lottery, the scratch cards. Sir Patrick claims more money would
be raised for good causes if there were competition between two lottery
operators with one specialising in terminals and the other on scratch cards.
Funds from the lottery will be equally divided between five 'good causes' -
the arts, charities, a millennium fund, the national heritage and sport. Mr
Peter Brooke, national heritage secretary, has said that money should be
spent mainly on capital projects.
Eight consortia have bid for the licence to run the lottery and the winner
is expected to be announced in May.
