FT  22 OCT 94 / Arts: When artistic patronage proves a good investment - A
look at the beneficial relationship between arts and sponsors
In the past year arts sponsorship has proved itself an industry with
stamina. After two decades of steady growth, with business support for the
arts expanding from around Pounds 1m a year to Pounds 64.4m in 1992-93,
there was a slump, with the recession taking its toll and cutting
expenditure by 13 per cent to Pounds 57.7m.
But in the last 12 months the industry has stabilised, at around the same
sum. Indeed so many new sponsors are applying for the Pounds 4.8m a year
available in government matching money under the Business Sponsorship
Incentive Scheme, that the Association for Business Sponsorship of the Arts,
which runs the BSIS, has been forced to cut the top-ups by around 40 per
cent, to the consternation of many arts companies and their would be
sponsors.
Companies are now much more hard-headed about their sponsorship
expenditures: they want to see results. There is little inclination to throw
Pounds 100,000 at an event and hope for the best. This applies across all
the main reasons for arts sponsorship - to support an event which offers
entertainment for existing and prospective clients, influential contacts and
opinion formers; to use the arts as part of a marketing and PR strategy, and
to give something back to the community, viewing the arts as an element in
the charity budget.
It is usually too expensive to evaluate the effects of arts sponsorship
(although one new sponsor, Clerical &amp; Medical, has done so to its own
satisfaction) but there is much less money wasted these days. Take one of
the biggest new sponsorships of the year, Allied Domecq's Pounds 3.3m
support, over three years, for the Royal Shakespeare Company.
The company's arm might originally have been twisted by the Prince of Wales,
but the link gives it access to a prestigious national company that tours
abroad - useful as Allied-Domecq goes ever more international. It offers
opportunities for entertaining both in London, at Stratford-on-Avon near its
Midlands base, and throughout the country. It provides an educational
project, which serves the company's charitable needs. It offers RSC
privileges to its workforce. And it acts directly on its customers by adding
promotions for visiting the RSC to its brands. On November 6 the RSC will be
performing a Shakespeare revue at the opening of the CBI Conference in
Birmingham. This is good for the prestige of Allied Domecq and allows the
RSC to play before an influential audience.
The two biggest sponsors in the UK, BT and Lloyds Bank, (with BT just ahead
with a Pounds 1.8m a year spend) reveal two contrasting approaches. BT
concentrates on the community. Its main commitments support drama and music
at the amateur level. It also encourages young people to get involved in the
arts and this year commissioned a new work by composer James Macmillan to be
performed by 12 leading orchestras.
Lloyds Bank, with its support for music, film and fashion, concentrates on
art forms appealing to the young, possibly potential customers. Ideally it
looks for massive television coverage of its events, most notably the Young
Musician of the Year competition, organised with the BBC.
While hospitality is still important (the Pounds 26m raised by Glyndebourne
from companies towards the Pounds 33m cost of its new auditorium proves
that) this is increasingly seen as part of the general corporate hospitality
budget. Arts sponsorship is concentrated either specifically for marketing,
or for goodwill.
Among the most effective marketing campaigns has been Beck's Beer, which
concentrates on young people by supporting avant-garde visual arts events.
Its latest has been backing the German conceptualist Rebecca Horn's shows at
the Tate and the Serpentine. Once again a special production run was
produced, with a work by the artist decorating the bottle.
On a more altruistic level, Manchester Airport has become the major sponsor
of the arts in the north of England, investing over Pounds 1.5m on such
local companies as the Halle Orchestra, the Tate at Liverpool, the Royal
Exchange Manchester and the Manchester Year of Drama. Here is a good example
of self-interested patronage, helping the arts but also raising Manchester's
profile as a travel destination.
The most encouraging features of the year have been the return of
traditional sponsors which held back during the recession, like Nat West
with its new art prize, and the penetration of the message into the regions
and down towards medium sized and small companies. Indeed the London based
companies are finding it hard to maintain their sponsorship income.
The fastest growth has been in the north, with the Halifax Building Society
and Boddingtons, the brewers, prominent new sponsors, while it is the
professions, notably solicitors, surveyors, and especially accountancy
practices, that have proved useful friends for many local arts
organisations.
One of the most satisfied accountancy sponsors of 1994 was Ernst &amp; Young,
which put Pounds 500,000 behind the Picasso exhibition at the Tate. The
publicity and entertainment spin offs exceeded its expectations and it is
quickly returning to the Tate, backing a Cezanne show there.
There is more imaginative arts sponsorship than ever before. Companies are
more inclined to offer help in kind; they are also loaning specialist staff
 -accountants, computer experts, etc - to arts organisations under schemes
like Business in the Arts; there is more interest in sponsoring the
adventurous (like Michelob's support for fringe theatre and Toshiba's Pounds
500,000 help for the ICA), or commissioning new music, new drama, new art
(although the New Contemporaries travelling art show desperately needs a
sponsor following BT's withdrawal).
It remains true that many arts directors spend time chasing up sponsors
which could be more fruitfully directed at creative work, but there have
been no indications that sponsors have ever tried to determine the artistic
programme. The relationship over the past two decades has been largely
beneficial - opening up the eyes of business to the imagination of the arts,
and teaching the arts something about commercial reality.
