FT  21 JUL 94 / International Company News: Fall of the Springer old guard -
The shake-up was dramatic. Did it come too late?
Mr Axel Springer, who in 1946 founded what was to become one of Germany's
largest publishing and newspaper houses, never had any doubts about what
editorial line his papers should take, and what they stood for.
Mr Springer, born in 1912, was a staunch defender of the reunification of
Germany; he was virulently anti-communist; he sought reconciliation between
Germans and Jews; and he was an ardent advocate of the market economy. The
decision to locate Springer's tall office block at Check Point Charlie, the
main crossing point for the divided Berlin, and to ensure it could be seen
by east Berliners, confirmed these principles.
However, he never lived to see the collapse of the Berlin Wall. He died in
1985.
The Springer group's troubles started after German reunification, which
coincided with the rapid expansion of the electronic media. The group, whose
reputation was based on its three big dailies - Die Welt, Bild, and Berliner
Morgenpost - were slow to adapt to a united Germany and the changing tastes
of consumers.
'Springer was just too slow in getting into the electronic media,' said Ms
Ute Wolf, media analyst at Deutsche Bank Research. 'They were also slow in
cost-cutting.' In fact, it wasn't until two years ago that the board finally
undertook to shed 800 of its 12,000 workforce, revamp Die Welt, and move the
paper's headquarters to Berlin.
However, the main stumbling block facing Springer was the lack of strategy,
caused largely by uncertainty on the board itself. Over the past year,
shareholders have been asked to accept no continuity in the leadership of
the group.
When Mr Gunter Wille, the chairman, died in November 1993, aged 65, he was
succeeded by Mr Gunter Prinz, 64. Then last April, it was announced that Mr
Horst Keiser, 58, would take over at yesterday's annual general meeting. He
would remain in the job for only for a short time, an then be replaced by Mr
Jurgen Richter, 52.
Yesterday's decision by the supervisory board to end the uncertainty by
promoting Mr Richter as chairman was welcomed by shareholders and analysts.
'This is a positive development,' said Mr Michael Geiger, media analyst at
NatWest Securities in London. 'Now it can work on its strategy.'
The question is who organised the 'coup' against the old guard, and what
does Mr Richter want to do with the Springer group, which is almost certain
to leave behind the traditions of Axel?
Dissatisfaction over the lack of continuity was apparent for some time,
particularly within the Springer family, which holds a 50 per cent stake.
Three of the heirs to the Springer group earlier this year published a
letter in Die Zeit weekly criticising Mr Bernhard Servatius, chairman of the
supervisory board, for what they saw as a confused strategy and the slow
implementation of decisions.
Staff at Springer yesterday said the heirs had the support of Mr Leo Kirch,
the media magnate who holds a 35 per cent stake and who, since 1956, has
built up a a vast media empire spanning film, television, print and
interests in eastern Europe. For his part, Mr Servatius supported Mrs Friede
Springer, Axel Springer's widow, who is on the supervisory board.
The internal divisions in the family and supervisory board were expected to
be papered over at yesterday's AGM. 'But suddenly, three days ago, the
supervisory board held a special meeting. They decided to replace the old
guard. They informed the management board. And that was that,' a Springer
staff member said.
Mr Richter, apparently backed by Mr Kirch, now intends to proceed with the
following strategy:
the management board will be reduced from seven to six members;
intermediate layers of decision-making will be scrapped, with the aim of
giving board members more direct responsibility for marketing and
distribution; younger staff from within the group will be promoted, to
improve morale and keep them from going outside the company. Yesterday, Mr
Klaus Leisner, 59, was dropped from the board and replaced by Mr Falk
Ettwein, 52, who will be responsible for finance. Meanwhile, Mr Rudolf
Knepper, 49, replaces Mr Hans-Joachim Marx, 63, as head of production.
Springer will also focus more on the electronic media, and look at how best
to cut the losses in its television magazines, which have not yet found
their audience, and cut Die Welt's annual losses, which exceed DM70m
(Dollars 45m).
Analysts and staff believe Mr Kirch has played a role both in the strategy
and the 'coup'. 'After all, he would like to increase his stake to 50 per
cent,' an analyst said, and this depended on whether the Springer family was
prepared to increase his stake.
Already, Mr Kirch and Springer are working closely on Sat 1, the independent
television network in which the former holds a 20 per cent stake, and the
latter, 40 per cent.
'The possibility of Kirch holding a majority stake in Sat 1 through Springer
cannot be ruled out, but it would be criticised, if not prevented, by the
authorities. We all think of Berlusconi,' another Springer staff member
said.
Whatever the outcome, yesterday's quiet revolution in Springer represents
just one of the biggest shake-ups in the German media. It also represents
the end of an era in a publishing house which prided itself on castigating
the communists and upholding conservative traditions at any opportunity.
