FT  28 JUN 94 / Survey of Computer Networking (5): Viruses are no joke -
Worries over network saboteurs - Networking allows an easier spread of
information across an organisation - unfortunately, the same principle
applies to computer viruses
Computer hackers have a powerful disguise. Forget the image of the amateur
hacker who has the habit of gazing into a screen, probing password
combinations, long after sane people have gone to bed.
Technical ability is nothing beside the rather comic image of the socially
inadequate teenager whose world revolves around intruding into computer
networks. And once the hacker is perceived as an ineffectual individual, it
follows that his activities are harmless and do not merit serious
punishment.
This failure to spot a real threat has allowed hackers, and the authors of
computer viruses, a remarkable freedom of movement. A recent DTI sponsored
survey on IT security found that viruses were responsible for 27 per cent of
security breaches in PC networks. The figure for standalone PCs, isolated
from any network, is much higher. But the potential for damage once a virus
is loose in a network is enormous.
One of the most expensive virus outbreaks infected three large networks and
over 200 personal computers. Immediate costs to the company concerned ran to
Pounds 100,000. This is not petty vandalism. But like their creators,
computer viruses still retain the air of a practical joke.
The world's largest computer company IBM uses a huge number of internal
networks. Mike Collins, UK manager for IBM local area network (Lan)
software, reports that the virus threat is taken very seriously - 'a virus
on a Lan can wreak havoc. It can lie dormant until triggered on a certain
date when it corrupts every file. It's possible to lose a whole database or
the contents of every hard disk.'
Mr Collins concedes that some lightweight hackers are just out to poke fun -
'these anorak-types are usually quite visible, but people who infiltrate a
destructive virus are perpetrating wanton vandalism when translated on to a
computer screen.'
The tacky glory of Las Vegas will witness just how far the network saboteurs
can go when the gambling resort hosts a three-day conference from July 22.
The title is 'Def Con II,' a sarcastic jibe at military systems and their
escalating scale of what are termed 'defence conditions' or 'def cons' for
short - which are states of alert. 'Def Con II' invites hackers and virus
writers from across the globe to swop ideas and lines of code. Among its
'highlights' will be an award to the winner of the Second International
Virus Writing Contest. The conference is legal under US law.
Faced with worries over serious hackers and virus writers, how can a company
secure its networks against a determined, and apparently organised, enemy?
Dr Nigel Bennee spent 11 years with Nato headquarters in The Hague. A
nuclear physicist by training, he was responsible for secure systems in a
highly sensitive environment. These days he has left the world of military
counter-measures to take up a post as director at the networking
specialists, Intelligent Networks.
Characterising his area of expertise as 'wizardry,' Bennee explains that he
'understands things from inside out' - this often means spurning the
technology-intensive approach for 'common sense tactics . . . viruses are
totally defeatable, purely by procedures. One of the best devices at your
disposal is terms-and-conditions of employment.'
Viruses are frequently transmitted via computer games, he explains. Hence a
growing number of companies regard game-playing as a sackable offence. It
sounds a draconian solution. But a sales person returning from the field
with a portable personal computer has to download sales data. If his or her
machine contains an unauthorised program, it can infect an entire company
with a destructive virus in a matter of seconds. Best practice means keeping
a strict eye on which programs are running and where they appear. The whole
point of networking is that it allows information to spread across an
organisation - unfortunately, the same principle applies to viruses.
'I've seen Flight Simulator running on a Pounds l0,000 graphics
workstation,' Bennee recalls. 'If that copy had been purchased by the
company for staff to play with, fine. If an employee brought it from home it
constitutes a danger.'
In an ideal world, companies would recognise the overpowering temptation to
indulge in high-tech games: a standalone PC, isolated from the network and
dedicated to personal software is one answer. But staff need to be fully
aware that carrying a disk across from this box to their professional system
is risky. The threat of severe disciplinary action is certainly one way to
reinforce this message.
Reflex Magnetics expanded into the business of virus protection after a
virus attack threatened its original line of duplicating computer data.
Reflex sells Disknet, a program that resides on a network and interrogates
floppy disks to ensure they have already been scanned for virus infection.
In the absence of a positive response, Disknet prevents the suspect disk
from accessing the computer's hard disk, and hence passing a virus on.
Disknet costs Pounds 5,000 to implement across a 100-user network. Reflex
sales director Andy Campbell has become increasingly concerned about the
virus threat to networks. Files are 'compressed' in order to be flashed over
a network - 'these present a problem, it's harder to identify a virus,' he
says.
Disknet spots those files on a disk that have been compressed, expands them
to their original format, and hands over to an additional tool whose name
should impress 'codeword crazy' virus authors: the tool is Thunderbyte,
developed by the Dutch systems house, Esass. It scans for the presence of a
virus.
Thunderbyte apart, Reflex technical director Dr David Aubrey-Jones knows it
takes more than a macho name-tag on a scanner to halt the flow of viruses
christened with names like 'Pathogen' or 'Ripper.'
UK authorities are applying a firm policy to help avert the virus threat.
Scotland Yard's computer crime unit has hit back, too, closing down
electronic bulletin boards that have been used to pass on details of
destructive viruses.
But the culture represented by the 'Def Con II3 event is still active. Dr
Aubrey-Jones reports that a particular CD-rom disk, containing masses of
computer data, is headed for Europe from the US.
On sale for Dollars 100, the disk contains a large catalogue of viruses for
the corporate saboteur to savour.
Thunderbyte should be busy.
