FT  12 DEC 94 / FT Guide to the Week
Monday 12
Rabin visits Tokyo
Israeli prime minister Yitzhak Rabin (left) visits Tokyo - the first visit
to Japan by an Israeli premier. While in Japan, Mr Rabin is expected to sign
two agreements: one on cultural exchanges and another on co-operation in
science and technology. The visit is expected to herald a landmark in new
relations between the two states after years when Japan took a pro-Arab line
because of its overwhelming dependence on Arab oil. On Wednesday, Mr Rabin
travels on to South Korea.
Swiss and European Commission officials begin bilateral negotiations this
morning on matters that would have been settled if the Swiss people had
agreed two years ago to join the European Economic Area.
Talks will initially focus on relatively easy issues: mutual relations in
research, public procurement and elimination of trade restrictions. But
Brussels will insist that the Swiss cut farm subsidies to European Union
levels and allow EU nationals freedom of movement in return for giving
Swissair equal access to the EU open skies. The talks are unlikely to
advance quickly.
Peace talks aimed at ending the five-year-old war in Liberia resume today in
the Ghanaian capital, Accra. In attendance are the member states
contributing to the West African peace-keeping force, Ecomog, which is
dominated by about 10,000 Nigerian troops. The August 1993 Cotonou peace
accord between the provisional government and the rebel leader Charles
Taylor failed to achieve disarmament.
A recent UN mission to the region expressed concern at the deteriorating
security in Liberia which, apart from the capital Monrovia, is in the hands
of a growing number of rival militias.
European parliament begins a plenary session in Strasbourg (to Dec 16). It
will review the results of last week's Essen summit, consider a report on
the work of the outgoing German presidency, and is expected to give its
assent to the Gatt Uruguay Round.
A ticklish issue today is the integration of Spain and Portugal into the EU
fisheries policy, as Spain is threatening to block the accession to the EU
of Austria, Finland and Sweden unless restrictions on the Spanish fleet are
lifted.
Bangkok: The United Nations International Drug Control programme sponsors a
world non-governmental organisation forum on drug demand reduction.
Holidays: Kenya, Mexico, Thailand (Constitution Day), Venezuela.
Tuesday 13
Decision on Efta's future
The future of the shrinking European Free Trade Association will be decided
by ministers in Geneva (to Dec 14). Efta will be reduced to four members -
Norway, Switzerland, Iceland and Liechtenstein - when Austria, Finland and
Sweden join the European Union in January. Switzerland is the only Efta
member outside the European Economic Area.
Islamic summit: Leaders of the 51-member Islamic Conference Organisation
meet in Casablanca for their seventh summit. The talks are likely to be
dominated by the Bosnia crisis and by the desire of many members to counter
the image in the west of Islam as a religion dominated by fudamentalists.
The issue of Jerusalem and the progress of Middle East peace talks will also
be high on the agenda.
Ethiopia's central supreme court in Addis Ababa starts the trial of leading
members of the country's former regime. Exiled ex-president Mengistu is to
be tried in absentia.
BCCI: A planned settlement for creditors of the failed Bank of Credit and
Commerce International, put forward by the liquidators Touche Ross, goes
before the courts in London. Further ratification of the deal, based on a
Dollars 1.8bn contribution from the government of Abu Dhabi, is needed in
Luxembourg and the Cayman Islands. An earlier deal fell on appeal in
Luxembourg.
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators in Cairo resume stalled talks on
arrangements for eventual Palestinian elections in Gaza and the West Bank.
The talks will centre on Palestinian demands that Israel proceed immediately
with redeployment of its troops from population centres in the West Bank.
Israel, citing security worries, has said it wants to examine whether it
would be possible to proceed with elections without large scale
redeployment.
Ireland's parliament is due to reconvene to vote on a new government. Last
week talks broke down between Fianna Fail and Labour, the outgoing coalition
partners. The most likely alternative is a coalition between Fine Gael, the
main opposition party, Labour and one of the smaller parties. If talks fail
again, Ireland will face a general election.
New Zealand's Reserve Bank is due to publish its six monthly monetary policy
statement, and most analysts expect it to be cautionary.
Saleroom: Relics of the Battle of Trafalgar are offered at Sotheby's in
London, when the Earl of Northesk sells mementoes of his ancestor, Admiral
Lord Northesk, third-in-command at the Battle. Among the items are a letter
from Lord Nelson giving Northesk the order of battle, and a gold naval
medal, one of three awarded after Trafalgar and the only one still in
private hands.
Wednesday 14
Nato mulls Bosnia options
Nato defence ministers begin a two-day meeting with the question of
contingency planning for a possible withdrawal of UN troops from Bosnia high
on the agenda. Diplomats expect US defence secretary William Perry to be
pressed hard on the question of how big a force Washington would provide in
the event that Nato has to cover UN forces during a contested pullout.
Al Gore, US vice president, visits Russia (to Dec 16) for a meeting of the
Gore Chernomyrdin Commission, the group designed to boost commercial ties
between the US and Russia. It has also become a vital back channel between
Moscow and Washington for sensitive non-commercial matters.
Belfast hosts an international investment conference, aimed at attracting
business to Northern Ireland in the wake of the paramilitary ceasefires. The
conference, to be opened by John Major, UK prime minister, and attended by
Ron Brown, US commerce secretary, is expected to be attended by about 50
foreign companies.
Sweden's prime minister, Ingvar Carlsson, starts his first visit to Finland
since returning to power in September (to Dec 15). Top of the agenda in
Helsinki will be the entry of both countries to the European Union next
year.
Germany hosts the third round of talks on the so-called stability pact, a
European Union initiative to help prospective members in eastern Europe
resolve bilateral disputes about borders and the status of ethnic
minorities.
Gatt: The French National Assembly is due to ratify the Gatt world trade
agreements on Wednesday, though the French government is still hoping that
when the European Council of Ministers comes to approve Gatt next week it
will adopt new Commission proposals to stiffen European defences against
unfair commercial practices.
London's transport:
The closing date for bids to build the Pounds 100m-Pounds 130m privately
financed extension of the Docklands Light Railway across the Thames to
south-east London. At least five consortia, some international, are likely
to submit preliminary bids. The contract is expected to be awarded next
autumn.
UK economy: Kenneth Clarke, chancellor of the exchequer, will be hoping for
good news from today's clutch of economic statistics. The headline annual
inflation rate is expected to have stuck at 2.4 per cent in November, while
unemployment is forecast to have fallen by a further 30,000.
Thursday 15
Loyalists in Ulster talks
Ulster loyalist representatives are due to open exploratory talks with
British officials in the first step towards inclusive talks with the other
constitutional parties involved in the search for a settlement.
UK by-election: Polling takes place in the constituency of Dudley West, with
the opposition Labour party hoping to take the seat from the ruling
Conservatives for the first time since 1979. At the last election, the
Conservatives had a majority of 5,789.
Sweden's Social Democratic government is due to decide whether to order the
raising of the ferry Estonia, which sank in September with the loss of more
than 900 lives. The maritime authorities say it is technically possible and
many relatives of the dead are pressing for the ship to be lifted. But the
huge cost, proposals to declare the wreck a sea grave and advice from divers
that many bodies can be recovered without a full salvage may persuade the
government not to proceed.
The Bank of France unveils monetary policy goals and targets for 1995 which
are expected to be roughly in line with those of 1994. The central bank,
which a year ago was made independent of the government in monetary policy,
has said its priority is to maintain stability of prices and of the franc.
FT Surveys: Charity Fund investment and Arab Banking.
Friday 16
Mercosur leaders convene
The four presidents of the Mercosur customs union of Brazil, Argentina,
Paraguay and Uruguay arrive in the Brazilian city of Ouro Preto for their
last meeting before the agreement comes into force on January 1.
They are likely to finalise details of the customs union, decide which
products are to be exempted from a common external tariff, and may also
discuss recruiting further members.
Greece's finance minister Alex Papadopoulos presents his 1995 budget to
parliament. Despite calls by the European Commission for revenue-
raising measures, the budget contains no new taxes. It hopes to boost
revenues almost 20 per cent through a crackdown on tax evasion by Greece's
800,000 self-employed workers.
Finland's pulp and paper industry, its biggest export earner, faces an
all-out strike unless efforts to arbitrate a settlement of the trade unions'
annual wage claim are successful.
Bank of Japan governor Yasushi Mieno retires, to be succeeded by Sakura Bank
chairman Yasuo Matsushita, who is expected to continue Mr Mieno's cautious
monetary policy.
FT Surveys: Slovak Republic and World Commercial Vehicles.
Holidays: Bahrain (National Day), Bangladesh (Victory Day), Kazakhstan
(Republic Day), South Africa (Day of the Vow).
17-18 Weekend
Gulf foreign ministers meet
Foreign ministers of the six Gulf Co-operation Council states, Saudi Arabia,
Kuwait, United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Oman and Qatar, meet in Manama,
Bahrain, on Saturday to discuss the agenda for the annual GCC heads of state
summit at the end of the month. This is likely to focus on joint security
arrangements for the Gulf.
South Africa's African National Congress, the dominant party in the
country's government of national unity, begins a five-day national
conference in Bloemfontein on Saturday. The conference, the party's first
since 1991, is expected to formulate a new set of official policies on
everything from housing to foreign affairs. Closely watched will be
elections for party officers, in particular whether incumbent
secretary-general Cyril Ramaphosa, a possible successor to President Nelson
Mandela, will stand for re-election.
Bulgaria faces early general elections on Sunday, which are expected to end
the country's political crisis. An early poll follows the refusal of the two
biggest parliamentary groups, the Socialists and the Union of Democratic
Forces, to form a government to replace the non-party cabinet of technocrats
which resigned in September. Recent opinion polls indicate that the
Socialists could emerge from the elections as the largest single party.
Compiled by Patrick Stiles and Ian Holdsworth. Fax: (+44) (0)71 873 3194.
