FT  07 JAN 94 / Costly hospital buildings braced for fatal prescription:
Alan Pike considers the difficult decisions to be taken on health provision
in London
The future of many million pounds worth of new hospital buildings is in
doubt as the government approaches final decisions on the shape of
healthcare in London.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, announced last month the first
decisions arising from the Tomlinson report into London hospital services.
Further decisions, including some of the most controversial, are expected
this month.
Substantial building work has taken place at a number of the threatened
hospitals recently, and their managers are using this as an argument against
closure.
Among the recommendations being considered by Mrs Bottomley is a proposal
from the Guy's and St Thomas' trust that it continue to use the south Thames
sites of both hospitals. The trust board was asked by the government to
consider concentrating services on a single site, but has recommended that
the best buildings on each site be retained.
If the government were to reject this recommendation, the transfer of all
services to St Thomas' - where the accident and emergency department will be
located - would mean abandoning Philip Harris House, a Pounds 140m highly
advanced specialist care centre nearing completion at Guy's.
In west central London an excess of hospital capacity has made a merger
between the Hammersmith and Charing Cross hospitals a strong possibility.
Closing Hammersmith, the likely option, would mean the loss of buildings on
which Pounds 70m has been spent in the past seven years. These include a
Pounds 14m clinical research institute funded by the Medical Research
Council which is about to open. But closure of Charing Cross, which dates
only from the 1970s, would be still more embarrassing for the government.
Closure of new buildings will generate political criticism, but could prove
cost-effective. Staff costs account for up to 80 per cent of National Health
Service expenditure, and savings from hospital closures could exceed the
cost of writing off recent building projects within a few years.
Last February the government accepted the broad recommendation of the
Tomlinson report that health provision in London should shift from hospital
to primary and community services. Since then the London Implementation
Group - a specialist team chaired by Sir Tim Chessells, former chairman of
North East Thames regional health authority - has developed detailed
proposals and tried to broker ideas for change between hospitals.
One of the difficulties it has faced, however, is that the public - and some
NHS staff - still regard healthcare in terms of particular beloved
institutions rather than services.
Mrs Bottomley has decided to close the accident and emergency department at
St Bartholomew's hospital in the City, but intends to retain University
College hospital in Euston.
University College's local health authority had wanted to transfer patients
to alternative, cheaper hospitals. But Mrs Bottomley decided that the
requirements of the prestigious University College medical school and the
need for an accident and emergency department in north central London
justified the hospital's retention. However, neither University College nor
its sister Middlesex hospital has the quality of buildings required for a
long-term future. North East Thames regional health authority has
recommended to Mrs Bottomley that University College and the nearby Great
Ormond Street children's hospital should work towards 'being on a single
site providing a range of local and specialist services'.
This could lead to University College being relocated at Great Ormond
Street. Much of the children's hospital's recent redevelopment was financed
by Pounds 54m raised from the public in the Wishing Well, one of the most
successful one-off charitable appeals ever mounted in Britain. It would take
a brave minister to decide to abandon that particular building.
