FT  25 MAY 94 / Management: When managers carry guns - Lonrho's private army
has shown how a company can protect itself in the face of war
During Mozambique's 17-year civil war, which finally ended with the signing
of a peace accord in October 1992, the toughest battalion belonged to
neither the government nor the insurgent rebel forces. Commanded by Gurkhas,
it was recruited by Roland 'Tiny' Rowland to guard Lonrho's vast cotton
estates in an even vaster and lawless land.
As Mozambique's biggest foreign investor and partner of Samora Machel's
Marxist government, Lonrho's Dollars 80m-operation (Pounds 53m) was an
obvious target for rebels.
The Mozambique National Resistance (Renamo) had already crippled much of the
economy: electricity pylons were blown up; railways sabotaged; land mines
made travel impossible along many routes; whole villages were burned and
their men marched into the bush.
With government forces fully engaged in fighting Renamo, private farmers had
no choice but to organise their own security. In the Limpopo Valley, great
triple stacks of concertina wire surrounded Lonrho's 2,000-ha cotton farm at
Chokwe. Watchtowers and tanks guarded the perimeter. The main buildings
became fortresses. 'All our managers were used to farming with a gun on
their back,' says John Hewlett, Lonrho's managing director in Mozambique.
'They were mostly Boers or white Rhodesians, and they were excellent at
their jobs.'
These battle-hardened managers were backed by a militia of 1,400 men. Every
morning, Hewlett recalls, tractors on the Chokwe estate would leave in
convoys of five, guarded by 50 militias. The farming was planned with
military precision.
Routines were changed daily to foil surprise attacks. The working parties
maintained constant radio contact with their headquarters during their
solitary expeditions into the cotton fields. Despite the war, Chokwe's
2,000ha of irrigated farmland achieved Africa's highest cotton yields in
1989: 20,000 tonnes were produced.
Lomaco, the joint-venture with the government, also became the biggest
tomato grower in the southern hemisphere. At a tremendous cost. Hewlett says
Lonrho's security outlays in Mozambique consumed 30 per cent of the
company's operating costs - about Dollars 1m a year, not counting production
losses due to sabotage.
Lonrho also operates a pipeline in Mozambique, which supplies Zimbabwe with
95 per cent of its fuel. During the war, it was guarded by Zimbabwean
troops. 'But we had the best-trained force in the country,' Hewlett says of
Lonrho's private army. 'Occasionally there were full-blown battles with
Renamo. Once 16 guerrillas were killed.'
One attack in the early 1990s, however, changed Hewlett's mind about the
feasibility of running militarised farms in a civil war. The rebels came at
dawn, 200-strong. They drove a herd of cattle towards the perimeter fence,
raising clouds of dust. A tree was hurled over the barbed wire, the cattle
surged across in a wild stampede, and the rebels charged in.
In a matter of minutes Renamo blew up Dollars 500,000 of chemicals and
irrigation pipes. Offices were torched; trucks doused with petrol. Hewlett
later found his radio operator burned to death at his station. 'I realised
then that we couldn't fight them any longer,' Hewlett recalls. 'I took
photos of all the death and destruction and showed them to Tiny at a board
meeting in London. I told him: the war has to stop.'
There are those who believe that peace would not have returned to Mozambique
had Lonrho not been involved. Rowland is credited with arranging the first
meeting between Joaquim Chissano, who became president after Samora Machel's
fatal plane crash in 1986, and Renamo leader Afonso Dhlakama. Shortly after
their talks in Gaborone, the capital of Botswana, a peace accord was signed
in Rome.
Against all expectations, the agreement has held. The country is due to hold
its first multi-party elections in October. Now that the war is over, Lonrho
is at least making money out of Renamo's attempts to transform itself into a
respectable political party. Many of Renamo's cadres are being housed in
Lonrho's Cardoso Hotel in Maputo, at the United Nations' expense.
Lonrho has also supplied Renamo with vehicles, computers and office
equipment. The company Gurkhas are being employed as sappers in another
fast-growing business: the clearance of land mines. Nobody knows how many
lie beneath Mozambique's roads and fields - estimates vary from several
hundred thousand to 2m.
Lonrho is one of the companies involved in mine clearance, and a start has
been made on routes essential to the distribution of humanitarian aid.
