FT  05 MAR 94 / Collecting: Maastricht turns up Trumps - Susan Moore looks
forward to this international fair which opens next week
Drastic changes were anticipated at this year's European Fine Art Fair at
Maastricht. The fair, which celebrates its 10th anniversary in its present
form, was to have implemented its long discussed 'rationalisation'.
Unsurprisingly, two improvements have proved too difficult to implement: the
re-organisation of the vast and labyrinthine floorplan at the Maastricht
Exhibition and Congress Centre (MECC), and a corresponding cut in the number
of stands.
'There were something like 16 proposals for different floorplans,' explains
board member Ben Janssens of London's Oriental Art Gallery. 'None met with
the exhibitors' universal approval.' So, the 'Union Jack' layout is still
with us - an ironic if unwitting motif for the town of the much maligned
treaty. As for the fair's reduction in size, it is a measure of its
commercial success that hardly any exhibitors could be persuaded to pull
out.
Happily, the reformers have made some progress in tackling the fair's one
weak line: contemporary art. No longer will one have to run the gauntlet
through a hotch-potch of dismal stands of unedifying, predominantly Dutch
contemporary art to enter the fair proper. Great effort has gone into
improving the quality of the exhibitors and the appearance of this area and,
crucially, the emphasis has moved away from contemporary art to the
established modern masters.
This year a number of leading international dealers have been lured to the
fair, largely thanks to the good offices of Leslie Waddington, who was
invited to join the Maastricht board last year. The Mayor Gallery, for
instance, from London has come with Roy Lichtenstein and Paul Delvaux;
Galerie Kaj Formsblom of Zurich has brought late Picasso and Miro and to
mark the 50th anniversary of Mondrian's death, Borzo of 's-Hertogenbosch
presents no less than 50 paintings by the Dutch master. The Marlborough
stand shows Bacon and Kokoschka; and Waddington, who was astonished by the
amount of business he did last year, offers a brutalist Appel and Dubuffet.
The improvements bode well for the fair, but Waddington believes it will
take two or three years to make Maastricht the pre-eminent modern art fair.
It is vastly to the organisers' credit - and a major factor of Maastricht's
continuing success - that it is genuinely and relentlessly self-critical.
Maastricht can also claim to be the one truly international art and antiques
fair - quite different from a national fair with a few distinguished foreign
guests to add extra cachet. The 1994 event comprises some 149 major dealers
from 10 countries. Almost half of last year's 40,000 visitors came from
outside The Netherlands.
Here, the emphasis is on content rather than presentation. The advantage
gained by low exhibiting costs is the profusion of large-scale glorious
tapestries, carpets and textiles in the Textura section. Antwerp-based
Bernard Blondeel is indeed coming well armed with tapestries this year,
among them a Gobelins representing the month of August from the series Les
Moins a Arabesque, woven for Louis XIV's daughter Marie-Anne de Bourbon,
Princesse de Conti.
Maastricht's great appeal is that one never knowns what one will find there
 -although the exhibits do have a markedly Northern character, most notably
in the picture section which always presents an unrivalled selection of
Dutch and Flemish Old Masters. Here it is possible to have too much of a
good thing, for exhibitors and visitors alike. One dealer last year claimed
he counted no less than 25 landscapes by Jan Van Goyen.
True to form, this year's highlights range from new exhibitor Matthiesen's
Jacob Jordaens to Agnew's Rubens oil sketch. More unusual is Milan-based Rob
Smeets' 'Venus at the Forge of Vulcan' by the 18th century Venetian
Francesco Fontebasso. Johnny Van Haeften's offering of Isaack Koedijck's
'Barber Surgeon tending a Peasant's Foot' must rank as the least enticing
prospect of the fair.
Alongside the specialist paintings and drawings, Textura and modern art
sections, are Oriental and Western works of art, Antiquities, books and
manuscripts and Le Haute Joaillerie du Monde.
Dealers of jewellery and objet d'arts like London's Ermitage tend to show in
the works of art section. This year they present no less than 100 Faberge
objects for sale.
Le Haute Joaillerie du Monde is altogether more glitzy. Harry Winston of
Paris and New York, master of the Hollywood-Hello] school of kitsch who has
given us real Judy Garland ruby slippers and the world's largest green
diamond, this year presents the tiara he created for the marriage of Marla
Marples and Donald Trump. Incorporated into the tiara are some 325 white
diamonds, 104.88 in carat weight. At Dollars 2.5m, it is costly memorabilia.
Even these baubles are in danger of being outshone by the loan exhibits this
year. 'Treasures from the Hermitage' presents a choice and wide-ranging
selection of 60 works of art from the legendary collections amassed by the
tsars. Some are leaving St Petersburg for the first time.
From the Siberian antiquities collected by Peter the Great comes a gold
griffon, its claws sunk into the back of a goat, dating to the 5th-4th
century BC. Boucher's 'Flight into Egypt', as delightful a confection as any
mythology, is here via Madame de Pompadour and Catherine the Great. The
latter's spectacular Old Master collection is also represented by a grand
van Dyck self-portrait and Ruisdael's 'The Swamp'.
There are desks by David Roentgen, and a harlequin games table by Abraham
and David Roentgen at Galerie Neuse. The other exhibits range from a Russian
icon and a Byzantine pyxis to the entwined soapy limbs of Rodin's Romeo and
Juliet.
Maastricht also offers lecture and music programmes. The latter also has a
Russian flavour. On March 18, the Kiev State Opera presents Moussorgsky's
Khovanshchina. Also running concurrently with the art fair is a new
international trade fair at MECC, Art Collecting and Protecting, presenting
equipment relating to restoration, storage, climate control, transportation
and the security of works of art.
The European Fine Art Fair runs at the Maastricht Exhibition and Congress
Centre, March 12-20. Opening hours 11am-8pm, 11am-6pm weekends. Tickets for
the private view, the fair and the handbook are available from the TEFAF
secretariat, Tel (073) 145165. Sabena World Airlines again offers all fair
ticket holders a 50 per cent discount on first and business class flights to
Brussels, and a courtesy shuttle service between airport and fair.
