FT  07 JUN 94 / Hata challenges bureaucrats over consumer prices: Living
costs above OECD average
Differences have emerged between Japan's prime minister and the government's
economic bureaucrats over plans to curb the country's high consumer prices.
Mr Tsutomu Hata yesterday welcomed an interim report from an official task
force on deregulation, urging the government to halve over the next five
years the disparity - up to 50 per cent - between Japan's high cost of
living and that of its main partners.
Mr Hata's low price campaign has aroused fears of deflation - a chain
reaction of falling prices, wages and consumption - at the Economic Planning
Agency.
The deregulation panel, staffed by private sector advisers, estimates that
Japanese consumer prices are between 36 per cent and 50 per cent higher than
the US and European average. That is conservative by comparison with an
Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development estimate that Japanese
retail prices are 80 per cent above the OECD average.
Prices could be brought down by cutting costly regulations, banning cartels
and lifting barriers to cheaper imports, the panel proposes.
This is the second time in two weeks that Mr Hata has publicly espoused
consumer price cuts, after his related decision to freeze for six months an
estimated Y460bn (Pounds 2.9bn) worth of public sector price rises.
Both moves are politically popular for obvious reasons. They correspond with
an explosion in discount retailing and a trend among producers of cars and
consumer electronics to design cheaper products for the Japanese market. The
yen's strength has also fuelled demand for cheap imports.
The panel aims to produce a final report by the end of this month, for
inclusion in a government package to open the Japanese market and stimulate
the economy, to be presented to the US in the margins of the group of seven
summit in early July.
EPA officials, however, fear that more deflation on top of an existing
decline in wholesale prices might kill prospects of economic recovery.
Any attempt to force the pace on retail prices is also likely to anger
Japan's shopkeepers and its multi-layered distribution system. These are
important features in high prices and strongholds of the two main opposition
groups, the Liberal Democratic party and Social Democratic party.
According to the Ministry of International Trade and Industry, 6.9m people
work in retailing and 4.8m in wholesale distribution. This is far higher in
relation to retail sales than in the US, points out Mr Paul Heaton, retail
analyst at Baring Securities in Tokyo.
