FT  15 NOV 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: UN seabed agency prepares for
its inaugural meeting
A new United Nations agency to monitor the recovery of minerals from the
international seabed is to be launched in Jamaica tomorrow with the
inaugural meeting of the International Seabed Authority.
UN officials say that all the operations of Unisa will be on a commercial
basis, and that the intention is to find an orderly method of dealing with
minerals located on the international seabed, preventing 'chaos and anarchy'
in the world's metals markets.
The authority will be responsible for implementing the Law of the Sea
Convention, a broad agreement on seabed mining that was reached after 11
years of contentious negotiations between industrialised and developing
nations.
The new agency's work will focus on the exploitation of billions of dollars
worth of polymetallic nodules lying on the international seabed, which have
been declared the 'common heritage of mankind', by the UN. The nodules
contain mainly copper, nickel, manganese and cobalt, with smaller quantities
of other minerals.
When the negotiations started under the auspices of the UN, it was expected
that commercial exploitation of seabed minerals would have started by 1998.
UN officials now say that seabed mining will not begin until about 2008.
The Law of the Sea Convention also creates Enterprise, the authority's
commercial arm, which will oversee exploration and mining through joint
ventures among private companies and states, and Tribunal, which will
adjudicate disputes over seabed mining among states and companies. The
authority and Enterprise will be located in Jamaica, while Tribunal will be
based in Hamburg.
The negotiations on the convention were drawn out because of concerns among
industrialised states that developing country governments would have too
much an influence on the authority and effectively control seabed mining.
For their part, developing countries feared that international consortia
with significant technological and financial resources would dominate seabed
mining, depriving poorer countries of the benefits.
The treaty that the ISA will administer makes provision for the protection
of land-based producers of minerals found on the international market.
Land-based producers were worried that unregulated seabed mining could flood
markets and depress prices.
