FT  11 MAY 94 / Incentives urged to boost private rented housing
The government was urged yesterday to adopt a package of measures supported
by grants and tax incentives to encourage greater investment in Britain's
diminished private rented-housing sector.
The proposals, launched at a conference in London by the Association of
Residential Letting Agents and the independent Housing Investment Group,
renewed a call for the establishment of Authorised Housing Investment
Trusts.
The organisations say the size of the private rented sector has fallen from
90 per cent of the housing stock in 1939 to 9.6 per cent at present.
Investment trusts would need to appeal to institutions which would not
invest directly in private rented housing because of the intensive
management required and poor returns measured against other lower-risk
investments.
The trusts, to compensate, should be free from capital gains tax and pay
corporation tax at the lower rate of 25 per cent. The joint report says that
even with these benefits there would be a yield gap.
It proposes that the government offer grants of up to 25 per cent of the
cost of providing properties. Grants would be funded by the issue of zero
coupon bonds redeemable over 10 to 15 years and secured against investment
trust assets. Bonds, although underwritten by the government, would be
repayable by trusts.
The report estimates that grants of up to Pounds 250m a year supporting a
total investment of Pounds 1bn would provide 16,600 new or reconditioned
properties at an average cost to the exchequer of Pounds 15,000 a home.
Mr Alan Thurlow, one of the report's authors, says this would provide better
value for money than mortgage tax relief or public-sector grants to housing
associations.
Other proposals include allowing companies and individuals converting small
commercial premises into homes for rent to offset losses against other tax
liabilities during the early years of investment. This, the authors say,
would be cheaper than providing grants.
