FT  28 MAR 94 / Leading Article: Workers' rights and free trade
For an institution which will not come into being before next year, the
planned World Trade Organisation, successor to the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade, is already accumulating an impressive workload. On top of
the responsibilities vested in it by the Uruguay Round agreement, the WTO is
due to be charged with reporting on trade and environment policy. Now
efforts are being made - for highly suspect reasons - to add the still more
controversial question of workers' rights and labour standards.
The US has already moved to have the matter placed on the WTO agenda. Sir
Leon Brittan, the European trade commissioner, says he favours a similar
proposal. Though openly dubious about the merits of the case, he appears to
have been swayed by growing political support for it in France and Italy, as
well as in the US. He evidently fears that, if the EU ducks the issue, it
could lose influence over events and put its own cohesion at risk.
Sir Leon is right to be sceptical. Workers' rights is a large and complex
subject, and the arguments for linking it with trade policy are
unpersuasive. But the motives of the most vocal petitioners for action are
all too clear. Their overriding concern is to protect domestic industries by
penalising low-cost foreign exporters. France, which for once views the US
as a tactical ally, has given the game away by stigmatising it as 'social
dumping'.
Labour surplus
The protectionist lobby is deluding itself. Even if it succeeded in imposing
minimum labour standards on low-cost exporters, that would do little to
blunt their comparative advantage or to relieve unemployment in the west.
Wages in less developed countries will stay low as long as they remain poor
and have a huge labour surplus. Nor would labour standards deter
multinational companies from shifting investments to regions such as Asia
and Latin America, since wages are typically a fraction of their overall
production costs.
Furthermore, the most thrusting newer exporters are relatively high-wage
economies such as Hong Kong, Malaysia and Singapore. The biggest threats to
western prosperity and competitiveness are manufactured at home.
The belief that trade policy can secure humanitarian goals, such as
preventing forced labour, raising safety standards and entrenching the right
of free association, is equally shaky. It relies heavily on the argument
that trade policy offers the best prospect of exerting leverage on
repressive third-world regimes, not on realistic assessment of its likely
efficacy.
Increased deprivation
Repugnant as child labour or wilfully dangerous working conditions are,
efforts to ban them simply by imposing standards from outside could easily
increase deprivation in really poor countries where no alternative legal
source of family income exists. Such efforts would in any case be credible
only if backed by threat of sanctions, which would risk further
impoverishing third-world economies and the people the new social conditions
regime is in theory designed to assist.
Real living and working standards in less developed countries will rise only
if their economic welfare is first enhanced. One way is through much bigger
aid and resource transfers than the west seems disposed to contemplate. A
better one is to encourage the poorest countries to generate wealth by
allowing them to benefit from unimpeded private capital flows into their
economies and to export freely on world markets. That requires the west to
keep trade barriers low, not to erect new ones.
There may nonetheless be a case for broad-ranging discussion of workers'
rights in the WTO. That would raise awareness about the importance of humane
working conditions, while allowing the international community to identify
in an open forum what scope exists for actions which would genuinely promote
the economic development of poorer countries. Placing the matter firmly in a
multilateral framework could restrain industrialised countries from using
labour standards as an alibi for unilateral trade discrimination, and force
them to defend such measures publicly. The debate would expose self-serving
protectionist arguments for what they are.
