FT  26 APR 94 / Rightwing extremist attacks on S Africa poll feared
Rightwing extremists were feared last night to be planning violent attacks
targeting polling stations in South Africa's first all-race elections, which
start today, after bombers struck again yesterday.
Last night a bomb exploded in a black area of Pretoria following a car
bombing earlier in the day in Germiston, near Johannesburg, that killed 10
people and injured 36. Police said a number of people could have been killed
in the Pretoria bombing, but no casaulty figures were available. Yesterday's
attacks brought the number of explosions since Saturday to 13.
The Germiston bomb was planted at a rank for minibus taxis used by blacks.
Nine people were killed and nearly 100 injured in Sunday's car bomb
explosion in central Johannesburg.
Security in and around polling stations was being tightened last night after
talks between President FW de Klerk and Mr Nelson Mandela, the African
National Congress leader.
Although no one has so far claimed responsibility, it seemed likely the
country's extreme white right has mounted a campaign to disrupt the
three-day poll. Today the elderly and infirm go to the polls, as well as
South Africans abroad. The rest of the 22m eligible voters are able to cast
their ballots tomorrow and on Thursday.
The attacks, which have shattered the optimism that greeted the decision a
week ago of Zulu Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi to take part in the poll, are
expected to target the 9,000 polling stations around the country.
Shortly before yesterday's attack in Germiston, Mr de Klerk stressed that
the election would go ahead. 'We are not going to allow the right wing or
anyone else to delay this election,' he said.
At the same time, the shift of conservative opinion to the Freedom Front led
by retired army general Constand Viljoen, which is taking part in the
election, continued yesterday as MPs and town councillors defected from the
Conservative party, which is boycotting the poll.
The impact of the blasts is hard to determine. Recent research into voter
attitude suggested that blacks were more inured to violence than whites, and
thus more likely to ignore the risk and cast their vote.
Visiting some of the victims of Sunday's blast, Mr Mandela said: 'I am
convinced tough measures if applied can bring these people to book. I hope
the government acts in a way to remove the impression it is a government of
weaklings.'
Mr de Klerk and Mr Mandela are understood to be close to agreeing an amnesty
for perpetrators of past acts of violence, in an attempt to defuse the
rightwing threat and reassure white members of the security forces fearful
of retribution under an ANC-led government.
Bombs have also gone off at the Steynsburg town hall in the eastern Cape, at
Bloemhof magistrates' court in western Transvaal, and at a taxi rank in
Randfontein, west of Johannesburg. Most of the attacks have been close to
polling stations.
South African police have offered a R1m (Pounds 185,000) reward for
information leading to the arrest and conviction of those responsible.
The stock market shrugged off news of the bombings, with the general index
finishing up 28 points at 5,068.
Bombs bring white rule to bloody end, Page 7
Joe Rogaly, Page 20
Observer, Page 21
