FT  02 FEB 94 / Heseltine sees case for post sell-off
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, said yesterday there was
a strong economic case for privatising the Royal Mail. But he indicated that
he had been prevented from doing so by political considerations.
Appearing before the all-party Commons trade and industry select committee,
Mr Heseltine disclosed that the government's 19-month-old review of the
corporation favoured privatising the Royal Mail letters division.
He added: 'The steps of doing it are extremely controversial.' Making no
apologies for not concluding the review, he said it would be 'irresponsible'
to rush the decision.
He went on to say that the alternative to privatisation - the 'halfway
house' of giving the Post Office more commercial freedom within the public
sector - was also proving extremely difficult.
'The issue is whether there is a halfway house with a semi-monopoly
competing with the private sector. How do you allow the Post Office to
respond to commercial pressures without an outcry from the private sector?'
the minister asked.
Earlier in the day Mr Mike Heron and Mr Bill Cockburn, chairman and chief
executive respectively of the Post Office, argued that it was 'outrageous'
to prevent the corporation from enjoying the same commercial freedoms as its
European competitors.
But Mr Heseltine said: 'The Post Office has a massive captive market. There
is no way of dealing with this issue.' He had approached the halfway house
measure with less enthusiasm than he had full privatisation.
However, aware of the political difficulties surrounding privatisation, Mr
Heseltine assured the committee that the government had no wish to change
the ownership of Post Office Counters, which runs small post offices.
Many Conservative MPs with rural constituencies oppose privatisation on the
ground that their community sub-post offices, which handle pensions and sell
stationery, might be threatened.
Mr Heseltine said: 'This had nothing to do with rural post offices; there is
no way that we would change the structure of those post offices.'
The minister said he was not surprised that the Post Office management was
so angry about the lack of government decision-making.
But he warned the committee that management were intent on protecting
self-interest. 'Don't have any illusion, management may not like what they
are going to get.'
