FT  31 OCT 94 / FT Guide to the Week
MONDAY 31
Coal Authority takes over
The newly formed Coal Authority takes over ownership of the UK's coal
reserves and licensing functions from British Coal, which is being
privatised. The Mansfield-based authority's chairman is Sir David White,
chairman of Mansfield Brewery, and its chief executive is Neville
Washington, a former army colonel.
Sino-South Korean relations: Chinese premier Li Peng begins a five-day visit
to South Korea, where he will discuss Beijing's role in promoting improved
relations between North and South Korea. China is North Korea's closest
ally, but has also become a leading trading partner with South Korea. Li's
visit follows two trips by South Korean president Kim Young-sam to China.
EU expansion: European Union foreign ministers meet their counterparts from
Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovakia, Bulgaria and Romania in
Luxembourg. The leaders will discuss setting up a dialogue to help
strengthen their relationship, ahead of eventual expansion of the EU. They
will also discuss the situation in Bosnia.
Women on top: The Women of the Year lunch takes place at London's Savoy
Hotel. About 500 women who have achieved outstanding success in their chosen
fields will attend. Special guests are the author of Wild Swans, Jung Chang,
and Diane Abbot MP.
Greens vs Suharto: Environmental groups take Indonesia's president Suharto
to court today, alleging that he diverted Dollars 185m (Pounds 117m) from a
reforestation project fund to help develop the state-run aircraft industry.
Ship safety: Norwegian proposals for ro-ro ship safety will be put before a
meeting of Nordic ship safety directors following the sinking of the Estonia
last month, in which 900 people died.
Norway is responsible for looking at the stability of existing ships, while
Sweden, Finland and Denmark are examining ferry evacuation, the design and
operation of bow doors and lifesaving equipment. Norway has said it may take
unilateral action over standards for Norwegian ro-ro ships, and foreign
ro-ro vessels trading to that country, if there is no international
agreement.
Taxing time: Today is the deadline for filing annual tax returns in the UK.
All taxpayers whose pay is not fully covered by PAYE, who pay tax at the
higher rate or who have received a tax form from the Inland Revenue risk
being charged interest on any outstanding amounts.
TUESDAY 1
New rules on unit trusts
The UK's Pounds 100bn unit trust industry makes further progress towards
deregulation with the coming into force of new rules liberalising charges
and the range of markets in which the trusts can invest. A further change
means newspapers no longer have to publish the 'cancellation' price - the
lowest price at which units can be bought back by the unit trust company.
UK economy: The underlying rate of inflation may last month have reached its
lowest level since records began in 1967, but other indicators such as the
producer prices index, the third-quarter GDP report and the latest CBI
survey, suggest inflationary pressures lie ahead. November's quarterly
bulletin and inflation report from the Bank of England, out today, will give
a view on future prospects.
Casablanca summit: On its last day, delegates at the Middle East/North
Africa Economic Summit in Casablanca are expected to approve a declaration
establishing a regional financial organisation and laying the foundations
for greater co-ordination between development assistance and investment
guarantee organisations. The summit may see the setting up of a Middle
East/North Africa economic community.
The gathering aims to provide economic foundations for a peaceful Middle
East after Israel's peace agreements with the Palestine Liberation
Organisation and Jordan.
Havel in Hungary: Czech president Vaclav Havel visits Budapest at the
invitation of his Hungarian counterpart, Arpad Goncz. Although Havel has
visited the country several times and is on good terms with Goncz, it is his
first official visit as leader.
Dairy industry: The UK's Milk Marketing Board is replaced by the Milk
Marque, a voluntary farmers' co-operative. The UK's 30,000 dairy farmers
will be able to sell their milk to whoever they like. Previously the MMB was
obliged to buy all of it. Industry analysts claim milk prices are set to
rise as a result.
Duty call: Air passenger duty, set out in the UK Budget last November, comes
into effect. It will add Pounds 5 to the cost of domestic and European
flights and Pounds 10 to those elsewhere.
Dennis Potter: A memorial service will be held for British novelist and
playwright Dennis Potter at 11am in St James's Church, Piccadilly, London.
Potter, the creator of television dramas such as The Singing Detective and
Lipstick On Your Collar, died in June.
Japanese heritage: A six-day world cultural heritage conference opens in
Nara.
FT Surveys: Greater Atlanta and Australia.
Holidays: All Saints Day (some European institutions closed).
WEDNESDAY 2
Iliescu seeks UK support
Romanian president Ion Iliescu starts a three-day visit to the UK, during
which he will meet prime minister John Major, trade and industry secretary
Michael Heseltine and foreign secretary Douglas Hurd. He hopes to boost
economic ties between the two countries. Major is also expected to raise the
case of Adrian and Bernadette Mooney, jailed for 28 months each earlier this
month for attempting to smuggle a baby out of Romania.
Inflationary pressure: Chancellor Kenneth Clarke and the governor of the
Bank of England, Eddie George, meet to discuss monetary policy. Markets are
ambivalent about the likely timing of future interest rate rises. When the
chancellor raised rates in September, he did not announce the decision until
the Monday after that month's meeting.
Swedish finances: Goran Persson, finance minister of the newly elected
Social Democrat government, presents tough plans to cut the country's budget
deficit, which is running at 13 per cent of GDP. Citing the need to
stabilise Sweden's debt by 1998, he is expected to go beyond the SKr61bn
(Pounds 5.3bn) of planned savings and tax increases his party outlined
before its September election victory.
Nuclear trafficking:
A meeting at the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna will discuss
strategies to combat illegal trafficking of nuclear materials from the
former Soviet Union. After the discovery of several cases of plutonium
smuggling to Germany earlier this year, the agency has made the issue a
priority.
OECD in Bucharest: The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development advisory group on investment holds its fourth plenary meeting in
Bucharest.
Turkish prime minister Tansu Ciller visits Israel at the start of a Middle
East trip that will include Gaza and Egypt, with the aim of furthering
bilateral ties. She is the first prime minister of Moslem Turkey to visit
Israel.
William Holman Hunt's 'The Shadow of Death', one of the best-known Victorian
images, shows Christ in his father's workshop stretching at the end of his
day's labour to give thanks to God. The setting sun casts a silhouette,
which the Virgin Mary sees as a premonition of the Crucifixion. Sotheby's in
London offers the quarter-size replica of the 7ft-high original, which Hunt
made for use by engravers. It is expected to fetch Pounds 900,000.
THURSDAY 3
Swan song on the Tyne
The Type 23 frigate HMS Richmond, the last of 2,700 vessels built by
134-year-old Swan Hunter, leaves the Tyne for Portsmouth, on its way to be
handed over to the Royal Navy next week. Richmond's departure from Swan's
Wallsend yard signals the company's closure and the probable end of
shipbuilding on the river. Swan has been in receivership since May 1993.
Embattled Russian prime minister Victor Chernomyrdin arrives in Warsaw for a
two-day visit to sign an agreement that will cancel mutual debts and open
the way for a 600km natural gas pipeline across Poland to Germany. The
pipeline is part of a longer 3,000km project designed to bring 63bn cu m a
year from the Jamal peninsula in Russia to western Europe.
Cinema scope: The 17-day London Film Festival opens. More than 200 films
from around the world will be shown, and the event includes premiers of
Kenneth Branagh's Frankenstein starring Robert de Niro and Dennis Potter's
last film, Midnight Movie.
Plane facts: What is thought to be the world's first auction of commercial
aircraft takes place in Las Vegas. More than 40 civilian aircraft go under
the hammer at Bally's Casino.
FT Surveys: Turkish Finance and Industry, and UK Consumer Credit and Asset
Finance.
Holidays: Japan (Culture Day).
FRIDAY 4
South African delegation
South African foreign minister Alfred Nzo visits France. He will attend the
Franco-African summit in Biarritz as part of a delegation led by deputy
president Thabo Mbeki.
Light fantastic: Deepavali, or Diwali, the Hindu festival of light, is
celebrated by the Hindu community worldwide. The highlight of the event is
the lighting of thousands of lamps in homes to welcome the goddesses of
wealth and learning.
India has more reason to celebrate. The World Health Organisation gave it a
clean bill of health last week after the recent outbreak of plague. Overseas
visitors are expected to arrive in their thousands after more than 12
airlines which banned flights to the country during the scare resume
operations.
Non-farm payrolls: Bond markets will be trading nervously ahead of the US
non-farm payrolls for October, out today. The pace of payrolls' growth has
slowed to a monthly average of 260,000 new jobs in the third quarter,
compared with 340,000 in the second.
Canada's House of Commons breaks until November 14.
Saleroom: Christie's in London is holding a sale of Victorian works,
including Sir Edwin Landseer's 'The Deer Pass', which is expected to realise
up to Pounds 300,000, and William Holman Hunt's 'Bride of Bethlehem',
expected to fetch up to Pounds 400,000.
WEEKEND 5-6
Canada team in China
Jean Chretien, Canada's prime minister, leads a delegation of nearly 400
business leaders, politicians and officials to Beijing on Sunday. Canadian
exports to China, totalling CDollars 1.7bn (Pounds 770m) in 1993, have
stagnated in recent years. But imports have risen rapidly, reaching CPounds
3.1bn last year.
Old masters: More than 450 cars will take part in the 98th London to
Brighton Veteran Car Rally on Saturday. Only about 300 are expected to
finish: with a top speed of 8mph, it is feared some vehicles will be unable
to beat the 4pm deadline.
Business leaders meet: The Confederation of British Industry annual
conference begins on Sunday in Birmingham.
Motor racing: The Japanese Grand Prix takes place on Sunday at Suzuka.
Visiting Down Under: Qiao Shi, chairman of China's National People's
Congress, visits Sydney on Sunday.
Ask the people: Albania holds a referendum on a new constitution on Sunday.
Asian politics: Tajikstan holds presidential elections and a referendum on a
new constitution.
Compiled by Carol Major and Shelley Wood.
Fax: (+44) (0)171 873 3194.
