FT  12 JUL 94 / Survey of France (9): 'De luxe' looks east - The luxury
goods market is recovering
The Louis Vuitton luggage shop on Avenue Montaigne is almost always crammed
with Japanese tourists gleefully snapping up the brown bags bearing its
famous LV initials that are so sought after - and so much more expensive
back in Tokyo or Osaka.
Yet some Vuitton souvenir shoppers have been disappointed this spring and
summer. Customers hoping to buy three or four bags to take home have been
told that they could buy two at the most.
The 'rationing' at Louis Vuitton harks back to the frenetic era of the
mid-1980s when Chanel, another famous name in French luxury, was forced to
restrict the tourists flocking into its flagship store on rue Cambon to no
more than one of its classic quilted leather bags. (Some of Chanel's more
determined Japanese customers were later caught hovering outside the shop,
trying to bribe passing Parisians into buying more bags for them.)
The luxury market is still not as buoyant as it was in the mid-1980s, but it
does seem to have recovered from its doldrums in the early 1990s.
Louis Vuitton is not the only company to have experienced a sudden surge of
demand. LVMH, which owns Christian Dior cosmetics and Christian Lacroix
couture as well as Vuitton, recently forecast profits growth of at least 20
per cent for 1994. Hermes, another famous French leather house, and Chanel
have both experienced double digit sales growth so far this year.
These positive reports augur well not only for the companies themselves but
for the rest of the French economy. The luxury business, which encompasses
everything from expensive scents to designer clothes and fine cognac, is one
of the country's largest industries and an important source of exports.
France is not only the dominant force in the global luxury trade, but the
cachet of Cartier jewellery and Hermes handbags has a positive effect on
perceptions of almost every other area of French industry.
Some French firms have astutely exploited this. L'Oreal has established
itself as the world's leading cosmetics company by emphasising its 'Made in
France' appeal. Even Thomson, the giant electronics group, sees the
reflected glory of French style as a key tactical advantage in its plans to
relaunch its consumer electronics range across Europe.
Just as the downturn in the luxury market was one of the catalysts for
France's descent into recession, the upturn has come at a critical time when
the economy is teetering towards recovery. Yet the luxury industry is not
yet out of the doldrums. Bernard Arnault, chairman of LVMH, says that some
markets, notably the US and UK, have are already out of recession, but that
others, such as Germany and Japan, are still fragile.
The erratic picture in these established markets is countered by the
emergence of dynamic new sources of sales. Eastern Europe is one area of
growth, although still in a fledgling state. But the most promising future
markets are the emerging Asian economies of Taiwan, South Korea, Hong Kong
and even China.
The French luxury houses are now busily extending their operations into
these countries. Cartier has opened a shop in Shanghai. LVMH has already set
up a Christian Dior boutique in Moscow and is now planning to open a Vuitton
shop in the city. So far these ventures are at an experimental stage, but
the industry sees them as a vital investment if its new markets are to
provide the same stimulus for luxury goods sales in the late 1990s as Japan
did for much of the 1980s.
Yet the current crop of luxury consumers are different from their
predecessors. The industry's new Asian customers are showing signs of being
more price conscious than the self-indulgent Japanese. At the same time its
established consumers in the West have become more discerning about quality
and craftsmanship than their status-obsessed predecessors in the 1980s.
This means that the industry has had to become even more rigorous about
quality control and has had to invest heavily in improving standards of
service - particularly after-sales. 'It is impossible to under-emphasise how
important after-sales service has has become,' says Alain-Dominique Perrin,
chairman of Cartier. 'It's as important for the brand's reputation as
advertising.'
