FT  30 MAR 94 / Business and the Environment: An Indian tale of two extremes
 -Worldwide Waste / Big businesses are improving pollution control but small
concerns remain far behind
The effluent from the Shriram chemical works on the outskirts of Delhi is so
clean that samples are routinely passed through a fish tank. In seven years
the plant has not killed a single goldfish and officials boast the waste is
so pure they could drink it.
A few miles from Shriram stand the smoky workshops of about 20 dyers, full
of steaming vats of colours and bleaches. The untreated wastes are poured
straight into a ditch. Sultan Ahmed, who inherited his workshop from his
father, says he never checks his waste. Nor have his neighbours ever
complained.
The Shriram works and Ahmed's workshop are the two extremes of the
management of industrial waste in India. Shriram Foods and Fertiliser
Industries, controlled by a Delhi-based diversified group, is a model plant
producing vegetable oils, caustic soda and chlorine. It was turned into a
showpiece for the rest of Indian industry after a sulphuric acid leak in
1985 in which 500 people were injured. Today, it even has its own nature
reserve. Ahmed, meanwhile, is just one of millions of self-employed
craftsmen in India who have not heard of pollution control, know nothing of
the law on waste and have never seen an inspector.
Nobody knows how much industrial waste is poured into India's rivers. Data
at the government's Pollution Control Board (PCB) is fragmentary and often
out-of-date. The board's work mainly covers the country's large and
medium-sized factories - and barely touches the small workshops which
account for about one-third of India's manufacturing output. Moreover, even
large plants evade the law - some publicly-owned enterprises secure
protection from their ministries; some private companies pay bribes.
A common trick is to install pollution control equipment, but leave it
switched off because of power shortages, breakdowns or deliberate evasions
of the law. As Kapil Narula, a researcher at the Tata Energy Research
Institute, a private think-tank, says: 'With an average of only one
inspector for 50 factories, it is easy for a company to get away with
breaking the rules by paying money.'
Public awareness of the danger posed by some industrial wastes and materials
is low. In some parts of India, powdered DDT is still used instead of lime
to mark white lines on roads - because the deadly pesticide, banned in many
countries, is cheaper. D K Biswas, the PCB chairman, says: 'We have to
create greater awareness among workers and in the community.'
However, Indian pollution experts believe that standards of waste disposal -
as of airborne emissions - are gradually getting higher, particularly in the
large factories. In 1991, the PCB found that of 1,551 large plants with
potential pollution problems, only 112 had installed adequate control
equipment. By the end of last year, 1,119 of these factories had made the
grade and 77 had closed.
Newly-built plants are required to have international-standard pollution
control equipment. Foreign companies which might think of locating 'dirty'
industries in India would be wrong to believe they could save money on waste
and emission control systems. Even foreign companies obtaining goods from
Indian plants are obliged to take care. Indian environmental pressure groups
are quick to establish links between wrong-doings in India and a foreign
hand, however remote.
This awareness dates back to 1984 and the catastrophic gas leak in Bhopal,
central India. More than 3,000 people were killed and more than 50,000
seriously injured when deadly methyl isocyanate gas escaped from a pesticide
plant run by the Indian affiliate of Union Carbide, the US industrial group.
The accident forced the government to pass an Environmental Protection Act
in 1986 and make serious attempts at curbing pollution.
Large companies in pollution-prone activities - such as pesticides, textiles
and papermaking - have made progress in setting standards and installing
modern equipment. According to Biswas, the biggest remaining problems among
large companies are with distilleries, because of the organic waste flushed
into rivers, and with the smokestacks of fossil-fuel burning power stations.
Biswas admits that smaller companies are far behind in pollution control.
'Many small companies have no idea what to do,' he says. 'Their options are
to install equipment or to close. But very few have closed.'
In a celebrated case, the Supreme Court last year ended years of litigation
when it upheld the board's decision to force the closure of small metal
workshops surrounding the Taj Mahal to save the monument from airborne dirt.
But Biswas says that about 60 of the 212 workshops are still operating.
However, the widespread closure of small workshops in India is politically
almost impossible because it would make millions of people destitute. So,
the government is encouraging shared treatment plants in which clusters of
workshops can invest jointly in common equipment. But even these will prove
too expensive for many workshops.
Next week, Sweden.
