FT  09 APR 94 / Markets: Odds change in America's biggest casino - Wall
Street
A casual reading of the headlines last week might have led a reader to
conclude (mistakenly) that Americans no longer had an appetite for risk. The
nation that boasts the world's largest number of small shareholders had, it
appeared, lost faith in gambling. Some stocks fell as much as 30 per cent.
No, this was not the Wall Street casino. Voters in Missouri were casting
their verdict on whether slot machines should be legalised in their state
(they voted against by a narrow margin, hitting the share prices of a number
of casino companies in the process.) But in the bigger gaming hall that is
the stock market, the hunger for risk appeared undimmed.
That Americans have not given up on risk-taking was clear from two events
last Tuesday. First, a survey of public opinion (from a gaming company,
naturally) purported to show that 67 per cent of people around the country
approve of legalised gambling. A quarter of Americans in this survey claimed
to play their local state lottery at least once a week - roughly the same as
the proportion of US households that holds shares in mutual funds, though
this is no doubt a coincidence.
The second event was more telling. The stock market, which had been looking
as panic-stricken as a non-swimmer out of his depth, finally found that
there was a bottom to stand on (at least for the time being). And what is
more, the bottom turned out to be exactly where many analysts had said it
would be all along.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average, which had hit a closing peak of 3,978 on
the last day of January, touched 3,551 on Tuesday morning - almost exactly
10 per cent lower. From there it rebounded, recapturing half of its 84 point
loss of that morning by the end of the day and jumping another 82 points on
Wednesday.
Analysts who had been predicting a 10 per cent 'correction' from the peak
(but had been increasingly devoid of conviction in the face of the market's
slide) suddenly sounded cocky again. Those two words so beloved by
stockbrokers - 'buying opportunity' - were dusted off, tin helmets were
stored away.
So is it back to business as usual? In at least one regard, it appears so.
The financial markets have escaped the baleful effects of a nasty
chain-reaction, at least for now.
It went something like this. The half-percentage point rise in short-term US
interest rates since early February, modest as it seemed, had made it more
expensive to finance holdings of bonds and other securities by borrowing,
prompting some investors to liquidate their holdings.
Some of the biggest bets had been placed in markets which had a tendency to
freeze in moments of turmoil (thinly-traded European bond markets or the
markets emerging market 'Brady' bonds) or which involved esoteric
instruments difficult to value in times of market stress.
So investors who needed cash did the natural thing. They sold US government
bonds, which are traded in the world's most liquid securities market. That
helped drive the price of Treasury bonds down and the yield up. (There
already seemed to be good fundamental reasons to sell bonds: the US economy
was emerging from its winter freeze and showing every sign of advancing
strongly, raising afresh the spectre of rising inflation, the bond market's
biggest bogey.)
Falling bond prices led stocks lower. After all, why would anyone buy shares
when bonds appeared to be getting cheaper? Investment markets are all about
relative value. Until the bond market levelled out (as it did in the middle
of last week) there was little chance that the stock market would stabilise.
This insidious cycle took everyone by surprise, from market analysts to
regulators. No-one had realised how closely the behaviour of mainstream
financial markets was tied to such arcane corners of the financial world and
to the trading behaviour of what had been thought of as 'fringe' players
like hedge funds (in reality, this group of investors is probably being made
a scapegoat for a broader group of banks and institutions which had borrowed
to finance their trades).
So is the chain-reaction over? For the time being, it seems so. The yield on
the benchmark 30-year bond has levelled off at around 7.2 per cent.
Investors in the stock market, predicting a strong first quarter earnings
season over the next fortnight, have begun to regain their faith in share
prices - and there are more bargains around than two months ago.
And the US still seems to love gambling. Three quarters of Americans who
responded to that survey agree: gambling is an acceptable form of
entertainment.
 -----------------------------
Monday       3593.35    -42.61
Tuesday      3675.41    +82.06
Wednesday    3679.73     +4.32
Thursday     3693.26    +13.53
Friday       3674.26    -19.00
 -----------------------------
