FT  28 JUN 94 / World Cup '94: Jack's armies mass for battle - Ireland plan
to add another chapter to their soccer legend
Jack Charlton, the irascible - and now censured - English manager of the
Irish World Cup team, commands two armies in the US. The first comprises 22
fit, competitive young men and a carefully organised support team of
physiotherapists, shirt washers, press officers and so on. His other army is
a huge, good-humoured rabble.
Jack's two armies join forces again today, when Ireland play Norway at
Giants Stadium, New Jersey, in the last of their first-round Group E
matches. With Group E almost exactly evenly poised, it is make-or-break day
for Ireland, as well as for Norway and for Italy and Mexico, who clash in
the other Group E game, in Washington.
In New Jersey 10 days ago, Jack's players overpowered Italy while his fans
outnumbered and outsang the Italian fans. In Orlando last Friday, Jack's men
seemed stunned by the heat and humidity. The players were caught by the pace
of Mexico and the supporters surprised by the number and voice of the
Mexican fans.
Regardless of what happens to the team, the Irish fans will go home with a
tall tale or two to tell. The supposedly unsophisticated Irish have already
outplayed the aristocrats of Italy.
And a lot of the fans who say they don't care if Jack's team win or lose
know by heart all the possible permutations of quarter-final and semi-final
matches in which Ireland might play. But first they have to win or draw
today.
Anyway, the secret is out. After the opening win against Italy, it dawned on
a lot of people that this Irish team were something more than the collection
of over-achieving scuffers who had clawed their way to the quarter-finals in
Italy four years ago.
Charlton has been able to add the mid-field power of Roy Keane and the
defensive pace of Phil Babb to his team. Another youngster, Jason McAteer,
has made two impressive appearances as substitute. If there are weaknesses,
they are at centre-forward and goalkeeper: the two most important positions
on any team.
Charlton only brought four attackers along and has only played one at a
time, preferring to field a fifth good mid-fielder rather than a second
mediocre striker. This allows him to stick to his strategy of defence in
depth and attack on the break. But he has also brought in John Sheridan to
orchestrate a more measured passing game.
Ireland's chief weapon used to be the long high ball aimed at the head of
Niall Quinn or Tony Cascarino or John Aldridge. Cascarino and Aldridge
remain, but now Ireland's spearhead is speed down the wings, particularly
from full backs Terry Phelan and Denis Irwin.
Both are suspended for today's game. This gives Charlton a problem, but also
an opportunity. He can give McAteer a start and also pick the most exciting
youngster in his squad: Gary Kelly of Leeds. Kelly lacks experience, but
where Irwin is fast and Phelan faster, Kelly is fastest.
A lot of Irish fans wish Charlton would pick another Kelly: Alan, the
Sheffield United 'keeper. Many thought that Pat Bonner, having broken an
Irish record for caps in warm-up games, would be relegated to the
substitutes bench.
Bonner is dependable. He dominates in the air and neither makes basic errors
nor indulges in the unnecessary flashiness with which Jorge Campos of Mexico
dealt with even quite straight-forward Irish shots last Friday.
The problem is the perennial one when assessing goalkeepers. Mexico's Luis
Garcia beat Bonner with two hard and accurate shots. Might another man have
reacted quicker, dived faster, reached further, and perhaps saved a goal? It
is impossible to tell. The nagging suspicion remains that Bonner will not
reach shots that other goalkeepers in this tournament might save.
Nevertheless, the Irish hold a slight edge today. A draw means they would
finish above Norway and at least third in the group.
The temperature has been in the 90'c in New Jersey in the last few days, but
it is still cooler than in Orlando. The Norwegians are no more accustomed to
heat than Ireland and must do the attacking. The setting is perfect for
Ireland to add another chapter to their myth.
Charlton, meanwhile, has been adding to his. He began a running battle with
Fifa during the weeks before the World Cup, complaining ceaselessly about
the heat and the rules which effectively forbade giving players drinks
during play.
During the first two games he would not sit obediently in his seat. He stood
on the bench, strayed from the painted box around it, berated Fifa
officials, linesmen and referees, coached players (which is against the
rules) and found countless ways to give his players water.
After the Mexican match he again criticised Fifa for forcing his team to
play at noon in Florida and refused to answer questions he did not like.
Now he has been suspended from the touchline for 'misbehaviour.' This need
not be a handicap. It might even help.
Players like the way Charlton stands up for them, and the fans love him for
trying to outwit Fifa's pompous officials.
But the fans will not allow Charlton and his team all the fun. They are part
of the story, too. Already there are tales to match the myths of Irish
bravado which came back from Italy four years ago.
On a flight from Florida last Friday, an Ireland fan told me a tale.
The night before the Ireland-Mexico game, he said, a group of fans in
Orlando had found a bar which advertised that it was open all night. Better
than a hotel, they thought, and went in. In the early hours the manager said
that he was locking up and going home. The fans saw him to the door, locked
it, and put a glass on the bar to collect money for the drinks.
The manager called the police. Hearing that European soccer hooligans had
captured a bar, the police sent 16 squad cars. They encircled the building.
When all the police were armed and in place, an officer was sent to knock on
the door. It opened.
An Irish fan put his head out, surveyed the scene, and started singing Danny
Boy. One by one the fans trooped out, glasses in hand, singing along.
Nobody, said the man who told me the tale, was charged.
For Jack and his lads it has all, so far, been too good to be true.
