FT  04 OCT 94 / Leading Article: Wrong turn
Slovakia is at a crossroads, and at the weekend voters steered their country
down the wrong path. Offered politicians who promised market reforms and
liberal treatment of Slovakia's ethnic minorities, the electorate instead
endorsed the anti-reform platform of former prime minister Vladimir Meciar,
who is now likely to return to office in coalition with more extreme
nationalist allies.
Unlike the former communists now ruling Poland and Hungary, Mr Meciar and
his coalition partners have the potential and perhaps the will to turn
Slovakia off the road of economic reforms and political tolerance.
The election results are bad news not just for Slovakia, but for the rest of
central Europe. Bratislava's next government could exacerbate ethnic
tensions elsewhere in the region and provide an excuse for west European
lobbies seeking to impede central Europe's access to the EU.
Mr Meciar's promise to freeze Slovakia's fledgling privatisation programme
is the worst economic omen. Czechoslovakia's velvet divorce bequeathed to
Bratislava the lion's share of rust-belt industries. The obvious difficulty
of reforming these industries probably explains why Slovak voters lost their
nerve at the weekend. But such reforms are vital if their country is to
compete with its increasingly prosperous neighbours. Mr Meciar may find it
difficult to deliver his promised moratorium on privatisation - nearly 1m
Slovaks have already bought privatisation vouchers and factories have
already been earmarked for sell-off. But foreign investors who had shown
interest in Slovakia will be discouraged.
More worrying for the rest of Europe is the fact that the symbiotic
relationship in Slovakia between economic stagnation and extreme nationalism
is likely to grow stronger. The fear of painful economic transition which
pushed Slovaks into Mr Meciar's arms also rewarded extreme nationalists with
a surprisingly high 5.6 per cent of the vote. Under its new leaders,
Bratislava is likely to step up discrimination against the country's
560,000-strong ethnic Hungarian minority, a prospect which understandably
disturbs neighbouring Hungary.
There is still hope that, as Mr Meciar confronts the tricky task of forming
a coalition government and the even greater challenge of reviving Slovakia's
economy, he, like former communist leaders in Hungary, will embrace market
reforms and set aside ethnic quarrels.
As for western European countries, they should not rush to punish Mr Meciar:
that would only push Slovakia further into its self-imposed isolation. But
they should assure Slovakia's neighbours, particularly Hungary, that pursuit
of more enlightened ethnic policies will be recognised and rewarded, and
insist that Slovakia will not be allowed to hold up its more reform-minded
neighbours' progress towards EU membership.
