FT  17 AUG 94 / More plutonium seized in Germany: Man held in Bremen
allegedly carrying Russian 'sample' of nuclear material
An east German man was arrested in Bremen last weekend while attempting to
hand over a 'sample' of supposedly Russian plutonium to a German undercover
agent, it emerged yesterday.
Following last week's capture in Munich of two Spaniards and a Colombian
carrying some 300 grammes of plutonium on a Lufthansa flight from Moscow to
Munich, the news sparked instant demands from politicians for more
information and tighter links between federal and regional security forces.
Mr Bernd Schmidbauer, Chancellor Helmut Kohl's security adviser, who is to
visit the Russian capital later this week, will appear before a
parliamentary commission today.
The Bremen arrest prompted further Russian denials that its controls over
nuclear materials were not working. An official from the embassy in Bonn
claimed there was no evidence, only western prejudice. In Moscow, Russian
security officials attacked what they said were western attempts to
discredit the country's nuclear industry. They claimed foreign governments
were trying to exploit public concern caused by discoveries of weapons-grade
plutonium in Germany, to justify interference in Russia's internal affairs.
According to German legal officials, the Bremen arrest involves an unnamed
34-year-old living in Lower Saxony who had offered to supply up to 70g of
the plutonium. He also provided a certificate to prove its authenticity,
which suggested it came from a Moscow scientific institute.
According to preliminary analysis, the 2g 'sample' contained 0.05mg of mixed
plutonium and americium, elements commonly generated in nuclear power
reactors.
In a development suggesting tensions between the secret services and
civilian legal authorities, an unidentified man claiming to be the
undercover agent involved accused the arresting officers from the
prosecution service of interfering with his work.
He said in a television broadcast that the rest of the material could be
'wandering around north Germany'. However, the Bremen prosecutors said they
had arrested the man because of potential danger to the public. They
believed the remaining 68g were unlikely to be still in Germany.
The agent also claimed former members of the east German Stasi state
security service had set up a smuggling operation supplied from small
Russian boats plying Germany's Baltic coast.
In Moscow, the German embassy said its overriding concern was simply to find
the source of the nuclear material. If the plutonium found at Munich did
originate from Russia, as German investigators believe, then the German
government would help tighten international controls. If not, it could
redirect its investigations elsewhere.
Scientists believe it should be possible to trace the origin of the
plutonium-239 by studying its isotopic concentrations which leave a
distinctive 'fingerprint'. There are thought to be only three plants in
Russia capable of producing plutonium-239 in Chelyabinsk, Tomsk and
Krasnoyarsk.
