FT  05 MAY 94 / Lopez to pay DM75,000 to end perjury case
Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, the beleaguered production director of
Volkswagen, will pay an agreed sum of DM75,000 (Pounds 29,850) instead of
facing perjury charges in court, it emerged yesterday.
Mr Lopez still maintained his innocence and had wanted a full hearing on the
issue, his lawyers said. However, he gave up this right and agreed to the
closure of the case 'to avoid further stress from these proceedings and in
the interests of the company'.
The deal ended speculation that Mr Lopez, subject of continuing
investigations for suspected industrial espionage, might shortly face his
first public questioning under oath in the long-running battle between VW
and General Motors of the US, Mr Lopez's former employer.
Adam Opel, GM's German subsidiary, welcomed yesterday's decision, even
though Mr Lopez had been neither tried nor judged.
Mr Lopez remains under investigation in Germany and the US for suspected
crimes against GM and alleged breaches of federal mail and
telecommunications law.
A muted statement from the VW supervisory board said it was pleased the case
had been closed 'and that Lopez had subjugated his personal interest in a
continuation of the proceedings - and an acquittal - in the interests of his
board responsibilities'.
The case concerned suspected false affidavits presented in a Hamburg court
last year about press articles over suspected industrial espionage by Mr
Lopez and three associates. One sworn statement to the effect that he had
never asked for nor received photographs of a projected new car to be made
by Opel, GM's German subsidiary, was directly contradicted in a later
affidavit from Mr Lopez.
Another sworn denial that he was the author of a controversial speech was
strongly countered by verbal and material evidence in open court from a
former GM associate.
The Hamburg prosecuting authorities said yesterday that these two points
gave grounds for sufficient suspicions that Mr Lopez had made 'negligent,
false or incomplete statements'.
Although it appeared 'negligence' had played a significant role, the
prosecutors were not able to close the case on the grounds that all
suspicions had been cleared. Yesterday's decision prejudiced neither the
'special characteristics of the subject matter of the investigation nor the
associated considerable public interest', they said.
