FT  19 DEC 94 / Blair warns against poll complacency after victory
Mr Tony Blair, the Labour leader, yesterday warned his party's activists
that they need to make the British public more confident about voting for
them at the next general election if they are to defeat the Conservative
government.
His warning came as Mr John Major, the prime minister, gave an optimistic
view of his government's prospects in spite of further bitter criticism in
Tory ranks.
In the wake of Labour's record-breaking performance in the Dudley West
by-election last week Mr Blair adopted a highly cautious tone. He said that
Labour had actively to campaign to win votes rather than assume that Tory
disarray would bring down Mr Major's government.
Mr Blair said his party was 'ready and anxious' to govern and was enjoying
'a great renewal of confidence'.
But he declared himself 'utterly uncomplacent' about Labour's victory in the
Dudley West by-electin. He said that by-elections were not general elections
and there could be more than two years before the next dissolution of
parliament.
He told BBC Television's Breakfast with Frost: 'There is a long way to go in
electoral terms. We are ready to govern, we are anxious to govern. It's
frustrating not to be able to take on the government now.'
He added: 'We have got to make the British people sure of today's Labour
party - where we are, what we stand for, what we are going to deliver.'
Mr Major's upbeat comments about his government's prospects came in spite of
the continuing disarray in the Tory ranks over European integration and tax
cuts.
The prime minister admitted in an article in the News of the World that 'not
all has been rosy' in the Conservative administration in recent months.
But he said that the year had not been as tough for the government as people
had been led to believe. 'There is so much going on that is good that I
believe we end the year in credit,' he wrote.
Citing falling unemployment, the 'strongest programme ever' to cut crime and
the prospect of a doubling in living standards over the next 25 years, he
said he was proud of what was happening 'in this wonderful country'.
Other senior Tory figures were prepared to deliver harsh explanations of why
their party had done so badly at last week's by-election.
Mr Jeremy Hanley, the party chairman, was subjected to a blistering attack
from one senior Tory figure, who said that the Conservatives were now run
'by a man who is a pantaloon'.
Lord McAlpine, the former Tory deputy chairman, said Mr Hanley was 'totally
useless' at the job. He said in an article in the Mail on Sunday: 'He
believes that there is not a problem that cannot be solved with a slap on
the back.'
A cabinet minister also issued a blunt warning at the weekend to Tory MPs
who believed that an election victory could be assured by tax reductions in
next year's Budget.
Mr Stephen Dorrell, the national heritage secretary, rejected suggestions
that a 'good old-fashioned pre-election boom' could win votes. He said that
'it would constitute a conscious decision to turn our backs on our most
important single achievement'.
He added: 'I can think of no better way to give the next general election to
Mr Blair on a silver platter.'
