FT  06 MAY 94 / Leading Article: The tunnel visionaries
The question of Britain's institutional links with the rest of Europe may
continue to bedevil its national politics. But from today, the country's
geographic relationship with the continent is definitively settled. With the
opening of the Channel tunnel, it can never again be truthfully claimed that
the UK is not part of Europe. That is a development which deserves to be
celebrated, for both symbolic and practical reasons.
Late, over-budget and beset by financial uncertainties though it is, the
Anglo-French project marks a milestone in co-operation between two countries
accustomed to viewing each other as rivals rather than as natural allies. As
an engineering achievement, it represents a triumph of human perseverance
over arduous physical and technical obstacles. And as a means of transport,
it offers advantages in speed and convenience which promise in time to
reshape trade patterns and transform popular attitudes to international
travel, above all on the British side of the Channel.
Probably the biggest wonder is the fact that the tunnel has been completed
at all. Had it depended on government funding, as originally planned, it
would almost certainly not have been built. The halt called in 1975 by the
Wilson government - which concluded it could not afford both the tunnel and
the Concorde aircraft programme - would have seen to that. The project was
rescued only by the decision a decade later by a radical rightwing UK prime
minister and a socialist French president to resurrect it as a private
sector venture.
Useful example
Private management has not been a trouble-free solution. Eurotunnel's
history has been punctuated by missed deadlines, financial cliffhangers,
public squabbling and successive increases in total cost. Nonetheless,
without the commitment of private capital, notably by the commercial banks,
the pressures to ensure accountability, contain cost over-runs and drive the
project through to completion would almost certainly have been weaker. That
commitment has also been a useful example to some other governments about
the potential of privately owned national infrastructure.
However, it would be disingenuous to view the venture as a pure experiment
in free enterprise, untouched by the hand of government. Much of its
financing has depended on state-owned French banks closely linked to centres
of political power and, at a crucial juncture, on arm-twisting by the Bank
of England. The cost over-runs are due partly to government mandated
specification changes during construction. And the project's viability
hinges on public expenditure on fast rail links, which the UK government at
one stage balked at approving.
Further refinancing
Nor is it certain that private capital would have been as readily available
if its providers had known at the outset what they know now. As the
project's construction budget has steadily mounted, its revenue forecasts
have been repeatedly down-graded, deferring the prospect of returns. As a
consequence, Eurotunnel will soon be obliged to seek further refinancing to
replenish its dwindling cash resources.
Why the banks have remained loyal for as long as they have is a moot
question. Perhaps it is because they genuinely believe that Eurotunnel will
eventually prove a big money spinner - just as the Mont Blanc tunnel did
after it was built three decades ago. Or maybe it is because they concluded
long ago that it would cost them more to cut their losses by calling in
their loans than to stick with the project to the end.
Either way, it is clear that projects as monumental, as innovative and with
as long a lifespan as the Channel tunnel defy the risk and return
calculations conventionally employed by providers of private capital. Their
achievement involves a blind faith and vainglorious ambition exceptional in
business and rarer still in Anglo-Saxon financial markets often accused of
excessive short-termism. How far such faith will reap commercial rewards is
still impossible to say. But the world is a richer place for this piece of
Anglo-French tunnel vision, whose benefits will be counted for generations
to come. Eurotunnel has changed the map of Europe for the better.
