FT  14 JAN 94 / Recruitment: Bringing in, raising up, throwing out -
Psychologists' research casts disturbing light on widely used tests of
people's working ability
Would you willingly stake your livelihood on your performance in tests not
only devised by folk largely ignorant about your job, but of dubious
legality? What prompts me to ask is that, far from being hypothetical, the
question seems more and more likely to confront this column's readers in
hard reality.
The danger is especially great for those of you whose living depends on your
being employed in organisations, which show signs of becoming addicted to
psychologists' measures of human capability. To make things worse, the cause
of the danger is not just that the so-called psychometric devices are in
growing vogue for selecting new recruits and deciding who is to be promoted.
After all, such yardsticks have been used for those purposes for several
decades.
The big difference is that employers are no longer using them solely for
those purposes. For in the days when use of the psychologists' divining rods
was confined to promotion and initial selection, the only people at risk to
them were aspiring job-changers who volunteered themselves to be measured as
candidates. People happy to continue working in the same job were safe from
the shrinks' inventions.
But fewer and fewer settled staff now have the guarantee of safety. no
matter how loyal their service. The reason is that besides relying on tests
and the like to select new blood to bring in or raise up, organisations are
increasingly using them to determine which longer-serving employees to throw
out.
While the reject-earmarking variant has been in occasional operation for 15
years or so, the latest recorded example in Britain at least came just
before Christmas in the London borough of Southwark. Staff of the local
council's 120-strong finance section were given a long and complex test,
apparently on the assurance that there was no 'correct' answer to any
question. As a result, however, 19 of them were told to cease working and
escorted from the office, and 10 have since reputedly been informed that the
council considers them unsuitable for employment.
Wishing to learn what leading psychologists think of such goings-on, I
telephoned Professor Ivan Robertson of the University of Manchester
Institute of Science and Technology, who is a world authority on
psychometric testing. It turned out that he hadn't previously heard about
the Southwark incident.
Even so, his opinion of it can be gauged from the fact that I had to make
several attempts before persuading him that such a thing had really
happened. He found it very hard to believe that anyone could misuse a
selection device so badly. Once I finally convinced him, Outrageous] was the
only printable comment on the matter he uttered. But he did add, among other
things, that in his view shrinks of the occupational type, at any rate, have
long and wrongly concentrated their efforts on providing the employers' side
of the issue with yardsticks, at the expense of paying insufficient heed to
their effect on the employees who get measured.
Professor Robertson also endorsed numerous of the criticisms of current
testing which were spelt out by a fellow psychologist - Dr Mark Cook, of the
University College of Swansea's Personnel Selection Research Group - during
last week's annual conference of the occupational section of the British
Psychological Society.
Dr Cook's main target was the way in which the selection devices are
'validated' or, in lay terms, the rules by which shrinks decide whether or
not the tests adequately assess what it takes to succeed in the types of
work for which candidates are being selected. The only properly acceptable
yardstick, he argues, is one that is demonstrably linked directly with
objective criteria of actual achievement in the job at issue. Examples are
value or volume of orders gained in the case of sales people, and numbers
and quality of widgets turned out in the case of certain production workers.
One reason behind his argument is that unless selection tests are valid by
directly objective criteria, those using them may fall foul of Britain's and
other countries' laws prohibiting discrimination by race, sex and so on.
Indeed, such laws often state specifically that, if there is an illegal bias
in any attribute demanded by a selection procedure, the onus is on the
employer to prove that the particular attribute is essential to good
performance in the work concerned.
Unfortunately, Dr Cook's extensive research into methods of validation shows
that only a minority of yardsticks are directly tied to actual job
achievement, for the simple reason that there are relatively few types of
work in which performance can be adequately gauged by objective criteria
alone. Hence most psychometric devices - at least 60 per cent, and possibly
more than three quarters - settle for more subjective criteria such as
ratings of employees' performance by their bosses.
While that may be understandable at a technical level, however, the Swansea
psychologist's studies also show that far from being a reasonable substitute
for objective criteria, bosses' ratings are a very different thing.
Researchers in various parts of the world have found that such ratings are
subject to a wide range of biases that can have little bearing on actual
achievement in a job.
He divides them into four main categories. One includes not only
discrimination on illegal grounds together with 'ageism', but irrelevant
likes and dislikes of particular physical and other individual traits as
well as personal views. A second covers the distorting effects of
politicking. The third group lumps together various aspects of 'impression
management', including the art of buttering up the boss discussed in the
Jobs column last week.
The biggest group is left to the last. Headed 'the undeserved reputation',
it notes 10 ways in which seniors and juniors alike go about getting
themselves seen as good performers while doing little if any productive
work.
Dr Cook tells me that the criterion of bosses' ratings flaws not only a lot
of tests of personality, but also many of those purporting to measure what
was once called 'intelligence' although it is now termed 'cognitive ability'
or the like. In all such cases, the prevalence of subjective biases suggest
the yardsticks cannot be reliable for selecting truly productive staff, and
cast doubt on the measures' legality to boot. He nevertheless stresses that
mere doubt is a long way short of sufficient reason to view them as
unequivocally against the law.
But there was a certain contrasting lack of caution in the words of another
psychologist who contributed to last week's conference. He is Dr Derek North
of Sheffield who criticised further selection yardsticks which are even more
widely used in Britain. Their most popular use is in whittling down initial
applications to shortlists of people deemed worthy of interview.
He certainly pulled few punches in declaring that the evidence shows such
methods are not only of very dubious legality, but a poor predictor of work
performance. Employers using them in the standard way probably ensure two
results. First, rob themselves of 'the opportunity to employ people who will
probably be eminently suitable for the job'. Second, some of the recruits
whom they do take on will be less competent than the people they put off.
Dr North, by the way, works for Britain's official employment service. And
the yardsticks he criticised are formal educational qualifications.
