FT  30 MAY 94 / Housing shortage at centre stage in Israel: A lack of land
and labour
On a terraced hillside rising above west Jerusalem's huge new Malha shopping
centre, rows of new housing stand close to completion - outside walls faced
in golden Jerusalem stone, roofing finished, but with windows missing, no
plumbing, and electricity yet to be connected.
Across town, in the Talpiot neighbourhood, Yitzhak, bespectacled building
manager of a deserted site, explains the malaise: 'There are no Palestinians
coming in from the territories to work. And without Palestinians, there's no
building.'
The closure of the occupied territories - which is keeping virtually all
Palestinians workers from their jobs inside sovereign Israel - has
exacerbated a problem that has now become a priority for Prime Minister
Yitzhak Rabin's moderate Labour government: the soaring rise in house
prices.
For the third time in eight days, the Israeli cabinet yesterday devoted a
full meeting to the issue, finally approving measures to free land for
50,000 new housing units this year, setting aside cheaper housing for those
most in need, and introducing incentives for contractors to complete at top
speed.
Even yesterday's measures seem far too limited to achieve a drastic
improvement.
The problem, basically, is a matter of supply and demand. 'In Jerusalem, for
example,' says real estate agent Alex Losky, 'there's huge demand. Everybody
wants to live here. But there's just no land available for building on.'
Supply has been limited by the amount of red tape blocking allocation of new
areas for construction - the innumerable local, regional and national
committees from which approval must be sought. And once land is allocated,
private contractors - well aware of the spiralling prices - are in no hurry
to complete projects. The longer they take, the higher the price they'll be
able to demand.
Even contractors trying to work fast have been hampered by the closure of
the territories. Previously, 65,000 Palestinians worked in construction
inside Israel; yesterday, the cabinet agreed reluctantly to lift the closure
order on just 13,000 of them. Asked why, with a national unemployment rate
of 10 per cent, Israelis were unwilling to fill the vacuum, Mr Yehuda Goren,
deputy director of the Contractors' Association, said: 'The Israeli
unemployment reservoir is generally composed of people who aren't fit to
work in construction. There is potential to recruit only about 3,500.'
Mr Goren thought pay was quite competitive, and stressed Palestinians and
Israelis were offered the same rates, ranging from 2,100 shekels (about
Pounds 460) to 3,500 shekels a month - below, but not far below, average
Israeli wages. Israel has taken to bringing in workers from Thailand,
Romania and other cheap labour countries. Mr Goren said there would be
26,000 foreign construction workers in Israel by the week's end. Their
minimum wage is 1,500 shekels a month.
While land and labour shortages limit supply, demand is booming. Even though
the pre-Gulf war era of 20,000 Russian immigrants a month is now a distant
memory, new arrivals still average a monthly 6,000. Before the autonomy deal
with the Palestinians, many thousands of cash-strapped families could find
cheaper housing in the occupied West Bank, but only the most ideologically
committed are buying homes in settlements today. A further wave of demand
for homes inside sovereign Israel is inevitable when, sooner or later, the
government offers compensation to settlers willing to leave the occupied
territories.
On top of all these factors, demand is also being fuelled by foreign Jewish
investment in Israeli property which, according to Mr Bennie Loval of the
Anglo Saxon real estate agency, accounts for 40 or even 50 per cent of house
purchases in the best areas of Jerusalem, Tel Aviv and coastal towns like
Herzliyah and Netanyah.
In the previous Likud government, Mr Ariel Sharon, former general and
defence minister, was housing supremo. He bulldozed through much of the red
tape, and paid tens of millions of dollars in incentives to contractors, to
shake the industry into a period of furious construction. Mr Sharon
concentrated much of his building efforts on the south of Israel, the Negev
desert where jobs are scarce and where even new immigrants were reluctant to
live. As the Rabin government tries to address the housing shortage, many of
Mr Sharon's southern apartments stand empty.
 -------------------------------------------
ISRAELI HOUSE PRICES
% increase on previous year
 -------------------------------------------
1989       34.7
1990       34.5
1991       30.1
1992       10.1
1993       21.5
1994       10.4*
 -------------------------------------------
*To April
Source: Central Bureau of Statistics
 -------------------------------------------
