FT  10 FEB 94 / Major dismisses talk of crisis
Mr John Major yesterday dismissed as 'empty chatterings' the speculation at
Westminster that defeat in this summer's local and European elections would
threaten a new leadership crisis in the Conservative party.
With Tory MPs still stunned by the bizarre death this week of their
colleague Stephen Milligan, the prime minister acknowledged his frustration
at the constant talk of a leadership crisis.
During a visit to Leicester marking the start of an intense programme of
regional tours ahead of the elections, he insisted that the government's
attention was focused on a 'startling' improvement in economic prospects.
Mr Major, increasingly disillusioned with his treatment by the media at
Westminster, intends to use the tours to take his message directly to the
electorate. In Leicester, he held the first of a planned series of meetings
with regional newspaper editors.
He has ignored the advice of some colleagues that by taking such a high
personal profile in the campaigns he risks being blamed directly for a poor
Tory performance in the elections for local councils and the European
Parliament.
The prime minister has told friends in recent weeks that he is the only
leader capable of holding together the Tory party after its schisms over
Europe and economic policy.
Questioned about his own political authority, he replied: 'We had all this
last year - there was going to be a great leadership crisis in November but
it turned out to be empty chatterings - you will find the same thing this
year.'
He described the death of Mr Milligan, which is being investigated by the
police, as a deep personal tragedy. He added: 'He must have been pretty
unhappy, pretty miserable.'
His comments followed a warning from Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, that
a challenge to Mr Major would confront the Tories with almost certain defeat
at the next election.
The chancellor said the damage inflicted by a new leadership crisis would
become an argument over 'who leads the government to defeat'.
