FT  27 JUN 94 / Media Futures: The all singing, all dancing newspaper
One new local newspaper produced last week has that most traditional of
names - The Gazette &amp; Herald. But that is one of the few traditional things
about a very special paper, created by a collection of editors from the
Westminster Press regional newspaper group, working closely with Digithurst,
the communications research company that specialises in multimedia.
The colour picture of a trans-Atlantic yacht on the front page, for example,
had a rather unusual feature - you could hear the sound of the waves] And
when the reader checked out the latest pop record charts it was possible to
click on to clips of the actual records themselves.
Naturally when you turned to the classified advertising section it was easy
to call up colour pictures of particular cars or houses you were interested
in buying. All this is possible because The Gazette &amp; Herald is delivered
electronicly to personal computers using data broadcast links.
Using the conventions, and to some extent the design of an orthodox
newspaper, the project is probably the most ambitious trial so far for an
electronic newspaper in the UK.
'Anywhere you can receive good quality television you can receive this,'
says Peter Kruger, managing director of Digithurst, who has been working on
digitalisation for more than a decade.
In the experiment, the latest news was transmitted by modem from the
Marlborough offices of the Wiltshire Gazette &amp; Herald and brought together
with information created by pupils at the St John's School in Marlborough.
The electronic newspaper trials, are part of a broader series of advanced
communications projects run by Digithurst. In these programmes the Wiltshire
school is connected by an integrated services digital network (ISDN) link
with the Bookholtzberg School in Ganderkesee, northern Germany.
Apart from swopping electronic newspapers and their own magazines, the two
schools have facilities for video conferencing and on-line language
translation. The experimental electronic newspaper was produced by
Digithurst multimedia software. Called PictureBook, this is already on the
market. The 'authoring' system to put together the sound, pictures and data
costs Pounds 595, while the special card in the PC needed to receive the
service costs Pounds 99.
Kruger's other multimedia creations in the past have ranged from a system
for hairdressers, which allows clients to try out different styles on
pictures of themselves, to car presentations that enables potential
customers to 'explore' a car on screen.
In the wake of the electronic newspaper, Kruger believes that commercial
versions may be no more than three years away.
Meanwhile, he has in his company foyer another way of keeping up with the
news - an instantaneous teletext system. Digithurst has combined the
broadcast teletext service with the PC and anyone waiting to see Kruger can
call up the latest, national and local news, or the performance of a
particular share, simply by touching a special screen.
