FT  07 NOV 94 / Survey of Birmingham and the West Midlands (5): Carmakers
are the magnet - Inward investment / Paul Cheeseright traces its growing
importance
Foreign investment in the West Midlands is increasing after three years of
decline. Probably it now accounts for 20 per cent of the UK total, restoring
the region to the position it occupied in the late 1980s as the English area
most favoured by overseas companies.
Figures assembled by the West Midlands Development Agency (WMDA), the focus
of regional activity in attracting new investment, show that, in the year to
last April, foreign investment reached Pounds 652.72m, excluding the Pounds
800m takeover of Rover, the vehicle manufacturer, by BMW of Germany.
But of the 83 projects involved, 47, with a value of Pounds 309.39m, covered
expansion by foreign-owned companies already established in the regions. The
other projects were 19 acquisitions, worth Pounds 316.1m, 14 new investments
valued at Pounds 22.59m and three joint ventures.
'This year the number of projects is slightly down but capital expenditure
is ahead of the 1993-94 total,' reported Mr Paul Richards, the WMDA's chief
executive.
The high proportion of spending on company expansions underlines the
significance of foreign investment for the region.
Since 1988 foreign investment in the West Midlands has topped Pounds 2.5bn,
creating 22,000 jobs. Indeed, it is estimated that foreign-owned companies
now account for about 20 per cent of regional output.
'Unemployment in the second half of the 1980s came down faster in the West
Midlands than in the UK as a whole, because of inward investment,' said Mr
Chris Tillett, of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, accountants, in Birmingham.
Further, regional surveys showed that, during the recession, overseas
companies were more inclined than indigenous companies to follow through
their investment plans. Arguably, then, they softened the impact of
recession.
The greater part of the investment is coming from traditional areas. Last
year European companies were involved in 54 per cent of the projects and
North American companies 39 per cent. The pace of Japanese investment has
slowed, while the expected growthin interest from companies in Korea and
Taiwan has not materialised.
Although the sectoral spread of investment remains wide, ranging from
electronics to food processing, the automotive sector holds predominant
importance. Three factors are at work here.
First, the expansion of car assembly in the UK is drawing in suppliers
wishing to be closer to their customers. Second, overseas companies are
using the West Midlands, a vehicle manufacturing area, as a platform from
which to enter the wider European Union market. Third, cost patterns have
been shifting within the European auto industry.
'Not only is the UK cheap, but the West Midlands is even cheaper,' noted Mr
Tillett.
The US department of labour calculated that average total labour costs per
hour in the UK are Dollars 11, against Dollars 15 in the US, Dollars 16 in
France and Dollars 22 in Germany. Coopers &amp; Lybrand noted that average gross
male earnings in the West Midlands are 92 per cent of the UK average. It
assessed that operating costs of a typical Coventry plant would be less than
two thirds those of a German plant.
The drive against inflated costs has induced German car manufacturers like
Mercedes Benz and Volkswagen to widen the geographical sourcing of their
components. At the same time, the level of West Midlands costs has made it
feasible for their traditional suppliers to consider setting up operations
in the region.
Yet there is no guarantee that the stronger flow of inward investment will
continue. Costs are only one factor in an increasingly competitive race to
secure new employment. This is a race which sets country against country,
region against region, and even within a region, district against district.
The latest figures from the WMDA are the first since the government revised
the boundaries on its map of assisted areas and the European Commission
defined the areas which it considered qualified for aid. This has meant that
Telford, a focus for investment since the mid-1980s, and a number of other
locations, no longer have the opportunity to offer subsidies to incoming
companies at the level of past years.
This has made little difference so far. The easy access to greenfield sites
and the comfort to be derived by incoming companies from the presence of
their peers has led to what Mr David Rogerson, director of the Telford
Development Agency, described as 'the highest level of inquiries during the
last few months we've ever had'.
In the first half of this year, seven foreign companies established
themselves in Telford, compared with 11 in the whole of 1993 and nine in the
whole of 1992.
Yet 60 per cent of the jobs created or safeguarded by foreign investment in
the West Midlands were in the Birmingham-Black Country conurbation during
the year to last April.
The competitive attractions within the region may be changing. Land assembly
programmes of government agencies are coming to fruition. They have led, for
example, to the Black Country Development Corporation's planned automotive
components park and the Birmingham Heartlands Development Corporation's
proposal for a new business park on land purchased from Leyland Daf Vans.
Space is becoming available in the conurbation where there was none before.
This is good news for the WMDA, because it widens the range of site
possibilities it can offer to potential investors. Inward investment
agencies are searching for new services which can be provided for incoming
companies, not only to help them but to link them in to the local network of
suppliers.
'Inward investment used to be about a piece of land. Now it's much more a
company saying, 'What resources have you got to support my business?'' said
Mr Richards. Meeting this sort of demand, acknowledging that sustaining
companies which have already set up can be just as significant as drawing in
new arrivals, is likely to change the WMDA.
New forms of collaboration between local agencies in the West Midlands,
partly in response to the growing role of training and enterprise councils,
should diminish the reliance of the WMDA on the department of trade and
industry, its prime source of funding, and the local authorities.
