FT  25 APR 94 / UK Company News: Medeva facing legal threat
Medeva, the fast-growing pharmaceuticals company, is being threatened with
legal action over the delayed development of its hepatitis B vaccine.
The Swiss companies that sold the part-developed vaccine to Medeva for up to
Pounds 9.3m two years ago are threatening to sue for breach of contract over
the conduct of the development programme.
The vendors, GA Investments and Epitec, received only Pounds 3.86m up front
with the balance dependent on completion of development and registration of
the product in European countries.
At the time of the sale, in March 1992, it was expected that product
approvals would be obtained within two and a half years. But last month
Medeva revealed that an application for approval had slipped from 1994 to
1995.
Mr Bill Bogie, chief executive, declined to comment on the threatened legal
action but admitted there had been 'a sharp exchange of letters' between the
two sides' lawyers. He said the vendors had been doing some development work
on the vaccine for Medeva which had been ended last month 'by mutual
agreement'. 'We are in dispute over how to hand over what we believe they
have done.'
Mr Bogie added that it was wrong to talk of 'delays' in development which
suggested the company had met problems it did not know how to overcome. 'I
prefer not to talk about delays but technological hurdles,' he said.
However, the vendors say they will start legal proceedings unless they
receive payment under the original contract or acceptable new terms are
negotiated.
News of the delay to the project marred Medeva's otherwise upbeat annual
figures announcement last month which also saw the resignation as managing
director of the group's founder Mr Ian Gowrie-Smith.
The vaccine is already at the centre of legal actions concerning alleged
infringement of patents. In November the High Court ruled that Medeva's
activities had infringed a patent held by US drug company Biogen for a
hepatitis B vaccine. But Medeva says it is confident of winning an appeal
due to be heard in July.
The hepatitis B vaccine is seen as one of the prime sources of Medeva's
earnings growth in the later 1990s. Analysts had been looking for sales of
around Pounds 30m in 1995 with an eventual worldwide target of up to Pounds
200m a year.
The project is also viewed as an important test of Medeva's strategy of
buying portfolios of drugs in late stages of development to take them
through the regulatory procedures to market.
