FT  24 AUG 94 / Remploy chief hits back at Portillo
The statement by Mr Michael Portillo, the employment secretary, that a
scheme to help disabled employees was 'hardly ever used' has been challenged
by the UK's largest employer of disabled workers.
Mr Tony Withey, Remploy's chief executive, said the government's decision to
scrap the priority supplier scheme would affect 85 per cent of the company's
textile contracts with the Ministry of Defence.
The scheme allows companies which employ disabled workers to bid again if
they fail to secure a govern-ment contract at the first attempt.
About 40 per cent of Remploy's business comes from the public sector.
Mr Withey yesterday met Mr Phillip Oppenheim, the employment minister, to
discuss government support for Remploy's disabled employ-ees.
The company said it had sufficient work for its textile factories until the
end of the financial year, and Mr Oppenheim ordered officials to work with
Remploy to protect employment opportunities.
Although the textile division relies heavily on the scrapped scheme, the
rest of the company has been able to win public-sector contracts without
using it.
Mr Portillo has said a government subsidy worth Pounds 80m would continue to
help companies with disabled employees to compete even though the scheme had
been scrapped.
But Mr Withey said the subsidy would not offset the loss of the opportunity
to re-bid for tenders on government contracts.
The subsidy, which is set each year, only covers the extra costs incurred by
employing disabled workers.
Mr Withey said: 'The subsidy has never been used to make us more
competitive. Our pricing has nothing to do with the subsidy.'
He said the company had often won contracts with a higher bid because of its
offer of quality services.
Mr Withey said: 'We now have a two-fold problem. We are unable to compete
with some companies because we have higher prices as a result of higher
labour costs, and the privilege that we have had in bidding for government
tenders has disappeared.'
Mr Withey said he had known about the government's intention to end the
priority scheme for about a year.
He said: 'We made it clear that a large amount of our textiles business
comes from this scheme.
'But the way it was presented to us was that we had no choice because it was
illegal under EU directives.'
The company reported turnover of Pounds 126.7m last year, up Pounds 2m from
the year before. It was able to increase sales in spite of a cut in the
government subsidy, loss of important public contracts, and increased
competition from companies which employ cheap labour from north Africa and
eastern Europe.
