FT  13 APR 94 / International Company News: Motorola's 46% rise disappoints
market
Motorola's share price tumbled after the electronics and semiconductor group
reported first-quarter results that failed to live up to Wall Street
expectations despite a 46 per cent increase in net profits.
Its share price dropped by Dollars 6.75 to Dollars 99.25 in after-hours
trading on Monday and yesterday the stock was trading at Dollars 94.50 in
mid-session.
First-quarter net income rose to Dollars 298m, or Dollars 1.03 a share,
compared with Dollars 204m, or 72 cents, in the same period last year. Sales
rose 29 per cent to Dollars 4.69bn from Dollars 3.63bn.
However, the pace of growth in net income represented a slowdown from last
year's increase of more than 100 per cent. Analysts said they had hoped to
see the company outperform their projections of around Dollars 1.04 a share
with higher earnings growth in the semiconductor and communications
equipment markets.
A leading supplier of cellular telephones and transmission equipment,
Motorola said sales in that sector rose 57 per cent to Dollars 1.67bn, while
orders were up 62 per cent.
During the quarter the company resolved a dispute in Japan over market
access, reaching an agreement with Nippon Idou Tsushin Corp (IDO) to begin
expanding the service area for the Motorola cellular telephone system in the
Tokyo and Nagoya areas.
The communication products sector, which includes pagers and the two-way
radios used by taxi fleet vehicles, had sales growth of 20 per cent, to
Dollars 1.24bn, but orders grew just 1 per cent.
The company said the lower than expected order growth was partly due to
excess inventories among distributors in China. Sales of pagers to the
Chinese market exploded last year, apparently in advance of user demand.
Sales of semiconductor products, another large segment, grew 26 per cent to
Dollars 1.61bn, with orders up 15 per cent.
The government and systems technology group, which includes Motorola's share
of the Iridium satellite communications venture, reported revenues of
Dollars 138m, up 10 per cent.
Overall, Motorola said net margin on sales was 6.4 per cent, up from 5.6 per
cent in the first quarter of last year.
