FT  05 FEB 94 / Arts: An orgy of nostalgia - Video
For an art form still just short of a hundred - centenary fireworks next
year - movies have an amazing reverence for the past. They keep that past
alive now thanks to their life-extending nephew, the video market, whose
release titles this month read like an invitation to a nostalgia orgy.
Here is a new label called 'Golden Age' wheeling out gilded classics like
Griffith's Intolerance, Stroheim's Queen Kelly and Murnau's Faust. The late
Federico Fellini is honoured with two choice reissues of early films,
Variety Lights and The White Sheikh (Connoisseur). And then there are the
new Hollywood movies, like Abel Ferrara's Body Snatchers (Warner) and Joe
Dante's Matinee (Guild), whose sole purpose is to remake old Hollywood
movies or genuflect before them.
Dante's film has a whale of a time throwing a larger-than-life horror
director played by John Goodman (and based on William 'The Tingler' Castle)
into Key West during the true-life trauma of the Cuban Invasion. And Ferrara
gives the twice-filmed Invasion Of The Body Snatchers a fresh
fear-transfusion by setting it in an army camp. The 'pod' people wear khaki;
the innocent newcomers are an army wife (Meg Tilly) and her children; and
the clue to the newly 'possessed' is their tendency to emit
eardrum-skewering screams whenever they sight a potential victim.
Unreleased, bizarrely, in UK cinemas; worth catching now.
As for the lovingly reissued classics, you should pounce on three. Variety
Lights (1951) was Fellini's dazzling solo-directing debut, spinning wit and
visual poetry around his wife Giulietta Masina. Queen Kelly (1929) has
Gloria Swanson alternating piety with pulchritude as a convent girl raised
to royalty. (Loopy plot; lyric treatment). And Intolerance (1916) is still
the epic to end them all. Its Babylonian temples, horizon-to-horizon battle
scenes and multiple-choice narrative (Nebuchadnezzar, Crucifixion, St
Bartholomew's Day, modern love story) still amaze, even when squashed into a
TV screen.
That both Stroheim's and Griffith's films became raw material for later
movies - Swanson re-runs Queen Kelly in Sunset Boulevard, Intolerance
inspired the Tavianis' Good Morning Babylon - adds to our sense of cinema as
a Chinese box of nostalgic self-referentialism. For past-delving good
measure February also offers the original 1925 version of the thrice-filmed
The Lost World (Golden Age) and Clouzot's first, French and finest Wages Of
Fear (Arrow); made in 1953, 20 years before the excruciating Hollywood
version directed by William Friedkin.
But movies can also do more inventive things with Time than trawl through
golden ages for inspiration-prompts. My pick of the month is the Bill Murray
comedy Ground-hog Day (Columbia). Here an art form based on pictures moving
through time gets stuck in time as if in a revolving door. Murray is a TV
weathercaster weekending in the tiny town of Punxsutawney, Pennsylvania, for
the annual spring-heralding Groundhog Festival. But each morning, he wakes
up to find that it is the same day: same people saying and doing the same
things, except for Murray himself who finds he can use his cumulative
hindsight to influence destiny - and the affections of his beloved Andie
McDowell.
No medium but the moving picture could make this work. What would seem
laboured whimsy in a novel or stage play is funny because of cinema's
throwaway realism and Murray's own throwaway, cinegenic befuddlement. This
actor is modern cinema's best disgruntled comic - his face a living beanbag
 -and in Groundhog Day he has the time of his life trying to sort out the
time(s) of his life.
