FT  01 DEC 94 / Survey of Software at Work - Winter 1994 (10): Starting off
on the right foot - Forward planning / Claire Gooding recounts user
experiences with a business planning tool which helps lay the foundation for
profit
Anyone contemplating setting up a new business has plenty to think about:
accounts usually come later. But business planning is an essential part of
starting up, and the process of fixing budgets, prices, and estimating the
cost of raw materials, services, and overheads, will eventually filter
through to profit and loss accounts.
Business Architect, a product recently launched in the UK, is a PC-based
pre-planning tool that provides the analytical power which so many users say
they want from their accounts software.
'Business Architect is not an accounting system as such, but it leads you
through the process of setting up a business plan,' says Rory Anderson, a
managing partner in Dunn and Crome, based in Lowestoft, Suffolk, a family
firm of solicitors. He is involved in the launch of a new company being set
up by a client who has invented an innovative building product.
'Our practice wanted to move away from traditional legal fields and go back
to its roots as men of business,' he explains. He is producing his own
packaged service for small businesses and specialises in new ventures. The
new product he is helping to launch provides an effective way of fixing
plasterboard to ceilings.
'There's a huge potential, because it is relevant to 90 per cent of new
dwellings or refurbishments, not just in the UK, but in Europe and
internationally. We used Business Architect to put together a 15-page
financial business plan for the product.'
Business Architect helped him set up on an IBM PC the necessary accounts,
trial balance, profit and loss accounts, balance sheets and cash flow for
the new company. This job is usually left to management accountants,
especially when seeking capital from outside sources. The process helped him
to work through some of the projected figures for income, and realise that
the projected losses in the first year would continue for the next few years
with the pricing structure as it was.
'The client was cautious about new sales, but even so it was clear that the
price was fixed too low. The new product needs less skill than the existing
methods, and it's cheaper and better, so the balancing act was to make it no
more expensive than traditional products. We simply played until we got the
lowest possible pricing at which a profit could be made.'
Mr Anderson believes that life is too short to waste time learning how to
use software, and says he taught himself to use the package in about five
minutes. 'I've got really excited at what it can do.'
Another keen user of Business Architect is Peter Cross, managing director of
Leatherhead-based Computer Turnkey, which specialises in
internationally-used software packages for the insurance and re-insurance
industry.
As for any software developer, balancing resources available to support
existing software products and those needed to develop new ones is a fine
art. When deciding to launch a new version of its package for an
international market, Mr Cross decided to treat it as a separate enterprise
which would not take funds from existing core business.
'It helped clarify a number of factors in the marketplace, such as the
volume of sales to international outlets, the effort needed to support
existing activities, and the amount of additional finance we would need,'
says Mr Cross.
'It's more than a series of linked spreadsheets, it's about elements in the
business plan. Once it is set up, it can be used for 'what-if' games.
There's a lot of text, for example, on qualifying sales leads, assessing
expenses and so on. It was a good starting point from which to plan a new
project, but as an established company, it would be even better to pick up
real live accounting data for the planning model.'
Supplier profile Product: Business Architect is a business planning tool
rather than an accounts package. It guides the user through three stages:
assessing market opportunity, building a plan, and implementing it.
Often used to obtain financial backing, it is
designed, through good research and financial organisation, to prevent
business failure.
Suppliers: Business Channel was founded in the UK in 1992 by Bill Butt and
Stephen Bullas.
Turnover: new company: not applicable.
Number of users: not disclosed: new product.
Price: Pounds 259 plus VAT.
Hardware and operating systems: IBM PC and compatible.
Sales and support/maintenance: direct and through VARS.
Other services available: training and consultancy.
User views: very easy to use, clear structure, makes user analyse financial
components and risks in detail.
Contact: sales office.
Tel: 0784 483779.
