FT  14 MAR 94 / Ministers may use army for airport security
Ministers are this week expected to consider using army patrols to boost
security at British airports after a third IRA mortar attack at Heathrow in
five days and further threats to London's two big airports.
Heathrow and Gatwick airports were both closed for several hours last night
after coded warnings, and many flights were diverted. Scotland Yard later
described the warnings as a 'cynical ploy by the IRA to cause unnecessary
confusion and fear amongst the public'.
The scare came as the IRA demanded new direct talks between republicans and
the government. In a statement released in Dublin, the IRA said there had to
be talks if there was any chance of an end to violence. It was prepared to
be flexible and positive in exploring potential for moving the peace process
forward, but lines of communication would have to reopen.
The IRA has yet to make a definitive response to the Downing Street
declaration reached between Mr Major and Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime
minister, three months ago, but this is as close as it has come to
acknowledging that the agreement is not enough to stop its campaign.
Meanwhile, army personnel and equipment helped search Heathrow for further
devices following yesterday's attack in which four mortars, fired from a
heavily camouflaged launcher, failed to explode.
One hit the roof of Terminal 4, which was closed for eight hours, causing
delays to flights. The police believe the launchers involved in the three
attacks were placed at the same time. The launchers involved in the two
lastest attacks had timers attached to them.
The IRA's ability to embarrass the security forces and disrupt travel will
today bring renewed calls at Westminster for tighter security.
The government, however, will be anxious to prevent the IRA using the
introduction of army patrols as a propaganda coup. It is also aware that
tighter security measures in one location may only switch IRA attacks
elsewhere.
Ministers could meet as early as today to decide whether to approve a
high-profile army presence at airports. Downing Street said any requests
from the police for the army's help would be carefully considered.
Mr Dick Spring, Irish foreign minister, last night accused Sinn Fein and the
IRA of showing 'utter contempt' for the peace process. He believed the
mortar attacks had turned Sinn Fein's internal discussions on the peace
process into a 'bizarre charade' and said people viewed with growing dismay
the prospects for an early end to violence.
Last night the IRA claimed its warnings were deliberately ignored. 'The luck
of the British authorities who are deliberately taking these calculated and
cynical gambles with peoples' lives will inevitably run out,' it said.
London hotels fear the attacks will lead to cancellations by businessmen and
tourists this summer - particularly US visitors. But US business people
leaving New York for London yesterday thought it would have little immediate
effect.
The IRA action is also likely to bring Dublin under more pressure from
British ministers to improve cross-border co-operation in combating
terrorism - an issue already high on the Anglo-Irish agenda.
Veterans of Hedge End must scale city heights, Page 7
Major's public-service brain-child fails test, Page 9
