FT  19 AUG 94 / Hidden agenda seen behind Carlos arrest: Diplomats are sure
Sudan and France struck a deal
The Sudanese government would not have handed Carlos over to the French
'without wanting, and being promised, something fairly substantial in
return'. That view, expressed yesterday by a senior Arab diplomat, has in
the past few days emerged as the most prevalent reaction of government
officials and media throughout the Middle East to the arraignment of Illich
Ramirez Sanchez, better known as Carlos, before a French investigating
magistrate to face charges of terrorism.
Paris and Khartoum have hotly denied the allegation. Mr Charles Pasqua, the
French interior minister, insisted there were no trade-offs.
'It's a tissue of lies. It's disinformation, scandalous', he said earlier
this week. The Sudanese government stressed that the decision to extradite
Carlos to France was merely 'confirmation of its long stance against
terrorism and a reflection of its readiness to co-operate constructively
with the international community'.
Few western and Arab governments would recognise the Sudanese
self-assessment. In August last year the US added Sudan to the list of
governments which it accuses of sponsoring international terrorism, linking
it with Iran, Syria and Libya.
According to the US 'the cumulative weight of evidence establishes that
Sudan is providing repeated support for international terrorism'. The
support is said to come more from the provision of training facilities and a
safe haven, than from the active sponsorship of individual terrorist acts
abroad.
Diplomats have pointed to the regular presence in Sudan of representatives
of Iran's revolutionary guards, and members of radical Islamic factions,
such as the Lebanese Hizbollah and the Palestinian Hamas movement.
Sudan's drift into closer association with the most radical Middle Eastern
states has been accompanied by further economic decline, made worse by the
continuing civil war in the south. The seizure of power by radical Islamic
officers in 1989 under Lt General Omar Hassan al-Bashir, now head of state,
and backed by Mr Hassan Turabi's National Islamic Front, accelerated the
trend. The subsequent purges and attempts to eliminate all domestic
opposition have provoked condemnation by human rights organisations and
contributed to Sudan's international isolation. Support for Iraq's President
Saddam Hussein during the Gulf war took the process a step further.
The impact on an already strained economy has been calamitous. International
aid, beyond that from its radical allies, has almost dried up. Gross
national product is certain to contract again this year; exports, which have
more than halved in value since 1989, are expected to fall further, and
inflation to accelerate beyond the current estimated annual rate of at least
250 per cent. There have been reports of violent anti-government
demonstrations from several towns this year and diplomats expect there to to
be more evidence of popular discontent as the economic crisis deepens.
Meanwhile, there is no sign of an end to the 11-year war in the south,
despite the ceasefire between the regime and the two factions of the Sudan
People's Liberation Army. The fighting, which none of the parties appears
able to win militarily, has caused intense suffering among the 4m people of
the south who are mainly animist and Christian. With aid efforts regularly
frustrated by the warring factions, the potential for a wider human disaster
in the south continues to preoccupy international agencies working in the
region.
Against such a background it would be surprising if the Sudanese regime did
not seek to capitalise internationally by delivering a terrorist whom, for
whatever reason, it no longer wanted as a guest. Sudan's economic and
political plight argues against making gratuitously generous gestures.
Lawyers for Carlos claim that a deal was struck between Paris and Khartoum
which allowed the terrorist to be transferred to France. 'Carlos was
betrayed and sold for a sum much bigger than 30 pieces of silver,' said Mr
Mourad Oussedik, one of the defence lawyers. Liberation, the French daily,
weighed in with claims that France supplied satellite surveillance
photographs to help Khartoum in its fight in the south.
The French government has denied the allegations and the Foreign Ministry
described its relations with Sudan as 'marked by prudence', adding Paris had
criticised the human rights record of the Khartoum regime and urged a
settlement to the civil war. A spokesman said France had suspended all
bilateral aid to Sudan in 1990, with the exception of food and medical
supplies.
Western diplomats in Paris, however, believe that France has been
cultivating ties with the Sudanese government for several months. They said
that in addition to its interest in capturing Carlos, the government was
seeking to develop relations with a regime which could prove influential in
the worsening Algerian crisis.
'It may be a typical case of a French dual-track policy, outwardly taking a
tough stance against Islamic fundamentalism and a state suspected of
supporting terrorism, while building contacts,' said one diplomat.
According to this argument, France may be seeking to use Sudan's leaders to
mediate with the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) which has been locked into an
increasingly violent struggle with the government in Algeria since being
denied certain victory in the 1992 general election. The French government
has begun cracking down on suspected Moslem militants and FIS
representatives in France since five of its citizens were killed in Algiers
earlier this month.
In the months ahead the policies and actions of the governments in Paris and
Khartoum are certain to be scrutinised with more than usual attention by an
international community which has grown sceptical about accepting deals
involving terrorists at face value.
