FT  25 MAR 94 / London Stock Exchange: Allied tumbles
The surprise Pounds 739m takeover by Allied Lyons of Spanish spirits group
Pedro Domecq won plaudits from across the market, although the accompanying
profits forecast proved disappointing. Allied suggested its profits for this
year will come in at Pounds 604m, whereas drinks analysts had been expecting
in the region of Pounds 625m. This was the chief factor in pulling down the
shares, which tumbled 44 to 561p. There was also some concern at the deep
discount of the 2-for-13 Pounds 651m rights issue priced at 490p.
The deal will catapult Allied from fifth to second in the spirits league
table and give it critical mass in the lucrative Spanish and Latin American
spirits markets. Mr David Thompson at Kleinwort Benson said: 'This gives
Allied a strong position in some of the best markets.' Mr Geoff Collyer at
NatWest Securities said: 'This is an outstanding deal. Domecq has been one
of the best performing spirits businesses of the last five years.'
Allied's lower than expected profit forecast hit other spirits groups, with
Grand Metropolitan sliding 10 1/2 to 455p and Guinness 15 to 467p.
Better-than-expected preliminary results and a highly successful
post-results meeting with insurance analysts saw Sun Alliance shares record
the best individual performance in the FT-SE 100 index.
Sun Alliance shares closed a net 12 higher at 326p, after touching a
session-best of 337p on exceptionally heavy turnover of 8.4m, the highest
single-day's activity in the shares since December 1992.
Mr Youssef Ziai, insurance analyst at Morgan Stanley, said he was preparing
to upgrade his current year forecast for Sun Alliance and reiterated his buy
recommendation on the shares.
Shares in tobacco and insurance conglomerate BAT Industries failed to
respond to a 25 per cent dividend hike and closed 5 lower at 454p. The
conglomerate is the first UK company to take advantage of legislation going
through parliament and declare that its final dividend is the result of
foreign income and so not liable to advance corporation tax (ACT). The hike
means that funds such as pension funds which are allowed to reclaim ACT will
not lose out while straightforward investment funds will benefit. BAT Due to
a technical fault, Thursday's edition carried a table of New Highs and Lows
for 1993/94 unchanged from the previous edition.
believes about 40 per cent of its shareholding is with non-tax paying funds.
Mr Nyren Scott Malden from BZW, the company broker said: 'The market has
given a grudging response to a company which is trying extremely hard to do
right by its shareholders.'
The shock of a Pounds 63m rights issue, the passing of the final dividend
and heavy losses for the year triggered a massive mark-down in shares of
John Mowlem, the construction group.
Marketmakers chopped their opening price for the stock to 120p, attempting
to stave off any avalanche of selling but nevertheless encountered a flurry
of sellers who drove the price down to close 40 lower at 112p.
There was talk that Great Universal Stores (GUS) had settled a problem with
the inland revenue over a plan to buy some of its shares back. The story,
unconfirmed by the company, was first heard following its share
restructuring late last year. GUS, which has over Pounds 1bn in cash, saw
its shares climb 7 to 574p.
Anticipated good results from Morrison (Wm), the northern supermarket group,
saw the shares edge up 3 to 120p. Results from Booker, which saw better than
expected cash generation, helped the shares gain 18 to 429p. Allied Lyons'
rights issue reminded the market of one of its perenniel favourites Cadbury
Schweppes and the shares slid back 14 to 473p.
A buy note from Credit Lyonaise Laing helped Granada gain 3 to 545p.
Transport and construction group P&amp;O was one of the best FT-SE 100
performing stocks after analysts upgraded profit forecasts following better
than expected full-year figures. The shares jumped 27 to 695p. UBS turned
buyer and raised its current year estimate by Pounds 40m to Pounds 320m.
Equipment and services group APV slipped 7 to 121 1/2 p, after reporting a
fall in profits.
A two-way pull in business services group BET brought volume of 12m by the
close, making it the day's most actively traded stock. The shares eased a
penny to 128p. The company has been seeing analysts this week before going
into closed season.
United Newspapers rose 5 to 643p after announcing figures at the top end of
the range of analysts' forecasts.
The day's two new issues both made perfectly respectable debuts, considering
the big losses across the market and the big tumble, around 6 per cent, the
market has suffered since the stocks were priced.
Computer service solution group MDIS opened a couple of pennies below the
issue price, but held up well, eventually ending the session at 257p after
turnover of 5.5m shares.
Brightstone Properties, placed in the market at 125p, ended the day at 136p,
albeit in thin trading of 223,000 shares.
There were, however, widespread fears that the flotation of Beazer Homes,
hived off by the Hanson group, could see the shares open at a discount to
the 165p issue price.
