FT  02 DEC 94 / Tax document seizures face strict controls
There will be strict controls on new Inland Revenue powers to demand
documents from accountants suspected of being involved in tax evasion.
The Ely Report - commissioned by the government after an outcry over
sweeping seizure powers proposed earlier this year - contains a series of
radical restraints on the Revenue.
Mr Philip Ely, the author of the report and a former president of the Law
Society, said he had decided that the powers recommended by the government
in March were 'far too wide'.
However, he agreed that the Revenue did face problems when there was no way
of getting hold of documentary evidence that an accountant was involved in
evasion.
Mr Ely's report, which has been backed by the government and may be included
in this year's finance bill, recommends that:
Action should only be taken where there are reasonable grounds to believe
that an accountant intended to evade tax liability.
The request for an order for documents by an officer of the Revenue should
be made on oath.
The evidence must point to a named client or clients. An appeal can be made
by the accountant.
An independent special commissioner should oversee the action.
The right of access extends only to the named individual client of an
accountant, not to the partnership's clients as a whole.
A strict time limit should run from the time the disputed documents were
filed to the Revenue.
During the consultation period on the Ely Report, a system should be sought
to allow agreed settlements to be made with the accountant concerned.
In spite of the restrictions on the new powers, the right of the Revenue to
acquire documents after an accountant has suffered a penalty or conviction
will remain.
Mr Richard Rees-Pulley, of accountants Ernst &amp; Young, which ran a campaign
against the extension of powers, said: 'We are desperately disappointed.
Obviously Mr Ely has done a very diligent job.
'However, the Revenue has too many powers already.'
Ernst &amp; Young polled more than 6,000 small accountancy firms on the earlier
proposals to extend Revenue powers. This found that 97.3 per cent thought
existing powers were sufficient.
