FT  31 MAR 94 / World Trade News: Tokyo defends access package, tells US to
look again
Japanese officials yesterday defended the government's package of
market-opening measures, stating that it was the most Japan could do for the
moment.
They also expressed hope that the package would lead to a revival of the
framework trade and economic talks with the US, which have been stalled
since February.
The package, announced on Tuesday, was dismissed by the US as being 'of
little substance'. Mr Masayoshi Takemura, chief cabinet secretary, said the
US reaction was 'regrettable'. He added Japan would do what more it could
before June, which Tokyo has set as a date for presenting details of its
market opening measures.
In the meantime, Japanese bureaucrats have indicated they will explore
diplomatic channels in an effort to convey the substance of the measures to
the US.
'We hope to win US understanding towards the package which clearly shows the
direction of deregulation and macro-economic reform. There will be many
opportunities to do so through diplomatic channels,' a foreign ministry
official said.
The Japanese defence followed negative US reaction to Japan's efforts to
stimulate the economy, open its markets and bring down the country's
towering trade surplus.
Mr Walter Mondale, US ambassador to Japan, yesterday added his voice to the
critical response from Washington. He described the deregulation measures as
'very vague, delayed and what they mean or might not mean is very difficult
to determine.'
The US response put further upward pressure on the yen, which broke through
Y103 to the dollar in Tokyo for the first time since mid-February when the
US-Japan summit failed to produce agreement on the framework negotiations.
Since then, the US has often accused Japan of not living up to its
commitments to achieve a 'highly significant' reduction in its current
account surplus. The two sides agreed on a cooling-off period during which
Japan, having rejected US calls for quantitative indicators to measure
progress in opening up its markets, was expected to come up with its own
scenario for reducing its surplus.
But despite the Japanese government's good intentions, the package has done
little to appease US calls for more concrete steps and threats of unilateral
action by Washington.
The package also failed to remove the threat of retaliation under Super 301,
the trade bill giving the US the right to retaliate against unfair trading
partners. Senior bureaucrats in Tokyo yesterday lamented that Washington had
not fully appreciated the significance of the measures.
While admitting that the language of the voluminous document produced in
Tokyo may have been somewhat obscure, there was much to read between the
lines, they said.
The US should look more carefully at the package before pronouncing it as
unsatisfactory, a foreign ministry official complained, adding that the
changes were part of an on-going process. While parts of the package need
further work, others are moving matters forward, said an official at the
trade ministry.
'We are introducing revolutionary changes in government procurement from
April . . . that is a very difficult thing to do,' he added, describing the
market-opening package as 'a firm foundation for reform.'
While the negative response from the US dashed immediate hopes for an early
resumption of the framework talks, officials made it clear that the two
sides could nevertheless work towards reviving the talks sooner rather than
later.
'The important thing is that both Japan and the US have kept the door open.
The framework talks can be revived at any level. It doesn't even have to be
official at first but some steps need to be taken,' a foreign ministry
official said.
'We believe that with these measures Japan has fulfilled its commitment
under the framework talks,' he added. Noting that Japan will endeavour to
firm up the package by June, he said: 'It is no longer fair to say that the
ball is in Japan's court. As responsible governments, the US and Japan must
both work towards resuming the negotiations. The ball is in both courts.'
