FT  06 MAY 94 / Survey of The Channel Tunnel (17): It's that D-Day spirit -
Ferries launch an all-out war for passengers
The Channel ports owe a vote of thanks to a legendary British Lions rugby
captain. Asked many years ago how he would combat a frighteningly tough
South African team, he said: 'Simple. We will get our retaliation in first.'
Every ferry operator and harbour owner threatened with losing business to
the Channel Tunnel has taken this philosophy to heart.
Millions of pounds have been invested in new or upgraded terminals and
ships, and costs are being cut to the bone, mainly through staff lay-offs.
Passengers and freight hauliers are already feeling the benefit of cheaper,
faster services. EuroTunnel can, therefore, see the scale of competition
even before services are properly under way.
'But no-one knows who will win the battle,' says John Gutteridge of the
Freight Transport Association. 'Time-saving will be unimportant to
long-distance hauliers. Everything depends on services and costs, and we are
still not certain how they will pan out.'
Opening delays have helped the ports immeasurably. They all planned
retaliation to strike last year, when the tunnel was due to open. Further
postponement has provided extra time to fine-tune the blows.
Dover, which overshadows every other port for passenger traffic, may have
the most to lose. It has already lost 4,000 jobs as ferry-related employment
crashed to 8,000 in four years.
But that is due to greater efficiency, says Keith Southey at the Dover
Harbour Board - 'we are handling more passengers and freight with fewer
people,' he says.
Throughput has risen from 14.4m passengers and 858,000 lorries in 1986 when
the tunnel was given the go-ahead to 18.5m and more than 1.1m respectively
last year. This comes partly from natural growth but also in response to
investment averaging Pounds 1m a month, including a new Pounds 11.5m ferry
berth.
The board, which collects around 85p for each passenger, has cut charges to
shippers by 25 per cent in real terms over the last three years through
increasing efficiency and economies. But a strong attack has also been made
on EuroTunnel's offer of a faster trip. P&amp;O European Ferries has
computerised its check-in to whisk people through in 20 minutes. This helped
the group to a fourth consecutive record year in 1993, shipping 8m
passengers and more than 250,000 lorries.
Stena Sealink, which carried 6m passengers and 312,000 lorries last year,
has increased the number of sailings and simplified fares. But both
companies are banking more on quality than price and speed to compete with
the tunnel. P&amp;O has invested more than 400m in ships and training while
Stena has put 250m into four new ferries. They are aiming to attract
passengers with boutiques, restaurants and comfort in both terminals and on
board, claiming the crossing will be a welcome break for travellers.
Real competition to EuroTunnel, however, seems likely to come from a merger
of eastern Channel operators. Dover risks crippling loss of ferries unless
the big operators combine, says PA Cambridge Economic Consultants in a
review of the Kent Impact Study, commissioned to assess the effect of the
tunnel. But the Monopolies and Mergers Commission has put everything on the
back-burner until it sees what happens to traffic patterns.
Meanwhile, Folkestone is fighting its own battle for survival. Too small for
the new super-ferries, it lost 700 jobs when services were cut and faced
destruction in the crossfire between Dover and the tunnel.
Sea Containers, the harbour owner, is fighting Eurotunnel with its own
weapons - speed and price. Around Pounds 1m has gone into facilities such as
shopping and fast check-in services, while the Seacat service to Boulogne
will offer extra sailings and greater capacity on each vessel.
Hoverspeed, which claims 16 per cent of the short-haul market after carrying
2m passengers last year, is guaranteeing that fares will be 10 per cent
below any to Calais.
Newhaven, another Sea Containers port, is in the longer-haul market via the
Stena crossing to Dieppe. It could find help from the other side of the
Channel through European Union grants to help expansion.
Sally Lines has a slightly different line of attack. Its four-hour services
between Ramsgate, Dunkerque and Ostend are promoted as a leisurely break for
weary passengers. And in a pre-emptive strike to double last year's 2m
passengers, the group has stepped in to replace P&amp;O in partnership with
Ostend Lines.
Competition for potential tunnel traffic extends to the west as well.
Operators at Portsmouth and Poole, for instance, are making great play about
access to the holiday hotspots of north-western France, and freight markets
in the Iberian peninsula.
'Going on holiday through the tunnel would be like a French visitor
travelling via Middlesbrough to Cornwall,' according to Ian Carruthers,
managing director of Brittany Ferries. He has a rich market to protect.
Since 1985 motorised tourist traffic west of Le Havre has grown by 15.5 per
cent a year compared with 10.6 per cent on the short crossings. The company
claims to have tightened its grip on this area, claiming almost half the
passenger and freight traffic west of Dover.
But it is not relying merely on geographical logic to ward off the tunnel
influence. Some Pounds 350m has gone into new ships over the last five years
and a ninth route, between Poole and St Malo, opens this month. Southampton
is remarkably sanguine about the tunnel. 'Overall, it could be potentially
beneficial,' says Patrick Bowyer, the port's marketing manager.
The owner, Associated British Ports, has invested heavily to maintain a huge
lead in freight, although it will not reveal details. Some 30m tonnes flowed
through the docks last year, far ahead of any other UK Channel port and a
big buffer against any leakage to the tunnel.
But a residual bitterness remains over the flight of ferry companies to
Portsmouth. Stena has returned with a Cherbourg service, pushing passenger
figures to more than 480,000 last year compared with 145,000 in 1990.
Around 150m cross-Channel passengers a year are expected within a decade
compared with less than 65m in 1990. Freight traffic is likely to grow even
faster. Few will predict today how this growing pie will be split.
