FT  26 JAN 94 / Survey of Mobile Computing (16): For those on the move - The
growing market for subnotebooks
The market for subnotebook computers, roughly the size of a sheet of A5
paper and weighing only a kilogramme or so, is rapidly becoming established.
Only a handful of manufacturers yet produce these miniature versions of
conventional computers but industry standards for the sector are beginning
to emerge and according to Mr Alan Rogers, portable products manager for
Olivetti in the UK: 'It is going to happen'.
One indication that the subnotebook market is more than a flash in the pan
is the fact that Hewlett-Packard of the US and Toshiba of Japan, a pioneer
in mobile computing, have both produced subnotebooks.
The Toshiba machine was launched late last year. It weighs two kilogrammes
and has up to 4.5 hours of battery life.
It is based on an 33 MHz Intel 486 microprocessor and has a thin film
transistor (tft) high resolution colour screen. At Pounds 3,150, it is very
expensive but it offers everything that larger machines are capable of in a
compact passage.
Olivetti of Italy was a pioneer in subnotebooks; its Quaderno, launched more
than two years ago, was a classic of its kind. Small and light, it featured
a non-backlit display and special software for writing notes, carrying out
calculations and so on. Customers liked the concept and the design but found
the screen difficult to read and the special software idiosyncratic.
Nevertheless, according to Mr Rogers, Quaderno users frequently formed
enthusiastic cliques.
The latest version, the Quaderno 33, is larger and heavier but features a
backlit display and conventional PC software running Windows 3.1, Microsoft
Works and Lotus Organiser, a novel program which displays through images of
a traditional paper-based organiser on the computer screen. The new machines
are powerful and well-featured, but have lost the idiosyncratic charm of the
early Quadernos.
Tulip, the Dutch personal computer maker, also manufactures a subnotebook
about the size of the Quaderno, which runs Windows and conventional office
software. It is being used by MAI Research, the market research consultancy,
to collect survey information. Each night the information is transmitted
over the telephone lines to the company's central computer in London.
What distinguishes subnotebooks from personal digital assistants and other
tiny gadgets is the fact that they are the smallest systems which can still
be regarded as conventional personal computers. The screens are small, but
display a full 25 lines or more of text and graphics. Touch typists may
complain about the keyboards but they have all the keys found on larger
machines. Trackballs and mice are built in or can be released from a special
cavity in the computer.
Mr Rogers has a separate definition. He believes that subnotebooks are
portable enough to be carried whether or not they are going to be used -
rather in the manner of a dictation machine or a camera. By comparison,
anybody carrying a notebook intends to put it to use.
Another key to the emergence of subnotebooks is the range of peripherals
which can be provided as standard PCMCIA cards. The size of a credit card
and only slightly thicker, PCMCIA technology encompasses such devices as
hard disk drives, fax modems and radio communications - all in a card just
over 10mm thick at most.
According to the US-based Gartner Group, which tracks technology trends: 'We
believe the PCMCIA standard will have the same impact on mobile computing in
the 1990s that the AT bus did on desktop systems in the 1980s. That is, it
will create a stable platform for system and third party vendors to develop
a wide range of fully compatible peripherals, add-ons and software.'
By 1997, Gartner says, some 60 per cent of all desktop, notebook and
handheld systems shipped worldwide will have at least one PCMCIA slot - say,
40m systems.
As MAI's use of the Tulip device shows, business is not short of ideas for
using subnotebooks. Within a few years, the notebook computer will be the
system of choice for computing in the office; the subnotebook will be the
machine for computing on the move.
