FT  22 APR 94 / Management: Time has come for a revolution in style
The redoubtable Percy Barnevik has achieved many feats in his six years at
the helm of ABB, the Swedish-Swiss engineering multinational. He has shown
how an organisation of more than 200,000 employees can be run - 'steered'
would be a better word - by a head office of only 150 people, and with
remarkably few management layers.
He has demonstrated that 'matrix management' - in which people report to two
or more different bosses - can be made to work in spite of having suffered
20 years of abuse. And he has been lionised as a model of how to lead
change.
But never before has he been held up as evidence that one of the most
fundamental organisational theories of the 20th century is at best
inadequate and at worst redundant, and that a new 'managerial theory of the
firm' is required in its place.
At business schools, the established theory goes by the name of the
'M-form'. Formulated in 1962 by Harvard's Alfred Chandler, the father of
modern strategy and organisation studies, it argued that most large
companies could manage their strategies effectively only if they adopted a
multi-divisional organisation structure - the so-called M-form.
This was not only because of the structure itself, but also because of the
management doctrine that went with it: it defined a new set of roles which
emphasised the decentralisation of responsibility to operating divisions
whose activities were planned, co-ordinated and controlled by a strong
corporate management.
The top management also made what Chandler called the company's
'entrepreneurial decisions' about resource allocation.
Then in 1970, Joseph Bower, also from Harvard, published a study of business
planning and investment decision-making, which combined Chandler's focus on
strategy and structure with a study of managerial behaviour.
It gave more credit than Chandler had to the roles of front line and
especially middle managers. Bower concluded that it was the middle, rather
than the top, which managed not only the organisation's information flow,
but also most of its business planning and resource allocation.
Bower's study was a big step forward from Chandler's work. But both men saw
the allocation of physical and financial resources as the main task of
management.
Which is where Barnevik and ABB come in.
ABB is one of 19 companies around the world whose changing organisational
and managerial styles have been studied over the past five years by two
business school professors, Christopher Bartlett of Harvard and Sumantra
Ghoshal of Insead. The other companies include AT&amp;T, Intel, Nike and 3M in
the US, Bodyshop, Cartier, Ikea and Shell in Europe, and Canon, Kao, Komatsu
and Toyota in Japan.
The first of several papers based on this work, using ABB as its main
illustration, is about to appear in Strategic Management Journal under the
title of 'Beyond the Mother-Form'*.
As with much practical management literature today - in contrast with many
academic studies - the paper concentrates on informal management styles,
patterns and procedures, rather than on the formal organisation. In formal
terms, ABB is not too different from Chandler's model. But in most other
respects it is poles apart, as are many of Bartlett and Ghoshal's other
study companies.
For a start, most of them consider the development of specialised knowledge
and expertise and their dissemination across the company as far more
significant in competitive terms today than the issue which preoccupied
people in the 1960s and 1970s: the allocation of financial resources.
But knowledge is far harder to handle. If a large company is to manage it
effectively, it must develop what the duo terms a 'horizontal integration
process' which changes considerably the role of management at every level.
In particular, it transforms the role of - drastically slimmed - middle and
senior management at ABB and elsewhere from power-broking, control and
information-processing up and down the organisation, to a cross-company one
of coaching and technology and skill-transfer. The middle manager becomes a
leading agent in the process of continuous 'organisational learning'.
This change of role is reinforced at ABB by all sorts of mechanisms. These
include the division of the company into 1,300 units which are too small to
have a full range of specialist skills, and therefore have to borrow and
learn from each other.
Meanwhile, top management's role changes from the allocator of resources and
resolver of conflicts to what Bartlett and Ghoshal call 'creator of purpose
and challenger of the status quo'. This includes stimulating a process of
continuous corporate renewal.
These concepts are brought to life in the paper by an analysis of the roles
and relationships of particular managers at each level in ABB's electrical
relays business.
This approach should help clear Bartlett and Ghoshal from potential
criticism that they are, in essence, providing an academic formulation of
what business people already recognise as the new realities of management.
Barnevik and his ABB colleagues may be among the pioneers, but most managers
are still stuck with an outdated view of the nature of organisations, and of
their own roles within them.
As Bartlett and Ghoshal put it in a previous paper, first-generation
managers are trying in second-generation organisations to operate
third-generation strategies. The mismatch is obvious.
*SMJ Winter 1993 Special Issue (published shortly). Details:fax (US):
317-463-6746
