FT  24 JUN 94 / Apology adds to pattern of black marks: John Authers on the
education secretary's turbulent two years
Mr John Patten's apology in the High Court yesterday, for calling
Birmingham's chief education officer a 'nutter', was the most personally
damaging episode in a turbulent two-year career as education secretary.
It was not, however, the most politically damaging.
Significant retreats have been made on all the gov-ernment's most important
education reforms since Mr Patten was appointed education secretary by Mr
John Major, the prime minister, after the general election in April 1992.
The past two years have seen the collapse of compulsory national curriculum
tests in schools, sweeping reductions to the curriculum itself, and a U-turn
on legislation still before parliament to curb the powers of students'
unions. Over the test boycott, the Conservatives sustained arguably their
most embarrassing defeat at the hands of trade unions in 15 years of
government.
Meanwhile, the flow of schools choosing to opt out of local education
authority control - a flagship of the government's 1988 Education Reform Act
 -has slowed to a trickle.
While Mr Patten's sharp tongue has harmed him, his difficulties mostly stem
from tactical mistakes handling national curriculum tests last year, when
they were due to be made compulsory for pupils in England and Wales aged 14.
The first opposition, in January of last year, came from the National
Association for the Teaching of English. It objected to the tests on
academic grounds, and said that they should be scrapped for at least a year
while more work was done.
At this stage an announcement that the tests had been postponed for a year
would have caused little comment.
But Mr Patten pressed on, and rejected a joint request from all six
teachers' unions for England and Wales to abandon the tests. He believed
either that the unions would fall out or that parents would side against
them. Failing that, the government believed industrial action against the
tests would break the law.
But the unions were united, and parents and governors sided with them. The
NASUWT successfully fended off challenges in both the High Court and the
Court of Appeal from the Conservative-run London borough of Wandsworth.
Mr Patten announced concessions - including the review of the national
curriculum by Sir Ron Dearing which was generally regarded as a political
success - but refused to make the tests voluntary. The boycott was almost
total, and the results went unpublished.
The year since this crushing defeat has seen a series of confrontations on
other issues. Independent school heads complained about Mr Patten's refusal
to alter A-level examinations, which he called the 'gold standard'. They
wanted more flexibility.
In November, schools and local authorities were angered by publication of
national truancy 'league tables' which suggested that in some schools more
than 80 per cent of pupils had played truant. Manchester, where in one
school the tables suggested that a fifth of pupils played truant at any one
time, said the figures were 'spurious'.
Soon after, Mr Patten was wrong-footed by an interview given by Mr Major
strongly favouring universal nursery education. The education secretary was
on record as thinking this was too expensive.
Needless rows over forcing schools to hold daily acts of worship - opposed
by most head teachers - and over plans by Mr Iain Sproat, sports minister,
to make five competitive team sports compulsory in schools have further
provoked teachers this year.
The distrust is still intense. Mr Patten was dubbed 'The Great Unshuffled'
by the headmistress of one independent girls' school last year, after he
survived Mr Major's last cabinet reshuffle. He may not keep that soubriquet
much longer.
