FT  22 DEC 94 / People: P&amp;O - Harris climbs another rung
Tim Harris, 47, has been marked out as the coming man at Peninsular and
Oriental Steam Navigation Company, Britain's biggest transportation
conglomerate. Harris, who has responsibility for businesses producing more
than a third of the group's profits, has been promoted to assistant managing
director.
Harris, in common with several of P&amp;O's top executives, comes from Sterling
Guarantee Trust, the property and services company founded by Lord Sterling,
P&amp;O's chairman. P&amp;O merged with SGT in 1985 after Lord Sterling, who had
taken over the chairmanship of P&amp;O in 1983, saved the 155-year-old shipping
company from an unwelcome takeover bid by Trafalgar House. Sir Bruce
MacPhail, SGT's managing director and Lord Sterling's most trusted
lieutenant, took over as P&amp;O's managing director in 1985.
P&amp;O played down speculation yesterday that Harris was being lined up to take
over from MacPhail. Lord Sterling, who turns 60 later this month, and
MacPhail, 55, show no intention of retiring and P&amp;O does not have a
mandatory retirement age for executive directors. Sir Frank Lampl, chairman
of P&amp;O's Bovis construction business, for example, is 68. However, given
Harris' relative youth his promotion suggests that he would be the
front-runner to take over if MacPhail were to step down.
Harris has been responsible for transforming the fortunes of P&amp;O's cruise
ship operation. He was sent to Los Angeles in 1986 to take control of that
business and oversaw the 1988 takeover of Sitmar Cruises. He has trebled the
size of P&amp;O's Princess Cruises and P&amp;O now earns over a fifth of its profits
from cruising.
In addition to overseeing P&amp;O's fast-growing cruise ship operation - another
three vessels are on order including the world's biggest cruise ship -
Harris is also in charge of P&amp;O Containers, P&amp;O European Transport Services
and P&amp;O Bulk Shipping. He retains responsibility for these areas.
