FT  10 MAR 94 / Leading Article: Salmon wars
Not since Elizabethan apprentices rioted because they were made to eat too
much salmon has this prized fish been as cheap or widely available as it is
now. So much so, that worried Scottish salmon farmers have complained to
Brussels. They blame the Norwegians who, they claim, are encouraging massive
overproduction by subsidising their salmon farmers through loans via the
state-owned banking system.
The Scottish farmers have not attracted as much sympathy. Cheap salmon is
something most people welcome. If Norwegian taxpayers are willing to pay the
bill so that others can gorge themselves, then that is their affair. This is
certainly the view of the UK Treasury, which has declined to intervene on
the Scots' behalf.
There are, however, some serious issues at stake. The Scottish salmon
industry provides livelihoods to 6,000 people, most of whom live in remote
regions of the highlands and islands where there is little other work. If
present trends continue, much of the industry could be devastated, adding to
the social cost of maintaining those communities.
Furthermore, the Scottish salmon growers have commissioned an outside report
from Ernst &amp; Young which says that, over the past five years, Norwegian
salmon production costs have been subsidised to the tune of 20 per cent of
the cost of sales, and that Norwegian farms have consistently lost money
over that period. Moreover, the number of smolts now being reared points to
a 50 per cent growth in Norwegian output by 1995, by which time Norway could
be supplying the entire demand of the EU by itself.
The Norwegians dispute many of these findings, particularly the allegation
of widespread subsidisation. But the question at this stage is not whether
the E&amp;Y report constitutes conclusive evidence of anti-competitive practices
so much as whether it presents a prima facie case for further investigation
by Brussels. This would appear to be so.
This may be a small dispute about a luxury product. But that is not enough
to warrant dismissing these concerns. Quite apart from the issues of
regional development and state aids, the volumes of salmon now being
produced in Europe exceed the catch of cod. So the effects of salmon
overproduction could spill into the white fish market. Indeed, recent
demonstrations by Breton fishermen were triggered by anger at Norwegian
fishing practices.
Salmon and chips might be an appetising prospect, but not at the cost of
heavily distorted trade.
