FT  15 SEP 94 / Survey of Northern Ireland (8): A sombre message -
Shipbuilding
In popular perceptions of Northern Ireland, the two huge gantry cranes at
the Harland and Wolff shipyard in Belfast loom as large as an Ulster fried
breakfast or the booming voice of the Rev Ian Paisley.
But while neither of the latter are likely to diminish in volume or
disappear from the Northern Ireland scene in the coming few years, the same
could not be said with total certainty of the shipyard.
The Harland and Wolff cranes, once the most potent symbol of Northern
Ireland's manufacturing industry, may become redundant by the end of next
year if the shipyard is unable to win new orders in the face of increasingly
stiff international competition.
The hull of the last order on the yard's books - a Capesize bulk carrier -
is taking shape on the floor of the main building dock, one of the largest
building docks in the world, designed to accomodate vessels up to 1.2m tons
dwt, twice the size of the largest ship ever built.
The last ship is a relatively modest 162,000 dwt Capesize bulk carrier, but
is one of a new generation of bulk carriers and tankers featuring enhanced
structural and safety features in which H&amp;W now specialises.
Mr Per Neilsen, chief executive of the Harland and Wolff group, estimates
that as many as 600 'newbuildings' of ships over 100,000 tons dwt will be
required over the next five to six years - the category in which H&amp;W
specialises.
Some 25m tons of bulk carriers and tankers are now on order around the
world. The H&amp;W yard has a capacity to build between four and six such ships
per year, so the Belfast builder would be aiming to win only around 5 per
cent of all orders worldwide, not - it would seem - an impossible task.
Mr Neilsen points out though that world shipyard capacity is growing and
that there have been big productivity increases in existing yards, 'there is
more than enough capacity to meet the demand for renewing the fleet.'
The problem for H&amp;W, which reported an operating loss of Pounds 10.1m for
1993, is that direct and indirect subsidies paid to competing shipbuilders
overseas 'including several countries in the EC' is making it impossible for
the Belfast yard to compete on price, despite large productivity increases
that have been achieved in recent years. 'We can compete on cost with the
best shipbuilders around. We have the cheapest overheads compared to similar
shipyards,' he claims.
Since the yard was privatised in 1989, productivity has doubled. The number
of man-hours required to produce a Capesize ship has been cut in half he
said, and overall workforce numbers in the shipbuilding division have been
cut from 2,850 to 1,400.
'We've done everything that has been asked of us through the privatisation,'
he says.
Restrictive work practices have been eliminated, flexible work hours have
been introduced, labour costs have been sharply reduced, and great emphasis
is laid on quality control - 'the employees have been prepared to take up
the challenge' he says. A technical co-operation programme has been in
operation for several years with Kawasaki Industries in Japan, and the
management style at the yard is now largely modelled on the Japanese system.
At the same time the yard has given wholehearted support to the government's
policy to eliminate all shipbuilding subsidies. But Mr Neilsen now wants the
government to either improve ship financing facilities through the
government-run Ship Finance Mortgage Corporation (SMFC) or to tackle more
effectively those countries that continue to provide direct or indirect
subsidies to their shipyards.
He says the norm for many foreign shipyards is to offer finance guarantees
for up to 80 per cent of the cost of construction, repayable over 12-15
years through government-backed finance schemes. In the US, ship finance is
available for up to 87.5 per cent of cost, repayable over 25 years, if a
shipowner uses a US yard. In the UK, the SMFC offers only 30-60 per cent of
the capital cost payable over 8.5 years.
Mr Neilsen says that using the SMFC scheme, a shipowner would be likely to
face a negative cash flow for the first seven years of operation, making it
uneconomic to build new tonnage in a UK yard - 'it will not matter how good
our productivity is if the builder cannot finance the ship. An owner needs a
lot of cash to build at H&amp;W'
There has been sympathy expressed in Whitehall, he says, but so far this has
not resulted in action: 'If the government isn't prepared to listen to us,
then clearly we will have to go in another direction and rethink our support
for a 'no-subsidy' policy.'
'I used to be an optimist. But I feel it is going to be difficult to compete
commercially if we are not playing on a level field with our competitors. It
is going to be extremely difficult to be in business in the longer term.'
It is a sombre message coming from one of Northern Ireland's oldest and most
famous industries. And hardly one likely to bring cheer to those problem
areas of Belfast where unemployment in some neighbourhoods such as the Lower
Falls Road or Sandy Row is higher than 60 per cent.
