FT  31 JAN 94 / FT Guide to the Week
MONDAY 31
Hurd in talks on Bosnia
The fast-fading prospects for a Bosnian peace settlement will be the main
item on the agenda of talks which Douglas Hurd, the British foreign
secretary, will have in the US this week. After seeing Boutros Boutros
Ghali, the UN Secretary-General, in New York today, Hurd will meet Warren
Christopher, the US Secretary of State, in Washington on Tuesday. The talks
will focus on the possible withdrawal of UN peace-keeping forces from Bosnia
if no peace settlement is reached by the late spring, and the proposal to
launch air strikes against the Bosnian Serbs if they refuse to relax their
stranglehold on Sarajevo or prevent the relief of Srebrenica and Tuzla in
Bosnia.
Kohl in Washington
Chancellor Helmut Kohl will meet President Clinton in Washington,
underlining Germany's growing role as the most important US partner in
Europe. He will also be the first European politician to address the
conference of state governors.
Alan Greenspan, US Federal Reserve chairman, gives his view on the 1994
economic outlook to Congress's joint economic committee at the start of a
week in which several key economic figures will be released.
IG Metall, Germany's biggest union, covering 2.5m engineering and steel
workers, will start industrial action following the breakdown of pay talks.
The union wants up to 6 per cent wage rises, while employers have demanded
pay freezes and benefit cuts.
Poll boycott looms: The Zulu Inkatha Freedom party and the white right
Afrikaner People's Front will make a decision on whether to boycott South
Africa's April elections after talks today with the government and the main
opposition party, the ANC.
ILO agenda: Michel Hansenne, director-general of the International Labour
Organisation, which celebrates its 75th anniversary this year, sets out its
agenda for 'social justice in a global economy' in Geneva. This will be
debated at the ILO's annual conference in June. The organisation, created in
1919 to counter the appeal of the emerging Soviet Union by improving labour
rights, is still struggling for a distinctive and respected voice in the
post Cold War world.
TUESDAY 1
EU airline report
The European Commission unveils its long-awaited report on the future of the
European airline industry. Abel Matutes, Spanish Commissioner for transport,
and Herman De Croo, the Flemish liberal senator who chaired the 'committee
of wise men', will present the report, which is expected to deal with the
prospects for liberalisation and the industry's financial crisis.
Banesto trading resumes: Trading in the troubled banking group resumes on
the Madrid Bolsa five weeks after the Bank of Spain intervened to replace
the management and its shares were suspended. The share price, which stood
at Pta 1,995 when trading was halted on December 28, will be allowed to fall
freely. In the off-the-floor 'grey' market, shares were last week priced at
between Pta 500 and Pta 700.
Schengen deadline passes: Today passport checks at land borders between
member states and on flights within the European Union should have been
abolished. But the operation of the Schengen convention, which ends border
controls in nine of the twelve EU countries, has been postponed yet again.
Britain, Ireland and Denmark are the only EU states to have stayed out of
the convention because of concerns over national security and illegal
immigration.
UN human rights moves: The UN Secretary General Boutros Boutros Ghali is due
to announce the appointment of Jose Ayala Lasso, Ecuador's UN ambassador, as
the first UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, for a four-year term.
Yasser Arafat, PLO president, and Benazir Bhutto, Pakistan's prime minister,
will address the UN Human Rights Commission in Geneva, which began its 50th
session on Monday in Geneva. For the next six weeks the 53-member
commission, which includes such staunch defenders of human rights as China,
Indonesia, Iran, Sudan and Syria, will be plied with evidence of human
injustice around the world.
China talks to Taiwan Representatives of China and Taiwan will resume their
slow-moving talks in an effort to expand areas of agreement on such issues
as fishing, hijackings and commercial links. The talks are scheduled to last
until 5 February.
Post Office inquiry: The all-party trade and industry select committee of
the House of Commons launches its inquiry into the future of the Post
Office. Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, and Mr Mike
Heron and Mr Bill Cockburn, chairman and chief executive respectively of the
Post Office, will give evidence. The Committee members are understood to be
concerned that the corporation's investment plans and profitability are
threatened by uncertainty created by the government's review of the Post
Office.
WEDNESDAY 2
Verdict on Volkswagen
Frankfurt state court is due to decide if Volkswagen poached General Motors
and Adam Opel managers 'unfairly' last March. A ruling in favour of Opel
could mean suspension for a year for seven key VW purchasing and production
personnel. It may also increase pressure for the company to review the
position of Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, their leader, and VW's
production director, who remains under criminal investigation in Germany and
the US.
Caldera assumes office
Rafael Caldera is scheduled to begin his five-year term as president of
Venezuela. Caldera, who founded Venezuela's Christian Democrat party but ran
as an independent, won the presidency with 30 per cent of votes in national
elections last December.
Caldera assumes office in the midst of recession and a financial crisis
caused by the failure of Banco Latino, the second largest bank. The
government faces reduced income, a taxpayer revolt and a large fiscal
deficit.
Euro Disney's banks will meet in Paris to assess the conclusions of the
special investigative audit of the troubled leisure group's finances that
they commissioned from KPMG Peat Marwick, the accountancy firm.
Treasury report: Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, and Eddie George, the
governor of the Bank of England, meet for their monthly monetary talks
today. The quicker availability of statistics has meant that these meetings
have been brought forward in the month.
National Party conference: The ruling South African party will publish its
manifesto and unveil its list of candidates ahead of April's first
democratic elections.
Commonwealth Games: In London the Commonwealth Games Council will receive
submissions from London, Manchester and Sheffield to host the games in 2002,
the year of the Queen's Golden Jubilee.
Maltese prime minister Eddie Fenech-Adami will be in Brussels to have talks
on the possibility of his island joining the EU.
Angola talks: ANC leader Nelson Mandela and Mozambique President Joaquim
Chissano will hold talks with Angolan President Jose Eduardo dos Santos in
Luanda. They will focus on ways to prevent elections this year in Mozambique
and South Africa degenerating into mass violence or civil war, as Angola's
poll last year has.
THURSDAY 3
Bundesbank council meets
The German central bank will hold a council meeting to review its interest
rates policy. Last week's inflation figures of 3.4 per cent for the month to
mid January compared with 3.7 per cent in December were proclaimed 'good
news' by Bundesbank directors. Bank chiefs expect December's figures will
show a rise in the rate of money supply growth, but January's figures,
published next month, to show a fall.
German privatisations: The long-awaited reform of German post and
telecommunications, paving the way for the privatisation of Deutsche
Telekom, Postbank and postal services, is scheduled to come to the Bundestag
for a first reading. It has taken months of negotiations between the
government and opposition in order to create the two-thirds majority needed
to change the German constitution.
Indian PM's visit: P V Narasimha Rao, the Indian prime minister, is in
Germany for an official visit which lasts until 5 February, during which he
will meet a range of top-level German industrialists as well as politicians,
and seek to promote more two-way trade and investment.
Meanwhile, in New Delhi from Wednesday to Friday, 15 major developing
countries will reaffirm their commitment to ensuring basic health standards
for all their citizens. The global Task Force for Child Survival and
Development, sponsored by the World Bank, UNDP, UNICEF, WHO and the
Rockefeller Foundation, will discuss how existing health systems can best
confront the range of problems associated with child health, including
family planning and maternal care.
Yeltsin visits Georgia
Russian President Boris Yeltsin will visit the former Soviet republic of
Georgia for a one-day summit with Eduard Shevardnadze, the embattled
Georgian leader. Although Shevardnadze still harbours suspicions over
Russia's military's role in his republic, he is likely to rely increasingly
on Russian economic and political support to extract his country from the
ravages of its recent internecine conflicts. The two men are expected to
sign a friendship treaty and various economic accords.
The Space Shuttle Discovery is tentatively scheduled for lift-off on an
eight-day mission to conduct experiments in a commercial laboratory anchored
in the craft's cargo bay. The 5 man, 1 woman crew includes a Russian
cosmonaut, Sergei Krilakev, the first Russian ever to be launched in a US
spaceship.
FRIDAY 4
National Front congress
France's extreme-right National Front party will hold its ninth national
congress at Port Marly, outside Paris, until February 6 to choose its top
officials, re-elect its president, Jean-Marie Le Pen, and to decide its
platform for this June's European parliamentary elections.
The advent of a centre-right government has pushed the Front more to the
margin, particularly because the cabinet includes hard-line conservatives
like Charles Pasqua, the interior minister. Its national share of the vote
dropped from 13.9 per cent in the 1992 regional elections to 12.7 per cent
in last March's parliamentary poll.
However, the Euro-elections' proportional representation system favours
minority parties, as the Front found in 1989 when it won 10 seats with 11.9
per cent of the vote.
US employment: The markets will be watching to see whether January
employment data released in the US will signal a modest deceleration in the
pace of economic recovery. Analysts are forecasting a 180,000 rise in
non-farm payrolls, roughly in line with the December increase of 183,000.
WEEKEND 5-6
Finnish run-off
The final round of the Finnish presidential election on Sunday pitches
Elizabeth Rehn, a member of the tiny Swedish-speaking minority, against
Martti Ahtisaari, a former UN diplomat and the firm favourite until Rehn
began a late surge in popularity.
Costa Ricans also go to the polls on Sunday. Opposition National Liberation
Party presidential candidate Jose Maria Figueres is running neck-and-neck
with Miguel Angel Rodriguez of the governing Social Christian Unity Party.
Togo holds its first multi-party parliamentary elections on February 6.
Hopefully it will be cleaner than August's poll which re-elected President
Gnassingbe Eyadema, in power since 1967.
Wehrkunde conference: Concern over the former USSR seems certain to dominate
the exclusive annual event in Munich over the weekend which brings together
leading luminaries of the European and US defence and foreign policy
establishment for a brainstorming on western security.
Compiled by Robert Anderson
Fax: (+44) (0)71 873 3194.
