FT  10 SEP 94 / Will they bid for peace?: The republicans say they have
given up violence. But are the unionists buying it? Christian Tyler went to
Northern Ireland and asked them
A woman in the little crowd outside the Orange Hall was shouting. 'Is Gerry
Adams in there? Is he hiding under Mayhew's raincoat?'
Inside the hall, Sir Patrick Mayhew, tall and grey-faced, was making his
most important public appearance since the IRA ceasefire. Alternately
flattering and firm - and with an apology for past misunderstanding - the
Secretary of State for Northern Ireland was trying to cajole the distrustful
ranks of Protestant brethren who remain convinced their British government
is selling out to Sinn Fein and the IRA gunmen after 25 years of bloodshed.
The hall was decked with the banners of the Orange lodges for an historic
encounter in the town of Comber, County Down, on Wednesday night. About 200
men - and half a dozen women - were packed into an airless upstairs room.
Arrayed in the orange stoles and insignia of their Order, they looked
honest, decent folk - but implacable. They declared their fears and
suppressed their anger as they respectfully applauded the first Secretary of
State to come down from Stormont Castle to face the rank and file of Orange
Protestant unionism.
Before Mayhew's ordeal a minister said prayers and read from St Paul's
epistle to the Thessalonians. The Grand Lodge chairman, the eloquent David
McNarry, warned against indiscipline on the floor. Sir Patrick was then
presented with a handsome bible: and for a moment it seemed he was expected
to take the oath on the spot: There Is No Secret Deal.
The unionist majority of northern Ireland feels itself the underdog these
days, the more so as Sinn Fein reaps the propaganda rewards of its
10-day-old initiative. For many unionist footsoldiers the IRA declaration is
a tactical sham, a con-trick. They are suspicious of the republicans,
suspicious of Westminster, afraid of being cast as the villains of the
piece, afraid of their own triumphalist paramilitaries, and afraid of
domination by Dublin - or Rome.
Can such people ever make peace?
In spite of the universal hope of peace, for many unionists the IRA
ceasefire has changed nothing. Asked whether he felt differently now, an old
farmer at the Saintfield weekly cattle auction winked roguishly and said:
'No. I had my hair cut last week. It's grown again this week.'
Farmers tend to be men of few words. But the buyers clustered at the
ringside this week, giving almost undetectable jerks of the thumb to
register their bids with the fast-talking auctioneer, constitute the
backbone of a dangerously aggrieved majority.
William Dick, a pleasant and articulate young beef farmer with 140 acres, is
a local councillor from the Rev Ian Paisley's Democratic Unionist Party.
Speaking after Paisley's showdown with John Major at Number 10 this week, he
said mainlanders should not make the mistake of thinking that just because
Paisley had 'his own way of expressing himself' he did not correctly
represent the views of the community. Nor should they forget that in the
recent European elections, Paisley's party had topped the Ulster poll.
'We have made our views known, but the unionist viewpoint has been set
aside,' he said. 'For the English it is hard to perceive what is going on.
At local level we have no trouble getting on with the SDLP (the non-violent
republican party led by John Hume) but at national level their demands are
hardening all the time.' As for Gerry Adams and Sinn Fein, they had
sponsored butchery one week and been received by the Irish Prime Minister
the next. 'There has been no word of remorse, no apologies for the deaths.'
Even out in the rolling countryside of County Down, most people have been
touched by the violence. The last IRA victim before the ceasefire was a
friend of Councillor Dick, a part-time member of the Royal Irish Regiment
(formerly Ulster Defence Regiment) and church organist called Trelford
Withers who was shot at point-blank range in his shop in nearby Crossgar on
August 8.
Another friend of the murdered man said he belonged to no party but was
'disgusted' by the way the British prime minister had treated Paisley. The
rival Ulster Unionists under James Molyneaux were betraying the people, he
added, and Sir Patrick Mayhew talked down to them. Then he confessed: 'Our
worst enemies now are the loyalist paramilitaries.'
The map says Ireland should be one nation. But Protestants behind the
north-eastern partition feel different, part of another culture, another
history, another tribe. The evidence of their descent is everywhere: in the
Scottish names of families, villages and streets, in the Presbyterian
churches, in the notices clamped to street lamps which read 'Alcohol-free
area'. The people of north Antrim are physically closer to Glasgow than to
Dublin.
Gerald Douglas, an eighth-generation Scot, is a Toyota dealer under the
Mountains of Mourne in the south of Co Down where Catholics predominate. In
spite of the ceasefire, he keeps a gun beside his bed: his garage was blown
up 20 years ago and he has received death threats. Though he regards Paisley
as a destructive force and a retrogressive influence, he thinks Major this
week put himself in the wrong.
Douglas is a former police reservist, an Ulster Unionist councillor and a
Presbyterian who goes to church every week. He is also a deputy county
Master of the Orange Order, and was flying to New Zealand this week as a
delegate to the Orangemen's world council. His is the profile of the
hard-line 'prod'. Yet Douglas comes over as a humorous and tolerant man who
lives peaceably with his Catholic neighbours.
'My grandfather told me 'you can't trust Englishmen', he said. 'This
suspicion goes back to the days of Home Rule.' Why, then, cling to London
rule? 'Better the devil you know, I suppose.'
Protestants were afraid that union with the Irish Republic would bring
religious oppression, he said. They still regarded the Republic as a
priest-ridden state and Irish Catholicism as a 'more superstitious,
idolatrous faith'. Douglas himself went to a mixed-faith school. His
observation was that the Catholic children spent more time learning religion
and the Irish language while the Protestant kids got on with their maths and
English. Ulster Protestants were thrifty, industrious and more likely to
succeed.
Religion is a cultural identifier in northern Ireland, not the cause of the
conflict. Catholics and Protestants are not killing each other over the
theological doctrine of transubstantiation. It is all about sovereign
allegiances. As if to prove the point, opinion polls suggest a majority of
Catholics - certainly the expanding middle-class - would vote to stay in the
Union if a referendum were held tomorrow.
It is this fundamental question of sovereignty which makes Ulster politics
so polarised. The centre Alliance party is small and weak. In the face of
what they call the 'pan-nationalist front', unionists remain badly divided.
If the unionist leadership cannot break with the past, new voices and new
blood will be needed to turn a ceasefire - still not reciprocated by the
Loyalist terrorists - into a genuine peace.
This week the Belfast Telegraph published a letter from 'a group of business
and professional people from the Unionist tradition'. It called for 'a
pluralist society at ease with itself' and went on: 'We must convince our
fellow countrymen and women that there is a place for all of us in this new
society. We 'protest-ants' must also be the 'persuade-ants'.'
Where were these well-wishers when they were needed in the past? Roy
Bradford, a minister in the last northern Ireland executive and now mayor of
well-heeled Bangor, was scathing. 'It is the trahison des clercs,' he
sniffed. 'The letter was unsigned. They hadn't the courage to put their
names to it because they were afraid it would be bad for business. These
businessmen are doing all right, and they don't want to get their hands
dirty.
'For a professional to be publicly associated with the unionist position is
not good for him. He does not want to seem a bigoted anti-Catholic. In the
past, of course, a lot were afraid of being shot.'
The mayor and his chief executive, Adrian McDowell, sat puffing cigars over
a map of the town's yacht marina. This is one of the most prosperous parts
of the province, a dormitory town for Belfast with below-average
unemployment and above-average income. The plate-glass villas, with their
hydrangeas and pampas grass, gravel sweeps and baying guard-dogs along the
Gold Coast southern shore of Belfast Lough are enough to make the
stockbrokers of Surrey weep with envy. Here, it is said, you will find the
highest concentration of BMW owners in the UK. Even without the help of the
Province's net subsidy from Westminster of Pounds 3bn a year, this would be
a bourgeois paradise.
Unionist politicians admit the middle class has opted out. In one sense it
is not surprising: under direct rule from Westminster the powers of local
authorities in Ulster are derisory. 'Burials and refuse collection - and
that's about it,' said Sir Edward Archdale, a former borough councillor.
After a distinguished career in the British Navy, Sir Edward, who describes
himself as 'a loose cannon' in the unionist ship, retired to his homeland to
study politics. He is a baronet who lives in a bungalow. In religion, he is
a diehard traditionalist, in social affairs an anti-capitalist radical. His
long absence allowed him to escape the atmosphere of intransigence among
those whose lives have been shaped by the conflict. For Sir Edward the
political answer for Ulster is self-government under the Crown, a similar
status to that of the Isle of Man.
'We would rather be detached on our own than semi-detached with Dublin,' he
said. Sir Edward would like to reconstitute his party as a secular Ulster
National Party to appeal to unionists of all denominations.
The plans of such potential peacemakers among the besieged majority were
looking sadly premature this week. The IRA may have laid down its weapons
but the unionists - mentally at least - are re-arming. A father of four sons
asked to remain anonymous for fear of reprisals - all his boys are in the
police. 'I once hoped they would be my coffin-bearers,' he said as he
proudly showed a photograph. 'But all these years I have been afraid I would
find myself carrying theirs.' That is what peace in Ulster means: a man
whose last wish can be granted.
