FT  25 JAN 94 / Technology: Exorcising Satan Bug - A new breed of multiple
viruses is threatening PCs
Can a computer virus change its spots? Yes, say computer security experts,
who warn that a new breed of sophisticated computer virus that changes
itself into multiple versions is becoming more common and that it can outwit
some anti-virus software.
Known as polymorphic viruses, they are designed to hide from popular
anti-virus programs by changing themselves slightly each time they
replicate.
Businesses relying on older versions of anti-virus scanning software risk
leaving their PCs open to infection from polymorphic viruses. Such viruses
can produce as many as 2.3 trillion versions of themselves, making them
impossible to detect without the help of a new generation of anti-virus
software.
'There is no question about it, polymorphic viruses are definitely the wave
of the future,' says Phil Talsky, product manager at leading US anti-virus
software developer McAfee Associates. Talsky adds that the most common
polymorphic virus is the Satan Bug and it is infecting increasing numbers of
PC users. 'It recently entered our top 10 list of most often reported
viruses, at number nine.'
David Stang, head of US-based Norman Data Defense Systems and founder of the
International Computer Security Association, agrees that the Satan Bug poses
a computer security challenge. 'We are hearing more reports daily of Satan
Bug infections and it is a major problem for some organisations.'
The Satan Bug has turned up at some US government agencies where it has
infected several hundred PC systems. These include the Social Security
Administration and the Army Corp of Engineers. There have also been reports
that the Satan Bug has been found in European PC systems, and that Tremors,
another polymorphic virus, is affecting PC users in Germany.
However, they should not panic, Stang says. 'Becoming infected by any kind
of virus is rare and coming across the Satan Bug is even rarer. But if you
are unlucky enough to get infected, it is going to be expensive.'
The Satan Bug is not designed to erase data like some viruses, such as
Michelangelo, but it interferes with users trying to connect to a local area
network and will change file dates. It replicates quickly and can travel
across a local area network to infect other users.
Computer virus experts at IBM say polymorphic viruses should not trouble
most users. 'If users take proper precautions, polymorphic viruses are easy
to deal with,' says Steve White, manager of the high integrity computing
laboratory at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center. 'We have not found a
very high infection rate among users by the Satan Bug and the whole issue of
polymorphic viruses has received more attention than it deserves.'
White and his colleagues at IBM have completed several detailed studies of
how computer virus infections propagate. They were the first to label the
Michelangelo virus scare two years ago as overblown and correctly predicted
that it would not cause much damage.
White points out that PC users face about the same chance of a virus
infection as they do of a hard disc failure, so proper backup procedures
should be a routine task. To eliminate a virus, users must detect and often
erase infected files and then reinstall them from an uninfected backup disk.
This can take several hours for each PC infected. The US Army Corps of
Engineers estimates that it lost more than Dollars 12,000 per hour in trying
to exorcise the Satan Bug.
McAfee's latest version of its ViruScan software can detect Satan Bug, but
users must delete all infected files.
While Stang says he has developed an anti-virus program that can detect and
erase the Satan Bug without requiring users to reinstall infected files,
Talsky says polymorphic viruses are more difficult to guard against since
they use encryption to hide from virus scanning software. 'Polymorphic
viruses are algorithm-based so we have to essentially crack their code first
and produce algorithms to counter them. Normally, it takes our programmers
one hour to modify our software to detect a regular virus, but with a
polymorphic virus, it can take us 48 hours to develop software that can
detect it.'
Researchers at IBM say they are working on an automatic system to detect and
analyse new polymorphic viruses. This will enable a faster response in
producing updates of anti-virus software and help slow their spread.
While computer virus experts concede that polymorphic viruses are written by
very talented programmers, the developer of the Satan Bug is believed to be
a 16-year-old computer enthusiast who uses the pseudonym Hacker4Life. There
is no US law prohibiting the writing of a virus program and programmers
often post their latest virus creation quite openly on local computer
bulletin board systems. There are about 2,500 known PC viruses.
Advancing computer technology could help solve this growing problem. Western
Digital, a US company making hard discs, has developed a chip, the
Immunizer, designed to monitor system activity and to block any suspicious
writing to the hard disc. However, the chip works only with certain newer
PCs.
On the software side, companies are developing different types of anti-virus
programs that, like the Immunizer chip, monitor what is happening within the
PC. If the software detects suspicious activity, it blocks it and flags an
alert.
Talsky warns that more polymorphic viruses are coming.
While the risk from a PC virus infection is small, there are important
safeguards all PC users should adopt. These include using the latest
anti-virus software. 'We produce new versions of ViruScan every six weeks,'
says Talsky. 'But there are a lot of people using older versions and they
won't get the full protection.' Any anti-virus software version written
before August 1993 is unlikely to offer protection against polymorphic
viruses. Users should contact their vendor and update their software.
All new software, no matter what its source, must be scanned for viruses.
'Most people avoid computer bulletin boards and shareware software, thinking
that they might be infected. But most of our calls are from users that have
been infected from commercial software, especially demo software disks,'
says Talsky.
Stang recommends that users with many PCs decide on a computer security
strategy. 'Some users apply the same security to all their systems. The
problem with this approach is that some systems should be better protected
while others may not need quite so much protection. If you tell each user
that they must spend five to 10 minutes each day scanning for viruses, that
translates into a huge cost in terms of staff time over the course of a
year. That can turn out to be more expensive than dealing with a virus
infection.'
