FT  06 AUG 94 / Books: Morality matters
VALUES: COLLAPSE AND CURE by Lord Hailsham HarperCollins Pounds 12.99, 177
pages
There have always been at least two Quintins, quite apart from whether he
was called Hogg or Lord Hailsham at the time. One is the rather wild,
bell-ringing politician who gave up his title in order to seek the
premiership when Harold Macmillan became ill. Another is the
lawyer-philosopher who has written around 20 books. Along with Enoch Powell
he must have been one of the most erudite members of a postwar Tory cabinet
and, like Powell, he is a great survivor. Both have a flair for publicity.
In a famous passage Hailsham once wrote: 'Conservatives do not believe that
the political struggle is the most important thing in life. In this they
differ from Communists, Socialists, Nazis, Fascists, social creditors and
most members of the British Labour Party. The simplest of them prefer
foxhunting, the wisest religion.'
Half a century on, Hailsham airs his doubts, not about politics, but about
religious belief. Values: Collapse and Cure is a remarkable book in several
ways. It is the facsimile of a manuscript. It is very short, at times - like
his memoirs, A Sparrow's Flight, very personal - and does not come to any
startling conclusion.
Hailsham explains that around the end of 1992, when he was well into his
eighties, he fell into a mood of deep depression. The principal reason seems
to have been the perception that the great hopes that had been entertained
for the future in 1945 had not been realised. Thus he re-examined the basis
of his religious and philosophical beliefs.
If there is one single thread, it is that he believes in the need for order.
But it is not order of an authoritarian kind. The libertarian in him comes
out when he defends minorities - 'protecting the weak against the strong'.
Humility emerges when he accepts 'judge not that ye be not judged' as one of
the safest rules when passing judgment on the conduct of others. His
preferred definition of law is that it is 'natural morality translated into
the enforceable'.
The sharpest attack in the book is directed at the logical positivism
associated with Wittgenstein and the Vienna Circle. Hailsham thinks that it
is unduly modest and defeatist to conclude with Wittgenstein: 'That of which
we cannot speak intelligibly is something about which one is bound to keep
silent'. But it is striking that he no longer makes a leap to any kind of
religion or theology.
What Hailsham is seeking is a set of moral and religious values on which
society can be based. In the end they may amount to no more than an
appreciation 'that the song of a nightingale is beautiful, or that it is
better to be kind than cruel, honest than fraudulent, or that it is better
to be loyal to friends than to betray them'.
To judge from the title, the depression was cured by the very act of
thinking and writing, and in its brief way it covers much of the best that
has been thought and said.
