FT  21 JUN 94 / Colombian poll victor may shift course: Sarita Kendall on
Samper's election win
Colombians opted by a narrow margin on Sunday for a continuation of Liberal
party rule, but the new president-elect Ernesto Samper is viewed as likely
to shift the emphasis of government economic policy.
In the second round of the election, Mr Samper polled just 1.8 percentage
points more than his rival, the conservative Andres Pastrana.
Abstention was unexpectedly low at about 55 per cent and, with 98 per cent
of the results in, Mr Samper had polled 3.7m votes. In his victory speech,
he told supporters he had received a 'social mandate' - a reference to the
priority he gave to increasing social investment throughout his campaign.
As he spoke, he was joined by two former Liberal presidents - a reminder
that the Liberal party is the most powerful machine in Colombian politics.
Mr Samper, 43, who started as a Bogota city councillor and moved to the
senate, built himself a strong supporting faction along the way. When he
starts his four-year term as the third successive Liberal president, on
August 7, there will be a Liberal majority in both Houses of Congress.
Early in his career Mr Samper headed the National Association of Financial
Institutions, a kind of economic think tank, and produced a document arguing
for the legalisation of marijuana. But when Colombia's Supreme Court
de-penalised drug use last month, he was quick to warn of the dangers of a
massive growth in consumption in a country where drugs are so cheap and easy
to obtain.
Like the present administration, he sees Colombia as a victim of the
drug-consuming countries and says he will continue with the current policy
of encouraging traffickers to surrender in exchange for reduced sentences.
In 1989, when car bombs were exploding in city centres and political leaders
were being assassinated, Mr Samper was hit by more than a dozen bullets and
was lucky to survive. Four bullets are still there. This, he says, made him
feel he had been given a second chance and increased his determination to
become president and try to bring peace to Colombia. Mr Samper is a moderate
with a strong populist streak and a sense of humour that was suppressed
during the campaign.
For the first time, Colombia will have a vice-president: Humberto de la
Calle, a former cabinet minister who is likely to be an active partner,
particularly on international issues.
In his victory address, Mr Samper paid tribute to President Cesar Gaviria in
whose government he served as minister of economic development. He said the
president's 'vision and valour have given Colombia a great modernising drive
which we shall continue with decision.'
However, his own programme is centred on tackling some of the problems
associated with the opening up of the economy over the last five years, such
as the gap between rich and poor and city and country.
Colombia's economy grew by 5.3 per cent in 1993 and, with the recent
improvement in coffee and oil prices, this year's growth rate should be
similar. But construction and services have been doing much better than
agriculture, industry and mining; non-traditional exports have risen very
slowly while imports are soaring. Mr Samper's plans to create 1.5m new jobs
includes an export promotion programme as well as industrial modernisation
and the rehabilitation of the countryside.
Although Mr Samper says he will continue to work towards Latin American
integration, he favours a stronger state role on sectors such as
agriculture. Badly-needed investment in roads, bridges and ports, are also
on his agenda. The extra income due from the Cusiana oil reserves from 1995
on will provide great opportunities but Mr Samper is aware of the potential
problems and is concerned to prevent further revaluation of the Colombian
peso.
