FT  10 FEB 94 / Smith to accept some Tory NHS reforms
Plans to retain decentralised management in the National Health Service
while abandoning some of the more explicitly market-based aspects of the
existing structure will be published by the Labour Party today.
A health policy document to be launched by Mr John Smith, the party leader,
will show that Labour does not intend to return to the system of centralised
decision-making that characterised the NHS before the government's 1991
reforms.
Labour will consult widely on its document over the coming year before
completing its health policy for the next election.
The party is taking a firm stand on some issues from the outset - notably a
determination to abolish GP fundholding, under which some family doctors
purchase hospital care for individual patients. The document will emphasise
that Labour is satisfied that fundholding has contributed to the development
of a two-tier health service and should be abolished. It will propose that
all GPs should instead be involved in joint commissioning arrangements with
health authorities.
Labour's document accepts the principle of the purchaser-provider split on
which the government's reforms are founded.
A Labour government would seek to operate it in a planned and co-ordinated
way, rather than with what the party sees as the commercialised and
competitive flavour of the government's internal market.
One of the most topical issues in the document concerns public
accountability in the running of hospitals and health authorities.
There is growing debate in the NHS over whether the current system of
appointing members to health authorities gives their decisions sufficient
legitimacy.
Labour intends to test public opinion on three options - retaining
nomination, direct election or integration of health purchasing with local
government. The document will stress that Labour's current view is that
nomination should be abandoned in favour of a more democratic structure.
Some of the most controversial aspects of the document are likely to concern
a future Labour government's relationships with private healthcare.
It proposes the eventual phasing out of private treatment in NHS hospital
pay beds, and restrictions on the amount of private work that NHS doctors
could carry out.
The document will not commit a future Labour government to any particular
levels of spending on the NHS.
But statements that Britain spends less on health than many other European
countries - for every Pounds 3 spent in Britain on health care, it says,
France, Germany and the Netherlands spend Pounds 5 - are likely to raise
public expectations.
