FT  23 JUL 94 / Drug group 'quitting Italy for Germany'
Menarini, Italy's largest domestic drugs group, said yesterday it intended
to transfer all manufacturing from Italy to Germany, as a protest against
proposed government-imposed price cuts.
The company flamboyantly revealed its threat by taking full-page
advertisements in the Italian national press.
The disclosure was timed to coincide with a meeting of the Italian cabinet
to discuss additional healthcare reforms. These could include drug price
cuts of at least 6.5 per cent, although the health ministry is calling for a
10 per cent reduction.
'With this (proposed) price structure, the lowest in Europe, we have no
chance of remaining competitive in Italy and so we are going,' said Mr Lucia
Aleotti, managing director. 'I think other Italian companies will be forced
to close or move.'
Menarini said it was negotiating with Italian unions about possible
redundancies. The company employs nearly 3,000 people in Italy, and already
has production facilities in Germany as part of efforts to reduce dependency
on the Italian market. In 1992, it acquired Berlin Chemie, east Germany's
biggest drugs maker.
Trade unions were angered by the newspaper announcement, and promised a
national strike in protest. Union sources claimed the east German factory
bought by the company in 1992 was being under-utilised.
They recognised Italian pharmaceutical companies were being squeezed, but
felt the company was not giving the full reasons for switching production. A
consumers group threatened legal action against Menarini, demanding it
return subsidies.
Mr Aleotti blamed the decision on a series of healthcare reforms introduced
in January by the Italian government which is grappling with a huge public
sector deficit. The government plans to cut drugs spending from L13,000bn
(Pounds 5.4bn) in 1993 to L10,000bn this year.
The reforms were also introduced after a scandal involving payments to
government officials in exchange for certain drugs to be reimbursed by the
state. Charges of bribery were brought against Mr Alberto Aleotti,
Menarini's chief executive and chairman. He vigorously denied the
accusations.
