FT  14 NOV 94 / Visa aims for more corporate business
Visa International, the payments organisation, is today launching a bid to
change the corporate charge card from being just a way of paying for travel
and entertainment to being a general method of buying goods.
The idea, which was launched in the US earlier this year, is that a company
will use the card to buy low-value items such as stationery and maintenance
supplies. This would sharply cut the cost of dealing with the purchase, as
much of the paperwork will be removed from the transaction. Research for
Visa by Andersen Consulting suggests that the cost of processing a single
purchase order and invoice is typically Pounds 60.
The billing arrangements should also mean that companies receive more
information about where they buy their supplies, offering them the
opportunity to rationalise purchasing.
Pilot schemes involving Barclays, Midland and National Westminster banks are
being carried out with 25 companies, including BOC, Anglian Water and Shell.
The move into general corporate purchasing will require many more suppliers
to be ready to accept Visa cards: the pilot with BOC found that about half
of its 1,300 suppliers had to be signed up for accepting Visa payment.
For suppliers there is the disadvantage of having to pay a charge of a few
per cent for all transactions processed in this way.
But the card issuers and the payments organisation emphasise that they will
benefit from being paid much more rapidly - within two to three days of the
transaction - than they are likely to do under current purchasing
arrangements. This in turn, they say, will save companies having to chase
payments which are late.
Mr John Chaplin, Visa senior vice-president for market development, says the
target is to sign up about 50 companies for the card in the first 12 months.
On the basis of results from the pilot schemes he expects the volume of
business in each account to rise to about Pounds 15m in the second year.
He says the more a company is accustomed to using the card, the more
confident it is likely to feel in carrying out transactions this way,
allowing volumes to increase further.
Barclaycard estimates that corporate transactions for less than Pounds 3,000
 -the typical use of the Visa purchasing card - total about Pounds 65bn in
the UK each year.
