FT  18 FEB 94 / Biggest US cable TV group acquires 20% stake in HTV
TCI of Denver, the world's largest cable television company, moved into the
British broadcasting industry yesterday by buying a significant stake in
HTV, the ITV broadcaster for Wales and the west of England.
The deal marks a significant stage in the current round of agreed and
hostile takeover bids in ITV as it involves for the first time a foreign
controlled, non-ITV company. It is the first attempt in the UK to bring
together a traditional television broadcaster with an emerging cable
television operator.
Flextech, the fast-growing media group controlled by TCI, is buying a 20 per
cent share in HTV for about Pounds 27m. A former oil services company that
turned itself into a media group, Flextech owns, manages or has stakes in 11
satellite and cable television channels in the UK and Europe. They include
five channels in the Sky Television multi-channels package.
The alliance with HTV, which Flextech is funding through a placing of 6.59m
new shares, would extend its reach into terrestrial broadcasting.
Mr Roger Luard, Flextech's managing director, said the two companies would
jointly exploit opportunities to use production facilities and broaden the
reach of programmes.
The deal effectively removes HTV from the list of takeover targets within
the ITV sector. It means that of the large or medium-sized ITV companies
only Scottish Television and Yorkshire-Tyne Tees are not subject to bids.
Granada's bid for LWT is due to come to a head next Friday, the final date
for acceptance of Granada's Pounds 776m latest offer.
At the same time as outlining the Flextech deal, HTV announced a pre-tax
profit of Pounds 3.3m for 1993 compared with a loss of Pounds 20.5m in 1992.
Earnings per share rose to 4.8p compared with a loss of 29.5p a share in
1992. After passing the interim dividend, the company plans a 1p final
dividend.
'The last 12 months have seen a return to solid profitability,' said Mr
Louis Sherwood, HTV chairman.
The Flextech deal is the equivalent of 156p a share, representing a 25 per
cent premium over HTV's closing price on February 16 and 32.5 times HTV's
1993 earnings. The HTV share price yesterday rose 27p to 152p and Flextech
rose 8p to 444p.
Barbarians at the gates, Page 24
London stocks, Page 40
