FT  24 SEP 94 / Survey of Residential Property (1): Simply the best, better
than all the rest - So you want to live in the best place in town, money no
object. What would you choose and why? Freed from any financial constraints,
FT correspondents around the world had no problem in letting their
imaginations roam in search of that perfect property
Somewhere in the world is the perfect home. If you had your pick of the best
properties in major cities what would you select? A mansion? A penthouse? A
riverside palace? We asked FT correspondents to let their dreams run riot .
. .
LONDON
The best flat in London only partly exists, writes Gerald Cadogan. Even so,
it costs Pounds 15m, which buys a two-floor penthouse newly-built on top of
Fountain House, a handsome 1930s apartment block next to the Grosvenor House
Hotel on Park Lane in Mayfair.
The flat has superb views, especially westwards over Hyde Park, the
Serpentine and the Albert Memorial, which from up top looks like a rocket
about to set off from Cape Canaveral.
Grosvenor House is across Mount Street to the north. On the east and south
the immediate views are over the late 19th century red brick and white stone
mansions of Mayfair, which are becoming smarter every day as they return
from office to residential.
Skips and scaffolding cram the streets now, but enough has already been
refurbished to show how classy the resurrected Mayfair will be.
In this superb position, in the heart of London, the penthouse occupies the
whole of the top of the building. Some Pounds 15m buys a shell of 15,500 sq
ft, basement parking for 12 cars, and an express lift to get to them, and
nothing more.
There is still the cost of fitting out this huge space, 1 1/2 times the size
of even the larger Mayfair mansions, and deciding where to put the partition
walls. The top floor has mansard roof - a Parisian attic on a mega-scale,
fit for a Mayfair lady.
WA Ellis (071-581 7654) and Wetherell (071-493 6935) are joint sole agents
for a 250-year lease. If the penthouse does not sell as whole, they will
offer it as four units. But I cannot see how some person of wealth could let
this opportunity slip by.
NEW YORK
A morning stroll down Central Park South reveals something important about
living in a vertical city like New York, thinks Frank McGurty. On the north
side, the grassy verges along the edge of the park are dotted with
slumbering forms twisted into unnatural positions by the indignities of life
on the streets.
Across the way, majestic apartment towers rise out of the pavement like
genteel citadels against the travails below. Here, the wealthiest New
Yorkers reconcile their need for comfort and security with their intense
desire to be enveloped by the city's richness and vitality.
Alice Tully, a renowned patron of the arts and a generous benefactor of the
needy, was one of the most successful at achieving this balance. Before her
death last year, aged 91, she found sanctuary in an extravagant 14-room flat
which occupied the entire 27th floor of the Hampshire House hotel.
Her eyrie floats high above the very nexus of the city. Equidistant from the
up-market shops of the east side and the chamber music hall at Lincoln
Centre which bears her name, the residence offers unmatched accessibility to
New York's delights.
Yet, amid its lavish elegance, a visitor feels a comforting sense of
distance. The vista from the front terrace, situated at the mid-point of
Central Park's south face, encourages the illusion of a graceful and
purposeful city where gentle woodlands and water-courses are framed neatly
by gardens of urban architecture.
Inside, Tully created the illusion of an 18th-century Venetian palazzo. Its
eccentric ramble of rooms - both intimate and grand - stands in refreshing
contrast to the sterility of most New York flats, even at the very high end
of the market.
The music room, a sumptuous space with 18ft ceilings and double-height
French windows, lies at the heart of this whimsical maze. In its stately
elegance, the philanthropist indulged her greatest passion in a style which
every New Yorker would envy.
Alas, few of them could afford it. The asking price is Dollars 7m - plus
Dollars 22,800 a month in service charges.
PARIS
If I was going for grandeur I would chuck out the Rothschilds and move into
Hotel Lambert, their 17th century townhouse on the Ile Saint-Louis, says
Alice Rawsthorn. If I wanted something more modern, I would have to choose
between Pierre Chareau's exquisitely eccentric Maison de Verre, in
Saint-Germain des Pres, or Rem Koolhaas's cool contemporary Villa d'Alba in
Saint-Cloud.
But there is only one serious contender for my perfect Parisian pad - Villa
Savoye, the white-walled house in a buttercup field in the western suburb of
Poissy, which was the last and the loveliest of the purist villas designed
in the 1920s by Le Corbusier.
It says a great deal about the house that it could coax an unreconstucted
urbanite like me into an insalubrious suburb like Poissy. Villa Savoye would
be worth it. It is a dream of a house: the perfect blend of Le Corbusier's
architectural theory with a sensuous sense of space.
Villa Savoye was built in 1931 as the home of the Savoyes, an insurance
magnate and his wife. The exterior is the same perfectly proportioned blend
of soft curves and straight lines that is so appealing in Le Corbusier's
bigger buildings. The main rooms are raised on columns above the ground so
that the house seems to float among the trees. The columns form a circle
specially measured so that the Savoyes' chauffeur could whisk them to the
door with a single turn of their Hispano Suiza's steering wheel.
The only hitch is that Villa Savoye is not on the market, nor is it likely
to be in its guise as a French national monument.
SINGAPORE
It is much better to throw mods and cons into the tropical breeze and go for
traditional, colonial style, writes Kieran Cooke. A house in the Mount
Pleasant area, only about 15 minutes drive from the downtown business
district, would be my ideal. You crunch your way up the drive to a
two-storey black and white house. A verandah as big as a running track
stretches around the building. Here, in the hallway by the front door, is
where you sit and have a sundowner or play a rubber of bridge.
The proportions of the rooms are more than generous. Fans hanging from high
ceilings sloop away. The floors, made from the best tropical timbers, creak
underfoot. Outside, the lawn is lined with sweet smelling jacaranda trees
and hibiscus.
There are some inconveniences to living in the old style. There is little or
no air conditioning. Crawling objects might choose to climb into bed with
you and there are mosquitoes. But it is more what living in the tropics
should be about. And you do not have to be a millionaire to afford this
ideal. A three-bedroomed house, with substantial garden and pool, plus
servants quarters, could cost just SDollars 12,000 to SDollars 18,000 per
month.
TOKYO
The ideal homes that Tokyoites are madly curious to know about are the four
penthouses on the 31st and 32nd floors of a luxury condominium complex
offered by Sapporo Breweries earlier this year, writes Emiko Terazono.
The other condominiums in the complex cost between Y123.7m (Pounds 808,400)
and Y486m (Pounds 3.177m) and have been snatched up by those who can afford
it. However, the company refuses to reveal the details and prices of the
penthouses, which it says are not for sale to the public.
Property analysts say the penthouses are likely to be the most luxurious
pieces of real estate to come on to the market in the last few years.
Sapporo says the development block, Yebisu Garden Place, in which the
condominium complex is situated, is itself a status symbol. Located in a
trendier part of town, residents of the condominiums have easy access to
high-rise office buildings, luxury hotels, restaurants and a shopping mall
all inside the block.
BERLIN
Property is scare, expensive and still plagued by claims from former owners
in east Berlin, writes Judy Dempsey. But do not despair. You will soon be
able to live in Stadtmitte, the heart of old Berlin.
It is likely to become the hub of the German capital and a clutch of luxury
apartments become available next summer when Tishman Speyer property
developers complete their exclusive retailing, shopping and housing complex
on Friedrichstrasse, a stone's throw from Checkpoint Charlie. No one could
ask for a better location, backing on to the Gendarmenmarkt. Renting is the
norm and expect to pay between DM40 and DM50 a square metre. You will not
regret it.
