FT  15 OCT 94 / Books: Down the Silk Road . . . into the empty quarter - AC
Grayling and Michael Thompson-Noel discuss masterly evocations of the
world's wildest places
THE LOST HEART OF ASIA by Colin Thubron William Heinemann Pounds 16.99, 375
pages
Asia's vast heart lies between the Caspian Sea and the mountainous borders
of China. For centuries it was a tumultuous space, bisected by the western
reaches of the Silk Road and ravaged by plundering armies of nomads. The
civilisations that flourished there, before the great rivers dried or
changed course, or before the plunderers came, are marked today by ruins and
dust.
Men once used to mince down the streets of great Central Asian cities in
high-heeled, thigh-length, pointed-toe boots, swathed in dazzling muslins
and riding horses caparisoned in turquoise and gold. The women of their
harems wore 'the most caressing silks in Asia', and painted their eyebrows
with antimony and their finger-nails with balsam. In the markets Chinese,
Hindus, Jews and Persians mingled to exchange Asia's brilliant riches. And
with wealth came learning, arts and ease.
No-one could better Colin Thubron's doleful elegance as recorder of the sad
and potentially dangerous plight into which Central Asia has since fallen,
first as a result of Russian and later Soviet domination, and now as a
result of the passing of that domination.
The grim poverty in Turkmenia and Uzbekistan summons Thubron's melancholy.
The cities are placeless, the hotels empty, the streets silent and dirty.
Bewilderment prevails in the current economic decay and uncertainty. Thubron
writes: 'Dusk emptied the lanes. A few street-lamps stood in stagnant pools
of light, and a call to prayer wavered on the sunset.'
The question that obsessed Thubron as he travelled through Central Asia was,
will it fall into the grip of Islamic fundamentalism? Apart from a few young
men studying in the newly-reopened mullah schools, few of those he quizzed
seemed to think so. They were unconcerned; fundamentalism of the Iranian
kind, they said, was alien to their traditions; their women were too
independent to accept the veil. Some Uzbeks told Thubron they dreamed of a
pan-Turkic federation in the region. They looked to the relatively
flourishing Western-style success of Turkey as an example of what Central
Asia could become. But questions of identity remain indeterminate; many of
Thubron's interlocutors were indifferent to nationalistic appeals, and felt
themselves inheritors of too many races to be deeply moved by considerations
of blood. Instead they appealed to a wider, more inclusive but still
diffuse, sense of Moslem brotherhood.
Thubron's chief fear is that the current mixture of political dislocation
and deep poverty will prove volatile. Gangsterism prevails, inflation soars,
the peoples of the region have exchanged Soviet illusions for what seems to
many of them a desperate futurelessness. The common cry is 'Last year mutton
cost three roubles, now it is three hundred.' It is unsurprising how many
told Thubron they regretted the Soviet era's passing, and cursed Gorbachev
for a betrayer.
The central episode of Thubron's wanderings among Central Asia's oases,
mountains and steppes was a wild dash by car through the Pamir Mountains
into Tajikistan, travelling just ahead of the civil war erupting there, and
threading a way through snow-clogged, avalanche-gashed passes high above the
snow-line. It makes for thrilling reading, and brings some of the region's
wildest and grandest beauty vividly into view.
But Thubron is happiest when he is saddest, picking his solitary way among
poignant ruins and meditating on the fate of civilisations.
A looming presence in Thubron's vision of Central Asia is Tamerlane, the
great emperor who built Samarkand. He was a descendant of the legendary
virgin Alangoa, who had given birth after being ravished by a moonbeam.
Tamerlane conquered a vast quarter of the world, and brought back as slaves
the best builders and artists to construct his capital. His monument is a
huge cairn of stones in a high pass of the Mountains of Heaven, which divide
Kazakhstan from China. 'It was said that Tamerlane, passing east with his
army, ordered every soldier to gather up one rock and pile it in the pass,'
Thubron tells us. 'Years later, on his return, each man took away his stone
to Samarkand, and those that remain became a cenotaph to the fallen.' It was
a fitting place for Thubron's own journey to end.
