FT  14 OCT 94 / Arts: Battle with the Philharmonia
Leonard Slatkin's programme with the Philharmonia Orchestra on Wednesday
seemed at first sight to have been a hotch-potch tailored to the strengths
of the evening's soloist, Kathleen Battle. In the event, even its light
demands showed up the American diva unfavourably.
Hers is a small voice unsuited to the open spaces of the Royal Festival
Hall, and indulgent patrons seated towards the back may have been happy to
make allowances for her distinctly underwhelming projection, even against
the reduced size of the orchestra in the opening work of the evening,
Mozart's Exsultate jubilate. But Battle's boring vocal display  - she
employed a single tone colour and maintained one mezzo-forte-ish dynamic -
across the contrasting moods of the motet was less excusable, especially at
moments of wayward intonation. In spite of her starry international status,
this was singing easily bettered (almost) any night of the week up the road
at English National Opera. The Overture to Die Entfuhrung aus dem Serail -
even in Slatkin's middle-of-the-road Mozart manner - restored spirits a
little.
But they were quickly dampened again, by the first British performance of
Andre Previn's song cycle Honey and Rue. Commissioned by the Carnegie Hall
for its centenary in 1992, the six songs were apparently conceived with
Battle's voice in mind. Previn, wisely, makes no demands on the soprano's
lowest register, but his music has a resolute predictability about it.
Though the score - sub-Copland with infusions of jazz - has perhaps more
substance than most of Previn's music, the composer responds to Toni
Morrison's bittersweet poetry with only the most obvious of orchestral
effects. The unaccompanied, spiritual-like fourth song, 'Do you know him?',
calls for an earthiness lacking in Battle's tone.
After interval, Slatkin, having paid respects to his fellow conductor, found
in Mahler's First Symphony something to sink his teeth into. London is not
starved for Mahler at present - the London Symphony Orchestra's Mahler
Festival forges ahead at the Barbican - but there is always room for more
performances of distinction. Though the first movement was slow in springing
to life, most of Slatkin's account was invigorating and up-front. He dug
deeply into the Landler rhythms, revelled in the third movement's
intoxicating Zigeuner cafe music. The excitement here all but dispelled the
torpor of the evening's first half.
Kathleen Battle sings with the Philharmonia at The Anvil, Basingstoke, on
Saturday.
