FT  13 APR 94 / Management: Does nationality really matter? - Christopher
Lorenz begins a series on ownership by looking at how several former Plessey
companies are prospering as part of Siemens
Yachting enthusiasts who flock to the Isle of Wight this year will notice a
strange new structure sticking into the sky above the famous harbour town of
Cowes.
At a quick glance, it looks like a factory chimney. But perceptive visitors
will guess correctly from its silver-grey colour that it has something to do
with high technology. It is far more than that: a symbol of the rebirth of a
British company under German ownership  - the antithesis of what some people
fear could happen to the Rover car group under its new parent, BMW.
The 100ft tower is a new type of radar test facility, the first of its kind
in the world, built by what used to be part of Plessey, one of the UK's
leading electronics groups. The Cowes operation was one of several Plessey
units that were bought outright by Siemens in 1989 after Plessey was broken
up jointly  - and controversially  - by the German company and GEC,
Plessey's main domestic rival. The businesses now have joint sales of Pounds
350m, and almost 5,000 employees, more than half of whom work in research
and development.
Roger Barnes, an old Plessey hand who is director of the Cowes site  - which
forms part of the largest ex-Plessey company, now called Siemens Plessey
Electronic Systems  - has no doubts about what would have happened if the
German group had not bought the operation. 'It would have been awful,' he
says. 'One has to question whether we'd still be in business.'
His reasoning is simple: the new German parent is showing a commitment to
the former Plessey businesses, and a readiness to invest long-term, that was
all too lacking under British ownership. Siemens certainly is committed:
Electronic Systems has run a loss since 1990, although it will be back in
the black this year.
In the main, Siemens has handled the aftermath of the takeover with great
care. There have been some strains over its much more structured and
deliberate approach to management, and over various other Anglo-German
cultural differences. But, with a few exceptions, the ex-Plessey executives
are full of praise for the way their new colleagues and masters in Munich
have behaved towards them.
That behaviour has been conditioned by several things, including the lack of
virtually any overlap between Siemens' operations and those of Plessey. But
another factor has been the Germans' genuine surprise at the high level of
engineering skill which they found in Plessey. Jurgen Gehrels, the chief
executive of Siemens UK, attributes the success of several of the businesses
since the takeover to 'the ingenuity of the people, and their pragmatism'.
This combination, plus the relatively low cost of engineers in Britain  -
little more than half the German level  - has also prompted Siemens to shift
some contract research work from Germany to one of the units.
But it is the gulf between short-termism and long-term thinking that, to the
managers involved, is the single most important lesson of the takeover.
Clive Dolan, head of the whole electronic systems company, is just as
damning about his former employer as Barnes. 'What Plessey did most of the
time was respond to the City of London's need for quarterly profit
increases,' he says. 'The British electronics industry hasn't done well
globally because they've had their eyes on the wrong ball. Sensible
long-term plans were disrupted constantly by short-term considerations.'
The new Pounds 1.5m radar test tower at Cowes  - considered vital by Siemens
for all sorts of reasons  - was first proposed in Plessey days as long ago
as 1980. It was rejected, says the engineering executive at Cowes, Bob
Barton, because it could not meet Plessey's normal criterion of a two-year
payback; instead, five years was thought likely under British accounting
conventions. Under Siemens' more cautious approach, it is now expected to
take at least seven years.
'Siemens recognises that if you're serious about a market, you go into it
properly  - to win, not just to turn up at the game,' says Barnes.
The test tower is one of three key investment projects on the Cowes site
alone which owe their existence to the change in ownership.
The second is a Pounds 5m design engineering centre, which was approved just
after the takeover and finished in 1991. Under Plessey, 'we'd tried again
and again to get approval,' says Barnes. The company refused, so more and
more engineers had to be squashed into portakabins  - which Siemens
considers 'is not the way to motivate people to do good work,' as Gehrels
puts it.
To Plessey's traditional fear that such an investment might have bankrupted
the Cowes unit if orders fell off, Barnes says Siemens' reply would be 'if
you've got that sort of worry and might let the business go bust, then you
shouldn't be in it in the first place'.
The third Cowes project, which is nearing completion, is a Pounds 5m outlay
on computerised design and engineering equipment over five years. This has
given each of Cowes' 250 engineers their own computer-aided design or
engineering station; under Plessey, each machine had to be shared between
eight of them.
It is not only on capital investment that Plessey's spending was inadequate.
'Some of the businesses had not seen a penny of the company's own R&amp;D money
for years  - it only spent government funds,' says Gehrels. The rate of
internally-funded R&amp;D has been doubled since the Siemens takeover, and will
reach 15 per cent of this year's Pounds 116m total R&amp;D expenditure, itself a
third up on 1989.
Apart from Barnes' air defence business  - which has grown in spite of
government spending cuts  - the most obvious beneficiary of Siemens'
commitment to technology has been a unit which develops and makes air
traffic control and management (ATM) systems.
Run directly by Dolan until his promotion last year, the order intake of its
UK operations alone has soared from under Pounds 15m in 1989 to Pounds 131m
in 1993, taking the unit 'from nowhere to number two in Europe', according
to Dolan. That has required about Pounds 30m of investment since 1991.
'This wouldn't have happened under Plessey  - or GEC,' he stresses (he is
fiercely critical of GEC's performance in world market terms). Neither
company, he argues, would have had the commitment to building a global
market position, including the willingness to price accordingly and carry
losses for a time. Like the electronic systems company as a whole, the cost
of ATM's expansion has been a (planned) loss.
'Plessey talked about being a global player, but was amateurish,' says
Dolan. 'It was doing things on a shoestring, without any realistic
expectation that they would work.' By contrast, he says Siemens 'is a very
adult company  - very sensible and cerebral'.
Dolan's early success with the unit led Siemens in 1991 to designate his
south London base, rather than a German location, as the global headquarters
for its ATM business. In one sense, this was an obvious step, since about 80
per cent of its total ATM revenues of Pounds 180m come from the UK unit  -
including heavy exports  - with the German end very much the junior partner.
But the move was nevertheless significant for a group which still ran almost
all its business units from Germany.
An expansive man, Barnes revels in the fact that 'the degree of autonomy we
have, within approved parameters, is vastly bigger than before  - the
Germans are more fastidious, but also more trusting'.
All the same, he says takeovers are 'difficult when you've been fiercely
independent for decades'. There is some sensitivity  - tinged with
admiration  - at Cowes about Siemens' insistence on involvement in the
detail of even things such as local building decisions; Barnes says Siemens
has detailed expansion plans for each site around the world for the next 20
years or more.
Especially frustrating, says Richard Wyatt, Dolan's manufacturing director,
was Cowes' loss of a planned investment  - a Pounds 200,000 machine  - to a
Siemens factory in Belgium because he and his colleagues had not yet been
familiarised with the parent company's tough policy on duplicate
investments. 'We didn't know how to debate our corner  - we didn't sell it
properly as a core investment for us,' Wyatt says.
There were also early strains when Siemens insisted on using its usual
German consultancy on a British cost-reduction project. Language problems
and other difficulties produced a set of faulty recommendations. Now, things
are different: on a current productivity exercise, Siemens has not insisted
on uniformity, and Wyatt and his colleagues have selected a consultancy
themselves.
Such strains would have been lessened, says Barnes, if Siemens had moved
more quickly to get him, Dolan and all their colleagues over to Germany for
an 'inter-cultural training' course with their opposite numbers. 'It would
have avoided a lot of difficulties  - ways of approaching things that were
180 degrees apart,' he says.
In the event, such a course was held a full three years after the takeover,
in late 1992. It certainly broke the remaining ice. Dolan recalls that it
showed the British thought the Germans were honest but intolerant, while the
Germans thought the British were intolerant and not overtly honest: they
said one thing, but meant something else.
Anyone familiar with Anglo-German differences will recognise these as
standard stereotypes  - but accurate ones. Yet that recognition is of no
practical help to two companies striving hard to work together  - even if,
as with Siemens, German executives are tolerant enough to break into their
colleagues' language whenever the need arises. To Dolan's embarrassment,
this still happens even when there is just one Briton in the room with 20
Germans. Wyatt admits that 'not enough of us have found time to do a total
immersion course. We need to  - it's critical'.
Dolan, who already speaks goodish German, is taking further lessons. 'One
observes that all Siemens' main board directors are German,' he observes
wryly.
The second article in the series will appear next Wednesday.
