FT  10 JUN 94 / Tories braced for poll rout: Mass abstentions on European
vote - 60 per cent turnout in Eastleigh
The Conservative party was bracing itself for electoral disaster last night
as a low turnout in the European elections and five by-elections signalled
mass abstentions by core Tory voters.
About 60 per cent of eligible voters were believed to have gone to the polls
in Eastleigh, the Hampshire seat held by the late Mr Stephen Milligan,
suggesting that Liberal Democrats were virtually certain to over-turn the
Conservative majority of more than 17,000.
Polling was also slow in the election for 84 members of an expanded European
parliament, underlining the possibility that the Tories lose up to two
thirds of their 32 seats, with up to a dozen going to the Liberal Democrats
and the rest to Labour.
Turnout was reported to be low in The Netherlands, where exit polls
suggested that the Christian Democrats would gain one seat. Voters in
Ireland and Denmark also went to the polls yesterday. Elections for the
expanded 567 seat will take place in the other eight EU countries Sunday.
In London, Conservative managers believe that a late swing to the party
could allow it to hold up to 20 seats, which would be regarded by many
activists as a triumph for Mr John Major, the prime minister.
However, the latest opinion poll, by Mori for The Times, indicated that the
party could be left with as few as four seats. The poll gave the
Conservatives 23 per cent of the vote, compared with 51 per cent for Labour,
and 20 per cent for the Liberal Democrats.
Such a result would expose Mr Major to renewed criticism from right-wing
MPs, in spite of his generally Euro-sceptic approach during the campaign. It
would also resuscitate talk of a challenge to Mr Major's leadership of the
Conservative party in the autumn.
Mr Major, who spent most of the day at Downing Street, made no comment on
the elections, which he has said will have no impact on his determination to
serve a full his five-year term in office.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, voted early in Yeovil, in his
constituency. Mrs Margaret Beckett, the acting Labour leader, also voted
early in her constituency in Derby.
The Liberal Democrats were hoping to dislodge the Conservatives from second
place in one or more of four by-elections in the Labour held seats of
Barking, Dagenham, Newham NE and Rotherham.
However, the party was scaling back its hopes in all five by-election
constituencies because of embarrassment over the last minute defection to
Labour of Mr Alec Kellaway, the party's candidate in Newham.
Officials said Mr Kellaway's defection had had a substantial impact in
Eastleigh.
Mr John Braggins, the Labour agent, said the party was hopeful of taking
second place. 'Our workers are very buoyant. In our areas voters are coming
out more strongly than it other areas,' he said.
Joe Rogaly, Page 18
