FT  10 SEP 94 / The windmills of your mind: The Nature of Things
What is it about drugs that allow them to alter the workings of the mind,
manipulating moods and perceptions, lifting depression, even enhancing
memory?
According to neuroscientists, these mental phenomena result from the
electrical activity in the circuits of the neural computer between our ears.
How then, do drugs cause selective changes in the activity in these
circuits? What gives the neural computer its chemical dimension?
These questions have been thrown into sharp relief by the reported deaths of
night club revellers, thought to be caused by the drug Ecstasy. And although
neuroscientists can answer them, and can even explain why Ecstasy has such
dangerous side-effects, it is still impossible to predict either the
efficacy or the side- effects of new drugs.
The chemical dimension of neural activity starts from the fact that the
electrical currents in neurones (nerve cells) are carried not by electrons,
as in a computer, but by ions (electrically charged particles produced when
salts dissolve in water).
Ions carry electric current much less efficiently than electrons because
they are bigger and heavier, but they have the advantage that ionic currents
can be switched on and off by chemical switches.
The brain compensates for the inefficiency of ions as current carriers by
using the same technique as modern communication engineers, digital
transmission. Information is coded and transmitted by neurones in the form
of a stream of identical pulses, called action potentials.
Action potentials are electrical pulses controlled by chemical switches. The
chemical switches are operated by changes in voltage (voltage-gated). The
action potential travels down a neurone by operating the voltage-gated
switches just ahead of it, and 'switching on' an action potential there,
which then repeats the process. This is exactly the way that relays enable
man-made cables to transmit long distances without losing signal strength.
Drugs that impair the actions of the switches can suppress the transmission
of information. This is how some nerve poisons, such as tetrodotoxin which
is secreted by the Japanese puffer fish, and anaesthetics work.
Any drug that acts on the voltage-gated switches that control the action
potential will affect the whole brain. To affect our moods a drug must
modulate the activity of different brain circuits selectively. It must act
on a process that works differently in brain circuits controlling different
functions.
The synapse, which is the device that transmits information between
neurones, is a promising target for selective drug action. When an action
potential arrives at a synapse, it releases a minute quantity of a chemical
called a neurotransmitter. The neurotransmitter acts on the next cell in the
chain by reacting with a special molecule, a receptor, to operate a chemical
switch and turn an ionic current on or off.
There are many different neurotransmitters, and each may act on several
different types of receptor. Different brain circuits differ in the
transmitters they use. The same transmitter may also differ from circuit to
circuit. This gives drug designers an opportunity to devise chemicals that
will have very specific effects on the brain.
Chemicals that influence the interactions of neurotransmitters with their
receptors, for example by altering the amount of transmitter released or the
duration of its interaction with the receptor, have the potential to alter
the operation of specific brain circuits. This is the way drugs alter the
workings of the mind.
Drugs can also affect the function of other brain circuits, and of cells
throughout the whole body, causing side-effects.
Unfortunately there is much, not only about transmitters, receptors and
brain circuitry, but also about general physiology that is not understood.
It is impossible to predict the effect of new drugs either on the body or on
the brain. Potential drugs still have to be identified by trial and error,
and rigorously tested for safety.
Ecstasy is the classic case of a drug with a wide range of effects. It acts
by suddenly increasing the release of the neurotransmitter Serotonin, which
is used by neurones in circuits controlling mood, particularly reactions to
unpleasant stimuli. Serotonin is also associated with the brain circuits
that control body temperature, and those that select which of the millions
of sensory signals available at any one time we attend to.
Ecstasy's popularity as a dance drug stems partly from its effect on mood,
but also from the fact that serotonin shuts out unpleasant sensory signals
caused by thirst and high body temperature. It enables people to dance until
they collapse from heatstroke.
Tragically, this effect of serotonin is compounded by the way it acts
outside the brain. It causes massive and widespread blood-clotting, which
could be fatal even in people not suffering from heatstroke.
Thus Ecstasy (3,4 methylenedioxymethamphetamine), which was originally
patented for use as an appetite suppressant, is an object-lesson in the
difficulties that face the pharmaceutical industry in their search for new
drugs.
