FT  02 JUN 94 / Brown gives Blair clear run at party leadership:
Modernisers' pact makes Labour succession 'a formality'
Mr Tony Blair's bid for the Labour party leadership looked unstoppable last
night after his close friend and ally, Mr Gordon Brown, bowed out of the
race to succeed Mr John Smith.
Mr Brown's decision means he will now give his full backing to Mr Blair and
will in turn be guaranteed his current post of shadow chancellor.
It is understood in talks between the two - the party's leading
'modernisers' - Mr Brown has been promised the pivotal role in shaping
economic and social policy in any future Labour government led by Mr Blair.
Mr Blair, currently shadow home secretary, now has the overwhelming support
of the shadow cabinet and of Labour MPs in the leadership race. A
substantial majority of trades union leaders also support him.
That raises the possibility that the 41-year-old MP for Sedgefield could
become the youngest party leader this century after only a token contest.
One member of the shadow cabinet said last night that the party's choice was
now 'a formality'.
Last night the head of one of Britain's biggest unions, Mr Bill Jordan, of
the AEEU engineering and electrical union, called on possible leadership
candidates to follow Mr Brown's example by not standing against Mr Blair.
Mrs Margaret Beckett, acting Labour leader, Mr John Prescott, shadow
employment secretary and Mr Robin Cook, shadow trade and industry secretary,
are all potential contenders for the leadership. Mr Cook was last night
understood to be keeping his options open and Mrs Beckett has said she will
not reveal her intentions until after the European elections on June 9.
But senior figures in the party last night appeared confident that both Mr
Cook and Mrs Beckett would decide eventually not to run against Mr Blair.
That would leave Mr Prescott, the standard-bearer of the party's
'traditionalist' wing with a difficult decision of whether to contest the
leadership or whether to stand against Mrs Beckett for the post of deputy
leader.
Left-wing Labour MPs believe a contest is vital to test Mr Blair's stance on
the key economic and social decisions the party must take before the general
election.
Mr Prescott has supported that view but must now assess the risk to his
political career that a defeat would cause .
In a brief statement, Mr Brown said that he had taken his decision to clear
up 'the confusion' over whether he would fight Mr Blair for the leadership.
He had only one consideration in mind - 'to ensure the election of a Labour
government to improve and regenerate our country'.
Close friends insisted that Mr Brown had won equal support from MPs, members
of the shadow cabinet and union leaders for his own candidacy. But he
recognised Mr Blair's stronger appeal to the electorate. Mr Blair accepted
that under his leadership the 'fairness' agenda developed by Mr Brown to
link economic and social policies would be the basis for Labour policy for
the next election.
Painful decision, Page 9
