FT  23 JUN 94 / Survey of Korea (13): Overseas publicity criticised -
Efforts to boost tourism
This season's T-shirts in Seoul feature the cute kids of the Visit Korea
Year logo, banal grins distorted in fear and chubby legs in flight as a Scud
missile approaches from the armpit zone. The legend runs: 'You'd better
visit Korea in 1994 . . . because it might not be here in 1995'.
North Korea's nuclear ambitions have undoubtedly made something of a mockery
of the republic's drive to woo tourists in 1994; but hoteliers and other
industry figures complain the drive has been as ill-conceived as it has been
ill-timed. Marketing has been thin and poorly targeted, incentive schemes
have gone unflagged. The tourist office in Seoul shows an exotic promotional
video containing war clips among shots of cherry blossom and snow-clad
mountains.
The Korean National Tourism Corporation will spend some Dollars 8m on the
campaign, promoting Korea as a tourist destination through TV advertisements
on Star TV and CNN, publicity tours for travel agents and school teachers,
poster ads on buses from London to Hong Kong, and - intriguingly - through
sending some 50 Miss Korea contestants to entice Americans in New York, Los
Angeles and Washington to sample the delights of Korea. That could well be
the winning stratagem in KNTC's armoury.
KNTC, which has masterminded the Visit Korea Year in commemoration of
Seoul's sixth centennial, claims success: tourist arrivals in the first five
months of the year are up 18 per cent year-on-year and it expect 4m visitors
for the whole of 1994, a 20 per cent increase on last year's 3.3m but still
below the 4.5m forecast in its own promotional slide presentation. The
average visitor spends four days and five nights, during which he will spend
Dollars 1,100.
Ambassador Chi Young-tai, KNTC's president, says the figures are encouraging
and blames any shortfall in visitors on the nuclear issue. 'Sometimes
relations are stormy between North and South Korea and unfortunately this is
a very stormy period, but I'm sure the cloud will pass over.
'If you look around it's business as usual - the stock market is rising and
traffic jams are as bad as ever - so it's only the news media that see
things differently.'
KNTC's efforts in pushing tourism are impressive: the tourist office,
complete with theatre and raised map models, must rate as one of the most
comprehensive and user-friendly in the world and staff display CD-Rom
memories and impeccable English. The trouble is that they are to an extent
preaching to the converted rather than broadcasting the message further
afield.
That, at any rate, is the lament of the hoteliers. The 1,500-room Lotte, one
of Seoul's leading tourist hotels, reports no noticeable improvement in
sales this year - because of the nuclear scare, the recession in Japan which
provides 70 per cent of its customers (although this is offset to some
extent by the strength of the yen) and the government's failure to spread
the Visit Korea Year message abroad.
According to a hotel executive, 'Malaysia had a very good Visit Malaysia
Year, but we have not been so successful in promoting sales in Visit Korea
Year. That is mainly because the KNTC is in charge of sales promotion. I
guess the promotion planning is a little strange and out of date.
'They do not have enough experience in promoting abroad, nor have they made
sufficient preparations in time. That - and the fact the budget is
insufficient - is why they have failed,' he explains.
Ms Seung Eun Chung, sales manager (Europe) for The Westin Chosun, one of
Seoul's 10 de luxe hotels, cites the case of a Canadian travel agent who was
unaware of one of the government's key incentives - scrapping the 10 per
cent tax which is normally added to room rates for non-resident guests and
travel agencies.
Having been told, the agent tried to contact the Korean government
representatives in Toronto for further information - but drew blanks all
round. Many guests staying in the Westin Chosun and benefiting from the 10
per cent reduction were also unaware of the government's bounty.
'My feeling is that the government has failed to promote Visit Korea 1994
abroad. They have also failed to activate demand internally,' says Ms Chung.
Much of the push has been concentrated on Japan, which yields some 45 per
cent of Korea's tourists. The tireless KNTC has supported this internally by
providing Japanese as well as English booklets and cassettes for taxi
drivers, although Ambassador Chi admits to limited success here: 'They don't
realise how important their role is in promoting tourism. Sometimes they are
very rude, especially because of language problems.'
Broadcasting the need to learn English - 'to internationalise' - has been an
important spoke of the tourism campaign, and staff at hotels and shops are
well-versed in the (Americanised) niceties, bidding guests have a nice day
and sweet dreams depending on the time of day. A limited number of road and
subway signs now bear English translations and taxi drivers generally have
at least enough English to ascertain if their passengers are American.
Other steps taken to enhance Korea's reputation as a tourist destination
include streamlining the immigration and customs procedure and government
plans to invest funds in improving the country's infrastructure. Sports
facilities are also being upgraded and developed, as these are an important
part of Korea's tourism message.
Korea itself has a convincing message for tourists. Depending upon the
season, it offers skiing and mountain hiking in national parks; sightseeing
round old Buddhist temples and palaces; scuba diving, golf and hunting;
cherry blossom in springtime and a semi-tropical climate in the southern
island of Cheju. It is no longer particularly cheap (except, perhaps, to
those wielding yen), a problem KNTC has paid lip service to by producing a
book of money-off coupons.
This year Korea will host 300 international meetings in the capital city, in
addition to sports and leisure events - such as the underwater photographic
championship and international windsurfing contest - across the country.
For the big hotels, the real money spinner is business travellers who are
starting to return after a two-year recession-induced slack period. This
year the Westin Chosun expects to fill some 80 per cent of its rooms over
the year. The average room rate is as much as W110,000, except for the five
months' low season.
