FT  10 MAR 94 / Survey of Software at Work, Spring 1994 - Financial Control
Systems (4): How today's executive sees the enterprise - Evolving EIS
systems
Taking different views of the same data, taken from different sources, has
given suppliers of executive information systems (EIS) an inside track on
multi-dimensional analysis, writes Claire Gooding.
Driven to escape from the 'executive' niche, several EIS suppliers are
converging on the same ground: that of data consolidation. Most also have
their eyes turned to the growing client server market, where the networked
PC/workstation rules.
'We're finding managing directors are much more aware of the need to control
finances, not just report on them,' says Steve Fluin, sales director at
Comshare UK, a Dollars 100m company which claims to lead the EIS market
worldwide. 'As organisations come out of recession, executives realise they
need to be able to control pro-actively, rather than just react. They want
'intelligent facilities that tell them where to look.'
Comshare's Budget and Financial Data Control products are aimed at this
market, and the development of 'exception alerting.'
David Friend, founder of Pilot Software, is credited with the development of
'traffic lighting,' a similar early warning system built into his Lightship
software. He agrees that retrieval is the problem - 'the typical problem is
multi-dimensional, 'slice and dice' view of data by region or product,' he
says. 'There's now an enormous amount of data, but it's difficult to get the
gold out.'
His four-year redevelopment of Lightship has concentrated on being able to
deliver multi-dimensional analysis of vast volumes of data, at high speed.
EIS tools are beginning to draw on the techniques of linking and combining
data, as used in relational databases.
The ability to present different views of data - such as looking at time
periods, sales regions or product breakouts - is known as OLAP, or on-line
analytical processing.
Business intelligence
IRI Software's Simon Rigden is another believer in 'slicing, dicing and
pivoting' the data to give a specific focus. He uses the term 'business
intelligence' for IRI's Express system, rather than EIS, to emphasise the
need for an enterprise-wide view of the data.
'Having a large enterprise-wide database is of little value if end-users are
unable to synthesise necessary information from those data stores,' he says.
'Traditionally, EIS has been the domain of a small number of executives, but
it's a big problem to spread it through an organisation. Databases and their
front-end add-ons, typically based on query/report generators, or
spreadsheets, limit the way in which data can be summarised, viewed and
analysed.'
Arbor Software's Essbase claims to be one of the first to capitalise on the
client/server revolution to create multi-dimensional views for different
groups (workgroups) of users.
According to Nigel Geary, managing director of Arbor Software in the UK, the
idea is to enable users to manipulate massive amounts of data from disparate
sources without any professional IT help, filling the gap between the
expensive mainframe modelling package, and the 2-D spreadsheet - 'users can
pull out data and look at it in any form,' he says.
Arbor's plan is to make its package complementary with other software
companies, 'so that they can package it and make it the standard front-end
for consolidation.'
The first such agreement, with Comshare, has already been reached.
