FT  03 OCT 94 / Survey of Building Services (4): Beware the back burner -
Tim Burt reviews research and innovation
When more than 1,200 opera lovers rose to applaud the first night of Figaro
at the new Glyndebourne Opera House, few of them paused to consider the
triumph of engineering behind the scenes.
The Pounds 33m East Sussex auditorium, however, would not have been ready to
stage last May's inaugural production had it not been for the use of
innovative building services technology.
That expertise, drawn together by consultant engineers Ove Arup, depended in
large part on products developed overseas. The cast list of the building's
main equipment suppliers was dominated by international stars such as
Froling, Weishaupt, Trane, Grundfos and Krantz.
Critics of the UK building services industry argue that contractors favour
such products because they represent thousands of hours of research and
development - an area which has been comparatively neglected in the past in
Britain.
'Research and innovation on building services is taken much more seriously
in Scandinavia and North America,' says Dr Leslie Hawkins, director of
occupational health at Surrey University's Robens Institute.
'We have just as many sites affected by sick building problems, but we don't
seem willing to commit the research funding needed to examine it.'
His concern is echoed at the Building Research Establishment (BRE), the
research agency funded partly by the government.
Mr Stephen Willis, head of the new technologies and controls section in the
BRE's environmental systems division, warns that innovation in the UK still
lags behind overseas competitors and is often regarded as conservative.
That fault may be due to the tendency among British architects to first
design a building and only consult building service engineers afterwards to
make the plans work.
With little room to manoeuvre, the engineers sometimes have no option but to
fall back on expensive and costly systems for air conditioning and other
services.
Moves to introduce supposedly innovative ideas, such as manually-opened
windows for natural ventilation, sometimes also run into hostility from
owner-occupiers who regard such ideas as unprestigious and old-fashioned.
In some cases, there has also been a reluctance by the construction industry
to embrace schemes which could threaten their lucrative maintenance
contracts.
The government, according to Mr Willis, has recently urged companies to
change their attitude by taking part in collaborative research funded
jointly by industry and the Department of the Environment.
Pressure to increase research funding mounted following the 1992 Rio
Convention on Climate Change, in which Britain acknowledged the need to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions from commercial buildings.
As part of that commitment, the BRE has launched a Pounds 1m energy-related
environmental issues programme, which includes 20 research projects on
subjects ranging from avoiding air conditioning to guidance on refrigeration
systems and the application of neural networks.
Its work is being matched by the Building Services Research and Information
Association (BSRIA), which represents almost 800 contractors, manufacturers
and consulting engineers.
Although it has 21 research projects under way, Ms Anne King, the
association's marketing director, admits: 'We do not compare favourably with
overseas competitors on R&amp;D. Britain spends less than Germany and Japan on
research, even though government backing has not been cut.'
By implication, industry - which funds 23 per cent of BSRIA's Pounds 2m
research funding - could do more to support development of new technology.
But in a sluggish commercial property market, construction companies are
anxious to keeping building service costs to a minimum and have been slow to
change.
There are, of course, buildings which show that innovation works. Mr Stephen
Willis, at the BRE, cites the De Montfort University's new school of
engineering and manufacture as an example.
Part gothic, part art deco - it makes use of natural ventilation and large
areas of glass to maximise light and heat.
Mr Willis claims that similar schemes are relatively rare because of a lack
of training initiatives among the building service engineers who advise on
plans for new or refurbished buildings.
'I don't see a great deal of evidence of professional training. Without
that, one ends up reinforcing the conservatism in British building
services.'
Dr Hawkins at Surrey University agrees. He blames most of the problems on
air conditioning systems, one of the main contributors to sick building
syndrome.
'We seem to be extremely bad at getting air conditioning to work properly.
I've come across a lot of companies with excellent facilities which are
allowed to deteriorate through poor maintenance.'
Claims that a lack of professional training is largely to blame are rejected
by the Chartered Institution of Building Service Engineers.
There has been a shift to continual professional training since the
mid-1980s, according to Ms Jennifer Hand, spokeswoman for the institution.
'Our 15,500 members are required to keep abreast of new developments and we
have increased the emphasis on updating skills for professional building
service engineers,' she says.
Citing changes in the training framework, Ms Hand points to the scheme run
by Ove Arup. Under its training programme, some 300 graduates are guided by
senior supervisors through courses ranging from acoustics to structural
engineering.
'It's a throwback to the apprenticeship system and we now create a gateway
for graduates to pursue the right career as part of a professional review
process,' says Mr Roger Chantrelle, training and development manager at Ove
Arup.
The scheme, however, is thought to be the exception rather than the rule in
an industry under pressure to cut costs and trim back on research and
development spending.
'There is still not enough money being put into prevention of sick building
syndrome through R&amp;D,' says Dr Hawkins.
Industry, it seems, has yet to be persuaded. Under government pressure, it
has paid more attention to research and new innovation. But remedial
maintenance of existing systems is thought to be a more lucrative pursuit
than installing new and innovative products.
In an industry still climbing painfully out of recession, research and
development runs the risk of being consigned to the back burner.
