FT  21 OCT 94 / Markets Report: Mixed showing for dollar following strong
data
The dollar traded in a fairly narrow range in Europe yesterday, providing
encouragement for those who believe the currency is due to rally, writes
Philip Gawith.
Strong economic data, which upset the US bond market, were shrugged off,
while the dollar also took little notice of comments from a Bundesbank
council member about the desirability of a stronger D-Mark.
The dollar ended in London at DM1.5016, from DM1.5009, and at Y97.325 from
Y97.15. It fell later in New York to DM1.4900 and Y96.95 on comments from Mr
Lloyd Bentsen, US treasury secretary, that the US government had no plans to
intervene in currency markets (to support the dollar), before finishing at
DM1.4927 and Y97.05.
Elsewhere, sterling recovered from a downward blip after the resignation of
a junior minister to finish at DM2.4325, from DM2.4296, and at Dollars 1.62
from Dollars 1.6188.
In Europe, the D-Mark was generally weaker as investors reassessed the
bullishness they had shown to the German currency in the run-up to last
weekend's elections.
Both the Swedish and Danish crowns firmed after a poll showed an increasing
number of Swedes in favour of joining the European Union. The Danish kroner
finished at DKr3.912 to the D-Mark, from DKr3.917, while the Swedish krona
closed at SKr4.774 from SKr4.8.
The dollar held above DM1.50 for most of the day, in spite of the buoyant
housing starts data, and the large jump in the prices component of the
Philadelphia Fed survey. Trade was very quiet, only livening up in the New
York afternoon when Mr Bentsen spoke.
Mr Bentsen was less emphatic than in recent months in supporting the virtues
of a strong dollar. His desire to see it 'a little higher' was clearly seen
as damning with faint praise.
Also unsettling for currency markets were earlier comments from Mr Tietmeyer
in Leipzig. He said: 'I hope the dollar remains a strong currency; the
D-Mark will remain so.'
A further concern for the dollar, at least against the yen, comes from a
Japan Development Bank's survey of manufacturers. Mr Michael Feeney,
economist at Sumitomo Bank in London, points out that 71 per cent felt they
could compete in world markets with dollar/yen in the Y90 to Y100 range.
More ominously, 86 per cent expect the rate to stay in this range for the
next three years.
Today the market is likely to take its lead from the expected release of the
German M3 money supply figure for September. This figure, together with the
Bundesbank council meeting next Thursday, are likely to be the main
short-term determinants of the dollar's progress.
There is considerable market speculation about whether the next move in
German interest rates will be up or down. Lower rates could provide some
support for the dollar, especially if combined with further rises in US
interest rates.
Earlier in the day, the market had focused on newspaper comments from Mr
Tietmeyer that any movement in Bundesbank rates again this year depended on
trends in the money supply, and other factors affecting inflation.
Analysts said the tenor of his comments suggested that the central bank was
clearly looking for further scope to cut rates, not to raise them.
Mr Paul Lambert, currency analyst at UBS in London, said a good M3 figure
would 'put interest rate reductions back on the agenda'. He predicted that
the Bundesbank might decide to revert to a variable rate repo at its weekly
auctions, and then follow with a final cut in official rates.
Before Mr Bentsen spoke, there was some comfort for dollar bulls from the
market's seeming unwillingness to take the dollar decisively below DM1.50.
Mr Malcolm Barr, economist at Chemical Bank in London, remarked: 'The market
is already rather over-extended in terms of short dollar positions, so it
held up rather well.'
The recent pattern of much of the liquidity being provided by the Bank of
England to UK money markets, coming in the form of late assistance,
persisted. After declaring a shortage of Pounds 700m, the Bank injected
Pounds 62m liquidity at established rates, and Pounds 665m late assistance.
The overnight money rate peaked at 8 per cent.
Cash rates were unaffected, with three-month LIBOR at 5 15/16 per cent. In
the futures market the December short sterling contract closed at 93.49,
from 93.52, on low volume. German call money eased to 4.80/4.85 per cent
from 4.85/4.90 per cent.
