FT  03 MAR 94 / Can Europe Compete?: Paper tiger versus the paper tiger -
Eco-labelling
Brazil's virgin wood pulp producers ought to be happy. The country's climate
and soil mean fast growing species like eucalyptus take about seven years to
mature while a pine in northern Europe takes 35. This, combined with low
labour and energy costs, gives the Brazilians a product they believe is
internationally competitive in terms of price and environmental standards.
Instead of celebrating, however, they are worried annual exports of more
than Dollars 500m to the European Union are threatened by planned
environmental legislation. They argue that the proposals are protectionist
and discriminate against developing countries. The problem stems from
proposals in Brussels to introduce 'eco-labelling' on paper products, to
inform consumers of the product's origin.
The scheme would start with tissue paper, and tissue producers would incur
penalty points if their raw materials or manufacturing processes were deemed
environmentally damaging. Producers who notched up too many points would not
get a label.
This month Mr Ioannis Paleokrassas, the EU environment commissioner, said he
was also keen to look at eventually introducing a tax on timber to
discourage felling in virgin tropical forests.
EU member states are due to vote on the eco-labelling proposals in the next
few weeks. Brazil fears the use of virgin wood pulp in paper products will
incur penalty points. It is also worried the eco-labelling system devised
for tissue paper, which has a low virgin pulp content, will later be applied
to photocopying and writing paper, where the content is much higher.
To the Brazilians, such penalties are acceptable if they prevent the cutting
down of 100-year-old hardwoods or the Amazon rain forest. But most of
Brazil's virgin wood pulp exports come from replanted forest 'farms'
thousands of miles from the Amazon.
According to the Commission, the Brazilians are overreacting. The best
producers, who have been awarded a label, may benefit from the scheme if
consumers prefer their products, but imports will not be shut out because
they lack a label.
But Brazil's Cellulose Exporters Association argues the proposals do not
give its members credit for being environmentally less damaging than
European producers. In particular, it points out that Brazilian paper
companies draw more than 90 per cent of their electricity from
hydro-electric sources - a renewable form of energy which does not cause air
pollution - where Europe's electricity is generated largely by oil and gas
power stations.
Brazilian analysts acknowledge that the impetus for the European proposals
came largely from environmental lobbies rather than competitors in Europe.
They also agree that some of the failings which they see in the proposals
may reflect bureaucratic oversight rather than protectionist instincts. But
some Brazilian companies claim European competitors will benefit
substantially from the proposals.
