FT  12 JAN 94 / FT/Transmedia Restaurant Promotion
More than 2,500 restaurants in the UK and the US are taking part in the 1994
Financial Times restaurant promotion. FT readers will be entitled to a 25
per cent saving on food and drinks consumed at lunch and dinner for a full
six months.  In addition, all readers who use their FT/Transmedia restaurant
card between January 24 and February 11 will be entered in a draw for 1,000
free lunches (or dinners) for two.
How does the FT/Transmedia restaurant card work?
When you dine at any of the participating restaurants, (lunch, dinner or
breakfast) and ask for the bill, you simply pay with your FT/Transmedia
restaurant card signing the Transmedia credit card slip for the full amount
of the bill.
This amount will then appear on your next Visa, Master Card or Delta credit
card statement together with a full credit for 25% of the amount you have
spent on food and beverages. Service and VAT are not included.
The FT/Transmedia restaurant card is free for six months.
After that period the annual membership fee is Pounds 35 and will be billed
to your credit card account unless you cancel your application with
Transmedia.
(Cardholders may cancel membership at any time for a full refund upon return
of the FT/Transmedia restaurant card).
All you have to do
Simply complete the application form and send it to FT/Transmedia Restaurant
Offer, PO Box 85 Watford, WD2 4WQ by Friday, January 21 1994.
You will then receive your personalised FT/Transmedia restaurant card
together with a list of all participating UK restaurants and a directory of
USA restaurants which accept the card.
1000 Free Meals
To enter the 1000 free meals draw, simply use your FT/Transmedia restaurant
card at any of the participating restaurants in the UK between Monday,
January 24 and Friday, February 11 1994.
You will then be entered automatically in the draw. The more times you use
your card within this period the better your chance of winning] A random
selection by computer will then be made of 1000 Transmedia Restaurant charge
slips generated in the promotional period entitling each winner to a Pounds
50 credit towards their next visit to any Transmedia restaurant (in addition
to the normal 25% saving with their card).
TERMS AND CONDITIONS The FT/Transmedia Restaurant Promotion entitles readers
to apply for an FT/Transmedia restaurant card free for the first six months.
Annual membership fees are Pounds 35 and will be billed to your credit card
account at the end of the fee-waived period.
Card holders may cancel membership at any time for a full refund on return
of the FT/Transmedia Restaurant Card. To participate in the promotion,
readers must have a Visa, Mastercard, or Delta credit card.
The FT/Transmedia restaurant card entitles holders to a 25 per cent saving
on the cost of the food and beverage portion of restaurant bills (not
including VAT, service and tip) at participating restaurants.
Group reservations for parties of seven or more must be booked through the
Transmedia office. Group reservations are subject to space available. The
telephone number for reservations is 071-930-0700.
To use your FT/Transmedia restaurant card select a participating restaurant
from the list published in the FT.
Present your card at the end of the meal as you would any other major credit
card, sign the Transmedia slip for the full amount and keep your copy.
Transmedia, not the restaurant, gives the 25 per cent saving and therefore
the 25 % saving will not be deducted at the restaurant but will appear on
your Visa, Mastercard or Delta statement.
Transmedia will charge your Visa, Mastercard or Delta account for the full
amount of the Transmedia charge slip and will process a corresponding
transaction crediting your account for the 25 per cent discount on the food
and beverage portion of the slip.
Continue to check the published list of restaurants as some restaurants may
be added or deleted. Restaurant directories will be sent to cardholders
updating participating restaurants after the initial promotion has ended.
Only the application form printed in the FT is valid. Photocopies or any
other reproductions will not be accepted. Closing date for receipt of
applications for the launch promotion is Friday, January 21 1994.
Applications should be sent to FT/Transmedia Restaurant Offer, PO Box 85,
Watford, WD2 4WQ.
Cards are expected to be sent within 7 days of application receipt.
Transmedia will continue to accept card applications after the initial
closing date, but cannot guarantee delivery in time for the launch
promotion.
The Financial Times and Transmedia cannot be responsible for lost or stolen
cards, although Transmedia will make every effort to recover these cards.
Transmedia will provide restaurants with an updated list of invalid cards.
The card holder should inform Transmedia as soon as possible to expedite
this procedure.
The promoters are Financial Times, Number One Southwark Bridge, London, SE1
9HL and Transmedia Europe, 11 St James's Square, London, SW1Y 4LB.
1000 Free Meals
All FT/Transmedia restaurant card holders using their card between Monday,
January 24 1994 and Friday, February 11 1994 will be entered into a draw to
be held on Tuesday, March 1 1994 when a random selection will be made by
computer of 1000 Transmedia Charge slips generated in the promotional
period.
There is no restriction to the number of entries per card holder-each
Transmedia restaurant charge slip generated in this period will be entered
separately into the draw.
Each Charge slip selected entitles the card holder to receive a Pounds 50
credit towards future visits to any Transmedia Restaurant (in addition to
the normal 25% saving with their card).
There are no alternatives to the prizes offered.
Winners will be notified by post by Monday, March 7 1994.
A list of winners may be obtained from Monday, March 7 1994 by writing to
The Marketing Department, Financial Times, Number One Southwark Bridge,
London, SE1 9HL.
