FT  30 SEP 94 / Survey of World Economy and Finance - The World's Economies
 -Europe (36): The EBRD is back on an even keel - Profile / Jacques de
Larosiere
Establishing liberal capitalism in eastern Europe and the former Soviet
Union has turned out to be more difficult than many forecast. The European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development was set up in 1991 as a central part
of western governments' efforts to assist in that task.
Jacques de Larosiere took over at the helm of the EBRD slightly less than a
year ago at a difficult time for the bank and for the countries it is
designed to serve.
The EBRD's eventual contribution to the economic rebuilding of the former
communist bloc may turn out to be less impressive than expected. However,
under Mr de Larosiere's stewardship, the bank is unquestionably in a more
solid position to tackle the task than in autumn 1993.
The former managing director of the International Monetary Fund and governor
of the Bank of France took over after the previous president, Jacques
Attali, resigned following revelations of over-spending and mismanagement at
the bank. Mr de Larosiere's first priority was to restore confidence among
EBRD staff and shareholders that the bank could make a real contribution in
spurring economic development in former communist countries. He has
refocused the bank's energies squarely and decisively towards that goal.
Mr de Larosiere is an unassuming man who lacks Mr Attali's visionary
qualities but - partly because of that - commands rare respect on the
international monetary circuit. He has a reputation for cool-headedness.
During his last weeks at the Bank of France, Mr de Larosiere was on the
front line during the foreign exchange crisis at the end of July 1993 when
the French franc came under heavy pressure against the D-Mark.
During negotiations with the German government, he effectively took over the
leadership of the French delegation, according to those present during the
talks, virtually eclipsing Edmond Alphandery, the French economy minister.
At the EBRD, Mr de Larosiere has displayed similar strength of purpose.
During his first few months, he quickly concluded that the bank, with 56
mainly government shareholders and Ecu10bn (Dollars 12bn) in equity capital,
had become too bureaucratic and disorganised to carry out its mandate.
As a consequence, he has carried out a quiet revolution, streamlining staff,
cutting increases in personnel and administrative costs and raising the
number of banking professionals working directly on projects.
The EBRD president led the drive for more cost-effectiveness, freezing
salaries for himself and senior employees and closing down the EBRD's
executive dining rooms.
Mr Attali's relationship with the bank's 23-member London-based board was
frequently adversarial. Mr de Larosiere, by contrast, is the epitome of
sobriety. Mr Attali used in turn to hector the board and ignore it,
occasionally reading newspapers during meetings to show his disdain for the
proceedings.
Mr de Larosiere, by contrast, surprised other board members during his first
meetings by taking notes of what was said. Mr de Larosiere also abolished
the merchant and development banking departments which previously handled
separately private and public sector projects.
Although some of the boundaries between the bank's new 'north' and 'south'
geographical departments looked a little arbitrary, the aim was to gear the
EBRD's activities more closely to the needs of the 25 countries in which it
operates.
Aided by Ron Freeman, the senior vice-president and No 2 at the bank, Mr de
Larosiere has led the drive to increase the EBRD's effectiveness by raising
the number of investment instruments at its disposal. He wants the EBRD to
widen its reach by taking more stakes in banks and investment funds in
eastern countries. He also favours the EBRD stepping up its indirect lending
through guarantees to back private sector project loans.
The EBRD statutes call for the bank's loans and equity investments to be
split 60/40 between the private and public sectors. In some former Soviet
republics viable private sector projects are hard to find.
But Mr de Larosiere has pledged to maintain the bank's priority leaning
towards the private sector, and has brought in a number of young bankers who
will work in the field in the EBRD's countries of operation, leading the
search for new projects.
Countries such as the US and Germany among the EBRD's larger government
shareholders have declared themselves pleased with the new approach and
direction. However, some countries - led by the UK - claim that the bank
could go further in slimming its operations by cutting back the size of the
board, which accounts for 12 per cent of the EBRD's costs.
Mr de Larosiere has succeeded in putting the bank back on an even keel. As a
slow and patchy economic recovery gains ground in the east, the EBRD will be
able to reap the benefits of improving fortunes among its clients. In some
countries, however, economic recovery may throw fresh question marks over
the bank's raison d'etre. If economic structures and performance in the west
of the former Soviet empire become increasingly aligned to those in the rest
of Europe, the justification for a large public sector bank to nurture these
countries' economies will look more questionable.
