FT  19 NOV 94 / Books: Wife-beaters and worse - Thrillers
The 59 bus route between Knightsbridge and Hackney provides the locations
for Frances Fyfleld's latest, excellent outing for frazzled lawyer Helen
West and her on-and-off boyfriend, blase detective Geoffrey Bailey. Despite
its summer setting, A Clear Conscience (Bantam Pounds 14.99) is a murky
tale, darkening from wife-beating to murder and incest.
Helen's shambolic flat is transformed by Cathy, an assiduous cleaning lady
recommended by the wife of a legal colleague. But Cathy is one of life's
victims and it seems inevitable that, like her brother, she will came to an
untimely and violent end.
Told in an elliptical style, dipping in and out of the character's minds,
this bleak narrative is lightened by flashes of humour - in particular
Helen's acidulous musings - together with superb characterisation and
pin-sharp detail. Its seedy terrain exudes a whiff of Greeneland. Though far
from being a conventional whodunit, few readers will foresee the double
twist at the finale.
A wife-beater also takes a central role in The Daughters of Cain (Macmillan
Pounds 14.99), the latest Inspector Morse mystery from Colin Dexter. This
villain is a child-abuser and drug-dealer into the bargain but as far as the
author is concerned his worst sin appears to be misuse of the English
language ('Where the 'ell a' you bin, woman?'). It hardly needs adding that
he ends up being dredged from the Thames.
Snobbish, sniffily didactic and pedantic, the Morse books are an accurate
reflection of the more complacent aspects of the city where they are set.
Yet despite the Latin tags and ostentatious parading of erudition, the
probings of Morse and his long-suffering side-kick Lewis provide
irresistible page-turning entertainment. The golden Oxonian backdrop is a
major advantage, as is, of course, the ineradicable image of the TV version
of the duo.
Mellowing as retirement looms, Britain's best-loved cop once again tackles
gory doings in the groves of academe. There is the customary mild flirtation
 -this time an improbable liaison with a prostitute. Dexter handles the
serpentine plot with exemplary clarity until the final chapters, where he
gets bogged down with some protracted and tenuous business concerning a
knife stolen from the Pitt-Rivers Museum.
In Political Death (Heinemann Pounds 12.99), Antonia Fraser comes up with
another souffle-light serving of her svelte sleuth Jemima Shore. A batty
grande dame entrusts her with a scandal-packed diary before apparently
committing suicide. The subsequent investigation takes the glamorous gumshoe
through the not-so-mean streets of Westminster and Kensington as she tangles
with a couple of high-powered dynasties involved in theatre and politics.
It is home turf for the author, but the huge cast is somewhat confusing. The
yarn hots up following the discovery of a second corpse and a literal
skeleton in the cupboard. Though distracted by a spat of steamy sex, Jemima
sorts things out with her customary stylish aplomb.
Dixie City Jam (Orion Pounds 15.99) by James Lee Burke is the seventh
mystery featuring Dave Robicheaux, New Orleans police detective (not that he
seems to spend much time at work). Goodness knows what happened in the
previous six episodes because this 367-page tome contains enough action,
usually of extreme violence, for a whole library of thrillers.
Central to this grisly epic are the efforts of a neo-Nazi psychopath to find
the whereabouts of a sunken German submarine discovered by Robicheaux years
ago. The author tops up the pot with hefty quantities of drug-dealing,
police corruption and racial tension. Though the narrative occasionally
splutters, the Delta dialogue is piquant as pepper sauce.
Marele Day makes the most of a Chinatown location in The Case of the Chinese
Boxes (Hodder Pounds 16.99), a second adventure for Sydney-based Claudia
Valentine. Latest in a wave of feisty female 'tecs, she is called in by
restaurant boss Victoria Chen to recover an ornate golden key which will
unlock an ancient box containing a relic - a finger - of the Buddha. Though
the key is nothing more than a colourful McGuffin - it is never found and
the box is never opened - the yarn maintains a zippy pace against an exotic
background of Triad war and oriental mysteries.
