FT  13 JUN 94 / International Company News: Ice-cream retail war hots up in
China - Western entrants have the locals licked
When the Great Australian Ice Creamery opened its first retail outlet in
China last week, it marked the latest shot in one of China's hottest retail
wars.
While the Australian company may not be a household name internationally,
some of its competitors are - notably Walls of the UK, which began producing
its best-known brands in Beijing this month.
Walls is investing USDollars 50m in a Beijing factory and retail outlets in
its efforts to capture a share of the China market, which is only now being
introduced to western-style ice-cream.
Mr Bob Smith, general manager of Walls (Beijing), said that by any standards
China, with its 300m urban dwellers, was a huge market - bigger, in fact,
than continental Europe, where Walls is the dominant brand.
'All the indications are that Chinese people like eating ice-cream and
eating food out-of-doors,' he said.
Western ice-cream companies entering China have been flying by the seats of
their pants, in the sense that they have concluded that researching the
market would be futile.
'To be absolutely honest, we did very little research,' said Mr Smith. 'We
decided the best way to find out was to come here and get established.''
Walls, which is part of the Anglo-Dutch Unilever group, signed a joint
venture agreement in 1992 with a Chinese company called Sumstar, an offshoot
of the old ministry of light industry. Under the agreement Walls is an 85
per cent shareholder with Sumstar a 15 per cent partner.
Walls' main competitor at this stage is Bud's Ice Cream of San Francisco,
which in 1991 began producing ice-cream at a factory in Beijing. Its output
has reached 1.5m gallons annually, using local milk and cream. Investment in
its Beijing venture is Dollars 1.6m, with a further Dollars 1m planned.
Ms Alice Chiu, marketing manager of Bud's, said the company did not worry
too much about the competition. 'The market is simply so huge,' she says.
The Chinese market is crowded with local producers. In Beijing alone there
are some 600, but they are hardly competitors to foreign entrants since
their products, sold for a few cents, consist mostly of flavoured ice.
Apart from Walls and Bud's, other foreign manufacturers in the field include
Kraft General Foods, which recently launched a small range of 'cup' products
under its Kibon brand name used in Brazil, where it is market leader.
But in light of Unilever's recent takeover of Kraft's US ice-cream making
arm, it is not clear whether the US company will continue its fairly small
operation in Beijing. Kraft's representative in Beijing declined to comment
on its ice-cream plans in China.
Nestle, the Swiss company, is also pushing into the China market with its
Dairy Farm brand. It has begun producing in southern China and plans a joint
venture in Beijing. Other joint ventures include Meadow Gold, linked with
Malaysian interests, and Louis D'or, launched with Taiwanese capital.
Companies like the Great Australian Ice Creamery and Baskin Robbins of the
US differ from other producers in that they are establishing boutiques
selling 'scooping ice-cream'. The Australian company opened its first near
Beijing zoo and has plans for two others, one near the Great Wall.
Mr Smith said Walls would concentrate its efforts initially in the Beijing
area, where it had already established 500 outlets with 3,000 planned by the
end of the month in shops and hotels.
'It's early days but things have been going exceptionally well. People
appear prepared to pay for quality,' he said.
Walls is able to secure 70 to 80 per cent of raw materials in the local
market, the exceptions being high-quality chocolate and flavourings. It
imports about half the materials required for packaging but hopes that in
time it will be able to source most of its product and packaging locally.
A Walls Cornetto sells for Yn3.50, which is about 40 US cents, or much the
same price as a can of Coca-Cola in China. With urban incomes rising, this
is well within reach of an increasing number of Chinese who would not be
seen dead eating a locally-produced bing gur, or flavoured ice.
