FT  04 JUL 94 / Prescott pledges independent jobs commission
Mr John Prescott, the shadow employment secretary, will today promise to set
up an independent commission for full employment if he wins the contest to
succeed John Smith as Labour leader.
The commission, modelled on the Commission for Social Justice, established
by Mr Smith after the 1992 general election, will form the centre-piece of a
personal manifesto setting out Mr Prescott's view of Labour's future.
His manifesto launch will follow a claim yesterday from Mr Tony Blair, the
clear front-runner for the leadership, that the Conservatives were chasing
Labour's agenda on employment and social policies.
Speaking as aides said he was certain of winning, Mr Blair said that the
government was being forced to abandon the individualistic rhetoric of the
1980s in favour of commitments to recreate social cohesions.
The result was that Labour was winning the battle of ideas. 'We are
redefining the new political landscape of Britain, not the Tories,' he said.
Speaking on BBC Radio, Mr Blair confirmed that he was looking at ways to
ensure that those on the highest incomes paid a minimum level of income tax.
But he said the details of the proposed squeeze on allowances and avoidance
schemes were still to be worked out.
The commission suggested by Mr Prescott would be chaired by an independent
figure, and would be asked to review the party's existing employment
policies and recommend any changes necessary to end mass unemployment.
The idea is likely to be seen by some activists as a retreat from Mr
Prescott's earlier pledge to set targets for cuts in unemployment during the
first term of a Labour government.
However, Mr Prescott is believed to see the commission as a more practical
commitment than the statements of values offered by Mr Blair and Mrs
Margaret Beckett, the interim leader.
Mr Prescott also believes that his emphasis on full employment has helped to
restore action to end mass unemployment to the top of the agenda for both
main parties.
With Mr Blair now all but certain to secure the leadership the focus of the
campaign during the next two weeks will shift increasingly to the battle
between Mr Prescott and Mrs Beckett for the position of deputy.
Mr Prescott will make clear at the launch of his manifesto that he remains
keen to win the deputy's post, which he believes could be transformed from a
largely administrative role into an important focal point for campaigning
and increasing party membership.
A friend said: 'John wants to be leader, and believes he can win, but he
would also be very pleased to win the deputy's job.'
Meanwhile a poll for GMTV, the ITV breakfast television station, tipped Mr
Blair as front-runner for the leadership. Among 600 Labour voters
questioned, Mr Blair scored 43.1 per cent. Mrs Beckett 19.1 per cent and Mr
Prescott 16.5 per cent, while 21.3 per cent were undecided. For the deputy
leadership 31.5 per cent backed Mrs Beckett, 26.7 per cent backed Mr
Prescott and 41.7 per cent were undecided.
Full employment agenda, Page 19
