FT  25 FEB 94 / UK Company News: Underlying business remains stable - New
competitive culture
British Gas yesterday reported flat full-year operating profits on an
historical basis of Pounds 1.68bn before exceptional charges.
The figures showed that the underlying business was stable despite the
Pounds 1.65bn exceptional charge taken by the company to fund its radical
restructuring.
The company was also able to make a fractional increase in its full year
dividend to 14.5 pence a share, compared with 14.2 pence last time.
Mr Philip Rogerson, finance director, noted that the increased dividend was
'broadly in line with inflation.' The company still retained a policy of
making achieving real rises in dividends, he said.
Mr Rogerson noted that dividend cover was 1.4 times, compared with the
normal level of 1.5.
The loss per share after exceptional items was 6.6p, compared with a profit
per share of 15.8p in 1992. But the adjusted figure, excluding exceptional
charges, was 20.8p (21.8p).
Despite diversification in recent years the UK gas supply business still
provides the overwhelming bulk of British Gas operating profits. These were
Pounds 1.16bn before exceptional charges of Pounds 1.56bn, resulting in an
operating loss of Pounds 405m, compared with a Pounds 927m profit in 1992.
Overseas gas supply made an operating profit of Pounds 162m (Pounds 137m),
while exploration and production profits rose to Pounds 264m from Pounds
226m before.
The rise in the overseas division was attributable mainly to good results
from the company's distribution operations in Argentina, where it is part of
a consortium supplying gas to Buenos Aires.
British Gas's US trading arm, the Natural Gas Clearinghouse, also reported
improved operating profits.
The exploration and production side benefitted from new fields coming on
stream and higher production rates from the South Morecombe field off the
west coast of the UK.
Analysts expect a steady increase in exploration and production profits over
the next few years because of a planned rise in production volumes. Total
sales volume last year was 98.9m barrels of oil equivalent, but analysts say
it could rise to 150m barrels by 1995-1996.
British Gas also benefits from the fact that the pricing structure of many
of its gas supply contracts is linked only partially to oil prices, which
could stay weak for much of this year.
