FT  03 AUG 94 / Management: The passage into adulthood - As it grows, the
Body Shop is striving to balance convention with creativity.
The Body Shop, the environmentally conscious toiletries business that was
founded 18 years ago, has outgrown its management structure. The need for
change was acknowledged by the company late last week, when it expanded its
board and announced the appointment of a new managing director to take
responsibility for much of the group's day-to-day management.
The changes were the result of a year-long review in which the company tried
to address the question of how it can preserve its distinctively idealistic
and innovative culture while achieving the efficiency of more orthodox
companies.
Anita Roddick, the company's flamboyant founder, has relinquished the title
of group managing director in favour of that of chief executive. The company
has appointed three new directors and changed the responsibilities of three
of the existing directors. It also indicated that it would shortly appoint
two non-executive directors.
Under the new structure, Anita Roddick will continue to be the driving force
in the search for new products. However, the responsibility for transforming
those ideas into products has been handed over to Stuart Rose, the new
managing director who was formerly in charge of corporate development.
Gordon Roddick, Anita's husband, remains as chairman of the group, but has
also handed over some executive responsibilities to Rose.
The changes are a response to the growth and increasingly international
character of the company, which made pre-tax profits of Pounds 29.7m on
sales of Pounds 195.4m in the financial year that ended last February. Its
expansion has exposed shortcomings in the loosely defined structure of the
group's top management and problems stemming from the lengthly absences of
Anita Roddick, who spends much of her time travelling to remote suppliers,
in rainforests and elsewhere.
The difficulties were brought into focus two years ago when a drop in
profits provoked concern that the company had lost control of parts of its
empire. Critics in the City of London pointed to a need to bring in more
professional management and, in particular, non-executives to provide checks
and balances to the executive directors. The complaints were reinforced by
Robert Gluckman, the company's international general manager, who left
complaining about the Roddicks' 'autocratic' style.
Gordon Roddick says he takes 'almost no notice at all' of City criticism and
dismisses Gluckman's comments as 'rubbish'. However, he says that the
problems in the company's structure had become apparent in the lack of
communication and control between different parts of the group. 'It had
reached the point where the lack of a good structure was impeding
creativity,' he says. 'Ideas were taking a long time to come through.'
In many respects, the Body Shop is confronting an issue that is faced by any
entrepreneurial company which is forced to adopt a larger, more
bureaucratic, structure as it matures.
However, the Body Shop's growth has brought with it extra complications.
Although the company wants to be efficiently organised, it does not want to
dilute its 'New Age' business values which emphasise human, animal and
environmental rights. 'We wanted to maintain within the structure the values
and vision of the company,' says Gordon Roddick.
For many other idealistic companies, growth has involved compromises. Ben
and Jerry's Ice Cream Company, which Anita Roddick describes as 'like a
brother company', has been forced to water down its unusual executive salary
policy - by which it restricted top salaries to a maximum of eight times the
pay of its lowest paid worker - with its recent decision to bring in a new
chief executive to deal with the problems of growth.
The risk that the Body Shop would become more conventional as it brought in
more outsiders who did not share the company's original philosophy was a
real one, according to one insider. 'The company wobbled on the brink of
becoming an ordinary organisation,' he says.
In trying to address this dilemma, the Body Shop conducted a brainstorming
session with its 22 most senior managers. Over a day and a half, they were
invited to come up with all conceivable criticisms of the company's
workings, after which they discussed possible solutions.
It also sought advice from Ichak Adizes, an Israeli management consultant.
Gordon Roddick, who distrusts the attitude of most consultancy firms, liked
the way that Adizes dealt with business 'in very human terms'.
He was attracted to the philosophy that when businesses have grown to a
certain stage they need to create a balance between bureacracy and
creativity. 'You need to have both in constructive conflict, but neither
stronger than the other,' says Gordon Roddick.
One conclusion from this exercise was that different people should be put in
charge of the bureaucratic and creative aspects of any function. This is to
prevent the day-to-day demands on the administrative aspects of a role from
pushing out the more creative aspects.
The most distinctive feature of the organisational structure devised by the
Body Shop and its advisers is the prominent roles given to people in charge
of cultural aspects of the business. For example, one executive is
responsible for 'values and vision' and another for corporate culture. 'You
have to systematise your values and vision,' says Gordon Roddick. 'You have
to systematise corporate culture in order that it enters into the reflexes
of the business.'
Put more simply, the decision to devolve some of the responsibility for the
company's values from the Roddicks was in part, according to Gordon Roddick,
'a question of what happens if my wife and I get run over by a number 52
bus'.
