FT  15 SEP 94 / People: EBRD's Ljungh leaves for Morgan Stanley
Sweden's Anders Ljungh, 52, who has been vice-president of finance since the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development opened for business, is
returning to the private sector as a senior adviser to Morgan Stanley.
Ljungh (right) is the second senior EBRD official to leave within the past
eight months and his departure will lead to a further reshuffle of the
EBRD's relatively new top management team which is still settling down after
the abrupt exit of Jacques Attali, the EBRD's first president in July 1993.
Earlier this year, Mario Sarcinelli, 59, number three in the EBRD, returned
to Italy to take up the chairmanship of Banca Nazionale del Lavoro.
Sarcinelli was not replaced. However, Ljungh's departure cannot be ignored
and the EBRD's board of directors is expected to decide on his successor at
its board meeting on September 20. Bart Le Blanc, a 48-year-old Dutchman who
is the Bank's secretary general, has been tipped to take over from Ljungh.
Meanwhile, a report in Italy's Il Sole newspaper yesterday suggested that
Antonio Costa, who used to work in the European Commission and is currently
employed by Ferrero, had been lined up to fill Le Blanc's job. Although
appointments to the EBRD are supposed to be made on merit there has been a
feeling that Sarcinelli's exit means an Italian is likely to be a front
runner for the next big job which comes up at the EBRD.
Ljungh's combination of commercial banking skills and knowledge of
multinational development institutions will consolidate Morgan Stanley's
presence in the Scandinavian market and help expand its international
business with financial and emerging market institutions. In addition to his
Morgan Stanley post, he will sit on the boards of Telia, the Swedish
telecoms company, Nordbanken, a commercial bank, and will be chairman of KM,
a Swedish engineering company.
Before joining the EBRD, Ljungh spent 15 years with Svenska Handelsbanken in
Stockholm and was head of its international activities between 1985 and
1991. Before becoming a commercial banker he worked at the World Bank in
Washington, serving as a personal assistant to Robert McNamara, the former
president. He also ran the Bank's East Africa programs department for a
time.
