FT  12 OCT 94 / Games of chance set up Nobel prize in economics
Three academics from the US, Germany and Hungary won the Nobel economics
prize yesterday for their work deriving economic lessons from the dynamics
of games.
The winners are Dr John C. Harsanyi, born in Budapest and now at the
University of California at Berkeley, Dr John F. Nash, of Princeton
University, and Dr Reinhard Selten, now at the University of Bonn. They are
the first economists to win the prize from the field of 'game theory', one
of the biggest trends in economics of the past 30 years.
Game theorists draw on games such as poker to build models of situations in
which people may base their decisions on how they expect others to react.
Work by yesterday's winners has since been applied to everything from
corporate pricing strategy to international disarmament talks.
All three theorists tend to express their ideas in complex mathematical
models. But the basic themes are relatively simple. A Nash equilibrium,
formulated by Dr Nash in 1951, defines stalemate in a 'non- co-operative'
game.
In poker, this would mean that each player would make the same bid, even if
they could see everyone else's cards, and knew what everyone else was going
to bid. Nothing that a player could do would affect the other players' bids.
Dr Harsanyi stretched the concept to situations in which some players know
more than others; for example, where one person might look at another
player's hand. He also pointed out that games might be expected to run more
smoothly if everybody agreed on the rules at the start.
Dr Selten took game theory a step further, showing how players' behaviour
might change if they knew they were going to play again the next day. He
also contributed the 'chain-store paradox', which helps to explain why
well-known, profitable players may be willing to lose a lot of money to
scare off minor competition, if it helps to stop others from trying the same
thing.
Together, the three economists have helped to show that many problems can be
construed as games.
Work continues on applying these techniques to real life.
Editorial Comment, Page 25
