FT  10 FEB 94 / Book Review: Going the extra mile to beat the rest
A WORLD OF ITS OWN 1815-1890
By David Kynaston
Chatto, Pounds 25, 497 pages
London's pre-eminence as an international financial centre appears to defy
the logic of economic history. Venice, Antwerp, Genoa and Amsterdam, which
in turn dominated European finance between the late 15th and early 19th
centuries, largely owed their financial strength to their competitiveness in
international commerce.
The City of London took the lead in the 19th century on the back of
unparalleled growth in Britain's domestic economy, a dominant position in
world trade and the widespread acceptability of sterling. Much the same
could be said of New York when it posed a serious challenge to London's
international role after 1918, as the dollar eclipsed the pound.
Competitiveness in international finance appeared, until then, to march hand
in hand with national economic and commercial strength.
The postwar period has been different. While New York and Tokyo are
unquestionably bigger financial centres than London, their share of purely
international business is probably smaller. In spite of Britain's relative
economic decline and the structural weakness of sterling, the bankers and
merchants of the City of London have managed to re-establish themselves on
the global stage in a way that has eluded British politicians. This
performance is counter-intuitive, and the explanation owes much to history.
So much the better, then, that David Kynaston, whose earlier books include
histories of the Financial Times and of stockbrokers Cazenove, has embarked
on an ambitious new three-volume account of the Square Mile.
His starting point is 1815, which broadly marks London's emergence as the
financial hub of Europe following the flight of capital from Amsterdam to
the City during the Napoleonic wars. This late entree has its disadvantages,
in that we miss the excitement of the South Sea Bubble. More important, it
involves the loss of a crucial part of the City's story - the role played by
the Glorious Revolution of 1688 in establishing Britain's comparative
advantage in international finance. It was the revolution that turned
Britain into the only important European power apart from the Netherlands to
sustain a government debt market and public finances that were safe from the
predatory behaviour of the monarch. There followed the foundation of the
Bank of England and the rise of the merchant banking community, without
which the City could not have become the centre for foreign lending and
trade finance in the 19th century.
That said, Kynaston's is an exceptionally readable account, which gives due
weight to the cultural and social factors that helped transform the City
into such a powerful financial engine. The gamey character of the Square
Mile in the 19th century, with its crashes, frauds and insider dealing, is
beautifully conveyed. So, too, is the robustness of 19th-century finance
capital. When the City came under attack after the skulduggery of the
foreign loans boom of the early 1870s, Charles Branch of brokers Foster &amp;
Braithwaite defended outright speculation by declaring that 'a stock
exchange restricted to investment business would be as useful and as popular
as a public house licensed only for ginger beer'.
Such straight talking turned, at times, into powerful anti-semitism. When a
corrupt City editor of The Times resolutely puffed one Rothschild bond issue
after another, the paper came to be known as the 'Jews' harp'. Yet
anti-semitism did not prevent the Rothschilds finding their way into the
peerage - first, because money talked; second, because ministers feared that
if the Rothschilds were not in the aristocratic camp, they might join the
democratic one.
The dependence of prime ministers and chancellors on the house of Rothschild
meant that the scions of the family were able, in the old City phrase, to
get on financially and get honour. Then, as now, the rewards in merchant
banking dwarfed those available even to the most innovative industrialists.
Small wonder that Bertram Currie, the driving force at private bankers Glyn,
Mills, Currie, declined to take a seat in the House of Commons because, he
said, it would have 'diverted my mind from money-getting'.
Social acceptability took time, not least because Queen Victoria was won
over with difficulty. According to a minion, she felt that the trade of
these City gamblers was 'far removed from the legitimate trading which she
delights to honour, in which men have raised themselves by patient industry
and unswerving probity to positions of wealth and influence'. There is, it
seems, a regal antecedent for the Labour party's view of the Square Mile.
The 19th-century City differed from the late 20th in that power was more
heavily concentrated. In merchant banking the chief focus was, in Byron's
phrase, on 'Jew Rothschild and his fellow Christian, Baring'. The ebb and
flow of the fortunes of these two houses provide a counterpoint that runs
through the book. The other central thread is the story of the Bank of
England stumbling by way of successive financial crises into its role as a
modern central bank. The two strands converge when William Lidderdale, the
Bank's governor, duly emerges as the hero of the Baring crisis of 1890,
demonstrating nerve and sound judgment in his role as lender of last resort.
Kynaston is not uniformly clear in his treatment of the economic and
financial detail. And given the bankruptcies and collapses that punctuate
the tale, it would have been interesting to hear more of the murky business
of insolvency practice, out of which the modern accountancy profession was
born. But these are paltry reservations on a colourful narrative full of
well-judged extracts from contemporary material. Roll on volume two.
