FT  24 DEC 94 / Argentina opts for austerity to keep parity
Mexico's economic convulsions have produced a swift and emphatic response in
Argentina, where President Carlos Menem announced a policy of 'total
austerity' and vowed to maintain, at all costs, the dollar-peso parity
enshrined in law since April 1991.
'We are not Mexico and we will not devalue. Argentina will not vary its path
in the slightest degree,' he said late on Thursday, after his unprecedented
attendance at the National Economic Council.
Mr Domingo Cavallo, economy minster, announced a series of emergency
austerity measures aimed at calming international investors, after fears of
repercussions from Mexico had sent shares and bonds tumbling and had led to
a near-tripling, to 25 per cent, of short-term interest rates.
Argentina would emit no new debt of any kind while interest rates remained
high, Mr Cavallo said. Far from 'flexibilising' the convertibility plan - by
which the law handcuffs the peso to the dollar and forbids the Central Bank
from issuing unbacked local currency - Argentina would make it 'more
rigorous and pure', he said.
To show its resolve, the government would cut Dollars 1bn (Pounds 645m) from
the Dollars 42bn draft budget next year.
'We are going to demonstrate that we will maintain the rules of the game and
 -within a few weeks, or perhaps months - the international financial
community will see that we are capable of facing up to such adverse
circumstances,' the minister said.
At yesterday's close, the Buenos Aires stock market's Merval blue-chip index
had recovered by 1.9 per cent on the day, having lost 10.6 per cent in the
previous three days.
However, some analysts were not convinced by Mr Cavallo's performance. Mr
Juan Arranz, country manager at Santander Investment, described the
emergency measures as a 'show'. Of Mr Cavallo's pledge to issue no new debt,
Mr Arranz said: 'It is not that he won't borrow any more money; it's that
no-one will lend him any.'
Mr Cavallo warned against 'simplistic' attempts to draw parallels between
Mexico and Argentina. Some analysts had done just that last December, he
said, when they had compared riots in Santiago del Estero, in northern
Argentina, with the Chiapas uprising in southern Mexico last January.
A year later, Chiapas was still in turmoil whereas Santiago del Estero was
calm. 'Politically, socially, economically and financially, Argentina is not
Mexico,' Mr Cavallo said.
Mr Menem, who will not welcome having to take austerity measures so close to
the presidential election next May, has shown, even so, his commitment to
the convertibility plan, which has brought inflation down to below 4 per
cent a year and spurred rapid economic growth.
Mr Nicolas Grose-Hodge, chief manager at Lloyds Bank in Argentina, said:
'There is no possibility that the government will devalue - it would lose
them the elections. The whole credibility of the administration is based on
the stability of the currency.'
He also backed the Central Bank's decision yesterday to suspend, for the
second day, all repurchase agreements (short-term peso loans) after a sharp
move into dollars on Wednesday. In December as a whole, however, demand for
pesos has caused the Central Bank to buy a net Dollars 423m in dollars,
suggesting there is, as yet, no pressure on the peso.
Mr Grose-Hodge said that Argentina's bimonetary system 'makes things easier
in the sense that people still have access to dollars irrespective of what
the peso is doing.' Because the dollar has an important presence in
Argentina's financial system, where about half of deposits are in the US
currency, high peso interest rates need not have an immediate effect on
economic activity.
