FT  24 JAN 94 / The gas meter cometh . . .: Metering plans will be crucial
to liberalising the UK gas market
In recent weeks, the gasman has been calling on 1,000 homes in Edmonton,
north London, to fit a little electronic gadget to their gas meters. It is
the first practical step in the revolution which faces the UK domestic gas
market following the decision by Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade and
industry secretary, to abolish the monopoly enjoyed by British Gas.
The gadgets read the meters every six hours and transmit the information by
radio to a nearby receiver from where it is piped into British Gas
computers. The company can thus monitor gas consumption four times a day
rather than, as before, through the three-monthly meter readings.
The gadgets are part of an experiment by British Gas to improve its
management of the UK gas system and cut the cost of reading meters. But they
could help pave the way to the competitive market which Mr Heseltine wants
to develop later this decade. The changes will be pioneering insofar as no
leading industrial country has ever tried to liberalise gas sales to the
extent planned in the UK.
The intention is that, after 1998, every household in the country should be
free to buy its gas from as many as half a dozen competing companies.
Although households will continue to receive their gas through the same
pipes as before (these will still be owned and operated by British Gas),
their supplier will be responsible for injecting enough gas into the system
to meet its customers' demands. The supplier will therefore have to keep
close tabs on its customers' consumption.
One way this could be achieved would be by attaching the Edmonton gadgets to
customers' meters. These are made by Motorola, the US electronics company,
and cost about Pounds 10 each, including installation.
However, British Gas has also been trying to develop a new generation of
meter, which incorporates more sophisticated metering techniques as well as
the reading and transmission capability. Last month it launched a venture
with Gill Electronic, a tiny high technology company which won a contest
held by British Gas to design a meter for the 21st century. One of the main
specifications was that it should be no bigger than a building brick.
Mr Mike Gill, the founder of Gill Electronic, expects his company to be
producing the meters at a rate of about 100,000 a year within 18 months.
'This new technology will bring dramatic changes to the metering industry,'
he says.
He declines to say how the new meters will be priced, but British Gas has
indicated that they should cost about the same as standard meters, or about
Pounds 50 each.
One big - and so far unanswered - question, though, is who should pay to
have the new meters installed? With potentially 18m households involved, the
cost could be immense. Moreover, are the meters even necessary for the free
market to operate?
These questions are a big worry for the independent gas suppliers that want
to break into the domestic market. Their concern is that householders will
think they have to go through the cost and inconvenience of installing a new
meter if they want to change suppliers. This impression might be reinforced
by the fact that people initially had to buy new telephones if they wanted
to use Mercury, the independent competitor to British Telecom. This could
lead to powerful consumer resistance which could block gas market reform.
Mr Mark Petterson, general manager of Total Gas Marketing and chairman of
one of the industry groups looking at free market issues, says: 'There is
not a need for new meters.' He argues that daily balancing of demand and
supply in the gas network can be done by a process known as 'deeming'.
Every household which opted for a new supplier would be 'deemed' to use a
specified amount of gas based on its previous five-year record, and the
independent gas supplier would pipe enough gas into the system to meet the
deemed demand. If there was a surplus or shortfall, this would be corrected
between the supplier and British Gas periodically when the meter was read.
But this is not the way British Gas sees it. The company is worried that it
would have to 'back stop' the market by making up for any temporary
shortfall in supply, even though it could impose penalty charges on
suppliers that fail to supply enough gas.
Mr Nick White, a director of Arthur D Little, the consultancy firm which is
advising British Gas on the transition to a free market, believes the only
equitable way to balance the system is to install automatic metering
equipment in all households. He says that 'deeming' will prove too imprecise
and will lead to arguments between suppliers. These arguments could be
fierce because the UK operates a tight supply system, with only two big
storage areas to provide flexibility.
Mr White says that small suppliers, which are likely to operate on thin
margins, could face large penalty charges if deeming is not sufficiently
accurate to ensure they supply enough gas. In some cases these penalties
might be enough to lead to a company having to withdraw from the market.
Sophisticated meters would also be necessary if the market was to evolve to
the point where an individual household could buy gas from several different
suppliers. A customer might use one supplier in the day time, but switch to
another in the evening because it was offering better peak-time rates. If
so, the meter would have to distinguish between use at different times of
the day, probably based on four-hourly time blocks.
At an even higher level of sophistication, a combined gas and electricity
meter could be programmed to calculate which source of power gave the best
value at any given moment, and switch the home-heating system accordingly.
Since many of the new gas suppliers will be joint ventures between
independent gas companies and local electricity companies, the scope for
joint metering - and meter reading - will be considerable. 'It's early days
yet, and a lot of thought has to go into this,' says Mr Peter Bryant, deputy
chairman of United Gas, which has links with several electricity companies.
However, he does not think that new meters will be an issue in the early
days of the new market. 'May be by 2000,' he says.
Many of the issues to do with the actual operation of the new gas market
will be set out in a new Network Code, which will be debated between the gas
industry and Ms Clare Spottiswoode, the new head of Ofgas, the gas industry
regulator, over the coming months.
With her strong penchant for competition, Ms Spottiswoode is not expected to
insist on issues such as metering if they obstruct the free market.
But she realises that metering also raises fundamental issues of competition
which must be cleared up before a liberalised market is introduced. In a
speech last week she noted that the ownership of meters and the right to
read them could convey a commercial advantage to the companies involved.
Another concern is that gas suppliers might use meters as a way of 'locking
in' customers and keeping out competition. Last month, Mr Gregor McGregor,
director of strategic development at Ofgas, put out a consultation paper
which foresaw the market developing with both daily and non-daily metering.
But ultimately, it will depend on how eagerly consumers embrace the novel
idea of leaving British Gas for new suppliers. The independent gas companies
will be setting out to woo them shortly.
