FT  01 DEC 94 / World Trade News: Bhutto seeks Dollars 5bn power sector
funding
Pakistan is seeking additional foreign investment worth about Dollars 5bn in
its power sector to improve transmission and the supply of fuel to power
stations, Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto said in London yesterday.
Pakistan had received 'an overwhelming response' to its efforts to attract
foreign investment in power generation, receiving applications for four
times the country's needs, she told a meeting of businessmen at the
Confederation of British Industry.
Now it needed investment in power transmission, oil pipelines and terminals
and dedicated railway tracks as part of its effort to ensure that power
shortages were not a constraint on growth.
Ms Bhutto was at the CBI to sign agreements covering more than Pounds 1bn
(Dollars 1.56bn) of UK investments in Pakistan's energy, chemical and
tourism sectors. Among these are a letter of intent from ICI to build a pure
terephtalic acid plant costing Dollars 400m at Port Quasim.
Other agreements signed by Lasmo, British Gas, Shell and Premier
Consolidated Oilfields cover exploration and development of Pakistan's oil
and gas fields.
British Gas' initial investment with partners including Monument Oil and Gas
will be Dollars 15m, but the figure could rise to Dollars 250m if its
exploration in the Sulaiman mountain range of Baluchistan is successful.
Businessmen say the rush of investment in Pakistan reflects its liberal
approach, under which there is no limit on foreign ownership of any
production facilities. All restrictions on repatriation of principal,
interest, dividends and profits have been lifted and the domestic currency
is fully convertible on current account.
Although Pakistan has received a large number of investment commitments in
power generation, some businessmen believe that fresh opportunities could
arise if financing on existing deals falls through. Investment in power
transmission could prove more difficult than in generation, not least
because of the difficulty in ensuring supplies are paid for, they add.
Pakistan is also seeking to privatise two existing power stations at Kot
Addu and Jamshoro. National Power, which yesterday signed an agreement
covering its Hub River power project, is bidding for these stations. Other
companies involved in yesterday's signing were Midlands Electricity,
Greyhound House, which is involved in tourism, and Biwater, which plans to
build a Dollars 30m hydroelectric power station near Gilgit.
See Observer
