FT  16 MAR 94 / Futile and flawed: The UK cannot impose its vision of Europe
on its EU partners
It is hard to make strategic sense of the British government's campaign to
restrict majority voting in Europe. Yes, I know ministers are frightened of
the anti-Europeans in their party; and presumably they hope to appease them
with a vigorous stand in defence of national sovereignty. But the problem is
that this is a crusade which is certain to fail in the medium term, and
probably in the short term as well.
In any case, why go out on a limb now? The Maastricht treaty was such a
miserable experience for Mr John Major that you would think the prime
minister would do his best to steer clear of all questions of principle
about Europe and its development for as long as possible. Yet here he is,
taking a combative stand on an issue which is bound to involve a battle on
two fronts: it must lead to an unwinnable confrontation with his partners in
Europe, but it must also stir up the anti-European campaigners among those
who are nominally his own supporters. This is a spectacular exercise in
political masochism.
This crusade is doomed to defeat, because its underlying objectives set the
UK at odds with virtually all its European partners. The government pretends
that it is only asking that the voting rules which protect blocking
minorities in the Council of Ministers should be kept at the present level,
even after the admission of four more member states: 23 votes, or the
equivalent of two big countries and one small.
The reality, of course, is that the British government is trying to make
majority voting more difficult than at present; whereas effective
decision-making in a larger Union will obviously require more majority
voting, not less.
The puzzle is that the Conservative government seems to have been manoeuvred
by its Euro-phobic wing into refighting the last war but one. The windmill
it is tilting at is the old fantasy that Britain's national sovereignty is
threatened by the sinister federalists in Brussels; and it appears to
imagine that it can creep by stealth back in the direction of a national
veto. It does not seem to realise that the terms of the debate have been
changed beyond recognition.
Many years ago, in 1965-66, the Community had a shattering confrontation
between France and the rest, over the rights and wrongs of majority voting.
That was before majority voting was due to come into force as part of the
Community's normal regime, and the French were trying to prevent it
happening. After a six-month confrontation, a truce was signed in 1966 which
was afterwards called the Luxembourg Compromise, even though there had been
no compromise on anything. Nevertheless, the psychological shock of the
crisis effectively deterred majority voting for 20 years.
But the Luxembourg Compromise was wiped off the slate by the 1986 Single
European Act, which explicitly broadened the scope for majority voting; and
the agenda on the slate was rewritten by the Maastricht treaty, which also
carried the majority voting trend even further.
As a result, today's central question about majority voting is the reverse
of yesterday's: it is not whether a member state can be compelled by
majority vote to do things it would rather not do, but whether it can use
its national veto to prevent most or all of its partners from doing what
they collectively want to do.
It is now clear that the first, old-fashioned question can have several
different answers. Most rational people now recognise that the purpose of
majority voting is not to out-vote the recalcitrant, but to persuade them to
negotiate and to compromise. But for those who will not negotiate and will
not submit, there is the alternative of the opt-out: if you don't like the
journey, you can leave the ship.
That was the double lesson of Maastricht: the other member states could not
compel the UK to accept the social chapter, or the Danes to accept monetary
union or indeed anything else in the treaty; but nor, in the last resort,
could Britain and Denmark prevent the others from going ahead with the
treaty they had compromised on. In the long run, the majority will get the
kind of Europe they want, and the options for those who disagree will
essentially be quite simple: to compromise, to submit, or to stand aside. If
majority decisions are blocked inside the Council of Ministers, through
systematic legal obstruction, they will be taken outside, in some other way.
If the British government is now trying to strengthen the legal methods of
obstruction, it is perhaps because it is slowly dawning that the opt-out is
not a satisfactory type of solution.
The plan for economic and monetary union may well prove an acute test case,
and it is likely to come to a head during the 1996 Inter-Governmental
Conference to review and revise the Maastricht treaty. At that moment, it
will be clear which member states are still committed to monetary union. And
it is quite possible that an inner core will be ready to go ahead to a
single currency, conceivably in a very near future. Mr Major will then be
left holding his opt-out, which means he cannot stop them, just as it means
he cannot join them.
Note that the concept 'blocking minority' does not exist in any European
treaties. What they lay down is the number of positive votes required to
pass a measure; at present 54 out of 76. The underlying assumption is that
the governments which signed the treaties share a broad political consensus
on the purpose of their association. That consensus did not exist in 1965.
But the French lost that battle for one simple reason: they could not impose
their view of Europe then, and it is time the British saw that they cannot
impose their view of Europe now.
