FT  12 SEP 94 / People: The head who saw off Patten - As schools return for
a new academic year, Joan Clanchy tells John Authers that, while she regards
league tables as 'good clean fun', she drew the line at controversial
English tests for 14-year-olds
Joan Clanchy, headmistress of the North London Collegiate School, has had
fame thrust upon her in the past two years. She can lay the blame at the the
feet of the government and its spasm of education reforms.
Until two years ago, she and her school almost seemed to be going out of
fashion. A tall Oxford-educated Scot, she took over as head of North London
nine years ago having previously been head of St George's School, Edinburgh
 -another traditional girls' school.
A keen academic historian, Clanchy was then best known only as one of the
most imposing figures in a girls' school movement increasingly threatened by
the decision of some boys' schools to go mixed, and as a pragmatic
educational traditionalist.
With this reputation in mind, ministers appointed her to the National
Curriculum Council, the quango which administered the new curriculum it was
imposing in all the state schools of England and Wales.
Now, Clanchy starts a new school year as head of a school still bathing in
positive publicity, thanks to its mighty showing in exam result league
tables; it was top of the FT's table for girls' schools last year and this.
Meanwhile, the new education secretary, Gillian Shephard, has introduced a
radically reformed package of tests following a revolt by the teaching
profession in which Clanchy was seen to take a leading part. It accounted
for the political head of Shephard's predecessor, John Patten.
Ironically, Clanchy disapproves of the league tables which have showed her
school to perform prodigiously. Like most teachers, her first concern is for
individual pupils, and she is alarmed by the distraught reactions from girls
who managed 'only' a B in their GCSE exams - league tables now reveal that
81.5 per cent of the GCSEs taken at North London Collegiate last term
resulted in A-grades.
Unlike many independent school headmistresses, she has experience of the
state sector, having started her teaching career at a comprehensive, and is
quick to admit that North London is very privileged.
Set in beautiful buildings on the edge of an Edgware park, the school is
heavily over-subscribed, and she therefore has the luxury of being able to
select pupils, interviewing parents as well as their daughters.
She also treats the welter of positive publicity for girls' schools which
the tables have triggered with amusement: 'League tables,' she says, 'are
good, clean fun, but they don't necessarily show that girls' schools are
particularly wonderful. What they might show is that 16-year-old girls work
a lot harder than boys.'
The truly interesting phenomenon, for her, is girls' previous
under-performance, not their more recent improvement. She points out that
girls now out-perform boys by a wide margin at GCSE at both single-sex and
mixed schools, a disparity which is widening every year.
She believes this is a social circumstance: 'Girls, particularly those of
middle-ranking academic ability, now believe that they have a real chance of
entering a career with their academic qualifications, and so they are
working for them.'
And she attributes this to girls' 'constant lack of confidence'.
On this reading, the case for single-sex education does not rest on league
tables. Instead: 'The big argument for single-sex education is that you
don't have to conform to gender stereotypes. That's not just in science and
maths but in behaviour generally.'
North London Collegiate conforms to enough stereotypes to show that it has
not lost touch with its traditions. Girls wear uniform until the sixth form,
when most of them choose to dress smartly in any case. Many play hockey.
Standards of discipline seem high enough to satisfy any parent, and the
girls treat teachers - particularly Clanchy herself, just turned 55 and a
dominant figure standing around six feet tall - with obvious respect.
But it has shed enough stereotypes to move with the times. The student body
is almost as ethnically mixed as its neighbours in the state sector, partly
thanks to the government's assisted places scheme for children from
low-income families.
Cooking has been dropped in favour of craft, design and technology. Girls
are offered the chance to run their own companies as part of the Young
Enterprise scheme - 'selling each other junk' as Clanchy cheerfully
describes it - and this year's most popular A-level subject was maths.
Most North London Collegiate girls seem boisterously self-confident, and
obviously expect to take on a challenging career when they graduate. Thus
the school's role under Clanchy is, if anything, to challenge stereotypes.
One of these is that maths and sciences are a male preserve, and Clanchy
points out: 'It used to be that Latin and Greek were the ultimate measure of
cleverness. Now that women do much better than men at those subjects, all
the attention has shifted to the sciences.'
Views like this explain why Clanchy is a popular figure among other girls'
school headmistresses - in great part due to her opposition to the
introduction of national curriculum tests for 14-year-olds.
In March last year she fired off one of her first shots: 'The more we learn
about the tests the more insensitive, bureaucratic and absurd they seem. My
school, like all the others at the top of the league table, will not be
doing them.'
To make her point clearer, she then resigned from the National Curriculum
Council. This decision, she later told a sympathetic audience at the Girls'
Schools Association, had only been taken after several late nights agonising
in her kitchen.
In her resignation letter, she told Patten: 'The dominant aim has become a
curriculum designed for tests, and the result is a model of English teaching
which is barren and anti-intellectual. It is almost as if there is a
determination on the part of the council to pick a fight with English
teachers.'
It was as if, she said, 'the Highway Code had been narrowed down to
instructions on the three-point turn'.
Until then, Patten had assumed that objections to testing were restricted to
a handful of ideologically motivated teachers' union activists.
Heedless of Clanchy's warning, he chose to battle on, believing he could
beat the teachers in the battle for public opinion. He was wrong.
She treated this with icy disdain. Like many in the educational profession
she felt he should have been relieved of his post at least a year earlier
than he was, and referred to him as 'the Great Unshuffled'  - a nickname
that was to become very popular in the teaching profession. Shephard would
do well to pay her more heed.
