FT  21 JUL 94 / Arts: Message lost in double Dutch - Recital
Among other things, the Almeida Festival has brought us the Schoenberg
Quartet from the Netherlands, and in turn they brought us not only two works
by their eponym, but two recent Dutch pieces.
One of them was Louis Andriessen's 1991 quartet Facing Death, from about the
time of his De Materie - an imposing success, as I reported here, at the
South Bank's Meltdown festival; so I went.
There is nothing much new to report about Andriessen. Like each movement of
De Materie, Facing Death (title unexplained) explores a narrow vein at
relentless length, here a jazzily syncopated tune in innumerable variants
and simple counterpoint.
It just about succeeded in holding our interest, and might do so a second
time or even perhaps a third; but around then its sell-by date may have
passed. Such obsessive, close-focus treatment works better as a segment of a
larger whole than as a self-standing piece - at least when it takes some 20
hectic, exhausting minutes.
Though the Schoenberg Quartet are doughty players, they missed the degree of
gleaming precision that Reinbert de Leeuw got from his De Materie bands, and
there were occasional lapses in pitch.
Yet they are a keen, intelligent ensemble: blunt and sometimes - to
non-Dutch ears, anyhow - even graceless, but attentively musical and fully
equal to severe technical demands. In Schoenberg's Ode to Napoleon (after
Byron) they gave us a superbly lucid performance, better than almost any I
have heard of this gritty, angry piece, and Michael Grandage delivered the
text with grand Byronic flair.
Sepp Grotenhuis, the excellent pianist in the Ode, sounded odder in Webern's
quintet-version of Schoenberg's evergreen Chamber Symphony no. 1 for 15
instruments.
Certainly Webern's arrangement sets knotty problems of balance - even more
than the original] - but can Grotenhuis really have listened to the
original, so as to learn what he was standing in for? In the event, he let
subsidiary voices loom up like the Kraken's howl while understating the
crucial ones. It was like meeting the work in a reversed negative: weirdly
fascinating if you already knew it, baffling (though maybe exciting) if you
didn't.
I hesitate to mention the fourth work, the First Quartet of Klaas de Vries,
because I could make no sense of it. I could describe it - its elements are
not complicated, and they include some deliberate (very faint) echoes of
earlier quartets; but what it thought it was saying, or doing, remained
opaque to me.
There is perhaps a dense Dutch sub-culture of musical avant-garderie which
has taken different turns from those familiar elsewhere; if one doesn't know
the local history, its latest products may well be impenetrable.
