FT  12 AUG 94 / Discount rate increases to 7.5%: Italian central bank moves
as lira hit by political uncertainties
The Italian central bank unexpectedly raised its discount rate yesterday in
defence of the lira, which has been hit by political uncertainty.
The half-point increase to 7.5 per cent, the first since September 1992,
will take effect today. The Bank of Italy said the move was intended to
prompt 'a return to expectations coherent with the general economic
conditions', end speculative activity and 'avoid the build-up of
inflationary tensions'.
But the immediate effect of the rate rise appeared to be negative. The lira
weakened against the strong German currency, reaching a new record of L1,016
against the D-Mark in trading after the early-evening announcement.
Evidence of rifts in the coalition government of Mr Silvio Berlusconi,
following a series of political misjudgments, have also unsettled investors
in Italian bonds and equities, in spite of attempts by the prime minister's
supporters to dispel tension.
Yesterday the Christian Democrat Centre, smallest member of the Italian
coalition, added its criticism of Mr Berlusconi to that of the populist
Northern League, headed by Mr Umberto Bossi.
Arriving in Sardinia for a brief break on Wednesday night, Mr Berlusconi
told Italian television he could not take a full vacation because
'unfortunately, as you know, there are many people pulling against the
interests of the country'.
Yesterday Mr Antonio Tajani, the prime minister's spokesman, said on a radio
phone-in programme that 'attacks on the government are first and foremost
attacks on the country. These midsummer controversies within the majority
can't hide today's figures from Istat (the national statistics office)
showing a strong industrial recovery.'
The Istat figures showed that Italian industrial production grew by 5.3 per
cent in June, compared with the same month of 1993, a particularly gloomy
year for Italian companies. In the first six months of the year the
production increase was calculated at 2.6 per cent.
In spite of the production figures, however, the Comit index of Italian
stocks closed at 669.17, down 5.5 per cent over the last week. Analysts
believe shares may suffer further today in the light of the Bank of Italy's
announcement, which came after the market closed.
In the longer term, the rise in interest rates will also increase the cost
of servicing Italy's large public debt, which stands at almost 120 per cent
of GDP. Analysts estimate that each percentage point added to interest rates
increases the annual cost of servicing debt by L15,000bn (Pounds 6.7bn),
although it takes three years for such an increase to work through.
The interest rate rise will be unwelcome news for Italian companies.
Mediobanca, the Milan merchant bank, yesterday said that corporate Italy
reported an overall loss of L17,000bn in 1993, double the figure for the
previous year. Medium-sized companies were in deficit for the first time in
the last decade.
