FT  22 JAN 94 / M&amp;G faces criticism of executive option scheme: Move flouts
investor groups' corporate guidelines
M&amp;G Group, the UK's largest independent unit trust company, is facing
protests over a proposed executive share option scheme which some of its
institutional investors claim is against corporate governance principles.
The move is a potential embarrassment to M&amp;G, which, as a leading
institutional investor itself, has often taken a tough line on corporate
governance matters such as executive pay.
M&amp;G is asking shareholders at an extraordinary general meeting on February 4
to approve a 10-year scheme that will allow executives to buy share options
at current market prices and exercise them after three years, providing the
share price rises. There are no minimum criteria on share price performance.
The move flouts recommendations from the UK's two largest shareholder
groups, the National Association of Pension Funds and the Association of
British Insurers, who want to limit executives' freedom to benefit from
options unless their company has genuinely improved its performance.
Both organisations have registered their objections with M&amp;G's directors.
M&amp;G has defended the scheme, saying that all forms of performance criteria
may be manipulated. Mr Anthony Ashplant, M&amp;G company secretary, said: 'We
think the market is more sophisticated than that and we think that the
market takes into account all the variables.
'Bearing in mind we are a large institutional investor ourselves, we thought
about the matter long and hard.'
Mr Alistair Ross Goobey, chief executive of Postel, the investment arm of
Britain's largest pension scheme and holder of a stake in M&amp;G, said: 'In
general, we prefer share options to reflect individual performance. And with
a fund management group particularly, you should not confuse a bull market
with genius.'
Despite opposition, though, fund managers believe it unlikely that M&amp;G will
be forced to alter terms of its proposed plan. Its single largest
shareholder, the Esmee Fairbairn Charitable Trust, set up by one of M&amp;G's
founders, Mr Ian Fairbairn, is thought likely to support it.
The issuance of share options to executives, sometimes at a discount of up
to 15 per cent to prevailing market prices, has allowed some executives to
earn what appear to be exorbitant salaries at a time when their companies
are performing poorly.
The NAPF and the ABI last June issued guidelines for boards of directors
saying share option schemes that did not contain performance criteria should
be rejected.
The NAPF in particular has urged that exercise of share options be limited
to companies whose share price has outperformed the market generally or the
sector specifically, irrespective of factors affecting the whole market.
