FT  10 DEC 94 / Weekend Money (Investing for Growth): Disasters dog US
sector
Some fortunes have been made in the US biotechnology industry but rather
more have been lost, writes Daniel Green. There have been three big
successes, all from California, the latest of which came to global attention
only last month. The 13-year-old Chiron was valued at Dollars 4.2bn when
Swiss drugs giant Ciba took its stake from less than 5 per cent per cent to
49.
The transaction did not come out of the blue, however. Chiron was already
the world's third-biggest biotech company. The number two, Genentech, was
snapped up by another Swiss company, Roche, in 1990. Roche paid more than
Dollars 2bn for its 60 per cent stake.
Amgen, the dream investment of the sector, remains independent. It has two
of the world's top half-dozen drugs, blood treatments Epogen and Neupogen,
and a market capitalisation of around Dollars 6bn, two-thirds the size of
Britain's Wellcome. Not bad for a business founded in 1980.
Unfortunately for investors seeking to make sense of the sector, hindsight
reveals little about how these and not other companies made it. And if the
success stories are inspiring, the failures are frightening. Indeed, the
past year has seen a series of corporate disasters in the US sector where
shares have fallen by about one-quarter on average.
Most infamously, Colorado company Synergen managed two disasters in 18
months. It had a drug for septic shock for which the Phase 3 trial results -
the last before submission for regulatory approval - in 1993 were
inconclusive.
Failure here normally means the end of the road for a drug but Synergen
persevered and, at the same time, built a high-tech manufacturing plant
ready for the approval it thought it would get.
The drug failed again and was abandoned in July. Last month, Amgen offered
to buy Synergen for just over Dollars 9 a share, compared with the Dollars
66 the stock had reached in December 1992.
Other failures this year included Celtrix, Telios, Biogen and even a
merchant bank, D. Blech &amp; Co., that had backed several biotech company
financings.
These events show a subtle difference between biotechnology and
pharmaceuticals companies. A pharma company tries to develop a lot, perhaps
hundreds, of products at once. It is in the company's interest to eliminate
borderline drugs early, especially before costly, late-stage clinical
trials.
For biotech companies, a drug that gets to Phase 2 is probably one of the
few hopes of glory. Pressing on to Phase 3, even with a questionable
product, can be crucial to maintain the confidence of nervous, but ignorant,
shareholders.
You have been warned.
