FT  07 MAR 94 / Courts shift the employment goalposts: The Maastricht
opt-out may be academic
Last week was an unusually good one for British trade unions. A
well-received 're-launch' of the Trades Union Congress was followed by two
favourable court judgments, based on worker-friendly European law.
First came the ruling from the European Court's advocate general that
employees must be properly consulted in collective redundancies and
transfers of business ownership, even where there are no recognised trade
unions.
Then came the judgment by the law lords that reduced from five years to two
the qualifying period for redundancy pay and unfair dismissal rights for
part-time workers.
It is not clear whether these judgments - and others to come - will
significantly encumber the government's programme of labour market
de-regulation. But they do lend weight to the view that the government's
opt-out from the social chapter of the Maastricht Treaty has given it
strictly limited immunity from European employment law.
Right and left agree on this point. Mr Ira Chalpin, of the aggressively
free-market Institute of Directors, said: 'Our victory in securing an
opt-out from the social chapter just over two years ago is looking
increasingly hollow.' Supporters of European employment law, such as labour
lawyer Mr Simon Auerbach of Patteson and Brewer, said: 'The tide of social
directives and the way they are implemented will not be stopped by our
Maastricht opt-out.'
The government itself seems uncertain how to respond to the latest moves. Mr
David Hunt, the employment secretary, today lodges a formal appeal against
the European Union's working time directive, which despite being watered
down could introduce important new minimum standards in the UK on holidays
and working hours. He has also warned his cabinet colleagues that legal
pressures coming from Brussels may hinder some aspects of labour market
flexibility.
Advisers to Mr Hunt in the employment department were last week taking a
relaxed view of the two judgments. On the part-time workers judgment it is
estimated that only about 500,000 of Britain's 5.8m part-timers will be
affected.
It is difficult to calculate what kind of disincentive to part-time
employment might be created by introducing protection from unfair dismissal
three years earlier, but most analysts say it is not likely to be large.
Similarly, the minimum redundancy pay requirement is one week's pay per year
of service up to a maximum of 12 years, which is unlikely to generate more
than a maximum of Pounds 500 for a part-time worker.
There remain powerful incentives favouring continued growth of part-time
employment from a flexibility, cost and regulatory point of view.
For example, for those paid under Pounds 56 per week employers still do not
have to provide National Insurance, statutory sick pay or maternity benefit.
And those employers who do find the new unfair dismissal rules troublesome
can simply switch workers to rolling temporary contracts.
The requirement to consult workers' representatives in certain
circumstances, even where (as in a growing number of UK workplaces) there
are no recognised unions, has a less predictable outcome and is likely to be
fought hard by the government.
It will not mean the introduction of a right to union recognition or the
emergence of permanent works council-type bodies in Britain. But one
European Commission official said: 'Some sort of election system will be
needed to establish a worker representative,' though he added that the
system could be immediately disbanded once it had served its function. Many
smaller organisations would be excluded.
But the government faces other European employment law problems. In the
coming months it can expect:
A possible bill for tens if not hundreds of millions of pounds from workers
claiming compensation for loss of earnings or dismissal as a result of the
government's failure to properly implement the Transfer of Undertakings
(Protection of Employment) legislation, which gives workers some protection
in cases of business transfer.
Little joy in having contracting out from the public sector excluded from
the Tupe regulations. The latest draft of a commission discussion paper on
Tupe merely suggests that it should apply to genuine organisational entities
and not to individuals.
Pressure to raise the Pounds 10,000 maximum compensation limit for cases of
unfair dismissal.  As a result of EU legal judgments maximum compensation
limits have already been lifted from awards given to workers found to have
suffered from sex or race discrimination, which is leading to substantial
damages being awarded.
