FT  13 DEC 94 / Sinn Fein shuns conference: Ulster's gathering of
international investors faces disruption
Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, last night announced it was
boycotting an international business conference in Belfast, claiming its
proposed delegates were being treated as 'second class citizens'.
The move could disrupt the conference as some delegates from the US have
threatened to withdraw their participation if Sinn Fein does not attend.
With US delegates yesterday already on their way to Belfast for the
conference, it was not clear what position they would take before it is
officially opened tonight.
Sinn Fein last night signalled its intention to surround the conference in
political controversy by saying that it planned to organise a lobby of
overseas delegates.
Under pressure from the US, the British government last week agreed that six
Sinn Fein councillors could attend the conference. But last night Sinn Fein
said the councillors had not been invited as members of the party and that
its demands for equal status with other politicians had been rejected by the
government.
Mr Graham Gudgin, a leading Northern Ireland economist, said last night that
politics was threatening to undermine the success of the conference. He
said: 'Things are becoming very messy.'
The government's handling of the conference was yesterday criticised by the
Labour party as it launched proposals for economic regeneration in the
province.
Ms Marjorie Mowlam, shadow Northern Ireland secretary, said she thought
there had been 'a lack of clarity of thought' about the conference.
The party's 13-page document calls for a range of measures to regenerate
Ulster's economy including a strategy for redirecting public spending
towards investment.
The document says the Northern Ireland Office budget should not be cut
'simply because resources are available from international sources'. All
international aid 'is and must continue to be treated as additional to, and
not a substitute for, public expenditure'.
The paper advocates a package of measures for small businesses, including
the establishment of a Business Devel-opment Bank to raise private finance
for investment in the sector.
It also urges a 'Northern Ireland skills audit' to target training funds
more accurately. The Isle of Man government yesterday offered the island as
a neutral venue for peace talks on the political future of Northern Ireland
in a letter to the Home Office.
