FT  14 APR 94 / Foreign bears maul financial rand: Mark Suzman on the
collapse of South Africa's investment currency
South Africa's ebullient finance minister Derek Keys was at his bullish
best. There were many good reasons, he told a lunchtime gathering on Monday,
for confidence in the country's economy: a government of national unity had
been in place for several months and was working well, the economy had moved
out of recession into recovery and the country had enjoyed a bumper maize
harvest.
But in Johannesburg's Diagonal Street financial centre the bears were
running rampant. The financial rand, the yardstick of external investor
confidence, was at its lowest level ever as the market reacted to the
breakdown of the country's peace summit in the early hours of Saturday
morning.
Nothing Mr Keys said then or says subsequently can alter the fundamental
concern that will determine the outside world's judgment of South Africa as
an investment risk. Its financial services may be sophisticated, its stock
exchange capitalisation ranking it in the top 10 in the world, its
infrastructure excellent, its potential enormous: without stability and a
negotiated resolution of the country's constitutional crisis, these things
are worth little.
When trading opened this week the financial rand lost 14 per cent of its
value, finishing the day at a record low of R5.71 to the dollar and leaving
many foreign investors with hefty losses.
Although the currency partly recovered on earlier hopes of a successful
outcome to international mediation, its continued instability is leaving
investors distinctly nervous. Dealers report heavy foreign selling of South
African bonds and equities over the past two weeks, which has toppled the
markets from their mid-March highs.
It was a wave of such selling, in particular in the gilt market, that was
largely responsible for the fall on Monday.
One broker tells of an American investor who phoned him and ordered the sale
of his entire South African stock by the next day, whatever the price.
'It's all politically driven,' said another broker. 'Foreign investors are
very fickle.'
Although South African markets are no stranger to panic selling, the current
wave is particularly damaging because it comes in the wake of greatly
increased investor interest that followed the demise of apartheid and the
ending of sanctions against the country. The recent boom in both bond and
equity markets has been almost entirely foreign driven, in particular by
American funds looking for good deals abroad and attracted by South Africa's
relatively mature securities markets.
As a result, the discount between the financial and commercial rand,
regarded as a good barometer of international investor confidence, had been
steadily narrowing for most of the past six months. This in turn led to
speculation that the financial rand might soon be scrapped, a goal to which
both President FW De Klerk and African National Congress leader Mr Nelson
Mandela are publicly committed.
However, with the discount now around 30 per cent compared with a 21 per
cent average last year, most economists see little prospect for its removal
in the foreseeable future. 'If anything the financial rand is likely to drop
again,' notes Mr Kevin Lings, an economist at Nedbank.
The position is further complicated by South Africa's foreign debt
repayments. Combined with the interest and dividend payments due to
non-residents who have invested via the financial rand, these put enormous
pressure on the balance of payments as, without new foreign investment or
loans, the commitments have to be met through a current account surplus.
And with the country's reserves currently able to cover only around five
weeks' imports, room for manoeuvre is limited.
The commercial rand too has come under increased pressure in recent weeks,
also hitting new lows against the dollar. Its fall, however, has been less
precipitous than that of its financial counterpart and partly as a response
to the dollar's strength. Similarly, the stock market has remained
relatively steady, reflecting continued support from local institutions and
some bargain hunting by more experienced foreign investors prepared to take
the political risk.
But Mr Keys' stout defence of South Africa's economic future
notwithstanding, the volatility seems likely to continue, with many analysts
predicting further sharp movements in the markets in the run-up to the
election.
