FT  18 JUL 94 / Survey of South Africa (22): Bubbling with enthusiasm - The
business mood
The recent announcement that Mr Derek Keys, finance minister, intends to
resign in October has put a bit of a dent in the unadulterated optimism that
most businessmen had been professing after April's elections, writes Mark
Suzman. But there is still an overwhelming sense of relief within the South
African private sector that the transition proved so successful.
More important, there is a widespread conviction that, given the new
political dispensation, South African business may be in a position to
revisit the glory days of the 1960s.
'It really is a miracle,' says Mr Richard Laubscher, chief executive of
banking group Nedcor. 'There's no other word to describe it.' Indeed, the
South African corporate sector has been positively bubbling over with
enthusiasm since the success of elections, and the South African Chamber of
Business confidence index has been rising steadily month by month.
This is not to say that traditionally hard-nosed businessmen are overlooking
the big problems they continue to confront - including overpriced labour,
outdated machinery and a severe shortage of skills - but there is an
overwhelming sense of relief that the difficulties now being faced are of a
conventional economic nature and not those of sanctions, disinvestment and
the threat of civil war.
'We've been through the business equivalent of the ten biblical plagues,'
observes Mr Meyer Kahn, chairman of South African Breweries, one of the
country's largest industrial corporations, 'These problems are paradise
compared to what we've been through.'
As a result, it is hard work finding someone willing to point to any
downsides to business life in the new South Africa. Part of this is just
reaction to the dismal economic and political climate of the past decade.
'If you'd told me ten years ago we were expecting 2.5 to 3 per cent growth I
would have been depressed. Now I'm ecstatic,' admits one executive.
Similarly, while the recent budget's projected deficit of 6.4 per cent and
its mild investment incentives would have drawn jeers amid the prosperity of
the 1960s and 1970s, today it is applauded as a blueprint for growth.
But while the economic numbers may turn up some negatives, there are also
some fairly hefty positives. The economy has returned to growth after a
four-year recession; exports are at record highs; and inflation is at a
21-year low. In addition, retailers report rising sales and, most
importantly, fixed investment is rising after years of decline.
Add to this the return - in small numbers - of many leading multinationals
which departed during the apartheid years and, more importantly, the opening
of markets from Africa to the Middle East to eastern Europe, that were out
of bounds for decades, and the resultant feeling is that the only way from
here is up.
No doubt tensions will surface. There are also worries that Mr Christo
Liebenberg, the new finance minister, will prove less capable of standing up
to demands for fresh government spending than his capable predecessor.
But despite all this, the underlying fact is that confidence is at its
highest level in years. And while it would take a miracle for South Africa
to transform itself into what one businessman wistfully describes as 'an
African lion that can take on the Asian tigers,' miracles are something the
country can claim to have some experience with.
