FT  30 DEC 94 / International Company News: Santander snatches cellular
phone licence - Banco Bilbao Vizcaya edged out in bid for Spain's mobile
telephony system
Banco Santander has delivered a second blow to Banco Bilbao Vizcaya, its
chief domestic banking rival, in a little over six months.
In late April it beat BBV in a public auction to acquire Banco Espanol de
Credito Banesto, and now a Santander-backed consortium has edged a BBV-led
group out of the contest to develop a nationwide mobile telephony system.
The result of the contest for Spain's second GSM (global system of mobile
communications) licence ' the first is reserved for the government's
Telefonica ' also saw AirTouch, the US cellular operator, and British
Telecommunications, the technological partners of the winning Airtel-ASR
consortium, defeat the UK's Vodafone, part of BBV's competing group.
BBV's humiliation is considerable. In addition to Santander, Airtel counts
among its main shareholders Banco Central Hispano, a second big bank
competitor and one that had stood aside from the Banesto bidding process.
Determined not to be thwarted a second time, BBV's Cometa-SRM consortium had
made a bigger cash bid for the cellular licence, offering Pta89bn (Pounds
432m) against the Pta85bn from Santander and its fellow Airtel shareholders.
In April Santander took the Banesto prize when its sealed bid offered Pta762
per Banesto share against BBV's Pta667.
With its acquisition of Banesto, Santander put itself ahead of BBV in the
size of its branch network and in the volume of deposits, mutual funds and
loans to become the largest domestic banking group. BBV, which has
traditionally maintained a high industrial investment profile, had sought to
even the score by taking on the mobile telephony business.
In the event, the cash offer by BBV and its fellow Cometa partners was not
enough to obtain the GSM licence. The competing consortia were also required
to make a series of undertakings covering industrial investment, job
creation and research and development, and the bids were awarded points
under a complex adjudication system drawn up by the government and Lehman
Brothers, the US bank.
Full details of the two bids to develop what represents one of largest
single investment project to date in Spain will be released to parliament
next month but Mr Jose Borrell, the telecommunications minister, said
Airtel's bid had totalled 447.30 points out of a possible 600 against
Cometa's 432.67.
Mr Juan Berberena, banking analyst at AB Asesores, the Madrid securities
house, said BBV's failure to win the GSM licence was 'a psychological blow'
that weakened its image but added that its defeat could turn out to be a
blessing in disguise. 'The GSM business is potentially very profitable but
it represents a huge investment effort which will have to wait three to five
years to see any returns,' he said. 'BBV was making a very large bet and
carrying a very big implicit risk.'
A key difference between the two competing consortia was that Cometa's
financial burden was squarely placed on BBV, which had a 29.8 per cent stake
in the consortium, as well as on Vodafone, which had a stake of 23 per cent,
whereas the equity at Airtel is more widely distributed.
Santander has only 13.5 per cent of Airtel and it has syndicated this equity
to a 13.5 per cent shareholding in the consortium owned by BCH. Airtel's
spread of financial backers is further increased by a 16.7 per cent stake
that is jointly held by a group of five regional savings banks.
Analysts say Airtel's financial partners will stand it in good stead as it
embarks on investments that could total Pta200bn. Under the terms of the
tender the consortium has to provide GSM's pan-European digital network to
all towns of more than 10,000 inhabitants within five years.
The Spanish licence rounds off an acquisitive year for AirTouch, which has a
16 per cent stake in Airtel (BT has 7 per cent) and will be its dominant
technological partner. The US operator entered the cellular markets in
Germany, Portugal and Sweden in 1992 and those of Belgium, Italy and Spain
this year.
Airtel will share with Telefonica a Spanish GSM market forecast to have 2m
users and a turnover of Pta208bn by 1998. 'Telefonica will have to beef up
its marketing - in AirTouch and BT it will be facing two experienced and
tough competitors in the cellular environment,' said Mr Jonathan Lee,
telecommunications analyst at James Capel, the London broker.
