FT  19 JUL 94 / International Company News: US biotech groups top
expectations - Revenue up 21% at Amgen; Genentech income jumps threefold
The US's two leading biotechnology companies, Amgen and Genentech,
experienced strong sales in the second quarter of the year, enabling both to
record profits which exceeded market forecasts.
Amgen, whose sales in the first three months of the year had failed to live
up to expectations, bounced back with revenue growth of 21 per cent in the
three months to June, to Dollars 414m.
Sales of Neupogen, its treatment for chemotherapy patients, rose 13 per cent
to Dollars 212m, while revenue from Epogen, used in connection with dialysis
treatment, advanced 26 per cent to Dollars 176m.
During June, the company won regulatory approval to use Neupogen in
connection with high-dose chemotherapy, and to recommend an increase in
Epogen dosages on its packaging, both of which should support sales growth
in future.
With research and development spending up from Dollars 53m to Dollars 64m,
Amgen reported net income of Dollars 107m, or 77 cents a share, up from
Dollars 100m, or 70 cents a share, a year earlier. A legal award had added 6
cents a share to earnings in the 1993 quarter.
Half-year net income was Dollars 201m, against Dollars 190m.
Post-tax profits at Genentech, which is majority owned by Roche, the Swiss
pharmaceuticals group, jumped threefold in the second quarter as product
sales rose by more than a third.
The company reported net income of Dollars 33.4m, or 28 cents a share, up
from Dollars 10.4m, or 9 cents the year before, and broadly in line with
market expectations.
Behind the growth in product sales, to Dollars 152m, were a 32 per cent rise
in Activase, a drug used to prevent blood clotting, to Dollars 73.5m, and an
11 per cent advance in sales of the company's two human growth hormones, to
Dollars 59.5m.
Sales of Pulmozyne, taken by cystic fibrosis sufferers, launched in the
first quarter, reached Dollars 18.7m.
Mr Kirk Raab, president and chief executive, said Activase sales growth
could be further reinforced by a recent recommendation from a Food and Drug
Administration advisory committee. This could lead to larger dosages of the
drug being taken in the treatment of heart attacks.
Research and development spending, at Dollars 73m, was down from Dollars 84m
a year before when a one-off charge of Dollars 13.7m was included.
Spending on R&amp;D would increase in the second half of the year as later-stage
clinical trials started on a number of additional products, Genentech said.
For the half-year as a whole, net income rose to Dollars 72m on sales of
Dollars 394m, up from Dollars 25m on sales of Dollars 323m.
Sales at Upjohn, the US pharmaceuticals company, slipped in the second
quarter on growing generic competition to some of its biggest products. The
slowdown, however, was not as rapid as some industry observers had expected.
The company reported post-tax earnings of Dollars 120m on sales of Dollars
891m, down from Dollars 125m on its sales of Dollars 895m the year before.
Earnings per share, at 67 cents, were 3 cents lower than the corresponding
period but comfortably ahead of market expectations at around 60 cents.
Upjohn said US sales of Xanax, the anti-anxiety treatment which is its
biggest-selling drug, had fallen 64 per cent to Dollars 80m during the
period. US sales dropped 8 per cent overall, to Dollars 500m.
Outside the US, however, revenues rose 11 per cent to Dollars 391m, buoyed
in part by higher sales of Xanax.
Mr John Zabriskie, the company's recently appointed chairman and chief
executive, pointed to recent registration filings in 25 countries for
Freedox, a haemorrhage treatment, as a sign of Upjohn's attentionto the
development of new products.
Patent expiries on a number of its drugs in the US and the takeover of US
rival Syntex have pushed Upjohn to the top of most analysts' lists of
potential takeover candidates in the pharmaceuticals industry.
For the first half as a whole, net income fell to Dollars 255m, or Dollars
1.43 a share, from Dollars 253m, or Dollars 1.55, the year before.
