FT  21 JAN 94 / Scientists seek to ease fears as ozone layer thins
The thinning of the ozone layer has hit record levels, government scientists
said yesterday. But they also predicted that ozone levels would return to
normal towards the end of the next century if countries observe new treaties
curbing harmful chemicals.
At the publication of a government report on ozone, scientists also warned
that fears about an increase in skin cancer rates were sometimes
exaggerated.
The layer of ozone gas in the upper atmosphere shields people and plants
from the sun's damaging ultraviolet rays.
Mr Joe Farman, the scientist who discovered a 'hole' in the ozone layer over
the Antarctic, said yesterday that thinning would be at its worst around
2005.
According to the report, ozone levels over the UK in the winter of 1992-93
were the lowest since records began in 1979 - a thinning of about a quarter
in the past decade. The ozone layer is thinner in winter than it is in the
summer because of atmospheric pressure changes.
The thinning in 1992-93 was partly due to natural factors: the 1991 eruption
of the Mount Pinatubo volcano in the Philippines, and an anticyclone over
the northern hemisphere. Preliminary figures for the end of 1993 show some
improvement, scientists said.
Mr Farman said people's fears about the danger of ozone thinning were
sometimes out of proportion. 'The bigger problem may be disruption of insect
life and pollination of plants,' he said. 'Human beings can put on a hat and
sunscreen; bees can't do that.'
The extra dose of radiation which people in the northern hemisphere will
receive by 2005 because of ozone thinning will be roughly the same as they
would get by moving from Aberdeen to a sunnier climate such as the south of
France, he added.
The Montreal Protocol, renegotiated in Copenhagen in 1992, commits countries
to phasing out the production of industrial chlorine gases (CFCs) mainly
used in refrigeration and air conditioning equipment.
Environmentalists and scientists now want the ban to cover other chemicals
including HCFCs - a replacement for CFCs - and methyl bromide, widely used
to preserve fruit, vegetables and crops.
Mr Chris Smith, Labour environment spokesman, said: 'It is to the world's
credit that a treaty has been agreed, but it should now be extended.'
Stratospheric Ozone 1993, UK Stratospheric Ozone Review Group, Department of
the Environment, HMSO. Pounds 6.
