FT  24 MAY 94 / North-east limps behind rest of Brazil: Poor government puts
the brakes on development
Sitting amid peeling paint and regular power cuts, the secretary of health
for Brazil's north-eastern state of Maranhao is remarkably good humoured. Mr
Marival Pinherio Lobao even laughs when asked how many people work under
him. 'It's too disorganised to know. And people often get moved around each
month for political reasons,' he says.
Mr Lobao is one of many frustrated but largely powerless government
officials in the north east, a poor and extremely underdeveloped region.
Social indicators in the region contrast sharply with Brazil's rich south.
North-easterners are likely to live 10 years less than the 69-year average
in the southern state of Sao Paulo.
The illiteracy rate of 43 per cent is more than twice the national average.
Of the 42m people in the region, 1m have no income and a further 11m survive
on the minimum salary of about Dollars 65 a month. Diseases such as cholera
and leprosy, once on the wane, are increasing in several states. 'These
diseases are not really health issues, but signs of poverty,' according to
Mr Lobao.
The north-east's backwardness stems from a mixture of bad government, both
at local and national level, and corruption. But the problems are hard to
tackle because of an ingrained aversion to change and the lack of education.
Some states, notably Ceara, are trying to reform but it will take years to
solve even basic problems like education and health.
The difficulty lies in the political system. Most states are controlled by a
handful of ruling families who share the political and economic spoils to
maintain power and prevent modernisation. In Maranhao, for example, former
president Jose Sarney controls the largest TV broadcaster and the main
newspaper. His daughter Roseana is expected to win the race for governor in
October.
Mr Gastao Dias Vieira, a local politician critical of the ruling classes
says attempts to modernise the state have failed because of the elite's grip
on power. Two companies, mining group Vale do Rio Doce and aluminium
producer Alcoa, recently invested about Dollars 4bn in the local economy.
But the government, instead of using the revenues from these investments to
improve education or attack hunger, spent it instead on construction
projects to benefit their political backers, including the construction
companies themselves.
The elite's grip on power is reinforced by the region's backward education
standards and a patron-client tradition stemming from nearly 400 years of a
slave-based economy. In rural areas of some states, more than half the
population is illiterate. In states like Alagoas, whence Mr Fernando Collor
rose to the presidency before resigning amid corruption charges, there have
been complaints of unqualified people being given jobs as teachers in return
for votes.
Mr Mario Mamede, a Workers party politician in Ceara state, says: 'Voters
here don't want to know your record but whether you can help them get a job.
It makes buying votes very easy.'
Despite ingrained forces against change, there is a small but growing list
of states and cities benefiting from good government and reduced levels of
corruption. Slowly, change is coming from individual members of the elites,
often educated abroad, who are prepared to fight for change.
In Ceara, still one of the poorest states in the north-east, an enlightened
businessman won the post of governor in 1987 and decided to take on the
ruling class. One of Mr Tasso Jereissati's first acts was to dismiss 48,000
'teachers' who had been recruited in just one week before a previous
election campaign.
'People said I would never win another election because they thought
politicians needed to control all the jobs to be strong. But you need to
confront this,' he says.
Ceara was one of the first states to balance its budget and has enjoyed
economic growth above the national average. The state's reputation for clean
government is also attracting multilateral agencies such as the World Bank,
which are often reluctant to lend to other nearby states.
In Sao Luis, the capital of Maranhao, attempts are also under way to
dislodge the elites. Mayoress Conceicao Andrade, of the Brazilian Socialist
party, inherited a government which employed one in four of its population
and spent 96 per cent of its tax revenues on salaries. She has cut the
payroll by a fifth and introduced the strange - in Brazilian terms - concept
of fiscal thrift. 'We never spend all we collect from taxes. Instead, we
hold back a bit for investment,' she says.
But even the mayoress is pessimistic about the pace of reform in the
north-east, especially in the rural areas, where poor levels of education
and resistance to change are a brake to reform. And it is still extremely
rare for individuals or groups to join together as citizens or trade unions
and demand change. 'Most people are hungry a lot of the time. It's difficult
for people like that to feel like citizens and demand their rights,' she
says.
