FT  12 AUG 94 / Rosy vista with thorns for government: The middle class is
sceptical over the recovery and refuses to 'feel good'
This week's news that manufacturers in every region are increasing output
and orders was just the latest piece of data to paint a rosy picture of the
economy. Figure after figure has been pointing to steady, non-inflationary
growth.
Unemployment is falling, mortgage rates are at a 25-year low, economic
growth is ahead of the trend and underlying inflation is in the lower half
of the government's 1 per cent to 4 per cent target range.
Producer price numbers, announced this week, showed that rising commodity
prices are not yet being passed on by manufacturers.
But if Conservative Central Office staff were to imitate President Clinton's
campaign team, they would have a sign on the wall saying 'It isn't the
economy, stupid'.
In spite of the signs of economic success, and the conventional assumption
that this should translate into support for the government, Labour had a
record 33 percentage-point lead in a recent opinion poll.
It is not only political indicators that are signalling a lack of British
joie de vivre. Although the economic recovery is two years old, and output
is now above the 1990 peak, Gallup surveys show that consumer confidence has
failed to regain pre-recession levels.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, has lamented the lack of a 'feel-good
factor'.
In part, this downbeat mood is due to the nature of both the recovery and
the recession which preceded it.
According to Mr Kevin Gardiner, UK economist at Morgan Stanley, there were
two unusual features of the last recession. 'First, there was a drop in
nominal house prices,' he said. 'Secondly, when the labour market had its
shakeout, it hit the service sector and white-collar employees.'
Both factors particularly affected the middle classes - a key Tory
constituency. And the upturn has not restored their position.
For a start, this recovery is not as robust as its predecessors. Mr Douglas
McWilliams, chief executive of the Centre for Economics and Business
Research, points out that the pace of economic growth in the present
recovery is only about half the average for the second calendar year of an
upturn.
Furthermore, the new flexibility in the labour markets means that 'people
are prepared to accept terms they would not have accepted before', Mr
McWilliams said. 'Some have traded down their jobs.'
Middle-class jobs used to be almost a sinecure, he said, but now
professionals faced constant career uncertainty.
Nor have consumers been able to enjoy a feel-good factor from rising house
prices. According to Mr James Barty, UK economist at Morgan Grenfell, 'this
is one of the first recoveries where the housing market hasn't played much
of a role'.
There are some upbeat signs, however. Mr Gardiner said: 'What consumers are
saying is not what they are doing. They are reducing their savings ratios
and taking out more credit.'
He points to figures published on Monday which show that year-on-year growth
in consumer credit is running at 12 per cent. In spite of widespread fears
this year's tax increases have not derailed the recovery, although they may
have slowed its pace.
Most economists believe that there is still scope for consumer spending to
grow, as the savings ratio - savings as a proportion of personal disposable
income - is still relatively high at 10.4 per cent.
So while the economic end-results may be good, it is possible that consumers
still resent the means by which the government has achieved those results.
Mr Barty of Morgan Grenfell said: 'In people's perceptions the recovery is
not due to the government's good management but to an accident - our
departure from the Exchange Rate Mechanism. And a government that got
re-elected on the basis that it was the party of low taxation then hit
voters with one of the largest tax increases in history.'
The Conservative party's agony may thus be that, even if the voters
eventually feel good about the economy, they may still feel bad about the
government.
