FT  11 JUN 94 / Heartlands turn to 'wastelands': How the political parties
interpreted the Eastleigh by-election result
It is a measure of the government's unpopularity that the losing
Conservative candidate in a by-election can claim a 20 per cent swing to the
Liberal Democrats as an encouraging result.
Mr Stephen Reid, Tory candidate in the Eastleigh by-election, who saw a
17,702 Tory majority turned into a Liberal Democrat one of more than 9,000,
yesterday said the result proved that the third party's bandwagon had come
to a halt.
In the Newbury and Christchurch by-elections there were swings to the
Liberal Democrats of 28 per cent and 35 per cent respectively. Commenting on
the Eastleigh by-election, Mr Reid said: 'This is obviously not a good
result for the Liberal Democrats.'
He said he was delighted that he had won more than 13,000 votes. Yet it was
the first time his party had been pushed into third place in a by-election
in a seat which it had previously held since it lost Brecon and Radnor in
1985.
While Labour had more to be pleased with by coming second in a seat which it
knew it had no chance of winning, it decided to compete with the Tories on
the hyperbole stakes. 'This is a remarkable result for Labour,' said its
candidate Mrs Marilyn Birks, ignoring the fact that her party polled about
500 votes less than in the 1992 general elect-ion.
She had avoided the ignominy of a lost deposit in a southern seat - which
she indicated yesterday she had feared from the beginning of the campaign.
'Our great success was that we avoided a collapse in the Labour vote,' she
said.
Mr John Denham, Labour MP for the neighbouring Southampton-Itchen
constituency, declared for Mr Tony Blair in Labour's leadership election
because he said the shadow home secretary could make the difference in
Labour coming second or first in scores of southern Tory-held seats. But Mrs
Birks did not share his analysis and said she had yet to make up her mind on
who to vote for.
It was left to the Eastleigh victor, Liberal Democrat Mr David Chidgey, to
make the only plausible claim of the three main parties. He said the result
demonstrated that the Liberal Democrats were still best placed to win Tory
seats in the south of England.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, leader of the Liberal Democrats, could not resist the
temptation to make grander claims by declaring that the Tory heartlands had
become 'Tory wastelands'.
He added: 'To the Tories it was a night of humiliation and catastrophe.'
It may have looked that way to most people, but at the Eastleigh Tory
headquarters party workers were relieved that they had managed to get their
vote into double figures. 'It is important not to be over-ambitious in a
by-election,' said one Tory worker without a hint of irony.
