FT  02 NOV 94 / Yorkshire Electricity loses deal in Sweden
Yorkshire Electricity yesterday abandoned plans to buy a 17.3 per cent stake
in Stockholm Energi, Sweden's third-largest energy producer, after an
effective veto from the newly-elected Stockholm city council.
The SKr1.8bn (Pounds 154m) deal was central to the diversification plans of
the regional electricity company. It is understood that Yorkshire will
receive around SKr200m in compensation.
Mr Malcolm Chatwin, chief executive, said: 'We are obviously disappointed
that the new political regime in Stockholm does not wish to go ahead with
the agreement that was made with the former regime.'
The swing to the left in the Stockholm elections reflected a broader
national trend which carried the Social Democrats back to power last
September with a more critical policy on privatisation.
Yorkshire's shares rose 24p to 759p as the City expected Yorkshire to follow
East Midlands Electricity's decision to give Pounds 186m back to its
shareholders in a special dividend payment.
Yorkshire could alternatively buy back up to 10 per cent of its shares after
its closed period ends on December 16.
The Swedish deal appears to have fallen victim to horsetrading on the city
council, which owns Stockholm Energi, following municipal elections. The
elections left the Social Democrats needing support from two parties opposed
to the agreement. When the deal was agreed in June, a centre-right coalition
was in control.
'This is purely a political decision,' said Mr Inge Telander, a spokesman
for Stockholm Energi. He said the group, which produces around 13 terawatt
hours (twh) of electricity a year, had needed a partner to bolster its
balance sheet after its SKr2bn purchase of hydropower generating facilities
in June 1993. A deal with Yorkshire would have strengthened its
equity-to-assets ratio from 11 per cent to more than 25 per cent.
The company was also seeking expertise from Yorkshire ahead of a planned
deregulation of the Swedish electricity market. However, this deregulation
was last week postponed by the new Social Democratic government. A proposal
to list Stockholm Energi has also been abandoned.
