FT  07 NOV 94 / Survey of Birmingham and the West Midlands (9): A vital role
for training - The skills shortage is causing employers anxiety
There is no doubt about what Mr David Ritchie, the civil servant appointed
to co-ordinate the government's work across the West Midlands, sees as the
main problem for the region's economy.
'The single most important difficulty we have in this region is in skills
and training. We have the worst-trained workforce in UK,' he says.
Employers complain that school leavers do not have the levels of literacy
and numeracy required in a world where skills in the workplace need to keep
pace with technological change.
In 1992, 7.3 per cent of West Midlands school leavers had no qualifications,
compared with a UK average of 6.6 per cent.
The UK has set national training targets. Lifetime target I is that 80 per
cent of the workforce be qualified to NVQ (national vocational
qualification) or equivalent level by 2000.
Lifetime target III is that half be qualified to NVQ level 3. The West
Midlands is the third worst UK region in its progress towards the former and
the worst in respect of the latter.
Surveys, such as the recent review by the Birmingham Economic Information
Centre, suggest that the skills problems are greatest in the manufacturing
sector, which is the mainstay of the West Midlands economy, and particularly
among the small and medium-sized companies.
Many small companies cont-inue to prosper without bothering with training. A
caricature of such a company would be one run by a self-made entrepreneur
with no formal training, whose employees are all trained to work their
machines, and who continues to make enough profit to draw a good living and
drive a big car.
Mr Edward Roberts, chair-man of Heath Springs, a spring-maker with 112
employees in Redditch, south of Birmingham, does not fit that caricature.
A former chairman of Centec, the training and enterprise council for the
area south of Birmingham, he is something of a missionary for the training
cause.
Most companies, he says, 'train because people say it's necessary, but they
are not quite sure what it is and they don't relate it to the require-ments
of their business.' He cites as a particular weakness reluctance among the
owner-managers of some companies to accept that they might benefit from
training.
The majority of companies are reasonably good at statutory training, such as
health and safety and first aid, he says, but because they don't think about
training for the long term strategic develop-ment of their companies, skill
shortages are inevitable.
There are skill shortages already, even at this stage of the recovery, says
Mr Roberts. He identifies a shortage of good people in the 35-45 age bracket
with experience of new equipment.
For his company, this means no night working - the employees do not have to
do it. His overseas competitors do not have the same restrictions. 'Twenty
years ago, our competition was all within 25 miles. Now it is not in the
UK.'
Like many small suppliers to the automotive industry, Heath Springs is
wrestling to retain the old skills - which Mr Roberts refers to as the
'black arts' needed to run older machines which appear to have personalities
of their own - while also developing skills to deal with fast-changing
demands from customers, to flatten the management structure and cope with
concepts such as statistical process control.
Skill requirements have changed dramatically in the past five years, he
says. Customers expect his company to be much more pro-active in design,
development and control of the parts it produces, while the flatter
organisation 'needs people who can communicate with other people and with
customers'.
Mr Roberts believes training in team leadership has paid off, as employees
are encouraged to produce ideas. And more is being demanded in basic skills
 -he needs employees with managerial potential to have language skills,
unthinkable 20 years ago in the UK, though not overseas.
But there is a downside, especially for the smaller company in a sector
where it is one of only a few that take training seriously.
Its training investment can be wasted if a competitor pays a small amount of
extra salary to snatch away an expensively-trained craftsman. Mr Roberts
says he lost one a week after he returned from an expensive trip to the US.
As a former training and enterprise council (Tec) chairman, he is positive
about the new national vocational qualification system, and the way it
enhances the self-esteem of people whose skills were once not accompanied by
certificates. He is also supportive of Investors in People (IIP), the
personnel development quality standard being backed by the government.
He believes the larger companies which already subscribe should promote it
among their suppliers, in the same way as they promoted the quality standard
BS5750.
Many commentators believe this is the way forward - if the big manufacturers
required suppliers to take training needs seriously through IIP, there would
be more of a level playing-field for companies like Heath Springs, and more
trained people available in the region.
Rover Group says it takes an interest in the 'whole business environment' of
suppliers, although it did not currently specify any training measure. It
might in future start specifying a measure, which might be IIP.
Mr Chris Tillett, a principal with Coopers &amp; Lybrand in Birmingham, says
most new investment is expected to be in small companies, which will not
have in-house training capacity.
If there is not a supply of skilled people, it will be more difficult to
compete with other areas for investment - Hertfordshire, for example, is
trumpeting the availability of skills from the aerospace industry.
Mr Tillett says the better educated parts of the region, such as Shropshire
and Warwickshire - are attracting higher value-added activities. For the
Birmingham conur-bation, however, skills remain a serious issue.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Qualifications of Birmingham's resident workforce
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                          W Midlands
                             Birmingham       region        UK
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
All higher level qualified
 as a percentage of:
Economically active                13.5         13.6      16.3
Adult population                    9.8         10.6      12.8
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Higher level qualifications
 (% of adult population):
Higher degrees                      0.8          0.6       0.9
Degrees                             4.7          4.6       5.9
Diplomas                            4.3          5.4       6.0
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: 1991 Census of Population
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
