FT  08 AUG 94 / FT Guide to the Week
8 MONDAY
Israel-Jordan peace moves
Israeli prime minister Yitzhak Rabin will officially enter Jordanian
territory for the first time to meet Crown Prince Hassan and open a new
border crossing between the Red Sea cities of Eilat and Aqaba.
The crossing, part of the peace accord signed last month in Washington, will
initially be for third country nationals.
US secretary of state Warren Christopher will attend the ceremony and make a
telephone call between Israel and Jordan, marking the opening of
communications between the two after nearly half a century of conflict.
After the ceremony, Mr Rabin and Mr Christopher will hold trilateral talks
with King Hussein in Aqaba.
US House and Senate representatives meet this week in conference to resolve
differences in two important bills: the Uruguay Round implementing
legislation and the controversial National Competitiveness Act, which
contains provisions discriminating against foreign business. Members are to
decide this week whether to give President Bill Clinton authority to
negotiate free-trade deals with Chile and other trading partners.
British Airways is expected to report strong first-quarter pre-tax profits
with estimates of the range of Pounds 85m-Pounds 95m (Dollars 132m-Dollars
147m). The good performance reflects the airline's strong traffic growth in
the first quarter, which has continued into the start of the second.
Particularly encouraging has been the increase in first and business class
traffic, which has been growing by about twice that in the economy cabin.
Holidays: Iraq (Victory Day).
9 TUESDAY
Armenia's president in US
Armenia's President Levon Ter-Petrosyan is due to meet US president Bill
Clinton in Washington. Mr Ter-Petrosyan, whose country has been reduced to
abject poverty by its war with neighbouring Azerbaijan, is expected to
discuss energy-starved Armenia's plans to restart its only nuclear power
station. President Clinton will no doubt wish to discuss with Ter-Petrosyan
the prospects for resolving the conflict over the Armenian enclave of
Nagorno-Karabakh in Azerbaijan.
Israel and Jordan resume bilateral peace talks on border demarcation, water
and security issues. The talks, at an Israeli hotel on the Dead Sea, aim to
resolve the main obstacles that stand in the way of a formal peace treaty.
Jordan is seeking the return of 360sq km of land occupied by Israel and the
'rightful' allocation of the waters of the Jordan and Yarmouk rivers which
it claims Israel has illegally diverted since the 1967 Arab-Israeli war.
US trade policy: The US House of Representatives is to vote on bills to
remove China's Most Favoured Nation tariff status or limit the low levies to
goods produced in the private sector. President Clinton would veto the
legislation if it were to pass.
SPD conference: Leaders of Germany's opposition Social Democratic Party
(SPD), including Rudolf Scharping, and Gunther Verheugen, his general
secretary, hold a conference in Bad Godesberg, near Bonn, to launch their
campaign for the October elections. They will be seeking to recover the
ground they have lost to Chancellor Helmut Kohl and his ruling Christian
Democratic Union in recent months.
Football tax probe: Clubs from the UK Football Association's Premier League
meet in London to discuss their response to a tax investigation by the
Inland Revenue. The agenda includes loans to players, payments to agents and
testimonial matches. The exact location and the names of clubs attending are
being kept secret by the FA - but Alan Sugar's Tottenham Hotspur will not be
there, having already settled with the Revenue.
Football: The televisions have barely cooled down from the World Cup, but
this week British teams return to competition. Today, Inter Cardiff make
their European debut at home against GKA Katowice, Poland. Tomorrow, Glasgow
Rangers open their European Cup campaign in Athens.
Holidays: Singapore (National Day).
10 WEDNESDAY
Turkey minister's debut
Turkey's foreign minister Mumtaz Soysal is expected to attend tripartite
talks in Damascus with his Syrian and Iranian counterparts in his first
official visit since being appointed last month.
The regular meetings are aimed at co-ordinating policy on regional issues.
All three countries have Kurdish minorities and are concerned about the de
facto Kurdish state in the north of neighbouring Iraq.
Ankara is also likely to urge its neighbours to curb the cross-border
activities of Turkey's rebel Kurdistan Workers Party PKK.
Traditionally, this question has been linked to the vexed water issue and
Ankara's control of both the Euphrates and the Tigris rivers.
Slovak privatisation: The Slovak National Property Fund, which holds shares
in companies to be privatised, begins a second round of sell-offs involving
stakes in 19 small and medium sized companies with an estimated value of
Sk735m (Dollars 23.1m).
US economy:
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the US Federal Reserve Board is due to speak to
a congressional committee about the reliability of monetary aggregates as
forecasting tools. Although the hearing is fairly technical, it falls right
in the middle of the Treasury's quarterly sale of new bonds, so Mr
Greenspan's every word is likely to be scrutinised by the bond market.
Ariane blast-off: The 66th Ariane rocket, delayed from July 30 by technical
problems, blasts off from the European Space Agency's centre in Kourou,
French Guiana, on the north-east coast of South America.
The rocket is to launch a 1.7 tonne communications satellite for a Brazilian
company and another satellite weighing 1.8 tonnes for Turkey's ministry of
posts and telecommunications.
UK economy: The Confederation of British Industry and Business Strategies
Ltd release their regional industrial trends survey.
The Bank of England will release its analysis of bank lending to UK
residents for the second quarter.
Dylan Thomas's widow Caitlin, who died last week in Italy aged 81, is to be
buried next to her husband, according to her last wishes at Laugharne, on
the coast of south Wales.
Holidays: Ecuador (Independence Day).
11 THURSDAY
Japan rejigs constituencies
A new political map of Japan will be proposed to prime minister Tomiichi
Murayama. A government panel has drafted new boundaries to create 300
single-seat constituencies for the lower house of the Diet (parliament),
along with 200 seats allocated by nationwide proportional representation.
This would replace the present multi-seat system which fostered corruption,
as members of the same party would compete for a seat by offering local
favours rather than differentiating themselves on policy issues. The Diet
will debate the map in the autumn.
Germany's postal service presents its annual results, giving some idea of
the privatisation prospects for the weakest link in Germany's great postal
reform package, alongside Deutsche Telekom and the Postbank.
UK electricity pricing: Prof Stephen Littlechild, regulator for the UK
electricity industry, announces the results of his review of price controls.
The review is expected to lead to price cuts in 1995-96, and tighter
controls on rises thereafter. The review will also remove the last
uncertainty holding back a merger shake-out in the sector.
Rossini opera festival: Pesaro, an Italian resort on the Adriatic, begins
its annual tribute to its most famous son, the composer Gioachino Rossini.
Holidays: Jordan, Zimbabwe (Heroes' Day).
12 FRIDAY
Non-aligned debt meeting
Finance ministers from member states of the Non-Aligned Movement meet in the
Indonesian capital Jakarta to discuss foreign debt management (to August
15). Indonesia, whose interest payments absorb some 30 per cent of its
export earnings, is hosting the event, the first time the Movement has
discussed the issue.
In addition to the 31 members, representatives from the International
Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the Japan Centre for International Finance,
the Development Bank of Africa, the Asian Development Bank and the
Inter-American Development Bank are attending.
Strikers strike: US baseball players have called a strike beginning today if
negotiations with team owners do not lead to the signing of a new labour
contract.
The dispute involves the use of television and attendance revenues, and the
owners' insistence that a new labour contract includes a salary cap.
Japan's rice market may have some price controls lifted and distribution of
the staple made more efficient as a result of an interim report to be
presented by the Agriculture Policy Council, a government advisory body.
Glorious Twelfth: The grouse shooting season begins in Britain.
Holidays: Thailand (Queen's Birthday), Zimbabwe (Armed Forces Day).
13-14 WEEKEND
Key poll in New Zealand
New Zealand holds a by-election on Saturday for the South Island
constituency of Selwyn, left vacant by the resignation of government MP Ruth
Richardson. The conservative National Party has a majority of one seat.
Apprentice Boys parade: Up to 10,000 Protestant loyalists are expected to
gather in the mainly Catholic city of Londonderry on Saturday for the annual
Apprentice Boys parade. It marks the 305th anniversary of 13 apprentices
closing the gates of the city on the army of Catholic King James II.
Football: On Saturday, the English Football League and the Scottish League
begin. The English Premier League begins a week later.
Guatemalans vote for a new congress on Sunday following constitutional
reforms approved in January to bring forward elections. The Frente
Republicano Guatemalteco, the party of retired general and former coup
leader Jose Efrain Rios Montt, who is accused of thousands of human rights
abuses, is expected to top the polls.
The Edinburgh Festival begins on Sunday, accompanied by its billowing Fringe
(to Sep 3).
Motor racing: The Hungarian Grand Prix takes place on Sunday.
Compiled by Patrick Stiles and Shelley Wood.
Fax: (+44) (0)71 873 3194.
