FT  19 OCT 94 / UK Company News: Why Walker has changed horses - The banker
who is leaving Lloyds for Morgan Stanley
Sir David Walker did not look a disappointed man yesterday.
This was despite having apparently forsaken the opportunity to chair
Britain's most successful bank, and a leading FT-SE 100 index company, for
the sort of role at a US investment bank that is usually more ambassadorial
than powerful.
Sir David's decision to become executive chairman of Morgan Stanley in
Europe rather than wait for the apparent certainty that he would succeed Sir
Robin Ibbs at Lloyds Bank raises fresh questions for Lloyds.
The bank now has to find both a new chairman and chief executive - to
replace Sir Brian Pitman - in the next two years.
Yet it also appeared enigmatic for Sir David himself.
Most European chairmen of US investment banks have been non-executives
appointed to bring City contacts and act as figureheads. Is that the role
for someone who describes himself as being 'reasonably creative' and having
'huge energy'?
Sir David's answer is an emphatic 'yes' on two grounds.
One is the nature of his role at Lloyds, where he thought his job would be
'more executive than is the case' when he arrived in July 1992. It then
seemed that he was being groomed for a rapid elevation, with Sir Robin as a
caretaker.
But Sir Robin, a former executive director of ICI and head of Lady
Thatcher's cabinet office 'think tank' from 1980 to 1982, now appears to be
rather enjoying himself at Lloyds. He has indicated that he would prefer to
hang on to the reins until the annual meeting after his 70th birthday.
The second reason is the nature of the role he is being offered at Morgan
Stanley. At 54, the former chairman of the Securities and Investments Board,
the City regulator, says he could be non-executive chairman of a FT-SE 100
company 'in six or seven years' time, if I want that' but has more active
ambitions now.
Sir David admits that the European chairman of a US investment bank is
normally 'an introducer or a public affairs chap'. But his job will be as
executive chairman of European operations. He will also be a member of the
New York board of directors that runs Morgan Stanley throughout the world.
Morgan Stanley needs such a role as a result of its rapid growth in the past
two years. It generated Dollars 1.25bn (Pounds 790m) of revenues in Europe
last year, and if its rate of expansion continues it could produce more
revenue from Europe than the US by the turn of the century.
The firm already employs Mr Francis Maude, the former UK cabinet minister as
managing director of global privatisation work.
Lord Richardson of Duntisbourne, the former governor of the Bank of England,
is also a member of the international advisory board based in its Canary
Wharf offices.
Executive responsibility for Europe is split between its joint chief
executives, Mr Steven Ward and Mr Stephen Waters. Mr Waters said yesterday
that it would 'probably become a triumvirate rather than a duet' once Sir
David had worked his way in and understood the firm's activities.
Mr Waters, who takes particular responsibility for mergers and acquisitions
work and equities, said the firm 'obviously wanted a senior figure who knew
his way around the City', and hoped to boost its presence in the domestic UK
market to the level achieved in some continental European markets.
Sir David argues that his role at Morgan Stanley will be one of
'collaborating, helping, coaxing and contributing,' as well as helping to
decide how the firm should allocate capital in Europe. Its rate of growth
means that there are competing claims among different country operations.
He emphasises that as the only employee of the firm in London without
functional responsibility, he will have a role in arbitrating between
businesses. 'One of the challenges is to ensure that people in business
units do not become so entrenched that we miss synergies,' he says.
Nonetheless, Sir David's move is likely to reduce his previous visibility as
a senior City figure, given the roots of his new employer on Wall Street.
Morgan Stanley's European growth will have to live up to expectations to
compensate for what he is sacrificing at Lloyds.
