FT  02 MAR 94 / Transatlantic row over a sacred cow: A milk-boosting hormone
is causing controversy
Last week, US supermarkets received the first deliveries of milk produced by
cows which had undergone a new form of hormone treatment that greatly
stimulates milk production.
The hormone, known as bovine somatotrophin (BST) and developed by Monsanto
and other chemical companies at a cost approaching Dollars 1bn, is a
manufactured version of a naturally occurring hormone. Marketed under the
name Posilac, it has been hailed as an important advance in bio-engineering.
According to the US Food and Drug Administration, milk and meat from cows
who have been treated with it are safe and virtually indistinguishable from
the normal product.
But these benefits have not prevented BST being swept up in a storm of
controversy in the US as well as the European Union, where a ban on its use
must be reviewed later this year. Fears about the hormone centre not just on
the possible health effects, but also on the damage that a sudden surge in
milk production could do to the subsidy-laden agricultural economies of
Europe and North America.
Use of the hormone in the US was finally approved last November after
decades of study and debate. At the same time the White House ordered a
study of the potential impact on a market already struggling with milk
surpluses. This showed that BST could boost US milk production by 1 per cent
a year over the next six years. Unless BST triggered a big change in milk
consumption patterns, the US government would be obliged by its dairy
support programme to buy up almost all of the additional production at a
cost over five years of more than Dollars 500m, an increase of 40 per cent
in its annual dairy outlays.
Although farmers who are quickest to use the drug would enjoy a short-term
profit boost, the study suggests that, as a result of larger and fewer dairy
farms and increasing rural depopulation, the net economic effect over five
years would be to reduce farm income by 1 per cent and shrink dairy herds by
up to 30 per cent. Nor would the consumer benefit, because the subsidy
payments would ensure that the retail price did not fall noticeably.
Resistance to BST has been building up for some time. Consumer and farm
groups, led by Washington-based activist Jeremy Rifkin who heads the Pure
Food Campaign, have staged protests and milk dumpings throughout the US. Ms
Robin Douthitt, professor of consumer science at the University of
Wisconsin, says that, while other bio-tech projects aim to produce a better
tomato or a tastier potato, BST-treated milk brings no benefit to consumers;
and because BST-treated milk is perceived as unnatural, it is seen as adding
risk to a product generally considered as pure.
Fearing a consumer backlash, nearly 200 US food companies, including large
grocery and convenience store chains and 14 dairy co-operatives, have asked
their suppliers not to deliver hormone-enhanced milk for three months to
give them a chance to assess the market impact. In the two top dairy states,
Wisconsin and California, six school districts have asked that milk
delivered to their cafeterias come from untreated cows.
However, consumers have few ways of ensuring that the milk they receive is
from BST-free herds, and the US government, keen to support biotechnology,
is making it difficult for processors to label their milk free of artificial
hormone treatments by requiring them to prove their claims with detailed
documentation. Monsanto is also suing two small dairy processors for using a
BST-free label and has sent warning letters to others.
The launch of BST in the US raises doubts about whether the European
Commission can continue to resist its use in Europe, where it is the subject
of a four-year-old moratorium. Its use could also erupt into a transatlantic
trade dispute, highlighting the potential clash between the ethics of food
production and the pressure for unrestricted commerce under the new General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
'The European Union emphasises quality, wholesome products rather than
quantity,' said a Commission official. 'We're stronger on that than the US.
The US tends to be more geared to market forces, competitiveness, economies
of scale and technological innovation.'
Brussels has no quarrel with the safety of BST for human consumption, but it
is concerned about its use on environmental and economic grounds. It
believes that consumers would see dairy products from cows injected with BST
as adulterated and would respond by cutting down on all milk products. A
German survey showed that dairy consumption would drop by 11 per cent if BST
were introduced.
Mr Steve Emmott of BST Concern, a UK campaign representing farmers,
environmentalists and animal welfare groups, says: 'This is the first
flagship of the biotechnology industry coming to the market. But we don't
think BST is a useful way of using the technology . . . It's a product no
one wants or needs apart from the manufacturers. We don't need surplus milk.
And we don't need milk with genetically engineered hormones.'
Until recently, Mr Rene Steichen, the agriculture commissioner, indicated
that BST-produced dairy goods would not be allowed into the European Union
while the moratorium remained in force. But US officials say any such ban is
likely to be challenged, just as the US fought the EU's 1989 ban on imports
of US meat produced with growth hormones. US dairy exports to the EU amount
to only Dollars 45m a year. 'But it's an issue of principle,' said a US
official. In any case, the US will have greater access to the European
market for its dairy goods under the Gatt agreement.
The Gatt view is that an import ban would be difficult to justify, because
products may in future only be challenged on strictly scientific criteria as
opposed to social or ethical considerations.
However, the matter does not stop at an import ban. The White House report
suggests that the US might challenge any extension of the EU moratorium.
'For countries to ban BST use, after the hormone has been scientifically
found to be safe, would undermine efforts to eliminate unfair trade barriers
to US exports,' it says.
At the end of the year, farm ministers must decide the future of BST in
Europe. Last December, the Commission lost its battle to keep the moratorium
on BST in place until 2000. The ministers agreed only to extend it until the
end of this year, saying they wanted to monitor its impact in the US, the
trade implications and the effect on European competitiveness.
To strengthen its hand, the Commission has assembled a long list of
arguments against BST. It says that using the drug is not compatible with
Common Agricultural Policy reforms designed to reduce milk output, and is
likely to accelerate the trend towards bigger and fewer dairy farms and to
lead to more cows being slaughtered and more beef cattle raised instead,
adding to the beef mountain.
US officials counter that, if fewer cows are needed to produce a given
amount of milk, BST helps the environment by cutting manure and methane
production and the amount of water, land and chemicals used. They say a
small well-managed farm could benefit as much or more from BST use as a big,
poorly managed one.
However, the Commission is polishing up a new weapon in its armoury to keep
the moratorium going. It argues that guaranteeing its dairy products free of
BST could give the EU a competitive advantage over US exports - and even a
chance to charge a premium - in world markets where BST is either not used
or not appreciated such as in Japan.
'We didn't think of that,' admitted a senior US agriculture official
ruefully.
