FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of Slovakia (3): Frustration of a nation builder -
Interview, Mr Michal Kovac
When independent Slovakia was born in January last year Mr Michal Kovac
hoped to use the authority of his office as the country's first president to
build a new sense of statehood. But the political instability that gripped
the country almost from the start has left him little time for
nation-building.
'So far I have not succeeded,' he notes with a shrug, sitting on the edge of
a chair in his sparsely furnished office in the baroque former Bishop's
Palace where Napoleon and the Austrian Emperor signed a temporary peace
after the French triumph at the battle of Austerlitz.
The man who has been making life hard for Mr Kovac is his former colleague
and fellow-communist, Vladimir Meciar, who is about to return as prime
minister after being forced from office last March, with the president a key
player in his ousting.
Mr Kovac appears unfazed at the prospect of his arch-enemy returning at the
head of a new government, which is likely to be strongly populist,
nationalist, anti-Hungarian and anti-Michal Kovac in tone. Indeed, the
president is a little richer because of the result of the election at the
end of September.
He was the winner of a presidential office bet on the outcome, winning the
princely sum of SKK1,000 (Dollars 32) by predicting most closely the share
of the vote going to Mr Meciar's Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) -
it won 35 per cent; Mr Kovac predicted 33 per cent.
Observers in Bratislava say Mr Kovac has learned quickly how to get his
opinion across within the constraints imposed by his position. Every
political party, he says, has the same value for him, and he can express
neither anxiety nor joy at a certain party's success or failure. Election
results, he says, express the democratic wish of the people, and 'I'm
obliged to respect that'.
But the the president now suspects that he and the office he holds are due
for renewed attack. Mr Meciar wants to establish a presidential form of
government in Slovakia, a move Mr Kovac thinks is dangerous. The roots of
democracy are not yet deep enough in Slovakia for such a system, he says,
warning of a subsequent misuse of personal power. 'I'm for a parliamentary
system, not a presidential one.'
In order to establish a presidential system Mr Meciar needs to muster 90
votes in the 150-member parliament to secure a change to the constitution.
As talks on forming a new government drag on without any immediate sign of
success the likelihood that the new prime minister will achieve his goal
recedes, though he has still not committed himself to ceasing his attacks on
Mr Kovac.
The president says that if a presidential system is established its success
will depend entirely on the personality of the holder. Does he think Mr
Meciar is a suitable candidate for such a position? 'I am not able to say,'
he comments diplomatically.
Would he be a candidate himself? 'I haven't decided yet.' Observers in
Bratislava say he almost certainly would run for office in such an event.
He would not object to a presidential system, he says, if the new
constitution that would result allowed for unfettered opposition politics
and independent radio and television and 'if other democratic functions were
allowed to function'.
But even without being president or even prime minister Mr Meciar has
already used the power stemming from a bare coalition majority to wrest
control of the media and other key state bodies such as the National
Property Fund, which prepares companies for privatisation.
Early in November, in a parliamentary session that has become known as
'Bloody Thursday', he organised a parliamentary coup which gives his
incoming government complete control of these bodies and gave an early
warning of the confrontational tone of his administration.
Though he appears remarkably self-confident for a man who has been publicly
vilified by his enemies for his role in removing Mr Meciar in the national
interest earlier this year, Mr Kovac is clearly disappointed that he has
been prevented from developing his original vision of a unifying presidency.
Mr Kovac was not widely known when he assumed office at the beginning of
last year. The man destined to become Slovakia's first president had been
Alexander Dubcek, the communist party leader whose Prague Spring reforms led
to the Warsaw Pact invasion in 1968. But he was killed in a car accident
just weeks before his country became independent on December 31, 1992.
Mr Kovac stepped into his shoes. But, both as a communist party official and
as chairman of the last Czechoslovak federal parliament after the velvet
revolution, he has spent a great deal of time in Prague, a suspicious past
for the more nationalistic of Slovak voters.
Asked whether he thought independence had changed him and his
fellow-Slovaks, Mr Kovac lamented that the old way of thinking, in which the
state promised to take care of everything, still predominated. It even
helped to ensure Mr Meciar's victory in the election. 'People still think
some bright new future will come out of that kind of thinking. But such a
thing does not exist any more,' he says.
