FT  15 DEC 94 / Survey of Arab Banking (10): A rush back to Palestine -
Jordanian banks clamour to re-open branches
For the Palestinians, one tangible sign of progress in the Middle East peace
process is the return of Arab banking to the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Before the historic peace agreement, signed in September 1993 between the
Palestine Liberation Organisation and Israel, most Palestinians kept their
savings under the mattress and the only credit available came from the UN
Relief &amp; Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
After the 1967 war, nearly all the Arab banks operating in the occupied
territories moved out. Likewise, during the heady days of the intifada, most
Israeli banks which ventured into Palestinian territory also closed down. As
a result, Arab banking activity was limited to the odd branch of the Bank of
Palestine in Gaza and Jordan's Cairo Amman Bank which opened in the West
Bank in 1987.
Since the peace agreement all this has changed. Jordanian banks are
clamouring to re-open branches in the West Bank and the Palestinian
authorities have big ideas such as printing their own money and setting up a
capital market for their nascent state.
Six Jordanian banks - Jordan National Bank, Arab Bank, Jordan Gulf Bank, ANZ
Grindlays, Arab Land Bank, and the British Bank of the Middle East - have so
far re-opened branches and more are planned for next year. Other Palestinian
institutions are also in the pipeline.
Under the present arrangements, Jordan's central bank is responsible for
banking regulations in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. However, the Bank of
Israel and the Palestine National Authority are also involved in licensing
and monitoring of the financial institutions, and a Palestinian Monetary
Authority is planned for the new year.
This confusing web of regulators, along with the free existence of several
currencies, are among the prime concerns of bankers on the ground.
'It's a very difficult environment. Not only are their huge risks in
offering loans in different currencies, but the regulations are a big
headache,' explains one banker.
Operational difficulties aside, most bankers are salivating at the prospect
of an investment-led economic boom which has been forecast for the
territories if and when the Dollars 2.4bn worth of aid funding which has
been committed over five years materialises. Taken against the World Bank's
estimates of GDP for the West Bank and Gaza Strip of between Dollars
2.5-Dollars 2.75bn, it is obvious that the huge capital inflows involved
will be a great boost to the services sector.
Arguments are still raging, however, between donor countries, the World
Bank, and the Palestinians over who will handle the distribution of aid. The
two main Palestinian institutions involved are the Palestinian Economic
Council for Reconstruction and Development (Pecdar) and the finance
ministry, although individual donors have insisted on monitoring their
contributions closely.
Despite the problems and uncertainties surrounding the final outcome of a
Palestinian/Israeli settlement, bankers are convinced they will have a big
role to play - 'the secret is to get in early and develop at the pace of
things on the ground. Sure, it's frustrating, but in the end it should be
very lucrative,' explains a Jordanian banker who plans to open the first
Islamic bank in the Gaza Strip in the new year.
