FT  29 NOV 94 / Survey of Bristol (1): City in search of a higher status -
Bristol has realised that it must take action if it is to improve its
position in the league table of British cities
Bristol is a city in search of a new role. It is the economic hub of
south-west England and in the top 10 of UK cities in population. But two
centuries ago, it was the second city in England. For generations, it
complacently lost ground in terms of status.
The recession of the early 1990s caused attitudes to change. During the
1980s, Bristol and the surrounding county of Avon benefited from business
relocations from south-east England and a rapid growth in the financial
services industry. But the recession not only curbed that growth but
coincided with the impact of the peace dividend on the defence and aerospace
industries, an important part of the local economy. Only last week, another
550 redundancies were announced at British Aerospace's plant at Filton,
north Bristol.
In consequence, the city has realised it must take action, if it is not to
slip further down the league table of UK cities. There is a belated
awareness that it has not fulfilled its potential.
That it has greater potential is undoubted. Mr Brian Leonard, director of
the Government Office for the South West, one of England's new integrated
regional offices, says: 'It should be a top-flight national and European
city. There is absolutely no reason why it can't be those things, because of
its strengths - the strengths are enormous.'
These include its proximity to the M4 and M5 motorway network, the existing
Severn bridge to Wales and the second crossing, due to open in 1996. There
are main-line railway links and a thriving port, although the local road
system is inadequate. The maritime and trading history - the Society of
Merchant Venturers, founded in 1552, is still influential - gave the city
six miles of quayside. There are handsome Georgian and Victorian buildings,
even if the centre is despoiled by unsightly post-war blocks. And the county
includes the world heritage city of Bath.
For employers, Bristol and Avon offer a high standard of education with
three universities and a skilled workforce, especially in engineering and
financial services. The west of England, according to an analysis by Coopers
&amp; Lybrand, the accountancy firm, is the largest UK regional centre for
financial services in terms of employment. A survey this year of 500
executives, carried out for Management Today magazine and Black Horse
Relocation Services, showed Bristol was the most popular choice for
relocation.
The recession, however, showed up the weaknesses and caused Bristol to
rethink its role. Perhaps because it offers an agreeable way of life, it is
not a dynamic city - the only sense of urgency is at 5pm when people start
heading for home. It lacks other qualities which make a great city. Its
shopping is outclassed by Bath and although it is seen as relatively
prosperous, it has been regarded as a city riven by factionalism.
The business community viewed the Labour-led city council as unwelcoming and
obstructive. Partly in consequence, most recent development has taken place
to the north of the city, in another local authority area. South Bristol, in
particular, has been left with intransigent economic and social problems.
There are other pockets of deprivation and many homeless people.
Government showed its disdain for the city council by imposing a development
corporation in 1989 and rejecting two bids for City Challenge grants. Last
year, the city failed to win European Objective 2 funding for areas in
industrial decline.
The council, under local government reorganisation, will benefit by
regaining unitary status with the intended abolition of Avon county council
in 1996. But the government has not accepted the argument - which is
supported by business groups - that the city should embrace more of the
conurbation.
Avon council, which never won popularity, is resigned to its fate, but the
city council has undergone a conversion in its attitude to the private
sector. 'There has been a sea-change here,' commented one senior officer.
The change began with the sale of the port in 1991 and has been further
encouraged by a new chief planning officer, Ms Diana Kershaw, and chief
executive, Ms Lucy de Groot, who was appointed in March.
There is, Ms de Groot says, 'a very genuine spirit of active partnership.
There are real players to work with - we have a very good relationship with
Bristol Chamber of Commerce and Initiative (the Chamber has merged with a
business ginger group, the Bristol Initiative).
'What's happened in the last year is a recognition that there are problems
which cannot be solved by individual interests doing their own thing, or
waiting for the next cycle of the economy.'
Mr Chris Curtis, director of the south-west Confederation of British
Industry, comments: 'We see at last local authorities realising that
planning and land-use policies have a direct bearing on economic growth  -
at last, that is realised in Bristol.'
Part of the Government Office's role is to ensure the south-west's case is
given a fair hearing in Whitehall, which appears responsive to the evidence
of changed attitudes in Bristol. This month Pounds 6.2m was granted to
improve a deprived estate in Hartcliffe.
The city now has a sponsoring minister - Lord Astor, a national heritage
minister - as a direct link with government.
The most significant outcome of the spirit of co-operation is the Western
Development Partnership, a public and private sector forum set up last year
to co-ordinate economic strategies in Avon and promote the sub-region.
The partnership, together with similar bodies in the four neighbouring
counties, has convinced the Department of Trade and Industry to provide
Pounds 100,000 initial funding for an umbrella agency to attract inward
investment to the west of England.
Within Bristol, another partnership is the Harbourside project for what
should be the city's best waterfront site at Canon's Marsh. Typically, it
had been allowed to decay for decades, apart from the notable recent arrival
of Lloyds Bank retail headquarters.
The council is promoting Harbourside, with other landowners and the chamber
of commerce, as 'the single most significant development in Bristol in the
past 40 years'.
The more positive attitude comes as the local economy shows some resurgence.
Unemployment in the city's travel-to-work area has fallen to 8.1 per cent.
The latest quarterly survey by the chamber of commerce showed 76 per cent of
manufacturing companies and 72 per cent of service companies reported
improvements in turnover, although fewer than 40 per cent were operating at
full capacity.
'Undoubtedly there is a recovery taking place,' says Mr Curtis. 'But the
recovery is not spread evenly - it is only companies with a particular
market position which are doing well, the others are static. Investment is
certainly improving, but employment in manufacturing is continuing to
decrease.'
Mr Donald Merrylees, director of the Bristol and Western Engineering
Manufacturers Association, says: 'Things are looking better - the majority
of businesses are busier than two or three years ago. But there aren't long
order books and margins are still fairly tight.'
Uncertainty about the recovery is reflected in the city's lack of clarity
about its future. Manufacturing has become much less important than the
service sector but, says Ms de Groot: 'It can't just be a professional city
 -there have to be things for the professionals to be doing.'
Mr Leonard comments: 'Bristol can set its sights high - but it has to
mobilise to be successful and that's not easy.' It needs, he believes, to
look for allies and learn from the tactics adopted by other cities and
regions.
One new tactic is the Bristol Regeneration Partnership, formed by the public
and private sectors to bid for project funding from the government's single
regeneration budget. Its first objective is 'to promote Bristol's image as a
vibrant European regional capital'.
The city may not have that image yet, but at least it has the ambition.
