FT  16 SEP 94 / Arts: The Hostage - Theatre
Just as we all were hoping that poor Ireland might find a way out of its
troubles, along comes the Royal Shakespeare Company and disturbs the peace
with Michael Bogdanov's maladroit new production of Brendan Behan's awkward
farcico-serio-weirdo 1958 IRA play The Hostage. Bogdanov and Behan is a
marriage made in Hell anyway; for heaven's sake everyone make sure Ian
Paisley goes nowhere near the Barbican for the next few months.
And, by the way, don't you loathe the notion of 'topical' revivals? You can
just see how some grim spark around the RSC at the time of the Downing
Street Declaration must have thought 'Oh goody] - now we can revive Behan's
flawed old Hostage - OK, it's flawed, but it'll be relevant.'
We sit for the worse part of three hours in the Barbican, looking at a
Dublin brothel that IRA activists take over with their 18-year-old British
soldier hostage. The non-IRA characters sit around, they entertain a motley
crew of customers, they drink, they sing songs, they waffle on about
religion and the British and the troubles, they even dance. The IRA guys are
as feckless as everyone else, and they leave their hostage alive just long
enough for him to form an attachment to an 18-year-old girl called Teresa.
All of which is meant to set us reflecting about the terrible futility of
the troubles, and the topicality of a 1958 play.
Not, however, in my case; I just sit and fume about the guys who waste my
time with a clumsy revival of a clumsy text of a minor and imperfect play.
Behan wrote more than one version of The Hostage; it looks as if Bogdanov
and the RSC chose the least pithy. Bogdanov has made the Dublin
boarding-house-cum-brothel as deranged a place as he can, and has encouraged
some (but not all) the cast to perform it all as if urging us not to believe
that this house might be real or that these Irish characters are worthy of
being taken seriously for a moment.
Some of this farce potential is there in Behan's play, to be sure. But Behan
did not imagine that his Dublin tenement might be tipped forwards and
sideways by 30 degrees, as by Kendra Ullyart's decor here. You take one look
as this skew-whiff set and you feel seasick before the action starts.
You feel a whole lot more seasick as you try to piece together the life of
this boarding-house, in which characters keep popping in and out of nine
different doorways like rabbits. There is the transvestite navvy Rio Rita
and his black boxer boyfriend Princess Grace, the whore Colette and her
drunken client (a Russian sailor who travels bisexually round half the cast,
seldom exiting with the same person twice, and who then turns out to be an
undercover agent . . . ). Not to mention the musicians who appear
sporadically.
Slightly more important are the kilted old Anglo-Irish (but anti-British)
Monsewer, with his Gaelic (terrible) and his bagpipes (worse); and the crazy
religious spinster Miss Gilchrist. Central are Pat, the caretaker and an
ageing IRA fighter, and his consort Meg; and the skivvy Teresa.
There are some excellent performances: notably from Dermot Crowley and
Dearbhla Molloy as weary Pat and brassy Meg. 'Go on, abuse me,' he tells
her, 'your own husband, that took you off the streets on a Sunday morning
when there wasn't a pub open in the city.' You want to see actors like this
in a production that makes a stage world real; it is too bad of Bogdanov to
waste their time as well as ours. Alison McKenna is touching as Teresa, and
John Woodvine makes the eccentric Monsewer amusing if not convincing.
Of the actors who encourage one not to trust the play, the worst is Jenny
Quayle as Miss Gilchrist. As in Bogdanov's (generally otherwise hilarious)
RSC version of Goldoni's The Venetian Twins, she overdoes every actorly
touch, with special vocal effects in mid-sentence. (The way her voice dips
to add a louche connotation to 'so much more satisfactory than medical
students' is an object lesson in bad theatrical camp.) But she is the
actress most perfectly in tune with Bogdanov's messy and half-surreal
account of this sprawling version of a nutty play.
In my review of the Birmingham Rep Tempest, I inadvertently cited Andy
Hockley as playing both Stephano and Caliban. The latter role was in fact
played by Richard McCabe. My apologies to both.
In RSC repertory at the Barbican
