FT  07 OCT 94 / EU enlargement threat emerges
Plans to bring Austria, Sweden, Finland and Norway into the European Union
in January could be dashed by a byzantine intra-EU struggle. The difficulty
has emerged only days after the Union drew up a road map for the integration
of six east and central European states.
The root cause of the squabble is Italy, where Mr Silvio Berlusconi's
government has refused to ratify the EU budget increase planned for next
year until its partners retroactively condone Italy's cheating on EU milk
quotas.
The enlargement is affected because Spain will not ratify the EU expansion
from 12 to 16 members unless the decision to raise the Union's revenue
ceiling, reached by the December 1992 Edinburgh summit, is legally secure.
The Edinburgh decision provides the extra money for EU structural aid and
'cohesion' spending in poorer member states, a main beneficiary of which is
Spain. Unless all 12 parliaments ratify the extra money, Spain's endorsement
of enlargement to the Union's north is 'out of the question', said a Spanish
official. He said the decision had all but been taken by Madrid. 'This is a
real problem,' said an EU official after foreign ministers again failed to
resolve the Italian milk wrangle in Luxembourg this week. Finance ministers
will make another attempt on Monday.
There are growing fears in Brussels that the squabble could exacerbate
anti-EU sentiment in Finland, Sweden and Norway - due to hold referendums on
entry to the Union on October 16, November 13, and November 28 respectively
 -as well as more general north-south antipathy within Europe.
Any delay in EU ratification of the new entrants, moreover, could unravel
the financial and agriculture deals the Twelve struck with them, according
to a leading EU negotiator in this spring's enlargement talks.
Italy has been fighting the milk issue since it threatened to block the
landmark reform of the common agricultural policy in May 1992. It backed
down then but has brought the issue to successive EU summits.
Rome had agreed to cut its excess milk output in exchange for a quota
increase amounting to a third of the illicit surplus. This spring, Brussels
said Italy had not cut enough, but the incoming Berlusconi government then
produced new figures claiming its output had been overestimated.
Germany, the UK, Netherlands and Denmark have resisted pressure to wipe out
most of the fine on Italy's excess production. But these four states are
also the greatest enthusiasts for enlargement. Spain's threat therefore
increases the probability that a means will be found to buy Italy off.
