FT  28 FEB 94 / Equity Markets: Big sell-off in gilts casts a shadow -
London
The equity market was certainly taught a sharp lesson on Thursday; the only
question left open was just what was the lesson and who was doing the
teaching. The gilt-edged market, falling heavily in the European-wide
sell-off which reflected US worries over the next move by the Federal
Reserve, was clearly behind the 2.2 per cent drop in London share prices.
Yet many equity strategists flatly rejected fears that interest rates were
about to rise in Europe.
'Central banks, and that includes the Bank of England, are not about to
abort the economic recovery by pushing rates higher,' summed up the views of
a number of London-based trading houses. Salomon International hastened to
assure clients that much the same argument applied to the Federal Reserve,
which it believes is also more concerned to foster recovery in the US than
to curb it.
London's largest institutional broker was urging investors to buy the London
stock market on Thursday, even as the Footsie Index was plunging. And retail
business in equities on Thursday, worth Pounds 1.7bn, was by no means at
panic levels.
Britain's largest institutional broking house was urging clients to buy UK
equities, on the simple premise that they were a lot cheaper than on the day
before.
The lesson was that, since Christmas, equities have been focusing too
strongly on one factor - the chances of another base rate cut. And that
lesson was delivered from the derivatives market, which reinforced their
power by driving share prices mercilessly downwards for a change. In
contrast, with the relatively mild selling in equities, both stock index
futures and traded options saw heavy trading.
The London market is now almost 8 per cent off from the peak reached a few
weeks ago and the Footsie charts indicate an uncomfortable absence of
support levels. With the Federal Reserve still expected to tweak rates
higher again soon, stock markets have every reason to remain extremely
cautious.
One other point emerged last week. Optimists hoping that improving company
results will take over from interest rate hopes as the motor driving the
market may need to think again. The response to trading news from ICI,
National Westminster Bank and British Aerospace underlined that good profits
are not necessarily enough. The market reacted sharply when NatWest produced
profits at the lower end of expectations and ICI's unflattering remarks on
current trading outweighed other factors when its figures were announced.
This was a second reason for fearing the stock market was heading for a
fall, even before the US bond markets decided to take a hand. The banking
and financial sectors, which led the charge both before and after Christmas,
are paying dearly.
Friday's rally in share prices owed much to traditional end of account
influences, with the falls of the previous day discouraging investors from
rolling positions over to the new trading period.
