FT  24 MAR 94 / Moscow committed to tough budget regime by IMF
International Monetary Fund assistance to the Russian government will commit
Moscow to tough budget discipline that could be difficult for the government
to maintain.
The IMF, which expects to release a Dollars 1.5bn loan soon, is banking on
the ability of Mr Victor Chernomyrdin, the Russian prime minister, who has
impressed IMF officials, but who will be under extreme political pressure in
keeping Moscow's side of the bargain.
However, Mr Michel Camdessus, IMF director-general, reflected the Fund
team's recognition that the Russian government is already running a very
tight monetary policy, with real interest rates now standing at about 10 per
cent a month.
The commitments made by the government to obtain the second tranche of the
Dollars 3bn systemic transformation facility, to assist Russia in
restructuring its economy include:
Bringing down the monthly rate of inflation, presently at 10 per cent, to 7
per cent a month by December 1994.
introducing new taxes and improving tax collection.
Ensuring that all extra spending or loss of revenue will be compensated by
cuts in agreed spending programmes.
These commitments, coupled with the present tight monetary policy, mean that
the government has exceptional control over the economy. Industrial
production fell 24 per last month, compared to a year earlier, greatly
increasing political tension and fears of political upheaval.
However, Mr Camdessus said privately that he was extremely impressed by the
turnround in the central bank, whose officials he thought at least as
pro-reform as those in the more conventionally radical ministry of finance.
He managed to strike a warm acquaintance with Mr Victor Gerashchenko, the
bank head, who said after the signing of the agreement, 'allow me to give
you the congratulations of the world's worst central banker'.
This self deprecation was a reference to a description of him by Professor
Jeffrey Sachs, the former adviser to Russian ministers. Professor Sachs last
night said he was glad that the 'IMF has moved at last, but this is the last
moment to assist reforms'.
Monetarist swerve wins over IMF, Page 2
