FT  09 NOV 94 / Survey of Bolivia (27): Ambitious government plan - The
environment / Raymond Colitt examines forestry issues
For centuries, Bolivia's natural resources have been exploited in a
free-for-all manner - usually lacking any environmental concern. Today, the
economy is still heavily resource dependent and excessive environmental
degradation is common.
The government, in an ambitious plan developed by the new Ministry of
Sustainable Development and Environment, is attempting to introduce the
sustainable or rational use of natural resources without sacrificing
economic growth.
The challenges are daunting. Extreme poverty, powerful agro-industrial
enterprises and a general ignorance of environmental issues are the
principal causes of Bolivia's ecological problem.
The question is, will the government have the resources and political power
to enforce its scheme?
On the winding road from Santa Cruz in eastern Bolivia, trucks head westward
loaded with enormous trunks of tropical timber, winding their way up the
Andean slopes. These shipments, usually made up of mahogany from Bolivia's
vast Amazon rain forest, are destined for export. 'Forests cover 50 per cent
of Bolivia's territory, providing the woodworking sector with an immense
natural resource. . .' reads an investment brochure for Bolivia. Indeed, the
wood industry, which increases the country's income for each tree felled, is
growing steadily. But manufactured wood products, such as doors, make up
only only a small proportion of the income from exports: Dollars 7.2m of the
Dollars 52m total wood exports last year.
Mr Juan Carlos Quiroga, secretary of natural resources, says: 'Brazil
extracts the same amount of mahogany as Bolivia does, but by processing it
they earn Dollars 200m instead of Dollars 45m like we do.'
What makes Bolivia's wood industry 'unsustainable', however, is that
virtually none of the wood exported today comes from reforested areas, so
that the country's stock of forest simply dwindles until it disappears. In
addition, says Mr Gonzalo Flores of the forest conservation programme
Probona, 'companies evade paying the proper taxes and have management plans
rubber-stamped by corrupt officials.
A legislative proposal presently before congress is to institute a 40-year
concession on forested areas in exchange for annual fees per hectare of
between seventy cents and Dollars 1.30, replacing the present tax per square
foot of lumber, which was easily evaded. Management plans requiring a more
reasonable extraction of timber would be reviewed by international
consultants and approved by a high-level ministerial council. The idea is
that the concession would be revoked if timber companies exploited the area
irrationally.
Wood industry leaders are sceptical about the new law. Mr Carlos Miguel
Gagliardi, general manager of the industrial wood company Cimal, says: 'the
per hectare tax will drive up our cost because now we have to conduct
expensive inventory studies to be sure of the amount of marketable timber.'
Mr Cristobal Roda, whose family made its fortune in wood extraction, says he
realises the need for serious forestry management. 'We have to think of the
future because my factory and our people's jobs are at stake.' Yet few wood
companies have long-term investments. 'The majority operate only with a
skidder, a caterpillar and a saw mill,' says Mr Gagliardi.
'Our intention is to get these companies to think of long-term strategies
rather than just short-term profits,' says Mr Juan Carlos Quiroga.
The problem, reply industry representatives, is that so far government
policies have not been very consistent. Neither does the proposed idea of
concessions promote reforestation, they say. 'There won't be much interest
in reforestation if we can't own the land,' says Mr Roda.
