FT  15 DEC 94 / Amtrak axes 5,500 jobs in bid to cut projected Dollars 200m
deficit: Troubled US train operator slashes services as ticket sales fall
Amtrak, the US public sector train operator, is cutting about 5,500 jobs and
shutting down 21 per cent of its passenger service in an effort to eliminate
a projected Dollars 200m deficit this fiscal year.
Amtrak said most of the cuts would be in the frequency of train services,
but some routes would be eliminated, including services between Chicago and
Milwaukee, Chicago and Grand Rapids and San Jose to Sacramento and
Roseville, California.
Mr Thomas Downs, Amtrak president, said the system could no longer afford to
maintain its service to 540 cities across the US as a result of a rising
deficit and shrinking ticket sales.
Amtrak admitted earlier this year that it was losing Dollars 33 on every
ticket sold.
Its efficiency record has deteriorated and last year saw the worst accident
in the network's history when 47 people died in a crash on the Los Angeles
to Miami route.
Amtrak lost Dollars 76.2m in fiscal 1994, the fifth straight year it has
been in the red. Passenger numbers fell about 300,000 from the year before.
The rail system has always depended heavily on federal subsidies, this year
worth Dollars 952m.
The cuts announced yesterday are expected to save Dollars 173m in the
current fiscal year, and more than Dollars 360m in 1996 and annually
thereafter.
In addition to the three routes being scrapped, other services will be cut
back, including trains from St Louis to Kansas City, Birmingham to Mobile,
Alabama, and New York to Montreal.
Amtrak, which operates its services on track owned by the private sector,
said it was planning further cuts in the frequency of services, which it
will announce later.
Mr Downs said: 'In the past we have tried to be every place all the time.'
But 'rail passenger services can't afford that anymore . . . in a rapidly
changing transportation environment'.
Decisions on what services to cut and reduce were made 'strictly on what
made economic sense', he said.
