FT  02 AUG 94 / Portillo call for cuts may test unity of government
Mr John Major's cabinet was yesterday threatened by a serious split over
public spending plans after Mr Michael Portillo, the employment secretary,
called for a sharp reduction in state support for industry.
Mr Portillo's call, which came in a leaked letter to Mr Michael Heseltine,
the trade and industry secretary, was an early sign of the difficulties the
government could face in sticking to its tough spending targets in this
year's Budget.
But it also threatened to shake the uneasy truce between the left and right
wings of the Conservative party less than two weeks after Mr Major's cabinet
reshuffle.
Mr Portillo yesterday stood by the letter which he wrote to Mr Heseltine
last month in his former job as chief secretary to the Treasury.
In the letter, Mr Portillo berated Mr Heseltine for failing to support
policies to cut taxation and spending. He pressed the trade and industry
secretary to accept drastic cuts in a large number of DTI programmes,
including regional assistance grants, all support for shipbuilding and all
backing for an independent UK space programme.
Mr Heseltine's response to the letter is not known. However, he is known to
see a positive role for properly directed support for industry.
Treasury officials were yesterday anxious to play down any disagreement,
saying that discussion of these proposals was at an early stage and might
not form part of the forthcoming Budget.
Rightwing Tory MPs were confident that Mr Jonathan Aitken, the new chief
secretary, would take as hard a line as Mr Portillo. Mr Aitken has come to
the job with strong rightwing credentials and he masterminded many recent
cuts in the defence budget.
Mr Robin Cook, Labour's shadow trade and industry secretary, was concerned
the DTI's budget could be cut in this way.
'I am alarmed that any government minister could write a letter so dripping
in political dogma and so lacking in common sense,' he said. 'Britain
already invests less per head than any other European country in support for
industry.'
The Confederation of British Industry said while every element of government
spending should be reviewed the return on some measures of government
support for industry far exceeded the amounts of money involved.
However, Mr Tim Melville-Ross, on his first day as director-general of the
Institute of Directors, said it was right that all departments should make a
contribution to the fundamental review of public expenditure.
'In a situation in which markets work, there would be no need for government
intervention in industry or the regions,' he said.
Mr Portillo refused to elaborate any further on the contents of the letter,
saying he did not comment on leaks. 'Discussions between spending
departments and the Treasury do not imply decisions of government but a
healthy and appropriate debate about the proper role of government,' he
said. But there were signs the leak could become a political issue after the
Treasury launched an inquiry into how the letter became public.
Treasury axe, Page 7
Editorial Comment, Page 15
