FT  26 JUL 94 / Rare moment of sun for Christopher
Mr Warren Christopher has not enjoyed many unquestioned hours in the sun
since he became secretary of state in the Clinton administration 18 months
ago.
But yesterday's Israeli-Jordanian summit in Washington offered him such a
moment, for there is no foreign policy issue to which he has devoted such
unremitting attention as the various Middle East peace processes.
He has conducted three shuttle missions to the region already this year and
plans a fourth in the second week of next month. He has Israel and Syria
engaged in indirect peace negotiations. Even when apparently, if
temporarily, bypassed - it was the secret Norwegian channel which got Israel
and the Palestine Liberation Organisation talking - he and Mr Dennis Ross,
his able Middle East assistant, have always been around to nudge the process
further.
Middle East policies have long carried great weight for US secretaries of
state, perhaps exceeded only by relations with the former Soviet Union. It
was Mr James Baker in the Bush administration, who brought governments from
the region together in Madrid in 1991 after the Gulf War. The Camp David
accords rank high in the achievements of President Jimmy Carter and Cyrus
Vance. Henry Kissinger's shuttle diplomacy in the 1970s involved
negotiations as arduous and complex as Mr Christopher's.
Pilloried though he has frequently been on any number of foreign policy
issues, and with even his tenure the subject of endless speculation, nobody
has ever questioned Mr Christopher's dogged determination and patience,
qualities that seem to pay particular dividends in the frequently
incremental progress made in the Middle East.
Other volatile crises of the moment - Haiti, Bosnia, Somalia, Rwanda, even
relations with Russia - have often evolved at such speed that Mr Christopher
has not always given the impression of being on top of them.
The constant demand of his critics that he enunciate an over-arching vision
of US foreign policy also does not exactly play to his strengths. The recent
shift of Mr David Gergen, the spinmeister extraordinaire, from the White
House to the State Department reflected recognition of this deficiency.
In a collegial - and sometimes reactive - administration like President
Clinton's, Mr Christopher and a State Department in which personnel changes
at the upper levels have been constant, have not necessarily emerged as the
dominant players in many of these exigencies. The ball on Haiti, for
example, has been carried more by the National Security Council, the
Pentagon and the Central Intelligence Agency than by the secretary of state.
But the Middle East has always been different, for both strategic and
personal reasons. In the long Iranian hostage crisis of 1979-81, it was Mr
Christopher, then deputy secretary of state, who spent long weeks
negotiating in Algeria and elsewhere.
His familiarity with both the players and shifting policies of the region
has never been doubted. But, leaving nothing to chance, it was he who
persuaded Mr Ross last year to stay on in the new administration to provide
continuity.
Mr Clinton gave him his due yesterday on the White House lawns, saying that
nobody had done more than Mr Christopher to bring King Hussein and Mr
Yitzhak Rabin together. The secretary of state, his eyes discreetly hidden
by dark classes, allowed a small smile to lighten up his well-lined face.
