FT  27 APR 94 / Arts: Real drama from the Maly - Theatre
The particular pleasure of the Maly Drama Theatre's current tour of Britain
is the opportunity it affords to watch this exceptional ensemble in one play
after another. A larger impression - it is too dark to be simply called a
pleasure - is the way in which all the plays reveal the tragic history of
Russia in terms of (often comic) human detail.
Stars in the Morning Sky and the two-part Brothers and Sisters - which other
parts of Britain have seen before, but which Manchester is seeing for the
first time - catch two different Russian communities at two different stages
in this century's history. In Stars four Muscovite prostitutes are
temporarily exiled to a barracks during the 1980 Moscow Olympics (so that
foreign visitors will not note such scum); Brothers and Sisters is about a
northern Russian village in the immediate postwar era. The lighting of the
Olympic flame thrills the prostitutes, but passes them by, just as the end
of the 1939-45 war seems like the dawn of a new era to the villagers of
Brothers and Sisters, until they find that the new era is just as tough and
more hopeless.
The great achievement of these plays is, however, not that they fill you
with gloom about Russia, but that they catch so broad a range of humanity.
Not one of the prostitutes in Stars is a 'type'. Each is distinct, with her
own peculiarities, and a nervous system brilliantly revealed. Strangest and
most forlorn is Maria (Anzhelina Nevolina), who seems at last to have found
love with Nikolai but who is doomed by her own past. Even as she nestles in
his lap, and tells him 'Only you treat me as if I am human', she wriggles
madly as if half-seeking escape. Most glamorous is Lora (Tatiana
Rasskozova), often speaking of her supposed career as a trapeze artist and
bearing herself like a ballerina. She finds (the play's greatest irony)
tenderness with Alexander, a patient from a mental asylum.
The dramatis personae of Brothers and Sisters is larger - 31 actors (men and
women; old people, young adults and children) - and the action takes them
through several years. We see two men talking about women; all the women in
the village talking about men; several different households; love-affairs
that last and others that evaporate. And we see the whole community, based
around the Kolkhoz (collective farm), coping with successive issues of moral
outrage, severe taxation, wedding celebrations, seasonal festivals, chronic
poverty. At the end you are sad simply because you want to know more of
these people. (A third play, House, to be seen in Glasgow and Newcastle,
covers the same characters 20 years later.)
There are several features of stagecraft (some of which I noted two weeks
ago apropos of The Cherry Orchard) that constitute a Maly house style. Best
of all, scenic economy. The lighting - coming from above, against a black
backdrop - works far better in these plays than in Chekhov. I still find
that too much of the action is symmetrical, and that too many speeches are
delivered on the centre-line of the stage facing into the audience, though
only in Chekhov do these really mar the play.
But I am astonished at the perfect naturalness with which this stage
ensemble interacts. The first act of Brothers and Sisters ends with a huge
long party that I did not want to end. One woman is shocked when another
woman flirts with her husband, but when people try to make her kiss her own
husband in public she is wooden. Everyone congratulates the young Mikhail,
returned from the war, and makes him drunk; but his mother suddenly wails
out loud about the husband she has lost. Laughter, tears, tenderness,
resentment, joy, despair - all present, all brimful, all utterly real.
Touring to Glasgow, April 29-May 15; Newcastle, May 18-21; Nottingham, May
24-28
