FT  10 DEC 94 / Sport: The ups and downs of a 24-hour race - Skiing
It is high noon at the top of Ajax Mountain. Two at a time, the racers
launch themselves down Aspen's legendary peak, gradually building up speed
to 50mph or more down Spar Gulch.
A severe left-hand bend checks their speed at Kleenex Corner as they hurtle
past the portals of the Compromise Nine - the only working silver mine on an
American ski slope - and then they hurtle down Little Nell to the bottom of
the Silver Queen gondola.
They have travelled the best part of three miles. The vertical drop is
3,267ft. The fastest time is 2:26.27 minutes. In a conventional contest, the
race would be over. But this race is just beginning.
During the next 24 hours, the racers - 11 teams of two - will repeat this
desperate dash up to 50 times, skiing the equivalent of more than nine
Everests. They will use the 13-minute gondola ride back to the top to
recover body heat with blankets and hot water bottles, to eat, drink,
respond to the call of nature and even doze for a few precious moments until
their next headlong plunge down the race-track.
The Land Rover 24 Hours of Aspen is called 'the most brutal ski race on the
globe'. As the skiers from eight countries continued to hurtle down Ajax's
now floodlit slopes, I rode the Silver Queen with the British pair, Malcolm
Erskine, veteran of more than 100 downhills and third at Aspen two years
ago, and Bill Gaylord, recently retired from the British Olympic team after
racing at Lillehammer and Albertville.
Not being a racer, the best time I could manage was five minutes and I could
not think of anything particularly intelligent to say. But I felt I should
at least offer them a little moral support.
Gaylord seemed to be cheerful in spite of smashing both his skis in a fall
earlier, and Erskine was busy eating bananas. They leapt from the gondola
for their umpteenth lap, while I retired to the old-fashioned splendour of
the Jerome Hotel, from which one could watch Aspen's floodlit slopes.
By the time I stirred again at dawn, the amiable Erskine had crashed twice.
'Once at 3am, when I wrapped myself round a pylon, and again at 5am when I
fell at Kleenex Corner,' he said when I dived into their gondola again after
breakfast.
Unbeknown to any of us, Gaylord was suffering from quite seriously
frostbitten feet, which he only discovered after the race when he removed
his boots.
By now, the French and American men's teams had dropped out, leaving a dour
battle to avoid coming last between the British, the Germans and the
Argentines. The British pair somehow managed to draw ahead of the American
women's team, leaving Germany to finish last behind Argentina.
The Aspen men's team won the race from last year's champions, Canada. But in
the end one could only marvel at the extraordinary valour of all the racers.
Later, I was in Telluride for the Tournament of Champions, and I described
the event to Franz Klammer - just 41 years old and perhaps the bravest racer
of all time. He said: 'I just couldn't do it. My knees just couldn't take
it.' And Bill Johnson, the Olympic gold medallist in the downhill at
Sarajevo in 1984 agreed: 'I wouldn't last more than an hour.'
