FT  24 SEP 94 / Books: Judgment in the balance
PARALLEL THINKING by Edward de Bono Viking Pounds 16, 240 pages
Socrates has a great deal to answer for. Thanks to him, and to fellow
ancients Plato and Aristotle, the west has got stuck in an adversarial way
of thinking, in which creativity has been stifled and destructive criticism
has flourished.
In Parallel Thinking, Edward de Bono suggests that we put the last 2,500
years behind us and start looking at the world in a new way. No longer
should we be preoccupied with truth and falsity, definitions and judgments,
but we should think in terms of possibilities, laying before us a number of
parallel ideas, using them to design a way forward.
This is his boldest attempt yet to change the way our minds work. The deluge
of books from de Bono over the last 30 years has introduced the world to
lateral thinking, to water logic and to a large number of other thinking
techniques. This time he is doing something more radical: suggesting that we
throw out our entire thinking machinery and adopt his ways instead.
To take such a bold step, we are going to need some persuading. He tells us
that western thinking, which assumes conditions are stable, is increasingly
ill-equipped to deal with a changing world. He claims it encourages us to be
destructive and discriminatory in our habits and institutions (he just stops
short of making Socrates responsible for racism, but does blame him for the
pointlessly adversarial nature of the British parliamentary system). Western
thinking also makes us complacent, because we build everything around the
status quo; and arrogant, because we view the truth as absolute. These
tendencies mean we cannot accept that the whole system is flawed.
Instead, if we could only stop viewing events in terms of is/is not and
always/never and concentrate on sometimes/usually/maybe the world will open
up, and new ideas and initiatives will fall into our laps. De Bono is not so
unrealistic to assume that adults can make the transition easily or quickly.
He insists that all schools should teach these new ways of thinking to
children, that governments should set up special thinking departments, and
that the United Nations should even establish an Office of Creativity.
De Bono is right to point out the dangers of a system that relies
excessively on criticism. He is right that new ideas need encouragement,
they do not just happen. It may also be true that we are excessively
preoccupied with putting events into boxes, rather then viewing them from
all sides, and wondering what they lead to.
Yet he overstates his case. As ever with de Bono, the whole is produced with
breathtaking arrogance. The sub-title, 'From Socratic to de Bono Thinking',
gives a flavour of what is to follow. Every one of the footnotes refers to
his own works, and the text is written in a style of one that brooks no
opposition. This is made harder to swallow by the fact that parallel
thinking is meant to be about humility and alternatives.
There seems no reason to view the Socratic and 'de Bono' methods as rivals.
Imagine the chaos if for every minor thought we had to lay out all the
possibilities in parallel and design a way forward. For the vast majority of
our thoughts our accustomed machinery suits us well, making it possible to
get through the day at all. Certainly we should try to be less inflexible in
our judgment; but Socrates would hardly have had a problem with that.
