FT  23 FEB 94 / Scott challenges security moves
THE legal position of ministers who signed public interest immunity
certificates in the Matrix Churchill trial was challenged yesterday by Lord
Justice Scott.
The judge heading the arms-for-Iraq inquiry told Mr Malcolm Rifkind, defence
secretary, that disclosure of many of the Whitehall documents which PII
certificates were intended to protect from public scrutiny would have had
only a trivial impact on the efficient functioning of government.
Yesterday Mr Rifkind justified his decision to sign a PII certificate
because of a 'principle of confidentiality' which was 'applied by successive
governments for generations'.
Mr Rifkind, a lawyer, told the Scott inquiry: 'There have been some wild
allegations made (against the government) . . . I consider it extremely
offensive to suggest that any minister knowingly acted against the interests
of justice.'
Documents made available to the inquiry show that, after the collapse of the
Matrix Churchill trial, Ministry of Defence officials thought that the
system of PII certificates could be 'deficient'. They suggested that the use
of the certificates should be more restricted and not extend to a blanket
curb on confidential Whitehall documents.
Although the suggestion was not taken up by ministers Lord Justice Scott
indicated yesterday that he considered a reform of the system to be
necessary. He said: 'Why is it necessary to have a system that operates to
allow government not to disclose documents which are not damaging to the
public interest?'
Mr Rifkind agreed that disclosure of documents showing officials
implementing established government policy 'could not possibly' have a
detrimental effect on the public interest.
Mr Rifkind said he was duty-bound to rely on the 'principle of
confidentiality' and sign the PII certificate.
The inquiry also heard yesterday that Mr Jonathan Aitken, minister for
defence procurement, had desisted from presenting a PII certificate at the
Matrix Churchill trial because of a potential 'conflict of interest' between
his role as minister and his past involvement as a non-executive director of
the British Manufacture and Research Company which was linked to the Iraqi
supergun affair.
