FT  15 OCT 94 / UK Company News: Attwoods accuses Laidlaw of depressing
share price
Attwoods, the waste services group, yesterday accused its largest
shareholder of prejudicing the interests of other investors as it launched
its defence to the hostile Pounds 364m bid by US predator Browning-Ferris
Industries.
The company also announced a fall to Pounds 9.1m (Pounds 33.1m) in pre-tax
profits from continuing operations for the year to July 31. Sales improved
to Pounds 364m (Pounds 346m).
Profits were affected by substantially higher than expected exceptional
charges of Pounds 12.4m (Pounds 2m) for the settlement of litigation in the
US, write-downs and reorganisation costs.
The dividend is maintained at 5p with an unchanged final of 3.25p proposed.
Earnings fell from 8.96p to 1.8p per share.
Mr Ken Foreman, Attwoods' chief executive, said BFI's offer was a 'low-ball
bid' pitched at a price depressed by the 'increasingly desperate attempts'
of Laidlaw to sell its substantial stake.
Mr Foreman said Laidlaw's new management was under pressure from investors
to dispose of the stake before the end of the year. Attwoods exhorts
investors to 'recognise the action of a forced seller for what it is and
ignore it.'
Attwoods also sought to reject BFI's claims that its track record was worse
than that of its peers. Between 1984 and 1991, the company said, it had
achieved compounded annual growth of 25 per cent. Only between 1992 and
1994, had it been affected by adverse market conditions.
Trading was expected to improve substantially next year, Mr Foreman said,
with recovery beginning to feed through in the UK and US.
BFI dismissed Attwoods' promises of improvement next year as 'not
particularly credible. They promise every year things will turn up and every
year things turn down'.
Mr Greg Muldoon, BFI's development director, said Attwoods' results showed a
fourth quarter some 49 per cent lower than last year.
The market was also unenthusiastic about Attwoods' defence. 'They are trying
desperately to defend a situation which probably cannot be defended,' said
Mr Roger Hardman of Granville.
However, most analysts expected BFI would have to increase its offer of 109p
per ordinary share, representing about Dollars 8.59 per American Depositary
Receipt. With the shares in London at 115p, one analyst said the real
question now would be 'just how badly does BFI want this company?'
