FT  06 JUL 94 / World Trade News: ABB in China power deal
The German subsidiary of Asea Brown Boveri, the Swiss-Swedish engineering
group, yesterday signed letters of intent to start up six joint ventures to
build power plants and electric locomotives in China. The signing was one of
several at which Chinese officials put their names to a variety of deals
with 17 German companies worth Dollars 3.5bn (Pounds 2.28bn) during a week
long visit by Mr Li Peng, the Chinese premier.
Germany has become China's most important trading partner in the European
Union with trade in 1993 totalling DM23.4bn (Pounds 9.53bn), according to
the Asia committee of federation of German industry. German exports stood at
DM9.6bn, up 67 per cent on the year before, while imports rose 18 per cent
to DM13.7bn.
ABB said it would take several months to work out further aspects of the
joint ventures and it could not give any financial details.
Five joint ventures will build and refurbish powers stations with a
generating capacity 4,000MW, the biggest of which will be a 1,000MW combined
gas turbine power plant near Hong Kong. A sixth joint venture will
manufacture electric locomotives with the Zhuzhou Electric Locomotives Works
in Hunan province.
The company said it expected Chinese orders worth over DM1bn from China this
year.
Mr Gunter Rexrodt, the economics minister, said much could be done through
closer economic contacts to improve the human rights situation in China. 'We
achieved the same thing with the Soviet Union and other countries in the
former eastern bloc,' he said.
About two dozen parliamentary delegates from Chancellor Helmut Kohl's
Christian Democratic Union wrote protesting about the Chinese human rights
record and questions about what the Chinese will do about their political
prisoners have featured in many conversations between Mr Li and his German
hosts.
Klockner-Humboldt-Deutz, one of the world's leading makers of diesel
engines, signed a letter of intent to set up a joint venture with the China
First Automobile Group which plans to make around 100,000 engines by the
year 2002.
Klockner signed another two contracts worth DM40m to build two cement-making
plants.
BASF, the chemicals group, said it had signed a contract to build a plant
near Shanghai which will produce auxiliary products for textiles, part of
DM220m which is being invested by a Sino-German joint venture in which BASF
holds a 60 per cent stake.
KSB, the pump maker, said it closed a contract for a Dollars 22m joint
venture with the Shanghai Pump Works which will start work in April.
