FT  09 FEB 94 / Anglia Secure to focus on nursing home activities
Anglia Secure Homes is proposing a series of changes which will result in
its withdrawing from sheltered housing and concentrating on its nursing
homes activities.
The company also announced reduced pre-tax losses of Pounds 7.11m for the
year to September 30, against Pounds 15.5m. The improvement was achieved on
turnover of Pounds 14.1m (Pounds 17.5m). Losses per share came out at 22.2p
(46.9p).
The moves include the disposal of the sheltered housing business and its
associated debt, the acquisition of two companies in the contracted nursing
home sector, and the raising of Pounds 3.4m net through a subscription and
rights issue.
The shares were suspended at 12p yesterday while the changes take place.
The new company will be known as Care UK and be 60 per cent owned by Nash,
Sells &amp; Partners, a venture capital company.
Anglia is acquiring the outstanding 72.1 per cent holding in Haven
Healthcare from Nash for 172m shares and Community Health Services from Nash
and National Home Loans for 100m shares.
The new shares will trade on the USM. The existing 10p shares are being
split into 1p ordinaries and 9p deferred. The company also intends to reduce
the share capital and share premium accounts.
Anglia is also retaining its 50.1 per cent interest in Haven Services, its
joint venture with Commercial Union.
The sheltered housing activity was financed mainly by bank loans, which
amounted to Pounds 22.1m at September 30. The recession, high interest
rates, and provisions against the fall in property values have left the
group with a deficit on capital and reserves of Pounds 6.52m. The banks have
conditionally agreed to relieve the new company of the debts associated with
the housing business.
The company is offering 49.6m shares in a 3-for-2 rights issue at 4 1/4 p a
share. A further 47m shares are being offered for subscription at the same
price. The proceeds will fund a payment of Pounds 3.3m to the banks.
As shareholders are not able to take part in the subscription they are being
offered warrants on a 2-for-3 basis, with each warrant entitling holders to
buy a share at 4 1/2 p in the future. Nash is offering to buy the warrants
at 0.88p.
