FT  14 MAY 94 / How To Spend It: Dunhill joins Linley for the royal box -
Lucia van der Post on a joint enterprise which has produced some fine
containers
Alfred Dunhill, that most English of enterprises, has teamed up with Lord
Linley, that most entrepreneurial of royals, to produce a series of boxes -
most of them designed to be humidors - on quintessential English themes. If
the very notion of hours and hours of intricate effort devoted solely to
producing exquisite boxes seems strange, it is worth remembering that fine
wooden boxes, exquisitely wrought, minutely detailed, are part of an
old-established English tradition.
Lord Linley himself has long been intrigued by boxes and made his first one
 -a birthday present for his grandmother - when he was just 15. 'It was made
of English walnut and had secret mitre dove-tails. She uses it still - it
appears regularly at the end of meals when it is used to hand the cigars
around. So when Dunhill came to me and suggested that we embarked on a joint
enterprise it appealed to me at once.
'My company had already made jewellery boxes for private clients as well as
cabinets to hold spectacles, pens, watches and so I was delighted to explore
the possibility of producing decorative boxes for cigars.
'The team came up with the idea of using architectural themes from the
repertory of England's greatest architects - we had already explored
architectural motifs in some of our furniture but none of them are exact
renditions of any given period, more they aim to capture the flavour and the
style.'
Dunhill's brief was that it would provide the humidor expertise (Alfred
Dunhill started up as a supplier of accessories to the newly chic hobby of
motoring, but it eventually became best known for its tobacco business) and
David Linley's company would contribute the decorative container.
It might now seem politically incorrect to produce exquisite receptacles for
carcinogenic symbols of high living; but both Dunhill and Linley say that
all the boxes can be customised for other purposes - holding jewels
(coronets and tiaras?), stamp collections, pens or beads.
Two years on and the boxes are now ready. There are five designs (based
loosely on the architectural styles of Christopher Wren, Pugin, Inigo Jones,
William Kent and John Soane) and just 10 boxes of each design. They measure
14ins high, 10 1/2 ins wide and 10ins deep and, if used with the humidor
fitting (which is included in the price) hold 250 cigars. Each style,
though, has a much larger run of what Linley calls 'disciple' boxes - these
are smaller but in similar mood and are considerably cheaper.
They are exquisitely made but, and Lord Linley is adamant about this, they
are designed to be used. 'The lovely thing about wood is that it gets better
with age.'
Each is made by hand from mainly English woods such as walnut, oak and ash,
while ebony, satinwood and black sycamore have been used for the inlay.
Making the boxes involves intricate crafts such as marquetry, inlay and
wood-carving ('using wood to paint with', as Lord Linley puts it), all of
which is very labour intensive.
'We are beginning to see many people who want something designed and made
specifically for them and not for some abstract market' - that individuality
is what these boxes are all about.
Who, you might legitimately wonder, could possibly be prepared to pay Pounds
1,500 - the price of the smaller, disciple boxes - let alone the Pounds
9,500 or so that the larger boxes command?
The boxes are currently on a world tour, progressing at a hectic pace with
their royal designer (and his wife) accompanying them. Six have sold in New
York, three in Chicago. This week was San Francisco's chance. Next comes Los
Angeles and Hong Kong, while London must wait until Wednesday May 25 when
they go on sale at Dunhill at 30 Duke Street, St James's, London SW1.
