FT  24 MAY 94 / Yeltsin scraps curbs on energy exports
President Boris Yeltsin, seeking to revive economic reform, yesterday
scrapped quotas and licences for oil and gas exports from July 1 and offered
a three-year tax holiday to foreign investors in the manufacturing sector.
Six decrees issued by the Russian leader yesterday are an attempt to push
the government of Prime Minister Victor Chernomyrdin into resuming the more
active tempo of economic reform in evidence until last winter - in part by
not waiting for parliament to pass the relevant legislation.
In keeping with Mr Yeltsin's new spirit of 'national reconciliation',
however, the decrees blend well with the views of Mr Chernomyrdin and many
parliamentarians who have called for more measures to stimulate economic
growth and restore 'discipline' among state-owned enterprises.
The scrapping of quotas and licences for almost all exports means Russia has
finally heeded calls by domestic and foreign economists to lift antiquated
controls on its lucrative energy exports.
The quotas and licences have not only stimulated massive corruption but have
served as an indirect control on domestic energy prices by regulating
quantities available on domestic markets.
However, Mr Alexander Livshits, head of the president's group of economic
experts, forecast that this decree would not significantly increase
lucrative hard currency exports because export taxes remained high and
pipeline capacity restricted.
Nor was it clear last night how the decree's separate scrapping of all
exemptions on export taxes - with several exceptions cited in the decree
itself - would affect tax breaks promised but not yet granted to foreign oil
companies.
In an effort to stimulate economic growth and reduce tax evasion, Mr Yeltsin
instructed the government to submit to parliament by September 15
legislation lowering companies' overall tax burden by 10 to 20 per cent. He
also decreed a three-year exemption from profit tax for all manufacturing
ventures registered since January with at least 30 per cent foreign
ownership and Dollars 10m (Pounds 6.6m) investment - as long as they stay in
business for at least five years.
Another decree sought to restore genuine state control, including the power
to dismiss dishonest and incompetent directors, over enterprises
theoretically owned by the state but in reality free to do what they want.
Mr Livshits said a priority of this decree was to stem theft of state
property by directors of enterprises which could not be privatised and
therefore subjected to the scrutiny of private shareholders.
Professor Yevgeny Yasin, head of the president's analytical group, said a
list of 'several hundred' enterprises now being prepared would include
several defence plants, and inefficient factories which would be kept open
to prevent otherwise unacceptably big local job losses.
Finally, Mr Yeltsin issued new instructions attempting to reduce
enterprises' indebtedness to one another and the state treasury. For
instance, the decree allows the government to start bankruptcy proceedings
against companies which are more than three months late paying their taxes.
It also attempts to speed the introduction of a long-promised system of
promissory notes for inter-enterprise debt.
