FT  09 SEP 94 / World Trade News: Glasnost for ports in Estonia
The end of Soviet rule has given a new lease of life to Estonia's smaller
ports, most of which were closed by Moscow to ensure tight control of the
Baltic state's borders. Kunda, a small port 120km east of Tallinn shut down
in 1940, reopened last week, enabling cement to be shipped directly to
export markets in Germany, Belgium, the UK and West Africa.
The cement is produced by Soviet-era cement works within the harbour and was
mainly used domestically and transported by rail.
Kunda, originally founded as a port by Tsar Alexander I in 1805, is well
placed for trade with Scandinavia, Germany and the St Petersburg market, and
could be used for other goods, said Mr Jan Owren, managing director of Kunda
Nordic Cement - the Estonian joint-venture with American and Nordic
partners, which owns both the port and the cement works.
Exports are vital for the survival of the Kunda factory, as domestic
consumption has plummeted since independence in 1991. Exports accounted for
70 per cent of the 440,000 tonnes of cement and clinker produced last year.
In a test period since May this year, 70,000 tonnes of cement have been
shipped out of Kunda, which has a capacity to ship 500,000 tonnes annually.
In 1988 more than 70 per cent of the factory's 1.2m tonne output was used
within Estonia, much of it by the Soviet army.
The port was financed by Atlas-Nordic Cement, which has a 30.3 per cent
share in Kunda Nordic Cement, while the Estonian government has retained
49.9 per cent. The building materials industry is considered an important
sector for the country's economy.
Other shareholders include the International Finance Corporation, the
private lending arm of the World Bank; the Nordic Environmental Finance
Corporation; and the Finnfund.
The development of the port marks the first stage in a three year, Dollars
30m project to renovate the factory's Soviet-era machinery, increase
capacity (currently 200,000 tonnes annually per kiln), and drastically
reduce the dust pollution emitted by the three cement kilns.
'Our aim is to increase capacity by 30 per cent, raise production and make
it profitable,' Mr Owren said.
Reconstruction of the Kunda port foreshadows the Dollars 600m reconstruction
of the three big deep-water ports in Tallinn.
