FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (1): Small is beautiful - Liberated from
50 years of Soviet rule, Estonia, smallest of the Baltic states, is
revelling in its new-found freedom to rediscover its historic traditions and
adapt them to a modern, democratic way of life
Estonia is an encouraging place for those who argue that the dissolution of
the Soviet empire has released much frustrated energy which allows the world
to face the 21st century with guarded optimism.
In less than three years, a small group of youthful politicians, academics,
bankers and businessmen has managed to restore the liberties and customs of
a small nation, introduce market-based economic reforms and shift trade and
investment decisively towards the west in general and Scandinavia in
particular.
Taking advantage of Russia's internal turmoil after the failed August 1991
coup, Estonia, together with the other former Soviet Baltic states, promptly
declared independence and then moved with great speed and determination to
create a new constitution and a multi-party political system.
The central bank, headed by Mr Siim Kallas, who worked closely with Russian
reformers in the Gorbachev-era Supreme Soviet, reinforced economic reforms
by the introduction on June 20, 1992 of an independent national currency,
the Kroon. Its value is fully backed by the new state's steadily rising gold
and hard currency reserves.
Multi-party parliamentary and presidential elections in September 1992
allowed the formation of a broadly-based coalition government, headed by Mr
Mart Laar, the 33-year-old prime minister. His 'Fatherland Coalition' of
centre-right parties also secured the election of Mr Lennart Meri, a
distinguished historian and film-maker, as president of the restored
republic.
A top priority of the newly independent state was to form a 3,000-strong
armed border patrol force and a 2,000-strong national army backed by a
volunteer national reserve. The army is commanded by an Estonian-American
former US Army colonel and armed mainly with Israeli weapons following a
Dollars 47m arms deal.
Clearly, Estonians, after centuries of domination by Baltic Germans and
Swedes, and subjected to nearly 300 years of Russian hegemony in the eastern
Baltic, believe that strong fences make good neighbours.
Not everyone is amused. Estonia's reluctance to extend nationality rights to
former Soviet military personnel, and some other categories among the ethnic
Russians who now make up 29 per cent of the population, has attracted the
ire of Vladimir Zhirinovsky, the Russian chauvinist, and others.
To which Mrs Marju Lauristin, the minister of social affairs replies: 'Such
people are demanding for ethnic Russians in Estonia rights and privileges
which they cannot guarantee in Russia itself.'
Given that Estonia's main requirements are independence and stability,
however, Mrs Lauristin argues that it is in Estonia's own best interests to
see that its ethnic minorities feel at home in, and loyal to, the restored
state. Such expressions of enlightened self-interest are welcomed by many
Russians, especially those with family roots in Estonia, dating back to the
Czarist period and the younger, better-educated business people for whom
Estonia is an excellent place from which to do business with neighbouring
Russia.
One prerequisite for acquiring nationality is proof of minimal linguistic
language ability. The Council of Europe judged this a not unreasonable
request, given that ethnic Estonians, who make up 65 per cent of the
population, speak a distinctive language related to Finnish and Hungarian.
For most Estonians, full independence requires that the 2,500 Russian troops
who remain from a once 100,000-strong Soviet occupation army, leave by
August 31, 1994 - the deadline agreed with Moscow after months of difficult
talks conducted by Mr Juri Luik, a government high-flyer who has just
swapped the defence portfolio for the foreign affairs ministry. But in later
talks Moscow withdrew this promise despite strong pressure from western
governments.
Despite the second thoughts in Moscow, the Soviet withdrawal is virtually
complete. Only the nuclear training reactor remains to be dismantled at the
big Soviet-era naval and nuclear submarine training base at Paldiski on the
west coast. The huge military airfield at Tartu has been abandoned, as has
the nuclear fuel plant at Sillimae, all once staffed only by non-Baltic
Soviet citizens.
Only 1,000 special assault troops in a barracks, 500 metres from Toompea
castle, the pastel pink parliament building in the centre of the old town,
remain vaguely menacing, apart from the paratroop units stationed just
across the border in Russia's Vitebsk and Pskov military districts.
There is less progress, and less, insistence, on an outstanding territorial
claim. A swathe of territory recognised by Moscow as Estonian in perpetuity
by the 1920 Tartu Treaty remains outside the de facto border of the new
Estonian state. The actual frontier remains the old Soviet administrative
dividing line between the Russian and Estonian Soviet republics.
It will probably remain so for the foreseeable future. Moscow has signalled
its determination to keep the frontier where it is by building a big, modern
customs and frontier post at Ivangorod just across the river from the
largely Russian-speaking Estonian city of Narva on the western bank.
A similarly permanent-looking border post is currently being built by the
Russians on the south-eastern border where the main Riga-St Petersburg
highway crosses the Estonian line.
Already much of the reduced volume of trade which crosses the borders is
private, not inter-state. Estonia was tied to the Soviet Union for over 90
per cent of its trade, three years ago. Now Russia accounts for little over
20 per cent of a total which is now overwhelmingly orientated towards
western markets.
Finland has replaced Russia as the top trading partner. But all Estonia's
gas and much of its oil and raw materials still comes from Russia while 90
per cent of the traffic through Tallinn port is linked to the former Soviet
hinterland. St Petersburg, Russia's second city and the former imperial
capital, is partially lit by electricity from Estonia's oil-shale fired
power stations.
Estonians will never be able to ignore the giant on its doorstep. The trick
is working out a way of living more creatively and freely with it. After 50
years spent debating the merits of submitting to Soviet forces without
firing a shot in 1940, many Estonians are determined never again to suffer
the subjugation which followed the infamous Molotov-Ribbentrop pact on the
eve of the Second World War.
They see their future in the closest integration into western defence and
economic structures, starting somewhat reluctantly with half-way houses like
Nato's 'partnership for progress.'
But there is also a widely spread conviction running from President Meri
throughout the government and society that the future stability and
prosperity of Estonia and the other Baltic states hinges largely on the
degree to which the St Petersburg area can be integrated economically into
what could become one of the fastest-growing regions in 21st century Europe
 -the Baltic basin.
Asked to look ahead and describe the Estonia he expects to see by the turn
of the century, Mr Laar, the prime minister replies 'a young, modern
fast-developing country that looks to Europe, is part of Europe, but
maintains its own identity.'
That looks well within grasp, provided Russia abides by the rules of decent
international behaviour and honours the sovereignty of a small neighbour
which can never be a threat but could serve Russia's interests well as a
friendly, independent state and efficient trade partner.
