FT  06 MAY 94 / Survey of The Channel Tunnel (11): Europe wheels out its
best - Andrew Baxter studies the special rolling stock and who has built it
The supply of trains for the Channel Tunnel - locomotives, rolling stock,
wagons for cars, coaches and freight - has been a remarkable pan-European
effort, even if there have been plenty of delays and arguments along the
track.
Technical challenges and the sheer scale of the project - and hence the size
of the contracts - are partly to blame for timetables slipping.
On top of that, however, the contracts were awarded, and are on their way to
completion, during a period of intense upheaval in the railway equipment
industry, whose overcapacity problems are forcing it to consolidate across
Europe.
In summary, the main contracts are as follows:
Eurostar trains. Transmanche Super Train Group, led by GEC Alsthom, is
building the 31 Eurostar trains for the inter-capitals day service - London
to Brussels and Paris - at approximately Pounds 24m apiece.
Eurostar trains beyond London. The same consortium is building seven
slightly shorter Eurostar trains for the daytime services from Scotland and
from Manchester to Paris and Brussels.
European night services. Metro-Cammell in Birmingham, which is part of GEC
Alsthom, is building the 139 units of rolling stock for these services,
which will go from Glasgow, Plymouth and Swansea to Paris or Brussels, and
from London to Amsterdam, Dortmund or Frankfurt.
Nine of the 46 Class 92 locomotives being built by Brush Traction, part of
BTR, for British Rail and SNCF, the French railways, will be used to haul
these services, at least as far as Calais.
Freight services. The remaining 37 Class 92s will be used by BR's Rail
Freight Distribution, and SNCF's freight service, to carry freight through
the tunnel and beyond. Arbel Fauvet Rail, based at Douai in northern France,
is building low-platform intermodal wagons - which can carry freight in
containers and 'swapbodies' - and fully-enclosed wagons for shipping new
cars.
Le Shuttle. Thirty-eight locomotives for the cross-Channel car, coach and
truck service are being built by Brush Traction in Loughborough and Asea
Brown Boveri, the Swiss-Swedish engineering group.
ESC Wagons, a consortium created by Bombardier of Canada and its subsidiary
Bombardier Eurorail, is responsible for building 254 double- and single-deck
wagons for Le Shuttle. The single-deck vehicle carriers were assembled at BN
in Bruges and the double-deckers at ANF-Industrie at Valenciennes, France.
The manufacture of 19 single-deck loaders, included in the total of 254
wagons, was subcontracted to Fiat Ferroviaria in Turin.
The Italian company, in consortium with Breda Construzioni Ferroviare, also
won the contract for the design and construction of 270 wagons to carry
heavy goods vehicles and their crews.
The delays and controversy have centred on Le Shuttle railcars and Eurostar
trains. In December, Bombardier said it expected to make a loss on its
CDollars 820m contract to supply railcars, signed in 1989, and said a
CDollars 450m cost overrun was almost entirely due to design changes imposed
by French and British government safety inspectors.
ESC is to receive FFr700m in phased payments while Bombardier will receive
up to 25m Eurotunnel shares in settlement of its claim against Transmanche
Link, the main contractor for the tunnel, for costs arising from changes in
the rolling stock design. So far, at least 202 wagons have been delivered
and the order is expected to be completed this year.
The Bombardier order had been awarded in July 1989 by TML after an
international call for tenders, but the genesis of the Eurostar trains was
rather different.
Because of the technical challenges - the need for the train to run on all
three networks and cope with different power and signalling systems  - and
the many special safety features, 'we did not want everything new - we were
looking for proven high-speed train technology,' says Mr Malcolm Southgate,
deputy managing director of European Passenger Services.
In the mid to late 1980s, the only European contender was therefore Alsthom
 -later to become GEC Alsthom - which has built the French TGV trains. The
German ICE trains had yet to start operating, and as the UK, French and
Belgian governments all wanted some manufacturing in their countries, the
Japanese Shinkansen trains did not appear to get a look in.
The original date for delivery of at least the first Eurostar trains was May
1993, in line with the tunnel's scheduled opening.
Safety requirements, in particular the need for fire protection including a
30-minute inbuilt resistance to fire to protect passengers - generated a lot
of detailed design work, but did not hold work up, says Mr Southgate.
Instead, he lists a number of reasons why the initial Eurostar 'Discovery
Programme' service is due to start only in July, building up to hourly
services in the autumn. The first was the choice of power drives. The French
TGV trains had used so-called synchronous power drives, but GEC had
developed asynchronous drives which were seen as a better bet for the
Eurostar trains because they are lighter.
The maximum load on each axle allowed by SNCF is 17.5 tonnes, and the
Eurostar trains have to carry power equipment for three networks too. But
developing the asynchronous power drives for the trains took longer than was
originally foreseen, says Mr Southgate.
There were also arguments for two years on what sort of signalling system to
use. A cab-based, rather than line-side signalling was necessary for safety
reasons - drivers would not have enough time to react to lineside signals.
Eventually a French system was chosen from a number available on the
continent, and adapted to deal with the variety of trains using the tunnel.
A more sensitive reason for the delays revolves around the method of
manufacture. Mr Southgate says the decision to build different parts of the
trains at plants in the UK, France and Belgium caused big logistical
problems, which took some time to be recognised.
It may also be relevant that the early stages of the contract came very soon
after the creation of GEC Alsthom from the merger of GEC and Alsthom's power
engineering and transportation equipment interests. The difficulties in
merging a UK and a French company loomed large in the early days of GEC
Alsthom.
In the past few months, what is hoped will be the final problem has emerged.
A complex monitoring unit designed to prevent the electrical currents
generated by the train itself from interfering with the signalling was
activated by the frequent gaps in the third, conducting rail on the UK leg
of the Eurostar train's journey. The solution, replacing about 3,000 track
circuits between London and the Channel Tunnel, is now underway.
The good news, however, is that deliveries of trains have kept pace with the
revised deadlines, and delivery of the final capital cities trains is now
scheduled for early 1995. Mr Southgate believes the capital cities service
will be up to full steam, at least for a winter service, by January or
February next year.
