FT  03 AUG 94 / A pyramid of many parts: Kevin Done examines restructuring
in the automotive components industry
The competitive screw has tightened remorselessly on the world's automotive
components suppliers, as leading car and truck makers have sought to shore
up their sagging profitability during recession.
With bought-in components accounting for well over 50 per cent of the costs
of a car, the vehicle assemblers seek to squeeze their suppliers first, when
the going gets tough.
The fierce restructuring and fluctuating fortunes of the car and truck
makers themselves have been immediately apparent in several ways: the record
losses - and now the record profits - of the big three US carmakers; the
corporate revolutions at General Motors and Volkswagen; the record losses at
Nissan, Fiat and VW; the resurgence of Chrysler; the break-up of the
Renault/Volvo alliance; the financial collapse of Daf.
Down in the dense undergrowth of the automotive components supply industry,
however, the bloodletting is no less intense. Profound changes are taking
place in the global motor industry, and much of the activity concerns the
crucial relationship between the vehicle maker and its suppliers.
The demands of the vehicle makers are forcing the components industry to
restructure: New alliances are being thrown up. Valeo of France and Siemens
of Germany announced last week that they are studying a merger of their
automotive air conditioning and heater systems businesses into a
FFr4bn-a-year joint venture (see accompanying article).
The industry is consolidating as suppliers seek economies of scale to meet
the increasing and costly demands from the vehicle makers for enhanced
research and development. Allied Signal of the US, one of the leading
automotive braking systems suppliers, has entered into a worldwide truck
brake joint venture with Knorr-Bremse of Germany. With annual sales of
Dollars 650m and a workforce of 4,600 the venture is designed to cope with
the rising R&amp;D costs stemming from the introduction of electronic systems.
Opportunities for components producers are emerging as cost pressures force
vehicle makers to go outside for operations previously conducted in-house.
ITT, the US conglomerate, has spent Dollars 400m to buy 80 per cent of a
General Motors automotive components business, making electric motors and
wiper systems with an annual turnover of Dollars 760m. GM is pruning its
Automotive Components Group as part of the wrenching effort to restore its
North American vehicle assembly operations to profit.
As the industry undergoes transformation, the front-rank automotive
components suppliers are having to establish a global presence to meet the
demands of vehicle makers for global sourcing. Components producers are also
having to develop into suppliers of systems rather than simply of
components, as the vehicle makers concentrate more on their own core
activities of new product development - overall programme management rather
than the design and development of vehicle components - and final vehicle
assembly.
According to Mr Karl Ludvigsen, chairman of Ludvigsen Associates, the
UK-based automotive analysts: 'Carmakers want the supplier to participate
more in development, to be a more active partner in innovation and to carry
out testing and validation so thoroughly that the carmaker no longer needs
to check incoming components and sub-assemblies before bolting them into an
automobile.'
The structure emerging throughout the world automotive components sector
reflects more closely the pyramid organisation of the Japanese industry with
tiers of suppliers.
The players in the first tier are growing in size and technological
capability, as they assume new responsibilities. But at the same time the
category is becoming smaller, as the vehicle makers try to rationalise their
supply bases and reduce radically the number of suppliers with which they
have to deal.
'These new requirements will result in a shake-out that will leave fewer
than 300 truly global tier-one suppliers by the year 2000,' says Mr Ralph
Reins, president of AlliedSignal Automotive. 'Those that cannot meet the
demands of global sourcing, programme management and systems packaging will
either drop further down the supply chain or, like old soldiers, simply fade
away.'
Individual carmakers have taken drastic action to cut the number of their
direct suppliers from about 1,250 on average in 1988 to 900 at present,
according to a report produced by the Boston Consulting Group for the
European Commission. The number is expected to drop again to about 400 by
1997. Companies operating as second- or third-tier suppliers may fall by up
to a third, warns the study.
In Europe, Ford is cutting its suppliers from 1,200 in the late 1980s to
about 500 by 1996. As it moves to the use of single rather than multiple
sourcing for a given part or system, it is 'signing long-term contracts with
fewer suppliers for large volumes of components', according to Mr Eckhard
Jokisch, vice-president of supply.
'The European motor industry still has more suppliers than it really needs,'
he says. 'A lot have already fallen by the wayside . . . Changing our
philosophy from buying nationally to buying globally has already led to a
reduction in numbers. Our strategy of purchasing higher levels of
sub-assemblies will reduce the number of suppliers even further.'
Ford had more than 700 suppliers - all in North America - for its US-built
Ford Tempo/Mercury Topaz large family car range. Its successor, the Ford
Contour/Mercury Mystique, which has just entered production in the US has
only 227 suppliers, drawn from around the world.
The reduction in supplier numbers is spreading right down the chain, as the
first-tier components producers behave as rigorously as the vehicle makers.
AlliedSignal Automotive has cut the number of its suppliers from 2,400 at
the beginning of the 1990s to 1,000 and this will be reduced further to 900.
Valeo of France had 3,500 suppliers in Europe in mid-1991. This number has
been cut to 1,800 and the aim is to reach about 1,000 by the end of 1995.
The rationalisation of the industry is having alarming consequences for
jobs. The Boston Consulting Group report warned that employment in
automotive components production in the European Union could decline by at
least 40 per cent from 1992 to the end of the decade. More than 400,000 jobs
were likely to be shed, it said, as European components makers sought to
close the productivity gap with the Japanese industry.
Bosch of Germany, the leading European automotive components supplier, alone
cut 13,200 jobs last year (from all areas of operations including consumer
goods and communications technology) to reduce its group workforce to
156,600. Another 4,100 jobs are being eliminated this year. Bosch has been a
notable victim of the recession, incurring an operating loss of more than
DM500m last year, the first substantial loss in the postwar period.
The fortunes of many in the industry have begun to improve this year,
however. Some groups, such as Valeo and T&amp;N of the UK, have already improved
profitability in the past two years, and in the US leading automotive
components makers such as Allied Signal and TRW have seen record profits in
the second quarter.
While the industry restructures it is clear that the most agile first-tier
suppliers, capable of operating at the leading edge of their particular
technologies, have golden opportunities for growth.
Many suppliers are expected to disappear in 'the greatest rationalisation
the sector has ever experienced', according to a recent report by the
Economist Intelligence Unit. The survivors, in contrast, will be 'larger and
fitter with a global base to their operations and comprehensive R&amp;D
facilities'.
As the adversarial relationships of old between the vehicle makers and their
suppliers are gradually reformed with a new emphasis on partnership and
transparency, negotiating power is increasingly moving in favour of the top
components makers. But for those unable to keep up with the pace of change,
the message is stark.
As Mr Reins puts it: 'The bottom line for suppliers today is crystal clear:
change or die.'
