FT  01 MAR 94 / Business and the Law: Decision annulled and fine reduced -
European Court
The Court of First Instance has again shown its teeth by annulling part of a
European Commission competition decision and substantially reducing a fine
imposed on one of the applicants.
The Commission decision concerned the Helsinki agreement - an agreement
between certain French financial institutions and the Eurocheque
organisation - which provided that traders affiliated to the Carte Bleue
and/or Eurocard networks would accept foreign Eurocheques on the same terms
imposed for payments by Carte Bleue and/or Eurocard cards.
Under the agreement, the French financial institutions agreed they would
charge traders which were affiliated to the relevant networks a commission
for purchases paid for by Eurocheque. The level of commission would be no
greater than that applicable to purchases paid for by CB, Visa or
Eurocard/Mastercard.
The Commission said the agreement infringed the EC competition rules and
imposed fines of Ecu1m and Ecu5m on the Eurocheque organisation and on the
French financial institutions group respectively. The parties sought
annulment of the decision or annulment of the fines.
The Eurocheque organisation's case turned on a procedural issue relating to
the rights of defence. Just before the Commission sent out its statement of
objections, setting out its preliminary findings on the Helsinki agreement,
the French financial institutions group notified the agreement to the
Commission.
In the light of this notification, the Commission addressed a supplementary
statement of objections to the French financial institutions group, but not
to the Eurocheque organisation on the grounds that Eurocheque had not
notified the agreement. A copy of the document was sent to Eurocheque for
information.
Eurocheque claimed the failure to address the supplementary statement of
objections to it breached its rights of defence, in that certain new
objections were raised in the supplementary document which it had not been
able to answer.
The Court said that, under the procedural rules governing such matters, it
was the Commission's duty to address statements of objections to all
interested parties, and that it could only retain in its final decisions
those objections which the parties had had an opportunity to address.
The Court said the supplementary statement of objections had modified the
intrinsic nature of the objections raised against Eurocheque. It also said
the Commission should not send to one party a copy of a statement of
objections addressed to another.
As a result of its findings, the Court annulled that part of the
Commission's decision relating to Eurocheque, including the fine.
The French financial institutions raised several points. The first was that
the Commission decision had failed to establish the existence of a
price-fixing agreement. The Commission had taken the position in its
decision that, not only did the Helsinki agreement set out rules for the
charging of commission on certain Eurocheque transactions, but that it also
regulated the amount of such charges. The Commission based this latter
conclusion on certain provisions in the Helsinki agreement.
But the Court said, although the Commission had been right to find that
there had been an agreement to charge commission on certain Eurocheque
transactions, it had been wrong to find that there has been an agreement on
the amount of commission.
The Court said the different provisions of the Helsinki agreement, which had
been read together by the Commission in support of its finding, in fact
related to two different types of transaction.
Given that the basis on which the Commission reached its finding was wrong,
the finding itself was invalid. Even though the French group's other
arguments were unsuccessful, the fine should be reduced accordingly. The
Court said the fine should be cut from Ecu5m to Ecu2m.
Joined Cases T-39/92 and 40/92: Groupement des cartes bancaires 'CB' and
Europay International SA (formerly Eurocheque International) v Commission,
CFI 1CH, February 23 1994.
BRICK COURT CHAMBERS, BRUSSELS
