FT  03 SEP 94 / Markets: The arbs return, with defence in their sights -
Wall Street
There is one type of inflation that Wall Street knows and loves. It works
like this. You seek out a company in an industry that has been the subject
of some big takeovers recently - a list currently dominated by defence,
healthcare and entertainment. Then you pump up its share price for all you
are worth: spreading rumours to the effect that the company in question is
up for sale is usually a particularly effective way of doing it.
The rumour and a jump in the share price is often enough to put a company
'in play,' flushing out potential buyers. The trick is then to sit tight and
wait for the company to get taken over at a premium - or to sell out before
the rumours prove untrue and stock deflation sets in again.
The 'arbs' (an abbreviation of arbitrageurs) who specialise in trading
takeover stocks are out in force again. Not since the end of the 1980s has
short-term speculative stock trading reached such levels. And there is
plenty of activity to keep these traders busy.
This week there was an agreement to merge two of the US's biggest defence
contractors, Lockheed and Martin Marietta, and a planned Dollars 2.9bn
purchase by Anglo-US drugs group SmithKline Beecham of Kodak's
over-the-counter drugs operations.
These are hectic times in the takeover business. Other proposed deals that
surfaced last week, such as a Dollars 1.3bn takeover by General Signal of
Reliance Electric, a Dollars 600m purchase of Zenith, a maker of generic
(non-branded) drugs, by Ivax and an improved, Dollars 950m bid by buy-out
firm Forstmann Little for the money-transfer business Western Union, hardly
made the front pages.
It is clear where the arbs are looking to turn their next quick dollar. Top
of the list is CBS, one of the big three television networks. CBS became a
plaything of the stock traders two months ago, when it first announced a
plan (later dropped) to merge with Barry Diller's home shopping network,
QVC. Renewed takeover rumours last week, this time of an interest by Disney
(and a possible takeover of another network, NBC) pushed CBS's shares higher
still, to Dollars 333 1/2 by midday yesterday, nearly a third up on its
level before the QVC announcement.
In the healthcare sector, which has seen Dollars 30bn-worth of deals in the
past 12 months, two stocks stood out on the arbs' list, Warner-Lambert, a
company with a strong over-the-counter drugs business to match its
prescription pharmaceuticals side, gained further attention after the
SmithKline deal. Its shares were trading at Dollars 82 1/2 yesterday, having
started the month of August at around Dollars 65. Marion Merrell Dow, a
drugs company majority-owned by Dow Chemical, released a wave of speculation
with the announcement that it had asked an investment bank to consider how
it should respond to changes in the US healthcare industry. Its share rose
to Dollars 24 1/2 at one point during the week, up from less than Dollars 20
at the start of August.
The defence industry, meanwhile, had its own flurry on news of the Lockheed
/ Martin Marietta deal. Other contractors will need to merge in the face of
a shrinking US defence budget, ran the argument.
Though some of this speculation will no doubt be rewarded, much will end in
tears. As Nextel, a wireless communications company, proved last week, even
agreed deals sometimes do not come off: its shares plunged 26 per cent from
their level a week before, to Dollars 22 1/2 , as talks with MCI and
Motorola were called off. Punting on takeover stocks remains a game for the
risk-hungry and the wealthy.
While busy inflating takeover stocks, Wall Street also kept a wary eye last
week on the other type of inflation. The Federal Reserve's move to raise
interest rates on August 16 was meant to be the final twist to the the rate
spiral for several months, dampening the risk of inflation and putting a new
bounce in the stock market. That, at least, was how the market saw it then:
but the yield on long-dated bonds, the clearest sign of inflation fears, has
edged back up, rising further yesterday to brush up against 7.5 per cent.
The difference between short and long-term rates has also edged higher,
another sign of inflation fears.
Employment data for August, released yesterday, failed to ease the concerns
of the skeptics. The number of jobs created during the month was less than
expected: that is good news for markets, since it means wage pressure is
less than it might be. However, the average work week edged up, suggesting
more hiring and a growing shortage of skilled labour in future. The stock
market at first took heart at the figures, then reversed course. Yet at
3,896 at midday, the Dow Jones Industrial Average remained around 15 points
ahead on the week.
 --------------------------------------
Monday           3898.85  +  17.80
Tuesday          3917.30  +  18.45
Wednesday        3913.42  -  03.88
Thursday         3901.44  -  11.98
Friday           3885.58  -  15.86
 --------------------------------------
