FT  23 NOV 94 / Threat of Brussels split on TV quotas
Proposals to tighten European broadcasting quotas and separately to ban
advertising on new electronic information services are threatening to divide
the European Commission.
The outgoing audiovisual commissioner, Mr Joao de Deus Pinheiro, believed to
have strong backing from Mr Jacques Delors, Commission president, will next
week present plans that will force European television channels to ensure
that at least half of the documentaries, cartoons and drama programmes that
they screen are European-made.
Further, in a move that industry says will threaten the development of
interactive consumer services in Europe, Mr Pinheiro is proposing to extend
the scope of existing broadcasting rules to ban advertising on new
screen-based services such as 'tele-shopping' channels.
Mr Pinheiro's proposals amount to revision of of the EU's 1989 Television
without Frontiers directive to interactive services.
The directive sets limits on the amount of time television channels can
carry advertisements and the new effort is an attempt to protect the
existing advertising revenues of national radio and television broadcasters.
Opponents of the plans within the Commission and industry say the moves send
a bad political message to the rest of the world, and make Brussels'
approach to the information society look confused.
One official said yesterday: 'On the one hand it is saying it wants to
liberalise the communications sector as much as possible, and on the other
it is cutting off the possibilities for these new services to come on
stream.'
Much of the momentum behind Mr Pinheiro's changes comes from those within
the Commission who believe European culture and language need to be
protected from Hollywood. Some observers - in Brussels and in the industry -
believe Mr Delors may be trying to use more protectionist media laws to the
benefit of a bid for the French presidency next year, should he decide to
mount one.
'Mr Delors wants to get this through because it will enhance his status in
France,' said an industry source yesterday. 'The move is highly political
and it is being led by the Delors cabinet.'
The 1989 directive already requires EU television channels to reserve at
least 50 per cent of their output for European-made programmes, but only
'where practicable'. This 'loophole' has allowed some channels to ignore the
quota.
Officials in directorate general 10 - headed by Mr Pinheiro - argue that
they want to scrap 'where practicable' because of the legal ambiguity it
creates.
More worrying for industry, however, is the extension of the directive's
scope to cover new services, a move which will prevent teleshopping channels
from carrying advertising.
'Advertising is expected to play a key role in helping to make these
services affordable, and thus open them to a mass market,' said a Commission
official yesterday.
Editorial comment, Page 27
