FT  26 OCT 94 / Business and the Environment: A rumbling in the waterworks -
Jane Martinson on attracting tourists to a sewage plant
Managers of a sewage treatment plant in south-east Australia are considering
plans to turn it into a tourist attraction.
The 10,851 ha plant - which produces more beef than any farm in the region -
treats 55 per cent of the wastewater generated by the city of Melbourne.
Natural purification methods rather than chemical treatment are used to
produce effluent, which is deposited in Port Phillip Bay. Some 16,000 cattle
graze the grass fertilised by raw sewage; livestock generated just over
ADollars 3m (Pounds 1.4m) in income last year.
Much of the sewage is treated in lagoons, which cover 1,667 ha at the
Werribee site, 35 km south-west of Melbourne. Three large lagoons built in
the past six years have been designed to control odour and produce biogas.
Mechanical aerators speed up the process of digestion and reduce odour,
while covers are being installed to capture methane and other odorous gases.
The methane will eventually be burnt off to generate power.
The plan to create an 'eco-tourist park' focuses on 600 ha of older lagoons.
Over 250 species of birds are found around them. Many rare species have been
recorded, including up to 50 per cent of the world's total of the
orange-bellied parrot.
The area is listed by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature
as a wetland of international importance.
A study conducted this summer by Melbourne Parks and Waterways claimed the
sewage plant could attract up to 160,000 tourists a year if developed as an
eco-tourist park. The organisation manages a funding programme which aims to
encourage community use of open spaces and the preservation of wildlife.
Last year it allocated ADollars 6.2m to such schemes.
Melbourne Water, the state-owned authority which manages Werribee, says
there is 'definite commercial potential there' and has commissioned a full
economic analysis of the project.
There are a number of advantages to the plan, not least enhanced public
relations. Melbourne's sewers, with their network of old brick tunnels,
suffered three serious collapses two years ago. Sewage spilled into a local
river and it took more than three months to stem the flow.
More recently the Environmental Protection Agency, the government watchdog,
has decreed that checks on effluent discharges into Port Phillip Bay are to
be made much more stringent by 2004. Melbourne Water has committed itself to
complying with the regulations by 1997. It has also earmarked ADollars 32m
for upgrading its two major treatment plants.
The impact on wildlife of a significant increase in visitor numbers is
causing some concern, however. Alex Sandles, the wastewater treatment
manager at Werribee, says birds are attracted by the food, security and calm
of the plant. 'The lakes near here tend to be full of waterskiers and other
noise.'
The plan has some support among environment groups. Karri Giles, water
catchment manager for Friends of the Earth in Australia, says: 'We are
positive as long as it is done sensitively.'
However, the proposal may be delayed by the shake-up planned for Melbourne
Water by a state government keen on privatisation. It was to appear before
the authority's board in November.
Nonetheless, Sandles feels the plan will be implemented. Werribee treatment
plant could become part of a 'complete weekend package' for Melbourne's
tourists, he says.
