FT  25 JUL 94 / Struggle for market share puts industry in turmoil
The US healthcare industry has not been waiting on President Clinton. Every
part of the healthcare chain, from financing through to dispensing drugs, is
in upheaval, as companies strive to cut costs or fight for market share.
One result has been a string of mergers and acquisitions: four deals worth a
total of Dollars 13.5bn (Pounds 8.7bn) have been announced in the past three
months alone, making this the most active part of the US corporate takeover
market.
The causes for the shake-up can be traced directly to boardrooms, not to
Washington.
Take Ford Motor. In 1970 spending on healthcare for its workers amounted to
6 per cent of the US carmaker's payroll costs. Escalating health care
inflation (costs rose at more than double the rate of general inflation
during the 1980s) and an ageing workforce have pushed that figure up to 19
per cent. US companies, on behalf of their current and retired workers and
dependents, foot most of the the US's health bill. The cost could be making
them uncompetitive.
'Mercedes can start up (in the US) from scratch, hire a younger workforce
and not have the costs. They have an immediate advantage,' says Mr Robert
Ozment, director of corporate and employee insurance at Ford. 'The first
issue is to get national costs under control. Then we can talk about how you
finance the system.'
The drive by companies such as Ford to hold down their costs in this area,
under way for some time, has led directly to the indsutry's latest string of
mergers and acquisitions.
Companies have used managed care to take control of their healthcare costs.
Rather than simply paying their employees'ever-rising health insurance
premiums without question, they have pursued ways to bring down costs.
In its purest form, managed care involves enrolling an employee in a Health
Maintenance Organisation. For a fee, the HMO provides all the employee's
healthcare, from prescription drugs to a doctor's appointment. The HMO in
turn keeps costs in check by using only certain hospitals or doctors, or by
giving preference to certain companies' drugs: this enables them to
negotiate volume discounts.
HMOs have grown fast, and are expected to provide cover for one in five
Americans by the end of this year. Adding in other, looser variants on the
theme, such as point-of-service plans and preferred-provider organisations,
about half all US workers are now estimated to be covered by some form of
managed care arrangement.
The growing buying power of these organisations is the single biggest factor
shaping the healthcare industry, which accounts for about 14 per cent of the
US economy. Their impact is already being felt: annual healthcare inflation
fell from about 9 per cent in 1990 to less than 6 per cent last year. Drug
price inflation dropped from an annual 10 per cent to 3 per cent over the
same period.
The impact of this reining-in of price increases has been felt in all parts
of the healthcare industry:
Drug companies, though their products account for only 7 per cent of total
US healthcare spending, have seen some of the greatest upheaval.
Unless a drug carries benefits that are clearly superior to rivals in the
market, it is likely to be subjected to severe price discounting.
'A lot of research and development spending has gone into copying other
people's drugs and then changing a molecule or two. That really isn't
helpful,' says Dr Jay Crosson, an associate director at Kaiser Permanente,
the US's largest managed care group.
The result has been escalating price competition, and efforts by the biggest
companies to increase their market share and cut costs.
The takeovers have taken two forms. One has been the acquisition by drugs
companies of pharmacy benefit managers, large-scale pharmacies which make up
prescriptions, usually by mail. By controlling these distributors, which
have brought down costs in part by encouraging doctors to prescribe cheaper
drugs, the manufacturers hope to be able to sell more of their own products
at the expense of their rivals. Merck, Eli Lilly and SmithKline Beecham have
between them paid a total of Dollars 13bn to buy the country's three biggest
pharmacy benefit managers in the past year, two of the them in recent weeks.
The second form of takeover has been the acquisition of one drugs company by
another, signalling consolidation in an industry which is having to adjust
from the high-growth expectations of the 1980s to the prospect of a
lower-growth future. Sterling Winthrop, previously owned by Eastman Kodak,
and Syntex, a struggling US company, have both been bought by bigger
European pharmaceuticals groups.
Hospitals - which account for about half all US spending on healthcare  -
have faced their own cost pressures. Besides the discounts demanded by
managed care organisation, most hospitals also face problems of
overcapacity. Better control of the way patients are handled, improvements
in surgical techniques and the growing availability of care in the home have
all contributed to a shortening of the length of time the average patient
spends in a hospital bed.
With too many beds to go around, some hospitals have been closing wards. The
country's biggest private hospital group, known as Columbia/HCA since a
recent acquisition, has reacted differently: by buying up other hospitals
companies, then closing entire sites in areas where there are too many
hospital beds, Columbia/HCA has improved the profitability of its remaining
sites.
Health maintenance organisations and insurance companies have also been
sucked into the restructuring of the healthcare industry. United Healthcare,
one of the biggest of the HMO groups, has itself embarked on an acquisition
spree, buying up local HMO companies around the country. It recently agreed
to sell Diversified Pharmaceutical Services, a pharmacy benefit manager it
owned, for Dollars 2.3bn, providing it with more cash to continue its
acquisitions.
Meanwhile, insurance companies, responding to the change in the market, have
been busy converting their traditional health insurance businesses into
managed care organisations. One result: an agreement last month between two
of the country's biggest insurers, Travelers and Metropolitan Life, to
combine their health insurance activities in a new joint venture company.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Healthcare mergers and acquisitions (1993-94)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Buyer                          Acquisition           Price (Dollarsbn)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Merck                                Medco                   6.6
Colombia Healthcare*                   HCA                   5.7
Roche                               Syntex                   5.3
Colombia Healthcare*      Galen Healthcare                   4.2
Eli Lilly                              PCS                   4.0
SmithKline Beecham      Diversified Pharm.
                                  Services                   2.3
Elf Aquitaine            Sterling Winthrop                   1.7
Colombia/HCA          Medical Care America                   0.9
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
* Now Colombia/HCA
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
