FT  14 MAY 94 / The Long View: Forever in your debt
Is inflation really dead? Even in Brazil they are trying to bury it, with
the confirmation this week that the new 'real' will be introduced in July.
Yet, this is the seventh attempt in eight years to stabilise the Brazilian
currency, plagued recently by inflation topping 2,500 per cent.
True, there is a neighbouring precedent given that Argentina, once a victim
of hyper-inflation, cut its rate to 7 per cent in 1993. The trick has been
achieved through such measures as a peg to the dollar and opening the
economy to cheap imports. The trouble is, this has led to a big balance of
payments deficit, so the true test will come when this trade gap cannot be
financed.
For every currency saved, another seems to head for the abyss. Turkish
inflation, for instance, has soared above 100 per cent as the economy slumps
and government finances totter. Last year, Turkey was the star of the
emerging markets but, in 1994, the London-listed Turkey Trust (down nearly
50 per cent) is living up to its name.
Our perceptions of low inflation arise from experience in the mature western
economies, not from the rest of the world where currencies continue to be
debauched as regularly as ever. Eastern Europe is a disaster area for
believers in sound money. In the Group of Seven countries, however, average
inflation has fallen to 2.3 per cent.
In the UK, where the Bank of England published its quarterly Inflation
Report this week, the retail price index also shows a year-on-year increase
of 2.3 per cent, up from a freak low point of 1.2 per cent last year. But
the Bank's RPIY measure of 'core' inflation, which excludes distorting
influences such as mortgage interest rates and indirect taxes, is still
trending downwards and stands at 1.9 per cent on the latest calculation (for
March).
Why such a low level? Even in the least inflationary years of the 1980s,
between 1982 and 1987, prices were rising at 4.7 per cent on average. But
the labour market was hammered in the early 1990s and international price
competition on traded goods is intense, stimulated by ever-increasing third
world participation.
The global economy, meanwhile, has been at its weakest since the 1930s.
Growth in the OECD member states was only 1.2 per cent in 1993, and was
probably negative outside the US. The credit-based binges of the 1980s have
collapsed, to be replaced by the threat of debt deflation, a condition in
which monetary contraction leads to actual falls in prices (although only
Japan is still threatened seriously by such a plight).
Serious economic depression has, however, been held off by central banks -
in the US and Japan, in particular - which have propped up their banks.
Depositors have not lost their money. Confidence has been sustained in
financial institutions - but only at the cost of huge public sector
deficits. US government debt has been rising but the position is worse in
Europe where, according to the OECD, net public sector indebtedness has
risen from 27 per cent of GDP in 1980 to 43 per cent in 1990 and is likely
to reach 61 per cent in 1995, bolstered by figures of 117 per cent for Italy
and 132 per cent for Belgium.
When economies are depressed, these public sector deficits can offset
smoothly the surpluses arising in the private sector. Low, short-term
interest rates will not generate excessive credit growth, because borrowers
are too cautious, but will encourage investors to seek higher levels of
income from long-term bonds. This week, the Bundesbank actually said that
one of its motives in cutting short-term D-Mark interest rates was to reduce
the excessive growth of its targeted measure of money supply, M3, by
diverting savers into bonds and other longer-term assets not defined as
money.
So far, the central banks still appear to be winning in their efforts to
stave off financial and economic retrenchment and create a path to recovery
with low inflation. Continental Europe, for instance, seems to be heading
towards an economic upturn this year. But have the underlying problems been
cured, or just postponed?
Certainly, the US Federal Reserve is having awful problems in shifting from
low to 'neutral' interest rates. The delicate bull market in bonds has been
torpedoed, leading to a sharp rise in long-term interest rates. In the
absence of the brutal impact of a deposit-destroying economic adjustment, we
find that US consumption and Japanese production are both too high, with
huge and destabilising payments imbalances. So, the dollar has been
wobbling.
Moreover, as the private sectors of the leading economies revive (as has
happened in the US), the public sectors must step back rapidly and eliminate
their demands on the capital markets. Otherwise, bond interest rates will
soar to still more unacceptable levels.
In the short run, there is no genuine scare over inflation - even in the US,
which is furthest along the recovery track, this week's latest producer and
consumer price figures were benign. During the bond market scares of recent
months, the gold price has moved only sideways, scarcely suggesting an
inflation panic. Some commodity prices have been rising, but mostly on the
back of the huge pools of speculative money which are now punting on
anything that moves.
For the longer term, though, the inflationary danger obviously remains.
Although the cost of bailing out the private sector last year seemed quite
low, in 1994 it has jumped. Right now, it costs the UK government more than
5 per cent in real terms to fund its deficit through gilt-edged sales, on
the basis of the Bank of England's projection of 3 per cent inflation two
years out.
That is an unacceptably high cost, and governments such as that of the UK
are eventually going to find it very tempting to inflate away the burden.
Perhaps, after all, we should save some of those Brazilian reals for a rainy
day.
