FT  11 OCT 94 / Thatcher denies impropriety in arms deal
Baroness Thatcher yesterday denied there was any financial impropriety in
the Pounds 20bn Al Yamamah arms contract with Saudi Arabia which she helped
to win. She was responding to allegations that her son, Mr Mark Thatcher,
received millions of pounds in commissions on the deal.
Mr Thatcher also insisted that he had 'made no money' from the UK's biggest
defence contract, and the Conservative party chairman, Mr Jeremy Hanley,
tried to prevent the affair overshadowing his party's annual conference.
Amid signs of growing concern among senior ministers, Mr Hanley rejected
Labour calls for a public inquiry, but said the allegations could be
investigated by Sir Robin Butler, the cabinet secretary.
Mr Thatcher would not elaborate on his role in the negotiations. However, he
has told friends that his current net worth is significantly less than the
Pounds 12m he is alleged to have received from Saudi Arabia.
Lady Thatcher, who was prime minister when the first part of the deal was
signed in 1985, defended the propriety of the negotiations in terms which
appeared designed to rule out any further allegations against those
involved, including Mr Thatcher.
'Lady Thatcher is absolutely satisfied that the Al Yamamah contract was
properly negotiated between the governments of Saudi Arabia and the UK,' her
statement said.
However, a former Ministry of Defence official closely involved in the
negotiations said: 'Mark certainly tried to generate the impression that he
had influence (over the possible outcome of the Al Yamamah talks). He was
putting himself around a lot.'
The main beneficiary of the deal was British Aerospace, the defence and
aviation group. Sir Raymond Lygo, BAe's managing director at the time, said
Mrs Thatcher's personal intervention in the negotiations had been crucial to
winning the deal against stiff opposition from France.
He added: 'She intervened at our (BAe's) request. We went into Downing
Street and asked whether the prime minister could be diverted to drop in (to
Saudi Arabia)'.
He was not aware that Mr Thatcher played any role in persuading his mother
to become involved.
Mr Hanley, asked whether Mr Thatcher's reported role in the deal breached
the rules and procedures for ministers - the ethical guidelines issued to
ministers - said: 'If that is the allegation, then the cabinet secretary
would be the proper authority.'
Mr Hanley sought to distance the government from the allegations by
suggesting that ministers were not answerable for Mr Thatcher's actions. He
admitted that the controversy threatened to overshadow the conference and
said he was not aware of plans for senior ministers to discuss the
allegations about Mr Thatcher. However, Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor,
said it would be discussed.
Mr John Prescott, Labour's deputy leader, said: 'Mr Hanley is out of his
depth and sinking in a deep blue sea of sleaze.'
A former government official who was a close personal adviser to Mrs
Thatcher at the time of the negotiations denied that the former prime
minister had allowed her son to profit from the deal. 'Knowing the way the
prime minister worked, as I do, I can tell you that that allegation is
laughable,' he said.
Lady Thatcher is expected to arrive at the conference today and to fly to
the US to give a speech near Dallas, where her son lives, on Wednesday.
MoD officials were worried yesterday that media coverage of the Mark
Thatcher allegations might damage prospects of continuing lucrative
contracts with Saudi Arabia.
The MoD said that Sir Clive Whitmore, its former permament secretary, had
denied warning Mrs Thatcher about the potentially damaging consequences of
her son's alleged involvement in the negotiations.
Details, Page 12
