FT  07 MAY 94 / Arts: Young singers and a pianist
The roving eye of a talent scout could be discerned behind Wednesday's
concert at the Barbican, writes Richard Fairman. For Rossini's Stabat Mater
the plan was to bring together four leading young Mediterranean voices.
As it happened, the final score was only three out of four. The intended
tenor was replaced by Bruce Ford, these days a well established Rossini
singer, but missing that open, sunny ring that is second nature to an
Italianate voice.
Both the soprano and the bass were Italian. Barbara Frittoli applied her
firm, lyrical soprano conscientiously to the work's most demanding solo
part. In the 'Inflammatus' she was outgunned towards the end, where Rossini
asks his soprano to sally forth with top C's blazing. Simone Alberghini,
still only 20, was the somewhat dour bass, but his voice rises to a
brighter, well-placed top.
One sensed that in this company the Greek mezzo Markella Hatziano was keen
to be a good colleague, keeping her voice down and holding in check a
personality several sizes larger. Once let loose in her own solo, Hatziano
gave notice that she is no mere promise for the future, but a singer who has
arrived.
The Brighton Festival Chorus was well rehearsed; the Stabat Mater gives all
the performers an equal chance and Carlo Rizzi conducted the Royal
Philharmonic Orchestra in a clean Italianate style.
                        *      *      *
Simon Keenlyside is already a noted talent on the operatic stage, writes
John Allison, but his Wigmore Hall recital on Tuesday brought reminder that
he is equally at home in Lieder. He is a communicative, physical performer,
bringing each song to vivid life. He projects a firm line, has an impressive
control of dynamics, and commands plenty of tone throughout his range up to
a tenorial top, all combined in an intelligent, musicianly way.
The first half, devoted mostly to Poulenc, opened with a group of four
Debussy songs, including a mellifluous account of the composer's first
published work, 'Nuit d'etoiles'. 'Mandolin', a Verlaine setting, was hazy
and evocative. A hint of strain made itself felt in some of the Poulenc, but
Keenlyside captured the mood of each song. We heard 18, perhaps too many:
each was effective, but in danger of cancelling the previous one out. But
the vigour of 'La belle jeunesse' from the hedonistic Chansons Gaillardes,
and the deep emotions of 'C' remain firmly in the memory.
Throughout the evening Malcolm Martineau was an impressive accompanist,
nowhere more than in Schumann's Dichterliebe, in which he was an equal
partner with Keenlyside in a performance of profound insight.
                        *      *      *
Young pianist Mark Anderson - well, he must be 30 now: he was one of the
oldest competitors at Leeds last September - appeared at the Wigmore Hall on
Wednesday, writes David Murray.
The BBC-2 viewers who judged this American pianist's performance of the
Brahms D minor Concerto the best in the Leeds final round would also have
admired his semi-final performance of Brahms Third Sonata. Here it was
slightly less brash but even more gorgeously laid out. Anderson has a
wonderful gift for achieving great warmth in the whole piano-sound whilst
keeping every strand clear and luminous. He boasts not only the requisite
full-scale grasp of the music, but the immaculate pedal-technique needed to
realise it (a rare commodity among British pianists, unfortunately).
Add to those his vital rhythmic instinct and his old-fashioned respect for
structure, and you can imagine why I agreed with the BBC audience that he
ought to have won the Leeds competition. He was quite right to include again
Bartok's seminal but under-performed Improvisations (1920), because Anderson
plays this superbly original piano-music more or less to perfection.
Rightly, the most prominent virtues in his Bartok were his flexible,
sprung-steel rhythms and his heartfelt rubato. But a detached ear might also
have noted his extreme finesse with tone-colour; his Wigmore programme gave
less scope to that than his Leeds recital, which included some exquisitely
imagined Debussy.
The major exhibit should have been his account of Beethoven's late Sonata in
A, op. 101, but Richard Goode's performance five weeks ago still keeps
singing in my head. But the comparison was positive enough: like Goode,
Anderson plays with unaggressive flair, but with great lyrical intelligence.
He is a musician eminently worth hearing.
