FT  21 NOV 94 / Survey of the World Nuclear Industry (7): Valiant efforts
eradicated - Bronwen Maddox takes a look at the industry's safety record
There is widespread public perception across much of the industrialised
world that the nuclear industry is unsafe. Some of this may have derived
originally from the industry's origins in the second world war's race for
the bomb. But the industry's valiant efforts over decades to disassociate
civil uses of nuclear energy from military ones in the public mind was
eradicated in 1986 by another event equally disastrous to its image: the
explosion at the Chernobyl reactor in Ukraine.
The industry internationally - and for these purposes, national companies
are surprisingly adept at acting in concert - argues vigorously that
Chernobyl was a one-off event. The Nuclear Energy Agency of the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development points out that it 'occurred on a
reactor of unique Soviet design and with operating practices that would not
have been tolerated in the west'.
Industry executives add that the Windscale accident in the UK in the 1950s
and the Three Mile Island incident in the US in 1979 did not cause deaths
through radiation emissions.
They have devoted pages of reports and millions of pounds to arguing, in the
words of the Nuclear Energy Agency, that 'it is possible with a sufficiently
high standard of safety to contain a potentially very dangerous process'.
In studying how to contain that process, the nuclear industry in western
countries and Japan has spent much time on improving the reliability of the
pressure vessels and pipework of the main circuits of a reactor,
particularly that for containing the reactor coolant.
In pressurised water reactors, much work has also been devoted to
strengthening the tubes of steam generators. The NEA reports that 'since the
early 1970s, operators of many PWRs around the world have found it necessary
to undertake much more plugging of steam generator tubes than expected'
because of corrosion and cracking.
Regulators' reports also repeatedly refer to the importance of training,
citing human error as the greatest risk in a modern reactor.
But how far should this process of refinement be pursued? What counts as
safe? Difficult political and economic decisions, such as the lifespan of
Britain's ageing Magnox reactors, depend on the answer. The answer to
whether that is 'safe enough' lies not in science or engineering but in
politics: on the degree of risk which the public will tolerate.
That brings the issue back to the question of the public image of the
industry. The UK government's Health and Safety Executive suggests that
safety standards in future nuclear plants should be set so that the risk to
a member of the public is at least 10 times less than that of a traffic
accident. As the HSE points out, though, however much time the nuclear
industry devotes to educating the public that the risk is low compared to
that from some other industries - and compared to that from activities such
as riding a motorcycle - it faces deep, probably immutable, prejudices.
People will tolerate much more risk from something they choose to do, such
as horse-riding, than they will from events beyond their control, the HSE
comments. Moreover, repeated surveys show that many people would rather die
of almost anything than of radiation from a nuclear accident.
In those efforts to persuade the public and politicians of its virtues, the
nuclear industry industry faces two other problems on which it also has
little influence. The first is that much civil nuclear power around the
world is closely associated with military uses - sometimes it occupies the
same site. Despite the industry's emphatic arguments that each reactor does
not represent a bomb, it has few tools to counter public suspicion, given
the secrecy that surrounds military programmes in even the most open
societies.
The second hazard the industry faces is that of an accident at one of the 58
crumbling eastern European and former Soviet reactors. If there is going to
be another Chernobyl, the odds are greatest that it will be here.
That gives nuclear companies operating to high standards a tough problem. In
the west, they are facing a battle to justify their existence, both with
government treasuries and with environmentalists. They have to reassure
those audiences that nuclear power can be safe and cheap. At the same time
they must stir up enough concern - among the same people - about the
perilous state of eastern reactors to persuade them to spend more money
quickly on repairs.
Even industries which have proved skilful at handling their public image
would find that juggling match difficult. Nuclear operators, which
frequently have an unwieldy and suspicious culture deriving from state
ownership, may find that the task of reassuring the outside world is
never-ending.
