FT  11 OCT 94 / Drug success claimed in fight to slow MS
Multiple sclerosis victims may be able to obtain, by 1996, a drug that
drastically slows the progress of the disease.
The results of clinical trials, presented yesterday in San Francisco, showed
with 98 per cent certainty that the progress of the disease's symptoms in
patients taking beta interferon was about half the speed in those taking a
placebo.
If approved by regulatory authorities, the drug should bring its developer,
the Massachusetts biotechnology company Biogen, more than a third of a world
market estimated at Dollars 1.4bn (Pounds 880m) by 1998.
MS is the most common disease of the nervous system in young adults. It
affects worldwide some 2m people who suffer a slow disintegration of
physical co-ordination.
The results of large-scale clinical trials were announced yesterday at the
American Neurological Association meeting in San Francisco.
As well as the slowing of the disease's progress, the proportion of patients
reporting 'flare-ups' in the debilitating disease was cut by half over 18
months.
These results seem better than with the one drug now on the market,
Betaseron from the German company Schering.
However, clinical trial results are not directly comparable because of
differences in condition of patients in the trials and in effectiveness
measures.
Even so, Mr Lawrence Jacobs, head of neurology at Buffalo General Hospital
in New York, who conducted the trials, was confident that Betaseron would
not have been as effective as beta interferon if the two had been compared
in idential trials
Analysts at Lehman Brothers, the US stockbroker, forecast that sales of
Biogen's drug will have overtaken those of Schering by 1998. However, there
could be two or three other drugs on the market by then.
Switzerland's Ares Serono is producing a beta interferon similar to
Biogen's, while Israel's Teva has a drug which works by a different
mechanism.
Such competition could reduce the price of the drug per patient from about
Dollars 9,000 a year at present, says Lehman Brothers.
