FT  31 AUG 94 / UK Company News: Further disposal at Heron
Heron International, which is moving into the final stages of a proposed
buy-out by Mr Steven Green, the US investor, yesterday sold off one of its
last two trading businesses, Heron Distribution.
The deal, achieved at below analysts' valuations, leaves Mr Gerald Ronson's
once diverse Heron group with its car dealership, a property portfolio, and
a mountain of debt.
Heron announced in early June that it had selected Mr Green's HNV
Acquisitions as its preferred buyer, but it has since been silent, and the
value of its bonds has fallen amid speculation that the deal might fall
through.
The delay is because of the complexity of a deal which has to prove
acceptable to more than 80 banks and also its bond holders. However, the
release of the formal offer document is expected imminently.
The company has been pursuing an aggressive disposal programme, which has
included the recent sales of its Suzuki motor distributorship, its
housebuilding business, and its service stations.
The disposal of Heron Distribution will leave the group with only one
remaining trading business, Heron Motor Group, which is also expected to be
sold. Heron Motor Group owns the HR Owen Rolls-Royce dealership, and also
the HMG and Hollingdrake businesses.
Heron Distribution is being sold to a management buy-out team led by
Granville Private Equity Managers, and will raise Pounds 12m for the parent
company. Already this year Heron has raised Pounds 31m from the sale of
Heron Homes, Pounds 44m from Heron Suzuki, and Pounds 33m from the sale of
seven properties, including its headquarters, to Derwent Valley Holdings.
Heron Distribution, which has been renamed Merlin Distribution, achieved a
turnover of Pounds 35m in the year to March 1994, but management said it had
been constrained by its parent's financial difficulties.
Mr Richard Morris, who will remain as managing director, said: 'Now that we
are able to operate on a level playing field we are very confident about our
ability to expand Merlin Distribution into one of the key players in the
contract distribution industry.'
