FT  15 FEB 94 / International Company News: BCI set to benefit from the
bandwagon effect - The latest move in Italy's privatisation programme
Italy's ambitious privatisation programme took another step forward
yesterday with the publication of the prospectus for Banca Commerciale
Italiana, one of its top financial institutions.
The deal follows two other bank sales. In December, the IRI state holding
company, which controls BCI, sold its stake in Credito Italiano, BCI's
slightly smaller Milan neighbour. Earlier this month, the Treasury floated
almost 220m shares in Istituto Mobiliare Italiano, the big financial
services group. Together, the two deals raised more than L4,000bn (Dollars
2.37bn). Selling BCI should raise about L3,000bn.
The BCI offer, in which IRI is selling its 54 per cent holding, should echo
the success of its predecessors. The bank, still probably Italy's most
prestigious financial institution, is successful at home and familiar
abroad. Its international links date back a century to its foundation in
1894 by Swiss, German and Austrian financial institutions.
The sale should be plain sailing thanks to the bandwagon effect of the two
previous privatisations, both of which were heavily oversubscribed, and the
bullish stock market, with share prices up by 9.4 per cent this year.
So great is the confidence about the BCI deal that many analysts believe the
shares will be sold at a substantially smaller discount to the stock market
price than for Credito Italiano or IMI. Credito Italiano stock was sold at
almost 10 per cent below market prices, while IMI was priced at a 6 per cent
discount.
Investor enthusiasm should also be boosted by upbeat group results, due on
Friday. BCI's parent company figures showed a 1.7 per cent rise in net
profits to L268.2bn. The consolidated figures should mark a recovery from
the L218.5bn made after tax in 1992, when earnings were hit by losses at
BCI's French and Canadian subsidiaries.
The earnings rise would be stronger but for higher bad debt and tax
provisions, notes Mr Sergio Siglienti, the chairman. BCI had to set aside an
extra L200bn at parent company level to cover potential bad debts last year,
while its tax bill rocketed by 145 per cent to L713bn because it has used up
all its remaining tax breaks from buying a loss-making IRI subsidiary.
Yet in spite of the bullish sentiment towards BCI's privatisation, some
doubts remain. First, the sale is taking place against rising controversy
about Italy's banks in the mushrooming political corruption scandal.
This month has seen the temporary resignation of the heads of two top banks
owing to alleged corruption. The revelations have triggered criticism of the
Bank of Italy for poor supervision and the banking sector in general, where
largely state-controlled banks have been accused of pursuing
politically-influenced lending policies.
The taint has reached BCI itself. Two former executives have been enmeshed
in the scandals. One, Mr Enrico Braggiotti, is a former chairman who still
chairs a Monaco-based bank 40 per cent owned by BCI.
Mr Siglienti says his bank has managed to steer clear of most of Italy's
worst corporate rescue deals thanks to careful lending. Its total exposure
to Ferruzzi, the troubled industrial group which is at the heart of a big
corruption inquiry, is only about L700bn. Only about a third of that is tied
up in the company's debt rescheduling package, he says.
In spite of his protestations, however, analysts note that BCI's lending to
now-troubled companies grew sharply in the early 1990s, just as political
influence over formerly independent Milan-based banks such as BCI and
Credito Italiano appeared to be rising.
The other imponderable concerns BCI's future. Mr Romano Prodi, the IRI
chairman, says he wants to turn the former subsidiaries into true 'public
companies' with a wide shareholder base. Following its share sale, Credito
Italiano now has about 200,000 shareholders.
A similar destiny should await BCI were it not for lingering doubts about
the plans of Mediobanca, the powerful merchant bank run by Mr Enrico Cuccia,
the legendary eminence grise of Italian finance.
Precise information about Mr Cuccia's plans are obscured by Mediobanca's
traditional refusal to talk to the press, creating an aura of mystery about
the bank and its honorary chairman. However, some analysts believe Mr Cuccia
still nurses ambitions to gain control of BCI by forming a small core
shareholders' group led by Mediobanca. Privatisation, they believe, will
give Mr Cuccia his chance.
The government appears to be divided over the question of shareholder pacts,
in spite of Mr Prodi's obvious hostility. But even those in favour of core
groups, which can have a disproportionately large sway over companies in
which they invest, believe they should be obliged to pay a premium for the
privilege.
Hence the background to Italy's latest privatisation rules, now being
discussed in parliament. The rules would require investors creating a pact
in a newly-privatised company to launch a public tender offer for part of
the remaining stock within two years of the flotation.
If the proposed regulations are put in place, they could balloon the cost to
Mr Cuccia of forming such an alliance. However, the rules are still unclear
and may not become law before parliament winds down before next month's
general elections. Moreover, they may only cover share pacts formed
post-privatisation.
Hence the reason, according to some analysts, for the very sharp recent rise
in BCI's stock price as potential pact members buy equity ahead of the
enactment of the new rules. Others, however, dismiss such theories as
fanciful and attribute the rise to mere speculation.
