FT  08 JUL 94 / Letters to the Editor: Devaluation merely debilitates
Sir, While it was cheering to read an honest diagnosis of the US economy -
rare in these days of celebration of the American way of life - it is
disappointing that Wynne Godley and William Milberg (Personal View, July 6)
concluded that a cheaper dollar is 'just what is needed'. Yes, the US
suffers from a chronic trade deficit and is again sinking deeper into
cross-border hock. And for the first time since before the first world war,
the US is no longer a net earner on foreign investments. (I point this out
not to celebrate the virtues of overseas assets, only to note a profound
shift in international relations.) But will depreciating the currency solve
the problem?
Devaluation is the economic equivalent of steroids: it can bulk you up for a
little while, but it is debilitating over the long term. As Keynes famously
noted, admittedly before he was really a Keynesian, debauching a currency
'engages all the hidden forces of economic law on the side of destruction,
and does it in a manner which not one man in a million is able to diagnose'.
It impoverishes a country on a world scale, and diverts attention from
serious underlying problems like chronically low investment levels,
political drift, and social decay. Among the countries with chronically
depreciating currencies are the UK and Argentina; with appreciating ones,
Japan and Germany. Which club would you rather belong to?
The answer is not some Volcker II, a dramatic tightening by the Federal
Reserve; while that might boost the dollar for a while, it would depress
real investment and further worsen the trade picture, which is the last
thing the US needs. Instead of reviving one of the less fortunate aspects of
the Keynesian legacy, devaluation, we might revive some of the more
intriguing aspects, namely the repression of finance and the 'somewhat
comprehensive socialisation of investment'.
Of course, these are deeply unfashionable things to say, but who wants to be
a slave of fashion?
Doug Henwood,
editor/publisher,
Left Business Observer,
250W 85 Street,
New York, NY 10024, US
