FT  27 APR 94 / Survey of Pension Fund Investment (8): Property likely to be
the star - Now the froth has been blown off, the future of markets becomes
clearer
Merchant bankers and brokers were not the only ones to collect large bonuses
at the end of 1993. Fund managers also had a vintage year, with UK equities
offering returns of 27.9 per cent and UK bonds only slightly behind at 25.1
per cent.
The real star performance, however, came from overseas equities which,
assisted by currency gains, rose by 39.4 per cent. With that kind of
performance, there was plenty of Christmas cheer. Interest rates fell, bonds
boomed, mainstream equities soared and emerging markets disappeared into the
stratosphere.
Last year was one in which everything went right. Still, it did not look
quite that rosy halfway through the year: in UK equities, there was a 40 per
cent difference between the performance of the best and worst sectors in the
first six months of 1993. Correct stock selection was thus critical to
securing good performance.
It was only in the last quarter that markets really caught fire. Driven by
the last leg of the bond bull markets, equities were driven to ever lower
yields. In the UK, interest rate-sensitive equities did particularly well,
and the passion for multimedia, along with the relaxation of rules for
ownership of ITV companies, made media stocks star performers. Overseas,
emerging markets offered dramatic returns in the run up to Christmas.
After three years in which prices fell, UK property also did well: total
returns were 18.8 per cent. Again much of the rally came late in the year,
and property also suffered from the illiquid nature of the market. Many
funds were established to invest in the high returns available, but it was
difficult to get money into the market. Since property yields were higher
than gilt yields for most of the year, it was a natural investment for
anyone concerned about inflation.
Thus far at least, 1994 has been very different. UK gilts peaked right at
the end of last year, and equities topped out on February 2 after the US
Federal Reserve started to raise US interest rates. The change in policy had
been anticipated, but the psychological shock to the market was severe. Led
by Wall Street, equity markets have tumbled, with some of the best
performers in the run up to Christmas showing the sharpest falls.
To some extent the correction is a healthy reaction to markets which had
become severely overcooked. Long UK gilt yields of about 6 per cent were not
really justified by the heavy government borrowing requirement and the poor
UK inflation record.
The enthusiasm for all forms of assets, which came with continually falling
interest rates, blocked out reasoned assessment of which represented value.
A heavy inflow of private investors' money into savings bonds, unit trusts
and equities exacerbated the trend, as did the move by overseas investors
into the UK market. The notorious 'hedge funds' may not have been as active
in UK markets as legend by now tells, but they certainly helped fuel the
rise.
Now that the froth has been blown off the market - equities fell by almost
400 points and bond yields rose by almost 2 per cent - it is perhaps
possible to take a more sober view of what the rest of the year holds.
Short-term US interest rates are likely to continue to rise from the current
level around 3.75 per cent to around 5 per cent by early in 1995.
But that need not mean UK rates will have to follow slavishly. As the impact
of tax increases becomes clearer, there may still be small falls in UK
rates, and that may be supported by the continued decline of interest rates
on the continent.
Despite the concerns of many, the underlying inflation picture in the UK
remains good, and the balance of payments and public sector borrowing
deficits are not quite as horrendous as feared. It is also clear that the
chancellor wants interest rates to come down further.
Provided the inflation numbers remain comforting, that should offer some
succour to the gilts market. Yields of around 8 per cent look much more
attractive given the historical UK economic performance. While buyers may
remain nervous as the market stabilises, 8 per cent will probably start to
look like reasonable value. That confidence should help underpin the equity
market. The FT-SE 100 index seems to have found support around 3100, and
some selective buying has re-emerged. However, that selectivity will
probably remain the key to success. Cyclical recovery shares already
discount large earnings rises, but there may still be some potential for
those companies which can increase dividends above the market average.
Dividend increases in the reporting season just past were higher than
expected, and some companies are making haste slowly towards the aim of
higher dividend cover. Many utilities - notably the regional electricity
companies - still have substantial dividend cover and growth prospects. With
market dividend yields around 4 per cent and dividend growth around 5,
equities offer attractive 9 per cent returns before prices rise at all.
If the general mood in asset allocation is to be somewhat underweight in UK
bonds and selectively overweight in UK equities, there is also a strong urge
towards being overweight in property. The difficulty of getting money into
the market remains, but for anyone worried about potential inflation
problems, property yields only slightly below those of conventional gilts
look very interesting. Location is all important, but property is likely to
be a star performer in 1994.
