FT  14 MAY 94 / Finance and the Family: Foreigners keep the whip hand in
Tokyo - Neil Kerr looks at the continuing conflict between bulls and
sceptics
The tug of war in the Tokyo stock market continues. On the one hand are the
international funds, for the most part very bullish, which have invested
Dollars 40bn net so far this year (against Dollars 30bn in the whole of
1993). On the other are sceptical domestic investors, whether individual,
corporate or institutional. On balance, they are sellers of shares.
The conflict shows no signs of an early resolution. So far this year, the
market's rise of 10 per cent (18 per cent in sterling terms) represents a
handsome outperformance of all major world markets. The foreigners still
have the whip hand.
Just how long their nerve would hold if the yen/dollar exchange rate were to
fall below 100 for any length of time is the big question. That is because
the bulls' main assumption centres on an economic recovery after almost
three years of accelerating downturn (last year's rise of a minuscule 0.1
per cent in gross domestic product was the worst performance since 1974).
The key to recovery is domestic consumption. Rising real incomes are
expected to support increased consumer spending and residential investment,
while public investment remains exceptionally strong as a result of the
government's previous pump-priming measures. Consequently, consensus
estimates of economic growth are edging up, to around 1 per cent this year
and 2 per cent-plus next.
These bets would be in jeopardy if the yen - which, by most fundamental
measures, is already at least 20 per cent over-valued against the dollar -
were to be forced even higher. The depressed export sector would be crushed
further and the still-fragile recovery in domestic consumption might be
unable to withstand this latest in a series of deflationary shocks.
The optimists, however, see this currency threat as transitory. The yen's 13
per cent rise this year has been essentially political, prompted by the
trade dispute with the US over Japan's enormous current account surplus
(Dollars 131bn in 1993). But this surplus is expected to decline sharply
because of the yen's total 25 per cent appreciation since the beginning of
1993.
What is more, despite the instability of the Japanese government, the bulls
take more or less for granted that an agreement will be reached with the US
eventually. This will involve the much-discussed radical deregulation of the
domestic Japanese market (involving greater access for American goods and
services) and continued measures to stimulate the Japanese economy.
Such a programme is in the evident interests of both parties. The
alternative - a trade war which, among other things, would threaten a
collapse of the US bond market as Japanese capital was repatriated - is
almost unimaginable.
On this sanguine reading, Japanese-American accord should accelerate the
forces already working for a more realistic valuation of the yen. Not only
is Japan's current account surplus past its peak, but the present sharp
upward moves in US interest rates will stem the capital outflows from New
York which have so undermined the dollar in recent months.
The fact that the US administration is now alert to the perils of its
undervalued currency (and is prepared to put its money where its mouth is)
further confirms the bulls of the Tokyo market in their economic optimism.
If you accept the key assumption that the Japanese economy is in the early
stages of a sustained recovery, then rationalisations of Tokyo's present
stock market valuations demand only a modest suspension of disbelief. After
the 60 per cent or so decline in corporate earnings over the past three
distressed years, the historic 1993/94 p/e multiple for the Tokyo market is
around 85. The dividend yield is a shade under 1 per cent.
Even by Tokyo's traditionally exalted standards, these are very full
valuations, whether in an absolute sense or measured against 10-year bond
yields of 4 per cent (after their rise during the international bond
shake-out) and three-month interest rates of 2 1/4 per cent. Only on a
price/cash flow basis, which allows for such factors as unusually large
depreciation charges, does the Japanese ratio of 10 look attractive on an
international basis.
Yet, the effect of even tentative economic recovery on corporate profits -
now an historically low proportion of national income - could be remarkable.
This is because of the uniquely high operational gearing of Japanese
companies.
Owing to very high fixed and semi-fixed costs, such as wages, even small
improvements in sales will have a magnified impact on profits. Such a
stimulus to sales could come not just from underlying economic recovery but
also from greater monetary relaxation by the Bank of Japan. With an annual
inflation rate of under 1 per cent the case for further reductions in
short-term interest rates is compelling.
Pauline Pong, who runs M&amp;G's flagship Japan fund, is typical of those
portfolio managers who see Tokyo as an outstanding recovery play. In her
view, the potential for strong corporate earnings growth over the next few
years is substantial and 'likely to have been under-estimated by many
analysts'.
Such sentiments cut little ice with most local investors. Their caution
continues to be shaped by the continuing psychological fall-out from the
collapse of the late 1980s' 'bubble economy', and its accompanying
devastation of the financial system.
Domestic confidence is unlikely to return to the stock market until the
economic recovery has acquired tangible shape. The beguiling sales pitch so
popular in the West - which focuses on the fact that the level of the Tokyo
market is still barely half its 1989 peak - still finds few local buyers.
