FT  24 AUG 94 / Leading Article: Mr Zedillo's long agenda
The candidate of Mexico's ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, Mr
Ernesto Zedillo, won a convincing victory on Sunday in the most competitive
elections in Mexican history. He would be making a grievous mistake,
however, if he interpreted that victory as a signal that he should leave
Mexico's political system unchanged.
Many voices in the ruling party will be telling Mr Zedillo that the wide
margin of his victory means he should leave well alone. He should ignore
them. Another six years of denying the political opposition a proper voice
would serve only to intensify the strains which nearly took Mexico's body
politic to breaking point this year.
His first gesture of conciliation to opposition parties is welcome. But
given the tenacity with which the PRI has held on to power in its 65 years
in office, Mexicans are sceptical of gestures. Mr Zedillo needs rapidly to
take action.
A democratic system will only emerge if the ruling party is itself made
democratic. Mr Zedillo can begin work before he takes office by embarking on
reform of the PRI. This enormous task of disentangling the PRI from the
structures of the state has frustrated his predecessors since 1965.
An integral element of the needed reform is to give to party members the
right to choose candidates. This will deprive the president of an important
lever for the management of the state, but is essential if the PRI is to be
converted into a modern political party. Such reform has its dangers: the
powerful and often undemocratic traditionalists may well take over parts of
the party. However, if their candidates are forced to submit to free and
fair elections for political office, the danger may be reduced.
Ensuring free and fair elections is therefore the next important reform.
Although Sunday's elections were probably the fairest in Mexican history, it
is clear that a substantial minority - with some justification - still
considers the election process iniquitous. Elections must no longer be a
source of such political conflict. The way to ensure this is to hand the
entire electoral process - lock, stock and barrel - over to the independent
magistrates who oversaw Sunday's elections. These magistrates, chosen by
consensus among the political parties, performed admirably, but were
appointed late and were limited in their powers.
This is only the beginning of the huge task Mr Zedillo will face if he is to
follow up on his campaign promises to turn Mexico into a modern, law-based
society. Decentralising the political system, reforming the legal system and
the country's corrupt and inefficient police forces, and reforming the
social security and health systems are all necessary. Efforts in these
directions will bring him into conflict with some of the country's most
powerful vested interests.
The new president also inherits an unfinished agenda on the economy. He must
rid the private sector of many of the obstacles blocking growth. These
include monopolies both public - oil, railways and electricity - and private
 -in particular, telephones. Eliminating the monopolies would greatly
enhance economic efficiency. If growth were, partly as a result, to be 5 or
6 per cent a year, rather than the 2 to 3 per cent achieved under the
present administration, the country's tensions would be greatly eased.
