FT  16 JUL 94 / Rabin to meet Hussein at US summit
The Arab-Israeli peace process gathered pace yesterday as the US announced
the first public summit between the Israeli and Jordanian leaders and as
Israel made substantial overtures to Syria on the eve of a Middle East peace
shuttle by Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state.
President Bill Clinton said Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israeli prime minister, would
meet King Hussein of Jordan in Washington on July 25. The two neighbouring
states have technically been at war since 1948.
The announcement, confirmed by Mr Rabin's office, came after Mr Shimon
Peres, Israeli foreign minister, said the Jewish state recognised the
sovereignty of Syria over the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights. Mr Peres made
the remarks in an apparent attempt to break the deadlock in talks before Mr
Christopher arrived in the region on his third shuttle this year.
Taken together, the two moves represent a significant further step in
Arab-Israeli negotiations. Mr Clinton said the summit would be 'another step
toward the achievement of a comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle
East'.
The US plans to lay on a full ceremonial fanfare for the occasion. Mr
Clinton said that in addition to their meeting, Mr Rabin and King Hussein
would be invited to address a joint session of Congress. They will also
attend a formal dinner at the White House.
In Israel the Rabin-Hussein meeting is expected to bolster both the
government and public support for the peace process.
The summit will be seen as one of the first concrete benefits from peace
talks with Palestinians and a step to ending Israel's regional isolation
despite a 13-year-old 'cold peace' with Egypt.
For Jordan the move marks the determination of King Hussein not to be left
out of the unfolding Middle East peace process and to press Jordan's
interests ahead of wider Arab co-ordination, particularly with Syria.
As an inducement to Jordan to move ahead in its peace talks with Israel, the
US is discussing possible debt relief measures as well as the supply of new
military equipment.
The announcement of the Rabin-Hussein summit came after Jordanian and
Israeli officials ended technical talks yesterday to prepare for formal
negotiations next Monday. The preparatory talks also laid the groundwork for
a meeting in Jordan on Wednesday between Mr Christopher, Mr Peres and the
Jordanian foreign minister to focus on economic relations and regional
integration projects.
Progress in peace talks between Israel and Jordan will marginalise Damascus
and put pressure on Syrian President Hafez al-Assad to compromise in talks
over the Golan Heights. Israeli officials said yesterday that Mr Peres'
acceptance of Syrian sovereignty over the Heights marked a 'far-reaching'
concession to Damascus. Israel annexed the strategic plateau in 1981.
They said Mr Peres had attempted to offer a ground-breaking opening in the
talks which have been stalled by Israeli refusal to say how much land it
would return and Damascus' refusal to specify whether it would agree to a
full peace including open borders, trade and embassies.
Mr Christopher will also meet Mr Yassir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine
Liberation Organisation, to review the implementation of the Israel-PLO
peace agreement. He said he would discuss 'the steps that I feel he must
undertake to establish the accountability necessary to reassure the donor
community'.
Mr Clinton said the Rabin-Hussein meeting was 'another step' on the long
road to an era of Middle East peace. 'I will do everything I can to make
sure the peoples of the region realise the blessings of peace that have been
denied too long to them.'
