FT  12 OCT 94 / International Company News: Goodman and bankers are close to
agreement
Mr Larry Goodman, the Irish beef entrepreneur, is close to an agreement to
buy back the outstanding 60 per cent of Goodman International which he lost
when it was taken over by its banks as part of a rescue deal four years ago.
Mr Goodman and his backers are understood to have offered the 33 banks in
the Goodman syndicate, led by Lloyds Bank, up to IPounds 50m (Pounds 49m) in
settlement of debts in excess of IPounds 300m.
Goodman International has declined to comment on the negotiations other than
to say they are extremely complex and it hopes they will be successfully
completed by the end of November.
Under the proposed deal Mr Goodman's stake in the company would initially
fall from 40 to 35 per cent, but he is likely to have the option to buy back
most of the remaining shares. He will remain managing director.
Morgans Waterfall, a US 'vulture fund' specialising in high-risk
investments, is believed to be prepared to take a stake of up to 25 per cent
in the restructured company, while a group of Irish investors, based outside
the Republic, are expected to take up to 12 per cent. Morgans Waterfall has
refused to comment on the proposed investment.
Other Irish investors are due to participate, including the McCann family
who are also shareholders in Fyffes, the fruit and vegetable distributor.
Fyffes itself has ruled out taking a stake.
Klesch and Co, the London-based debt trader, has confirmed that it is also
involved in the buy-back. The deal is expected to involve a mechanism by
which Mr Goodman can increase his stake by buying out the other investors.
The new investors are expected to get representation on Goodman's board. Mr
John O'Donnell, finance director, is expected to remain, as is Mr Ian
Morrison, the chairman and a former governor of the Bank of Ireland.
Two agreements have to be hammered out between the would-be investors and
the banks. One will cover the exit mechanism for the banks, the other the
provision of banking facilities for Goodman. Up to 10 of the banks in the
consortium are expected to provide it with a working capital facility of
about IPounds 100m to cover the peak of the cattle slaughtering season.
Goodman and the banks have already reached agreement on the distribution of
the company's contingent assets should any be realised. Goodman is, for
instance, owed IPounds 175m by the Iraqi government for beef exported prior
to the Gulf war.
The company, Ireland's largest beef processor and one of the largest in
Europe, went into examination - the Irish equivalent of administration  - in
1990, owing its banks more than IPounds 500m.
