FT  29 JUL 94 / Tax-based healthcare 'less burden on economy'
Britain's tax-based system of financing healthcare places less burden on the
economy and industry than alternative funding arrangements, a study of
health and the economy concludes today.
The report says that in contrast with the insurance-based schemes in
countries such as the US, Germany, France and the Netherlands, funding from
general taxation did not represent a tax on employment. This was a
particularly important consideration given the government's concern to
improve industrial competitiveness.
The study, by the Institute for Health Policy Studies at Southampton
University, was commissioned by the National Association of Health
Authorities and Trusts. It was designed to test a claim by Mrs Virginia
Bottomley, the health secretary, that the tax-based method of funding the
National Health Service imposed a lower burden on industry than other
systems.
The NHS consumes about 6 per cent of gross domestic product - a low
proportion compared with other countries.
Britain's health spending is joint 19th among the 24 OECD nations, with only
Spain, Portugal, Greece and Turkey devoting a lower proportion of GDP to
healthcare. The report says that indicators such as life expectancy and
infant mortality show that Britain's performance was 'not markedly worse'
than most higher spending countries.
In this sense, the report says, international data supports the view that
the NHS - 83 per cent of which is financed through general taxation and a
further 13 per cent from national insurance contributions - provides good
value for money. Britain's centrally financed, cash-limited NHS has been
more successful than any other system in containing growth in spending on
health, and is relatively cheap to administer.
The main disadvantage of a tax-based system is the limited choice it offers.
Users of the NHS often face hidden costs resulting from long waiting times
and treatment in poor-quality buildings that are not reflected in
expenditure figures.
The report says health affects the economy in many wider ways than the cost
of providing healthcare. Some of the report's main concerns about healthcare
in Britain relate to such wider links.
It says the total cost of work-related illnesses and accidents is estimated
to be between Pounds 11bn and Pounds 16bn a year - the equivalent of between
2 per cent and 3 per cent of GDP.
It is widely accepted that unemployment has an adverse effect on health,
while 'those on lower incomes are much more likely to report poorer health
than those on high incomes'.
