FT  10 AUG 94 / TV farce in search of a theme tune: An attempt to bring a
little harmony to European media ownership rules
Media magnate Mr Rupert Murdoch sends a flutter through the UK political
system by hinting that the previously right-leaning newspapers he controls
might back Labour leader Mr Tony Blair. In Italy, Prime Minister Silvio
Berlusconi is still dogged by controversy over a possible conflict of
interest between his political duties and Fininvest media empire. These are
just two examples of why media ownership in Europe is a sensitive topic.
But the need to tread carefully has not stopped European Commission
officials overseeing the progress of Europe's single market from tackling
the subject. They are worried that, because media ownership rules differ
between countries, investment in the industry is being hampered.
'If the status quo is maintained,' says a Commission official, 'the European
market will not attract potential international investment in the media. In
addition, existing national players in the media will try to expand in other
markets around the world which will result in a loss of investment in the
Union.'
The challenge identified by the Commission is how the European Union can
take advantage of advances in broadcasting technology which are paving the
way for, among other things, pay television, video on demand, and a
proliferation of specialised channels.
The ideal solution, according to many Commission officials, is to harmonise
rules on media ownership at EU level - a position the Commission is likely
to adopt next month when it considers draft proposals from the directorate
responsible for the single market.
But it may be harder to sell such a policy to the 12 EU member states.
Asking nations to dismantle their legislation on media ownership - even with
the laudable aim of improving the investment climate - will prompt searching
debates about the EU's role in regulating the media, as well as discussions
in the industry, with politicians, the European Parliament, and the
Commission.
Those in the Commission who would like harmonisation will hope the anomalies
in the current patchwork of media ownership rules will give impetus to their
proposals.
For example, in the UK, there is no limit on the number of satellite
television stations that can be owned by one person. In Italy, no one person
can own more than three satellite or terrestrial stations. In France and
Spain, the limit is one.
In the Netherlands, newspaper publishers with a market share of more than 25
per cent are not allowed to own a TV channel. The same applies in Italy but
with a threshold of 16 per cent. In the UK, a newspaper owner, no matter
what the market share, cannot own more than 20 per cent of a terrestrial
channel, but there is no limit on ownership of satellite channels.
The problems created by such differences have surfaced during a consultative
exercise the Commission carried out last year among 70 companies and
industry organisations. It found that many companies believe European-wide
action to smooth out such wide inconsistencies is urgently needed.
As the Italian media group L'Espresso said in its submission: 'The
disparities which exist between national rules create distortions in the
allocation of investments by penalising those countries in which legislation
on media ownership is more rigid.'
Another concern to emerge from the consultation exercise was the fear of
publishers that out-dated rules on cross-media ownership would deny them the
opportunity to take advantage of developments in electronic media.
Not all the companies consulted agreed on the need for harmonisation. 'The
media pluralism regulations have proved no barrier to cross-border
investment by News International in the media,' said Mr Murdoch's News
International, which owns The Times and The Sun newspapers. Similarly,
Fininvest said: 'The limits on capital investment in television stations
imposed in varying ways and degrees in many countries do not in themselves
constitute a decisive restriction on international competition.'
Nevertheless the industry consensus was that national regulation should be
harmonised. 'I would say that so far there has been an amazing degree of
consensus,' says Ms Angela Mills of the European publishers council, the
media lobby group. 'We think it is right that the Commission should do this
now because of the impact of new technology.' Others point out that some of
those media companies less than enthusiastic about harmonising ownership
rules - such as News International and Fininvest - have an interest in
protecting their dominant positions in their base countries.
But even with most of the industry backing the principle of reform, it will
be hard to formulate a set of European-wide rules satisfying everyone.
Commission officials believe the best way of winning support for their
proposals is to take as pragmatic an approach as possible. Thus plans
expected to be unveiled next month would set two criteria for judging
whether a media organisation should be allowed to expand its interests:
first, the current audience size of the organisation, and second, the other
media interests controlled by its owner (the 'controller' test).
Setting rules of media ownership according to audience size would be
particularly appropriate if, as expected, technology leads to a
proliferation of 'theme' television channels. 'This is much better than
looking at the number of channels, because channels have very different
audience sizes,' says a senior Commission official.
The problem would lie in measuring the audience size and deciding at what
point a media operator should be prevented from expanding. These points are
the subject of a further study by the Commission.
But the more controversial point will almost certainly be the so-called
'controller' test. Here many member states are likely to argue the principle
of subsidiarity should apply, and that it should be up to nation states to
decide how much media influence an individual should be allowed. On the
other hand, some in the media industry fear lax controls would not achieve
the goal of harmonisation.
Channel 4 Television in the UK has told the Commission that 'in view of the
high standards of regulation on ownership already set in some national
states . . . it would be appropriate for a directive to set minimum (but
adequate) transnational standards'. The Commission is still considering how
a 'controller test' could be applied in practice. But it envisages its
proposed rules reflecting experience at a national level and dovetailing
with existing EU competition and company law.
The Commission is adamant that judging media ownership issues according to
its two criteria would not go beyond what is necessary to create a single
market.
But the balance will be hard to get right. Further consultations will follow
the publication of the Commission's proposals next month. It will then be up
to member states to decide whether to proceed with a new European directive.
Submissions sent to the Commission during its first consultative exercise
give some flavour of the arguments for and against new EU rules - and the
lobbying will only intensify. 'We think that, because of political pressure
from the European Parliament, this measure could end up being very
restrictive. We don't think the Commission can deliver,' warns one media
company executive.
Small wonder the Commission is treading gingerly. As one official puts it:
'This is a very emotional issue. We know what we want, but we know that in
this area, perhaps more than any other, we have to find a consensus first.'
