FT  08 AUG 94 / Few tricks left up his sleeve: Bill Clinton's presidency is
beginning to look compromised, confused and directionless
At his press conference last Wednesday, President Bill Clinton answered
eight questions on healthcare reform, four on Whitewater, three on trade and
the economy, two each on Haiti and his own public image, and one on North
Korea.
A visitor from Mars might need Whitewater explained, as many Americans still
do, but could otherwise conclude that the subjects accurately reflected
legitimate national concerns of the moment. A year ago the mix might have
been different, with the budget, Somalia and Bosnia more to the fore, but
it, too, would have been reasonably representative. An activist president in
a changing world would expect to find himself facing a catholic selection of
questions.
The difference is that the Clinton presidency can now, more than ever, be
fairly said to be on the edge of deep trouble. Admittedly, it was
fashionable to make a similar case in the summer of 1993, on the hypothesis
that a defeat on the budget, a failure to ratify the North American Free
Trade Agreement and an inability to reach a Uruguay Round agreement deal
were harbingers of a failed presidency. But all were successfully concluded,
giving the president, by any yardstick, an impressive first year.
It is much more serious now, for several reasons. One, passing healthcare
reform has always been the top priority of Mr Clinton and his wife: later
this month, both houses of Congress will finally come to votes on the issue,
but no sane person would currently bet on the result. The president has had
to accept substantial modifications to his original plans, to the point
where the House version is touted by its Democratic sponsors as 'not the
Clinton bill'.
But, if anything approximating universal insurance coverage is eventually
approved, he will receive a good chunk of the credit. If it goes down, he
will get much of the blame, no matter where the ultimate responsibility for
failure might fairly lie. Probable Republican gains in November's mid-term
elections, which may include loss of Democratic control of the Senate, imply
no second chance for what Mr Clinton describes as the most substantive piece
of domestic legislation since the 1960s.
Two, Whitewater was subcutaneous a year ago. But Washington, if not the
country, has been consumed by 10 days of congressional hearings focusing on
but a tiny fraction of the tangled tale of the first family's land
investments in Arkansas going back over 15 years. Nothing has been proven
and no heads have yet rolled, though Roger Altman, deputy Treasury
secretary, was seriously stretched on the rack. The spectacle of senior
White House and Treasury officials under the guns of congressional grandees,
rather than right-wing talk show hosts, can only be a public relations
disaster.
Then, late on Friday, a judicial panel replaced Mr Robert Fiske as
independent counsel with Mr Kenneth Starr, another Republican. It is too
early to say if any of Mr Fiske's interim findings exonerating
administration officials of obstructing justice will be overturned. But a
new and more protracted element of uncertainty has been inserted into the
investigations, which is not good for an administration increasingly
comfortable with Mr Fiske.
Three, Haiti brings Mr Clinton far closer to exactly the sort of foreign
military adventure that he came to office intent on avoiding. He resisted
much pressure to send US troops to Bosnia, eventually got them out of
Somalia, did not send them quixotically to Rwanda and did not overtly
threaten to use them against North Korea, all at the cost of being accused
as weak, indecisive and indifferent to human suffering.
But a combination of the sheer awfulness of Haiti's circumstances and
domestic political pressures, above all from his old friends in the
congressional black caucus, means he now stands armed with a UN Security
Council resolution empowering the use of 'all necessary means' to restore
democracy to Haiti. Curiously, as that resolution set off alarm bells around
the world, his administration, again divided between the interventionists of
the State Department and a cautious Pentagon, seemed to be drawing back from
imminent invasion, not least because intervention might complicate the
healthcare debate. But the fact remains there may be no alternative but to
send in the marines - and accept the consequences of the occupation of Haiti
and domestic political fall-out.
As last year, each of the above may turn out to be individually negotiable
shoals. It also should help Mr Clinton that there seems little wrong with
the economy, higher interest rates and twitchy exchange and currency markets
notwithstanding. But his public opinion ratings (in the low 40s) are the
worst of his presidency.
Some of that may reflect the depth of dislike, often outright hatred, he and
his wife inspire, and this, in turn, reflects the palpable decline in civil
political debate in America. The vitriol is no longer confined to the
lunatic fringes but even shows up on the floor of Congress. Last Tuesday
night, Congressman Dan Burton, the Indiana Republican, virtually accused the
Clintons of direct involvement in the death of Vincent Foster, the former
White House aide; he was speaking to an empty chamber but anybody watching
the fixed camera of C-Span, the political cable channel, would not have
known that.
But this does not account for the last and most troubling aspect of this
summer. Even the president's journalistic supporters, well aware of his
legendary powers of political recovery, have begun to wonder if he has not
irrevocably lost his way and even his spirit. E J Dionne wrote in the
Washington Post last week that, whatever Americans thought about sexual and
financial misconduct charges, 'they just don't want their chief executive to
be the subject of so many doubts, questions, rumours and jokes'. Michael
Kelley in the New York Times observed that 'Clinton's life trails him like a
peculiarly single-minded mugger, popping out from the shadows every time the
president is for a moment safe'.
The concerns of both transcended the personal. 'The central threads of this
presidency have disappeared,' Mr Dionne wrote. Mr Kelley's view was that,
having mastered the art of politics brilliantly, he was 'not perceptive
enough to see what politics was doing to him'.
Thus the early bold strokes - the budget plan, the first healthcare
presentation, the commitment to 'change' - became trimmed and hedged by the
inevitable politics of compromise. A year ago, it was still possible to
discern a clear if very busy game plan. But there now seems either to be
none or merely a series of expedient lurches that lack any coherence.
Haiti is, only perhaps, the prime example of this. The twists and turns of
Mr Clinton's policy are well documented: his campaign criticism of President
George Bush's determination to control the influx of Haitian refugees, his
adoption in office of Mr Bush's approach, the establishment of a naval
cordon to stop a new refugee flood, the aborted landing in Haiti of a US
ship carrying US and Canadian military advisers, tight and then looser
asylum application procedures, a stumbling search for safe havens,
half-hearted sanctions and finally the ratcheting up of economic and
political pressure on the Haitian junta via tougher sanctions and the UN
resolution. Throughout, the administration blew hot and cold on whether
ousted president Father Jean-Bertrand Aristide could be trusted.
At various points along this tortured road, Mr Clinton has appeared to bow
to political pressure. First it was from Florida, bearing the brunt of
looking after the boat people. Then, as conditions in Haiti worsened,
liberal activists demanded action. Randall Robinson of the TransAfrica lobby
went on a highly publicised hunger strike in Washington and the black
members of Congress demanded action.
The 38-strong black caucus, under the hard-nosed chairmanship of Congressman
Kweisi Mfume from Maryland, has leverage. Mr Clinton was grateful that
enough of them, mostly good liberals, had supported the deficit-cutting
budget bill and Nafta last year to ensure passage (but only after they had
struck some good bargains.) He knew he had let them down last summer by
dropping the nomination of Ms Lani Guinier, who is black, to run the justice
department's civil rights division and Mr Mfume told him so, bluntly and
publicly.
He still needs their support on healthcare, welfare reform and the omnibus
crime bill which envisages measures costing Dollars 30bn. Indeed Mr Mfume
fought long and hard for the inclusion of a 'racial justice' clause in the
crime bill, under which appeals against the death penalty could be launched
on grounds of a pattern of ethnic discrimination. Although the clause was
deleted from the legislation now in front of both houses, Mr Mfume is still
playing hardball, forming an unholy coalition with the gun lobby to delay
debate on the bill until he gets the assurances he wants from the
administration. He is likely to be as tough when welfare reform gets to the
drafting stage.
Last October, the black caucus called for a 'protective military force' to
facilitate Fr Aristide's return, though its arguments for intervention are
based on social justice rather than foreign policy considerations. 'If
Haitians were not black, we would not sit back and watch this murder occur,'
Mr Mfume has said, noting that there are no asylum barriers against
lighter-skinned Cuban refugees. The caucus was solidly behind Mr Robinson's
hunger strike and, when it sensed it was getting its message across, helped
end it.
Recently, Mr Clinton appointed Mr Bill Gray as Haitian special envoy. He was
a leader of the black congressional caucus for years before retiring in
1992. As it stands at present, the caucus is not displeased with the
direction of US policy. But any backtracking by the president carries clear
risks.
Republicans, long distrustful of Fr Aristide, claim that the caucus has
hijacked Haitian policy. Recently Mr Dick Cheney, the former defence
secretary and prospective presidential candidate, sarcastically painted the
imaginary scene of what would have happened if he had gone into President
Ronald Reagan and told him that Randall Robinson was on hunger strike and
that therefore Haitian policy had to be changed.
But the stronger Republican hand rests on the whole question of invasion.
Senator Robert Dole, the minority leader, laid down his marker last week by
getting the Senate to pass unanimously a non-binding resolution requiring Mr
Clinton to seek the approval of Congress before despatching troops. The
president diplomatically replied that he hoped to have the support of
Congress but added, 'like my predecessors of both parties, I have not agreed
that I was constitutionally mandated to get it'. This was, indeed, President
Bush's position before the Gulf war but he still found it politic to secure
congressional assent.
As a practical matter, it probably makes sense to play down talk of
invasion, while keeping up the pressure on the Haitian junta, thus leaving
Congress free to focus on healthcare and crime. But it would only take some
egregious atrocity in Haiti itself to throw that calculation out of the
window.
The Senate vote and plenty of other polling evidence suggests that Mr
Clinton would be disappointed if he sought to restore his popularity by
'remembering the Mayaguez' - the rescue in 1975 of US sailors captured by
North Korea which sharply boosted President Ford's standing. There are some
suggestions he might invade Haiti anyway if only to assuage the pain if
healthcare fails. But that would really bring Congress down on his head.
Maybe Mr Clinton was lucky that he got only two questions on Haiti last
week. At least his answer to one of them was his most concise explanation
yet of why the US should deem it of vital interest. 'I think our security is
caught up in whether the people in this hemisphere are moving towards
democracy and open markets and observation of the rule of law . . . if you
look at the possible ramifications of (the violations of the junta in Haiti)
on other countries in the Caribbean and central and South America that is
where our security interest is.'
But this came late in the game. Indeed the broader question now, on Haiti as
on so many other issues, is whether the president can still play the game as
once he could.
