FT  19 DEC 94 / Survey of Sweden (7): Growing rapidly - Tourism
Tourism is one of Sweden's fastest-growing sectors and, although the trade
is relatively young, ranks as the country's third-largest industry,
generating annual turnover of an estimated SKr98bn of which SKr21bn is
derived from foreign tourists.
The attraction of Sweden has to be, among many things, the country's
unspoilt environment and alluring scenery comprising 60,000 islands, 90,000
lakes, a 4,725-mile coastline and endless forests. There are also 350
museums in the country and a wide variety of special events throughout the
year.
The tourist industry peaked in 1989 when turnover hit SKr100bn, but
nose-dived by nearly SKr80bn during 1990-91 when the then Social Democratic
government led by Mr Ingvar Carlsson, increased value added tax on tourism
to 25 per cent in two stages.
The VAT increase coincided with the onset of the deepest recession to hit
Sweden since the second world war. But the industry recovered during 1991-93
after a new conservative Moderate government, led by Mr Carl Bildt,
reorganised the marketing of tourism and cut VAT to 12 per cent.
These factors were aided by the start of a recovery in the economy which
began at the end of 1993.
Nevertheless, even after the rate cut, Sweden's VAT remains significantly
higher than the European average. The Swedes argue vigorously that prices in
their country have become competitive with the rest of Europe while a main
priority of marketing seeks to dispel 'the myth' that Sweden is far too
expensive to be considered a holiday destination by more than just the
elite.
'Surveys show that many foreigners still believe that Sweden is too
expensive. Heavy resources are therefore being invested in marketing Sweden
abroad,' the Swedish Trade Council said in its 1994 annual report on the
country.
In the first nine months of this year, the number of overnight stays in
Swedish hotels by foreigners rose 13 per cent compared with the year-earlier
period, and industry executives are predicting that 1994 will be a record
year in terms of growth. Last year, foreigners' overnight stays alone
reached 6.1m.
During the first nine months of 1994, Dutch and Danish tourists accounted
for the highest growth rate in overnight stays in percentage terms, rising
respectively 25 per cent and 26 per cent while US visitors rose by 14 per
cent.
German tourists, the largest group of foreign visitors to Sweden, increased
their overnight stays by 13 per cent and UK tourists 11 per cent.
Another indication of the strength of this year's activity is a forecast
rise in the number of cruise ship passengers calling on Stockholm alone. It
is estimated that international cruise ships will make 125 visits to the
capital city this year, carrying a total of 70,000 passengers, representing
an increase of 10,000 passengers over 1993.
Mr Per-Johann Orrby, president of Next Stop Sweden (NSS), the Swedish Travel
and Tourist Council, attributes the rise in tourism's fortunes partly to
Sweden's attractive prices - in foreign currency terms - since the krona was
devalued by nearly 30 per cent in 1992. The reduction of VAT and a slight
recovery of the economy are also considered significant.
NSS reckons that sterling buys 15 per cent more in Sweden since the
devaluation, while the purchasing power of the US dollar has risen 18 per
cent and the German mark 30 per cent.
But the Swedes probably also have their next-door Nordic neighbours to thank
for foreign interest, following Norway's success in arranging the Winter
Olympics earlier this year.
For more than two weeks in February, hours and hours of pristine, sunlit
'Scandinavian' winter images were broadcast worldwide from Lillehammer in
Norway. Such coverage undoubtedly had a spill-over affect for Sweden and
must have improved the country's standing as a tourist destination.
The Olympics boosted Norway's tourist industry by as much as 5 per cent this
year but it would be difficult to quantify the effect it had on Swedish
tourism.
According to Mr Jan Brannstrom, managing director of Image Sweden, the
state-backed agency which promotes Sweden internationally, recent studies
revealed that about half the foreign tourists visiting Sweden do so as part
of a Scandinavian tour. But, he said, there were no plans for a joint
Scandinavian tourism marketing effort and, in the long-run, he saw few, if
any, benefits from such a scheme.
Another important factor which has undoubtedly lifted the awareness of
Sweden abroad is the apparent success of the big overhaul of the
organisational structure of marketing services for tourism. The Swedish
Tourist Board was dismantled and Image Sweden established together with NSS.
Image Sweden purchases marketing services from NSS for an estimated NKr60m
annually.
