FT  24 NOV 94 / Survey of Italian Banking and Finance (6): Anxiety over
fiscal deficit - Bonds' difficult year
Investors in Italy's government bonds markets have experienced a rough ride
this year, with a combination of international economic trends and local
political uncertainty hitting prices.
As one of Europe's 'high yielders', Italian government bonds were hard hit
by the general retreat of international investors from bond markets in
general and high-yield markets in particular, in the wake of the increase in
short term US interest rates in February.
In addition doubts have grown about the ability of the government of Mr
Silvio Berlusconi to tackle Italy's high fiscal deficit and its heavy debt
burden. The delay in the publication of the government's financial programme
in July contributed to initial scepticism.
The increase in short-term interest rates from 7 per cent to 7.5 per cent in
August followed pressure on bonds and on the lira. Investors have
subsequently become concerned that the proposals to reduce the fiscal
deficit contained in the 1995 budget, currently before parliament, are
insufficiently radical and that political tensions may interfere with budget
discussions.
'The budget relies excessively on one-off measures, thereby postponing more
significant action for subsequent years,' says Mr Jose Alzola, analyst with
Salomon Brothers.
Bond yields have risen steadily, both in absolute terms and relative to
paper issued by Germany. The yield spread of the Italian 10-year bond - the
BTP - over the 10 year Bund fell gradually through 1993 and early 1994,
dropping from a high of 671 basis points in April last year to 255 basis
points in May this year. Since then, however, spreads have widened, with the
spread in the 425 to 475 basis points range during October and November.
There are some grounds to suggest these fears are overdone. Reductions in
inflation has at least partially reflected the success of measures to
introduce flexibility to the labour market. especially he abolition of the
scala mobile wage indexation mechanism in 1993.
The economy is growing: GDP is forecast to increase by 3 per cent in 1995,
following an expected 2.2 per cent rise in 1994.
Italy has made good progress over the past four years in improving the
efficiency and professionalism of its debt markets, and - not withstanding
this year's setbacks - it has made some progress both in making its markets
more attractive to foreign investors and in increasing the maturities of its
public debt, thereby reducing its vulnerability to shifts in market
sentiment and changes in short term interest rates.
Traditionally, the bulk of Italy's debt has been short term, and much of it
has been in the hands of Italian families. Since most of these bought their
bonds directly, rather than through intermediaries, and tend to hold them
until maturity, the debt is also relatively illiquid.
During 1992 and 1993, Italy began to extend the maturity of its debt,
shifting funding away from short-term bills towards fixed-rate medium and
long-term debt. The average maturity of the debt has increased from two
years and 11 months at the end of 1992, to three years and two months at the
end of 1993, up to three years and five months in February this year;
although, since then, maturities have shortened.
Stamp duty on bonds was abolished early in 1994, and the system whereby
withholding tax was reimbursed to foreign investors improved. Auctions for
medium and long term bonds have been streamlined and the time taken to
settle trades has been reduced. In addition, a new two-tier system of market
making has been established, with a number of investment banks asked to play
a more active role in the debt market by becoming super primary dealers.
Super primary dealers - so far there are three, JP Morgan, Morgan Stanley
and Bank of America - must trade in at least 3 per cent of new issues and
secondary market in all classes of debt paper, and account for at least 1
per cent of trades in each separate class of paper. In addition, they must
meet higher minimum capital requirements.
Foreign investors bought heavily during 1992 and 1993, increasing their
holdings of lira-denominated from 4 per cent of overall debt in 1990 to
nearly 15 per cent in 1993, although that figure has since fallen back to
well below 10 per cent of the total.
The ratio between debt and GDP, which is expected to reach 128.5 per cent in
1995, is high and remains a source of concern for the markets, which fear it
will increase government pressure on a limited pool of savings and force up
interest rates.
However, Italy's ability to tap the international capital markets could
reduce possible upward pressure on interest rates.
Mr Vittorio Grilli, head of the treasury's debt management and privatisation
department, says that the aim of the government's eurobond programme is
modest. It 'is a window on the world . . . designed to help increase the
foreign component of domestic debt.'
Italy completed a Dollars 11.6bn euromarket borrowing programme for 1994 in
mid-November, when it finalised a Y450bn euroyen issue.
However, the fact remains that the government still has room for manoeuvre.
Even after the recent issue foreign currency debt is still estimated by
analysts at well under 8 per cent of the total debt.
