FT  26 APR 94 / Technology: Right to reverse engineer - A US battle to
produce compatible software
The US software industry is in turmoil over a court decision that may
severely limit companies' ability to produce compatible software products.
At issue is the continuing legal fall-out from two court rulings involving
Microsoft, the world's largest producer of personal computer software, and
Stac Electronics - a relatively small producer of 'data compression'
software.
Stac recently won a verdict of patent infringement against Microsoft,
forcing the software giant to remove a 'DoubleSpace' feature that almost
doubles the amount of data that can be stored on a personal computer hard
disk, from its products.
This verdict has caused much discussion in the software industry. But a
second, less publicised ruling, made in Microsoft's favour, is prompting
more serious debate. Stac has been ordered to pay Microsoft damages of
Dollars 13.6m (Pounds 9.3m) for misappropriation of trade secrets.
Stac denies any wrongdoing, saying that it only 'reverse engineered'
portions of Microsoft's MS-Dos PC operating system. Reverse engineering is a
common practice in the computer industry. It involves examining the
components and functions of a product to produce a competitive product that
matches the functions of the original.
Stac revealed during the trial that it made use of what are known as
'undocumented system calls' to produce its Stacker product. This product
also expands the data storage capacity of a PC hard disk, to work more
efficiently with the MS-Dos operating system. Undocumented system calls are
those parts of the operating system that are not detailed in manuals. Given
the complexity of the software, there are typically several undocumented
elements to an operating system.
'We are concerned that the jury has found that Microsoft can protect
undocumented calls as trade secrets,' says Gary Clow, chairman and chief
executive of Stac Electronics. The decision 'will have a profound effect on
how companies, both large and small, compete in the software industry', he
predicts.
Critics of the ruling say the central issue is 'reverse engineering'. They
say that if companies cannot use reverse engineering design methods it will
become very difficult to create products that work well with established
programs from large software companies such as Microsoft. This has prompted
an investigation of the case by the US Justice Department, which is already
conducting an extensive anti-trust investigation into Microsoft's business
practices.
According to San Francisco-based copyright attorney Robert Barr, who
represents several US software houses, the ruling could drive some software
companies to move to Europe because the European Community's software
directives 'expressly make it proper to reverse-engineer in the way that
Stac Electronics reverse-engineered parts of MS-Dos 6'.
'It would be a shot in the arm to the European software industry,' he says.
'The allegedly wrongful act (of reverse-engineering) would be legal in the
UK, so Microsoft would be hard-pressed to block exports to the US.'
Microsoft, however, simply says the jury made the right decision which Stac
must accept.
'A federal jury in LA returned a verdict against Stac on a trade-secret
claim by Microsoft. The jury even awarded punitive damages because it
considered Stac's actions deliberate,' says Paul Maritz, senior
vice-president of systems at Microsoft.
'Since then, Stac's president Gary Clow and others have devoted an enormous
amount of energy . . . trying to foster the belief that Microsoft will use
this verdict to pursue claims against (other) third-party developers who
legitimately use debugging tools to achieve or maintain compatibility with
Microsoft's operating systems. These statements just aren't true.'
