FT  30 JUN 94 / International Company News: Caterpillar recovery hits a snag
 -A union row is hampering the machinery group
Caterpillar, the US heavy equipment and machinery company, has been
returning to strength on the back of the US economic recovery, with sales
and the share price rising steadily since 1992. It is profiting from global
expansion in the mining, trucking, construction, and farm sectors, where it
has its biggest customers.
However, now that Caterpillar's chronic US labour problems have blown up
into a full-scale strike, the company's customers may find themselves
looking for other suppliers. Komatsu of Japan, Caterpillar's main competitor
in equipment, stands to benefit.
Morgan Stanley analyst Mr John Mackin says although the strike 'doesn't
affect the long-term outlook' for Caterpillar, it is bad business for
everyone involved.
The company earned Dollars 345m on sales of Dollars 11.2bn in 1993, a big
improvement over the previous year's losses. In the first quarter of this
year, it reported earnings of Dollars 192m, five times higher than in the
same 1993 quarter.
Wall Street analysts quickly upgraded their earnings estimates, noting that
a 20 per cent gain in first-quarter sales reflected not only the sharp
upturn in US demand, but an unexpected surge in orders overseas.
Caterpillar, they said, could easily earn Dollars 7.50 a share this year,
and as much as Dollars 9 in 1995. The company's share price, which has
trebled from its 1991 low, is forecast to reach Dollars 1.40 by the end of
1995. Although rising interest rates have flattened recent share
appreciation, they have not dampened Wall Street's enthusiasm for the
company.
However, the strike could hit the company's bottom line. The 14,000 United
Autoworkers Union (UAW) members who walked off the job last week had been
working without a contract since April 1992, when Caterpillar ended a bitter
163-day strike by threatening to hire permanent replacements.
Animosity between the union and the company has grown in the intervening
months, with the union building up a strike fund, rumoured to be close to
Dollars 1bn.
'This is a classic labour-management struggle and, with no talks planned,
its just a question of who blinks first,' said Mr John Stark, whose
newsletters track the transportation and machinery industries.
The strike was no surprise to the financial community. 'We built labour
unrest into our credit rating for the company, because they had not been
getting along for quite some time,' says Mr Tom Carroll, a fixed-income
analyst for Duff and Phelps in Chicago. 'Now it's just a question of how
long it lasts.'
Mr Stark says the most immediate problem for Caterpillar is how to honour
long-term supply contracts for its diesel engines.
The company is the second-largest North American supplier of heavy-duty
truck engines, and the heavy truck industry is in the middle of its biggest
rebound, heading toward annual North American production of 200,000 units.
Caterpillar, so far, has managed to maintain production at its key
Mossville, Illinois, diesel engine plant by manning it with salaried
employees and newly-hired workers.
The company has taken on 1,000 employees since September in response to
upbeat production schedules, and has accelerated hiring since the strike.
The company also claims 3,000 employees, or about 20 per cent of
union-affiliated workers, had crossed the picket lines as of Monday. The UAW
strongly disputes those figures.
Mr Jeff Hawkinson of Caterpillar says the diesel engine plant is running at
full production, and the company is 'revising production schedules based on
customer demand' in other product areas.
In some of its big machinery lines, Caterpillar could be in a tight spot.
The company was struggling to keep up with surging demand long before the
strike, putting many products on 'allocation', so they would go directly to
a buyer rather than sit in dealers' inventories.
One more expensive option would be to use its plants in Europe and Japan to
meet US demand. 'We have that ability,' said Mr Hawkinson, 'A lot of
machines we make here (in Peoria, Illinois) are also made in Belgium, and
the excavators we make in Aurora (also in Illinois) are the same as those we
produce in Japan.'
