FT  11 JUL 94 / Hutus struggle to forget the horrors: Few will admit to
having witnessed the slaughter of 800,000 Tutsis in Rwanda
'You understand there are certain things I cannot talk about.' The priest is
standing in the courtyard of a church which dominates the village of
Shangui, in the hills of western Rwanda. A paramilitary policeman hovers in
the background.
In front of him, children are filing obediently into a catechism class. He
avoids the far end of the courtyard, marked by the indelible evidence of a
horrendous crime. Room after room is splattered with blood, blackened by
fire, or shattered by the blasts of hand grenades.
Father Aime Mategeko says he was not present when Hutu militias invaded his
church in late April and hacked 4,000 Tutsis to death. 'I was in another
parish when the troubles began,' he says. 'I do not know who the attackers
were, or how many people they killed.'
He feels uncomfortable with the questions of prying foreigners, which force
him to confront one of the worst crimes against humanity since the Nazi
Holocaust. 'What happened here happened throughout the country,' he
ventures. 'Part of the population felt threatened by the other part and were
forced to defend themselves.'
Father Aime is not alone in offering such tortuous explanations, which
obscure the responsibility of the killers as well as the identity of their
victims.
He will not say where the dead are buried. 'As priests,' he claims, 'we did
everything possible to protect the people, but it was not enough.'
This is a claim disputed by survivors of the Shangui massacre.
'It was only thanks to the intervention of Franciscan nuns that 420 of us
survived,' says an ageing Tutsi who escaped to a Red Cross refugee camp near
Rwanda's border with Zaire.
Throughout the country, the Hutu community, the largest of Rwanda's two
ethnic groups, is engaged in a process of collective amnesia.
Hutus cannot deny knowledge of what took place. Evidence of massacres can be
found in almost every village. Yet few Hutus admit to having been present at
the slaughter of 800,000 Tutsis that followed the assassination of President
Juvenal Habyarimana on April 6.
Shame weighs so heavily that the word Tutsi, like the race of tall, proud
pastoralists who once ruled over the Hutu majority, has been virtually
erased from the Rwandan vocabulary. Others prefer to describe the massacres
as a popular uprising against those who killed Rwanda's Hutu president.
Ever since Tutsi exiles launched a guerrilla war against the Habyarimana
dictatorship in 1990, the Tutsi menace has been a cornerstone of government
propaganda.
Despite the lack of evidence, Habyarimana's supporters did not hesitate to
blame the rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) for shooting down the
president's aircraft. Over the government airwaves, Hutus were incited to
take revenge.
The propaganda became more strident as the rebels gained military ground.
Government radio broadcast reports of atrocities allegedly committed by the
RPF were used to blur the distinction between Tutsi fighters and civilians
and to justify their indiscriminate slaughter. There is even evidence to
suggest the genocide was planned.
Tutsi survivors speak of government officials visiting churches and stadiums
with lists of people to be executed. The first victims were educated or
wealthy Tutsis and Hutu opponents of the Habyarimana regime.
'The extermination of Tutsis was so radical, so systematic, I have no doubt
it was prepared by the Hutu extremists in the government and army,' says a
Tutsi priest whose life was spared. 'Habyarimana's death was just a pretext
to begin the massacres.'
Among the Hutu militia, who call themselves Interahamwe ('those who attack
together'), there are those who do not regret killing neighbours, friends
and children. 'You must understand that Paul Kagame (the RPF military
commander) left Rwanda when he was two years old,' explains a young militia
on the road to Shangui. 'If we allowed Tutsi children to escape, they would
return to attack us a few years from now.'
Most Hutus blame the Tutsis for their own fate. If the RPF had not invaded
Rwanda, they say, the killings would not have taken place. Hutus believe
Tutsis have been guilty of massacres in rebel-held areas. They say Tutsis
have hidden the corpses in pits 60 metres deep to conceal the evidence of
their crimes. Such beliefs are essential in a society guilty of genocide,
and few are able to distinguish the fact from the fiction.
In the Bisesero hills, overlooking Lake Kivu, Hutu villagers are terrified
of the gunfire that echoes in the distance. They say Tutsi rebels have
infiltrated this government-held zone and claim many Hutus have been killed.
Less than two miles away, small groups of emaciated and badly wounded Tutsis
stumble on to the mountain road like an apparition from hell. For the past
three months they have been hiding in the woods by day and scavenging for
food at night as the army and militia hunted them down like animals. These
were the shots the Hutu villagers heard. When French soldiers arrive to
protect the Tutsi survivors, they train their guns on Hutu militias who can
be seen on the next mountain ridge.
Soon, however, Hutus may also become victims of Rwanda's reign of terror.
'When the war ends,' says a university lecturer, 'we fear that the Hutus who
have killed will turn on those of us who have not killed because we know the
truth of what happened.'
Those who breach the conspiracy of silence receive death threats. Few
believe those who instigated the genocide will be brought to trial. The few
thousand Tutsis who survive in French-guarded refugee camps say they will
only feel safe when they are granted asylum in another country. They cannot
envisage the day when Hutu and Tutsi will live together again.
For the Tutsi rebels, currently poised to win the civil war, the victory
looks set to be a hollow one.
