FT  29 SEP 94 / Pensions ruling will put costs on employers: Part-time
workers could get benefit rights for first time
European employers face costs of billions of pounds after part-time workers
 -mostly women - won a significant victory in the European Court of Justice
yesterday, with a ruling that could give many of them pension rights for the
first time.
Despite this additional expense, employers' groups in the UK expressed
relief at other elements of the judgment which will reduce future pension
costs. This is because employers who have typically allowed women more
generous benefits through retirement at 60 may now cut these and force women
to work until they are 65, the same as men.
The landmark rulings, part of a series of judgments in Strasbourg, came
after years of uncertainty about how employers should equalise pension
rights for men and women.
The court ruled that barring part-time workers from pension scheme
membership could amount to indirect discrimination against women, and that
it must be stopped. Moreover, it said employers should have realised this in
1976 following a previous ruling by the same court.
Because that decision was ignored, part-timers should have the right to
claim benefits for past service dating back nearly 20 years, the court said.
The UK government's actuary has calculated that, at worst, yesterday's
ruling on part-time workers could cost British industry Pounds 7bn. In the
Netherlands, where over 30 per cent of the workforce is part-time, employers
face a bill of up to Fl 1bn (Pounds 366m).
The six separate cases decided yesterday were brought by individuals and
pension fund trustees seeking clarification of the court's key Barber v GRE
ruling in May 1990. This concluded that employers could not offer members of
one sex better benefits than the other. But it has been unclear since then
just how equality should be applied.
The effect of the court's rulings will be to encourage employers to reduce
pension rights for women, said Mr John Cunliffe, partner at McKenna and Co,
one of the UK law firms involved in the case. 'Barber is a man's judgment,'
he said.
Pension consultants said the ruling may not impose as harsh a burden as
employers' groups fear. Employers who can provide 'objective justification'
for barring part-timers from joining their pension schemes will not be
required to do so for either future or past service.
Also, the court ruled, pension scheme members claiming retrospective
membership in schemes requiring employee contributions will have to pay all
past contributions to receive benefits.
Attacking the decision on part-time employment, Mr Tim Melville-Ross,
director-general of the UK Institute of Directors, said: 'The judgment will
cost British industry billions of pounds but will have little effect in
other member states which do not have the great advantages of Britain's
funded company pensions.'
He added: 'Many companies have already voluntarily extended their pension
schemes to part-time workers. This should be encouraged but not imposed.'
Pensions ruling: details of the judgment, reaction and background, Pages 8
and 9
Editorial Comment, Page 19
