FT  15 OCT 94 / Reluctant Iraqi citizens toe Saddam's line on borders:
Recognition goes against historic claims
If President Saddam Hussein is ready to renounce Iraq's claim on Kuwait,
most Iraqis will of course agree with him.
'Whatever President Saddam Hussein says, we will follow his instructions,'
said Mr Radwan Khalaf Mohammed, a 60-year-old waiting for a taxi to his
Mosul home in Baghdad yesterday. 'If he wants us to recognise Kuwait, we
will be with him.'
But even in the streets of Baghdad, where moustachioed men sidle up and
listen closely to any exchanges with foreigners, some Iraqis were prepared
to say that, as far as they were concerned, Kuwait is, was and ever shall be
part of Iraq.
'Should there be borders between Iraq and Kuwait? No,' said a 26-year-old
theatrical director. 'We all know, from since we are kids we've known, that
Kuwait is part of Iraq.'
'I cannot stand to hear say that we are to recognise Kuwait, even my body
shakes,' said a 44-year-old shopkeeper, who was indeed shaking. 'My arm is
trembling when I hear this, because we have for years known that Kuwait is
an Iraqi country.'
In fact, Iraq has long maintained that Kuwait has always been Iraqi - from
Ottoman times. Iraqi historians have taught generations of Iraqi
schoolchildren that the emirate was part of the vilayet, or administrative
district, of Basra. Western and Kuwaiti historians contend the emir of
Kuwait enjoyed considerable freedom from Ottoman rule and that Iraq's claim
is poorly based.
While successive Iraqi rulers have held diplomatic ties with successions of
Kuwaiti counterparts - including, up to the summer of 1990, Mr Saddam and
Sheikh Jaber al-Sabah, the Kuwaiti emir - Iraq sought to invade its southern
neighbour first in 1962, when a joint British-Arab force held the line, then
again, with a seven-month occupation and bloody consequences, in 1990.
If Mr Saddam unequivocally recognises Iraq's border with Kuwait, which for
the first time was formally demarcated by a UN commission after the Gulf
conflict, he would be the first Iraqi leader to do so.
Iraq has never been content with the loosely sketched British demarcation of
1922. Though this served as the roughly accepted line until the UN
demarcation, it relied on such imprecise markers as palm trees and low
rising rock formations in the featureless desert scrub.
Kuwait quietly ceded a strip of its northern coast to Iraqi control during
the Iran-Iraq war as a gesture of support for Baghdad, which used the land
to build a military hoverport at Umm Qasr, a facility now formally back in
Kuwait and housing the headquarters of the Unikom force which monitors the
present border.
Before the past week's border crisis, Unikom frequently reported shootings
across the desert line and, in January last year, incursions by Iraqis which
included the theft of a Silkworm missile stored in what used to be an Iraqi
military bunker.
Yesterday's declaration by Mr Andrei Kozyrev, Russia's foreign minister,
that Iraq would now recognise the border and Kuwait's sovereignty with 'no
conditions' holds some promise of closing this chapter of Gulf border
belligerence.
But if Iraq's recognition suggests that the Kuwait invasion and subsequent
war - costing tens of thousands of Iraqi lives - was a mistake, few Iraqis
will risk saying so in public. Instead, they argue that Mr Saddam has
rightly decided to remove any further pretext for continued sanctions or
further bombardment of their cities.
News that Russian diplomacy and apparent Iraqi concessions might bring
relief from the increasingly bitter scourge of sanctions was greeted with
cautious relief, deep scepticism that America will allow this to happen, but
an unmistakably profound desire that it should be so.
'It will be a better life for me,' said a tea vendor in his 30s who said he
fought in the Gulf war. 'I will be able to get married, have a wife and
child and have a better life. Conditions are not for this now.'
Booming over the posh but increasingly impoverished Baghdad suburb of
Mansour, the preacher's voice after Friday prayers implored: 'Please help us
to bring our enemies to reason.'
That task has now been entrusted to the Russian foreign ministry and Mr
Tariq Aziz, Iraq's deputy prime minister, who will take their diplomatic
package to the UN Security Council next week.
