FT  05 SEP 94 / Youthful Brazil faces problems of old age: Life expectancy
is rising while the birth rate is continuing to fall
Brazil looks set to enter the next century with 40m people 'missing'.
According to projections made in the 1970s, its population would reach 212m
by the year 2000. But according to latest predictions, the total will be far
less, probably 172m.
The reasons for the sharp slowdown in population growth are also seen in
other Latin American countries. They include a drastic fall in female
fertility rates, mainly due to increased use of contraceptives and rapid
urbanisation. The consequences, which include an ageing society and serious
strains on social and employment needs, have not yet been addressed.
'It is the population above 65 which will grow the most in the next decades.
Brazil will have to live with this phenomenon, which is well known in
developed countries, without having overcome typical problems related to
under-development,' says demographics professor Jose de Carvalho.
Brazil's population change started in the 1940s. Improved medical and basic
services led to falling mortality rates. Fertility rates remained high until
the end of the 1960s, leading to rapid population growth and a society with
more than half its members under 20 years old.
It also encouraged a belief, still held by many today, that Brazil was
blessed with an eternally young and fast growing population. At the first
international population conference in Bucharest in 1974, Brazil's
population was 100m and expected to double rapidly.
But the female fertility rate - the average number of births per
child-bearing woman - began a startling fall from 5.8 in 1970 to 4.3 in 1975
and 3.6 by 1984. In a recent study of Sao Paulo state, Brazil's richest, the
fertility rate was 2.3, in line with some developed countries.
The fall was partly due to rising education and urbanisation, as families
moved from agricultural to industrial jobs. But the main reason was
increased access to, and demand for, contraception. By 1986, 66 per cent of
women of child-bearing age said they were using some form of contraceptive.
Of these, about 40 per cent had been sterilised and a further 40 per cent
used the pill. By 1990, contraception use had risen to 69 per cent.
These rates are high, considering Brazil is the world's largest Catholic
country with a still conservative church hierachy. Abortion is illegal
unless the woman has been raped or is in medical danger.
Officially, the church promotes the Billings method, which teaches couples
to avoid sex during ovulation. But very few couples obey, suggesting the
church is, unofficially, more liberal than it appears or losing its sway.
Padre Antonio Carlos Frizzo, whose parish is in the poor suburbs of Sao
Paulo, says couples must choose. 'If a couple asked advice on sterilisation,
which is rare, I would take into account their economic situation and number
of children, the love between them and whether another method is possible.
'But the couple must decide, and that's something we should not and cannot
try to stop. And their decision has to be supported, too. This might be
criticised in the Vatican, but we are dealing with people in real
situations,' he says.
The increasing demand for sterilisation has a startling side-effect - it has
helped make Brazil the world leader for caesarian births. These account for
roughly one in three deliveries, about twice the rate for England and Wales.
The reasons are complex. Some women think caesarian section a 'modern' way
to give birth, a view hospitals encourage, while others fear the pain
involved in vaginal deliveries. Another reason is that when giving birth by
caesarian, a woman can request to be sterilised at the same time and the
government pays. Outside pregnancy, women have to pay to be sterilised,
usually at semi-legal clinics.
The declining birth rate will transform Brazil over the coming decades.
Population growth, which in the 1970s was 2.4 per cent, has fallen to 1.9
per cent and is still declining.
Today, 35 per cent of the country's 157m population is under 15 years old.
By 2020, the percentage will have fallen to 24 per cent. By about 2040, with
a rapidly aging society, the population will reach about 220m and stabilise
or even fall.
This prompts the church and other anti-abortion groups to argue that
population control is now obsolete in Brazil, especially given the country's
undeveloped agricultural land. A more stable population will also allow
better government planning. In the past, rapid population growth in cities,
for example, has prevented governments developing long-term urban plans.
But the changes will also provide some sobering challenges. The number of
people of working age is set to grow 2.4 per cent a year for the next
decade, adding to pressures on the economy to create jobs.
The social security system, established when the average age at death was
45, must be reformed to cope with life expectancies of 64 and 69 for men and
women respectively.
The country's under-funded public health system must emphasise preventative
medicine if it is to cope with the increasing demands of an ageing
population. Finally, the growing number of elderly from smaller families
will need extra services.
Unfortunately, Brazil does not seem greatly aware of these challenges.
Because of the government's economic problems, the 1990 census was postponed
to 1991. After further spending cuts, only basic findings are available.
