FT  28 JUN 94 / The Delors Succession: The EU's unseemly family feud -
Lionel Barber tracks the rivalry and division that ended in failure to
decide on a new Mr Europe
On the evening of December 9 1991 the leaders of western Europe gathered in
the Dutch border town of Maastricht for final negotiations on a new treaty
on European political and monetary union.
Over dinner in Maastricht City Hall, the conversation turned to the future
of Jacques Delors, the visionary, volatile Frenchman who had contributed as
much as anyone around the table to the cause of European integration.
Delors' second term as president of the European Commission was due to
expire at the end of 1992. It was time to think about a successor.
'It must be one of us,' declared Felipe Gonzalez, Spain's prime minister, to
general approval.
From his first month in office, in 1985, Delors had steadily accumulated
power. The 1992 Single Market programme, the European Economic Area, the
grand design for political and monetary union - all bore his indelible mark.
Delors had turned into Mr Europe. Next time, Europe's leaders wanted the
Commission president to come from their own ranks.
The president is chosen by unanimous decision of the 12 heads of government
of the European Union, meeting in secret session known as the European
Council. The Maastricht dinner conversation appeared to seal the chances of
one member of this exclusive club - past or present - taking over the top
job in Brussels.
But that solemn pledge of solidarity degenerated over the next two and a
half years into a family feud that culminated in the debacle in Corfu at the
weekend when the UK vetoed the choice of Jean-Luc Dehaene, the Belgian
premier. It has also cast the entire process of selecting the president of
the European Commission into question.
The story of the Delors succession offers a rare insight into the manner in
which Europe's leaders conduct business. It is a tale of rivalry between
small and larger states, fear about the preponderance of German power, and
the predicament of the UK inside the European Union - a fact underlined by
British prime minister John Major's calculation in the early hours of last
Saturday morning that isolation among his European partners was preferable
to losing the support of Conservative Euro-sceptics at Westminster.
It is also a story about the mental contortions and hesitations of one man:
Ruud Lubbers, the youngest and longest-serving Dutch prime minister ever,
whose hopes of a new career on the European stage foundered on Chancellor
Helmut Kohl's resentment over his attitude to German unification.
At least two leaders present at that Maastricht summit had their ambitions
fixed on succeeding Delors. The first was Lubbers, a millionaire who came
from a line of Rotterdam industrialists. The Jesuit-educated Lubbers' weak
point was a stubborn streak and a self-appointed mission to 'stand up to the
Germans', says a senior EU diplomat.
The second was Wilfried Martens, a long-serving Belgian prime minister whose
enthusiasm for European political integration infuriated Margaret Thatcher,
the UK prime minister, in the 1980s. A thoughtful man from Flanders, his
chief disadvantage was that he had alienated President Francois Mitterrand,
resisting the French leader's campaign to move the European Parliament
full-time from Brussels to Strasbourg.
In the spring of 1992 Chancellor Kohl, still riding high after the
unification of Germany, informed Martens that he was the best candidate to
head the Commission. Kohl had sent a similar message to Gonzalez the
previous year. But Martens guessed, correctly, that Gonzalez would be unable
to leave Madrid without bringing down his Socialist government.
But the summer of 1992 changed everybody's calculations. Danish voters
rejected the Maastricht treaty in a referendum, plunging the Union into
crisis. Suddenly, Delors did not look so dispensable. Despite mutterings
from Major, Delors was re-appointed for a third term, albeit for a curtailed
two-year stint ending on January 5 1995.
At that point, EU club rules suggested that the successor to Delors - a
French socialist - should be a conservative from a small member state. As
president of the European People's Party, the umbrella for the Christian
Democrats, Martens looked well-placed. He had the right background (the Low
Countries), and he could count on the support of Lubbers, his most obvious
rival.
'Mr Lubbers always defended my candidature,' recalls Martens, 'He said: I am
not a candidate if you are a candidate.'
Meanwhile, Sir Leon Brittan, chief EU trade negotiator, had been thinking of
making a run for the post for some months and was formally asked to enter
the race during a meeting with Major in Downing Street in the spring of
1993. The Brittan candidacy, though clearly a long-shot, appeared to offer
the UK a bargaining chip in the coming negotiations.
By the autumn of 1993, it was clear that Martens' chances of succeeding
Delors were ebbing away. He had resigned as premier a year earlier, his
energy sapped after more than 11 years in office juggling the Flemish and
French factions in a stream of coalition governments. His successor was his
former chief of staff, a little-known Flemish politician by the name of
Jean-Luc Dehaene.
Dehaene's political career advanced under the trade union wing of the
Christian Democrats. He was known as 'the fixer', 'the plumber' or 'the
carthorse'. Despite his vulgar language, scruffy donkey jackets, and greasy
hair, Dehaene was widely recognised as the power behind the premiership in
the late 1980s.
On July 1 1993 Belgium took over the rotating EU presidency from Denmark.
The prospects were poor: the Maastricht treaty was still unratified in the
UK, and the German Constitutional Court had still to pronounce its verdict
on it. Divisions inside the Union were emerging over world trade talks under
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. On August 2 the European
exchange rate mechanism collapsed under a wave of speculation against weaker
currencies, forcing members to create a de facto floating exchange rate
system.
For Dehaene, the idea of a run for the Commission presidency could not have
been more remote. His coalition government remained shaky. Labour unrest
threatened. There were calls to abandon the policy of shadowing the D-Mark,
a move which would have jeopardised Belgium's anti-inflation policy.
The 'plumber' pulled out his tool-box and produced plans for a 'social pact'
 -an agreement between government, employers and trade unions which amounted
to Belgium's most ambitious austerity programme since the second world war.
Watching events in Belgium with interest was Chancellor Kohl. His favoured
candidate, Martens, had failed to win the support of the Belgian government
and Lubbers was anathema to him. The only candidate on offer was Sir Leon,
whose free trade views and British nationality were unacceptable to France,
Germany's main partner.
A senior German official says that Kohl was soon impressed with Dehaene's
down-to-earth manner, his energy and his political skills. 'The Belgians are
the artists of compromise because of the precarious nature of their country.
That is very attractive for Kohl who is also a wheeler dealer by nature,'
recalls the official.
A special European Council called in Brussels to decide the location of more
than a dozen new Euro-institutions provided the occasion for their
relationship to develop.
Kohl was desperate to secure the the European Monetary Institute, forerunner
of a future European central bank, for Frankfurt. Putting the EMI in the
same city as the Bundesbank was viewed as 'the absolute minimum' needed to
appease the German public's fears about giving up the D-Mark in exchange for
a single European currency. But the British were holding out for London, and
Lubbers was campaigning for Amsterdam.
One week before the Brussels summit, Lubbers delivered a provocative speech
in the German town of Munster. He suggested that Germany was exaggerating
its role as 'paymaster of Europe'. He said it was unwise to neglect the
interests of smaller member states in a political union. He added that the
Dutch guilder was just as sound an 'anchor' currency as the German mark.
Kohl was furious. He thought Lubbers was underestimating the shift in German
public opinion against Maastricht and the single European currency - a shift
which threatened to undermine his own historic mission to bind a
newly-united Germany into an integrated Europe.
The summit in Brussels on October 29 1993 opened with a torrent of special
pleading, with the Spanish and British at their most aggressive. 'Dehaene
was a model of self-control,' recalls a participant. 'He sat perfectly still
and let the others run out of steam until they realised there was no other
answer (to Frankfurt). That takes a lot of nerve.'
Kohl was so impressed that he asked Dehaene why he had not thought of
putting himself forward as a candidate to succeed Delors. The Belgian
premier was stunned. A friend recalls that he could not imagine that he was
in the same league as Delors. His initial response was to employ his
favourite weapon: silence.
The German approach was the result of prior consultation with the French.
President Mitterrand had already agreed with Chancellor Kohl that, after
Delors, it was a Christian Democrat's turn to head the Commission. Edouard
Balladur, the French prime minister, later told French journalists that he
had come up with the name of Dehaene.
Around this time, Lubbers talked to Kohl. 'He asked me if I was interested
in the job. I did not exclude the possibility,' recalls the Dutch premier.
'He asked me if I was supporting Mr Martens. We agreed to try to seek a
(joint) Christian Democrat candidate.'
The conversation ended with a promise to talk things over again in the
spring. Lubbers did nothing to encourage the impression he wanted the job;
but Kohl may have deliberately introduced Martens' name to signal to Lubbers
he could not expect German support.
The exchange points to the complex relationship between the two men. Kohl
has never much liked Lubbers, and Lubbers has never much cared for Kohl.
Some blame Dutch uneasiness about their big German neighbour and the
memories of Nazi occupation.
A senior EU diplomat says Kohl cannot abide his manner and his independent
streak. All agree the relationship soured irretrievably during German
unification. Later, in a private moment of exasperation, Kohl declared he
was against Lubbers because he was 'egotistical, anti-German and an
accountant'.
Lubbers was not alone in harbouring doubts about the speed with which Kohl
sought to unify East and West Germany in 1989-90. Mitterrand and Thatcher
shared his concerns. But it was the Dutch leader who spoke out most
forcefully over a dinner at the European summit at Strasbourg in December
1989.
Lubbers began by saying there were dangers in talking about
self-determination and 'one German people'. It was impossible to unite all
the Germans in Europe. He urged Kohl to be clear about the Oder-Neisse line
 -which marked Germany's border with Poland - so as not to 'give
expectations' to Poland's minority German population.
Kohl said Germany had paid for the last war by losing one third of its
territory. He intended to be '100 per cent' clear on the Oder-Neisse line,
but the timing of his statement on it would be his own responsiblity. As the
dinner broke up, one participant recalls Kohl thundering at Lubbers: 'You
have not learnt the lessons of history.'
On January 10 1994, the date of the Nato summit in Brussels, Lubbers was
again asked whether he wanted the Commission job. This time, it was Gonzalez
who failed to receive a clear answer. Fearing that Kohl would renew pressure
on him to run, Gonzalez issued a statement saying he had no intention of
leaving Madrid and that his first choice was Lubbers.
The next approach came from the French. Again, Lubbers declined to give a
firm commitment, citing uncertainty about the upcoming general election in
the Netherlands.
Lubbers admits in retrospect that he may have played into the hands of Bonn
and Paris by giving the impression that he was not interested in the job.
What is more, by this time Sir Leon, exploiting his role in reaching an
agreement in the Gatt world trade talks, was touring Europe's capitals in
the first-ever public campaign for the top Brussels job.
On February 9, Martens visited Dehaene who hinted for the first time that he
was thinking about the Commission presidency.
The truth dawned on Martens two weeks later when he visited Hamburg to
attend the Christian Democrat congress. Chancellor Kohl indicated he might
be interested in backing Martens to be head of the Christian Democrat
grouping in the European Parliament, after the death of Bernard Saelzer,
Kohl's protege. Then the Chancellor added: 'I don't understand why Dehaene
is not a candidate (for Commission president), he handled the presidency (of
the Union) so well.'
The following day, February 23, Delors paid a visit to Madrid to see
Gonzalez. He asked the Spanish premier if he was running. The answer was No.
'In that case, it will be Dehaene,' said Delors, to Gonzalez's surprise.
Soon afterwards, word of the Franco-German push for Dehaene was leaked to
the Guardian newspaper. It looked like a trial balloon to test reaction
among the other member states. The Belgian premier remained silent, though
by some accounts he had not been forewarned.
By April, Lubbers was becoming desperate. He remained committed to Martens,
but was pressing his own candidacy privately in European capitals. Yet his
public position was that he would declare his intentions only after the
Dutch general election on May 3.
Lubbers' position looked all the more vulnerable when Peter Sutherland, the
Irish head of Gatt and a former EU Competition commissioner, announced that
he would leave his post at the end of the year. He then hinted he might be
interested in the Commission job - only to be disowned by the Irish
government.
Minutes after the result of the general election result in the Netherlands,
Lubbers ordered a fax to be sent out formally announcing his candidacy.
Belatedly, he sought to curry favour with Kohl. In a speech in Aachen, he
paid tribute to Kohl as a statesman with vision, and declared that he had
not opposed German unification.
Privately, Lubbers turned bitter about his prospects of winning support from
EU leaders, now that he was ready to step down as prime minister. 'They are
throwing me away like an old sock,' he said.
By this time, France and Germany were increasingly confident of Dehaene's
prospects. It seemed only natural for Kohl and Mitterrand (accompanied by
Balladur) to agree on the Belgian premier as a common candidate when they
met in Mulhouse to co-ordinate positions before the European Council in
Corfu.
Their desire was to select a candidate who would not run the Commission as
his own power base as Delors had occasionally appeared to be doing.
In retrospect, it is clear that the French and Germans overplayed their
hand. Though there was nothing out of the ordinary about Paris and Bonn
reaching a common position, it looked like a diktat to the rest of the
Union. This impression gained force when officials leaked the name of
Dehaene even though the Belgian premier had still not publicly announced his
candidacy.
For the Greek presidency, things were running out of control. The one chance
of avoiding an unseemly row was a 'package', whereby the Commission job
could be traded as one of a number of top jobs in Europe. These included
those of secretary general of Nato and of the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development, director general of the World Trade
Organisation, and the top civil servant post of the European Council.
But this required diplomatic skill (not least because the Nato, OECD and WTO
jobs were not within the EU's exclusive preserve), and political leadership.
With Andreas Papandreou, the ailing 75-year-old Greek premier, unable to
travel, the job of sounding out EU partners fell to Theodoros Pangalos, the
unpredictable European affairs ministers. Several leaders, including Kohl
and Mitterrand, deemed him too junior to talk to before Corfu.
It was only fitting that the battle for the Delors succession should reach a
climax over a dinner of the 12 heads of government, just as it had begun two
and a half years earlier - this time accompanied by the leaders of Austria,
Finland, Sweden and Norway, the four countries planning to enter the Union
next year.
The setting this time was the Achilleon, a gaudy 19th century palace built
for the Empress Elisabeth of Austria. At a given moment, Dehaene and Lubbers
were invited to leave, to replaced by their deputies - Willy Claes, Belgian
foreign minister, and Wim Kok, Dutch finance minister.
Major opened with a presentation on behalf of Sir Leon Brittan. Kok spoke
for Lubbers, and Claes for Dehaene. Papandreou, visibly weak, then surprised
everyone by calling for an immediate secret ballot - only the second time in
the EU's history that a formal vote has taken place rather than the
customary practice of using a general discussion to reach a consensus.
Eight countries led by France and Germany expressed a preference for
Dehaene: Belgium, Denmark, Greece, Ireland, Luxembourg, Portugal. Three
voted for Lubbers: the Netherlands, Spain and Italy. Sir Leon received the
solitary vote of the UK.
Just before midnight, Papandreou retired to bed. The meeting broke up. But
within a quarter of an hour, it was reconvened under the chairmanship of
Pangalos.
Major sat at the end of the table, well clear of Kohl and Mitterrand. 'This
is not going to be sorted out tonight,' he warned, 'I won't agree to Mr
Dehaene even if the vote is 11 to one.'
Other prime ministers sought to persuade Major to come round, but he was
irreconcilable. The job of the president of the European Commission was 'one
of the most important in the world', he said. 'For the umpteenth time, I am
not going to support Mr Dehaene.' Kok asked why Kohl was against Lubbers. 'I
don't have to explain this,' said the German Chancellor. Kok threatened to
walk out.
President Mitterrand, a veteran of more than 20 European Councils, said it
was clear that a solution could not be reached quickly. Kohl, who had done
so much to promote his protege Dehaene, looked across the table. 'We need
new candidates,' he sighed.
