FT  07 JAN 94 / Management: Radical change of art - The corporate benefits
of sculptures and paintings
The world of corporate art is changing. Two apparently unconnected
developments suggest that instead of remaining largely confined to
boardrooms and private houses, art may be penetrating more deeply into
British business.
First, there was one of the Confederation of British Industry's less
publicised initiatives - Art and Industry, which brought artists and
industrialists together one evening in October for the mutually beneficial
exchange of money for talent. The event is to be repeated annually.
Philip Herriott, one of the organisers and a director of Art Search, which
represents a large stable of artists, and puts business buyers in touch with
them, is still fielding enquiries from the evening. He is arranging for
business buyers to see artists in their studios.
Like an up-market wallpaper salesman, Herriott carries with him books of
photographs ranging from paintings under various headings - impressionist,
traditional, abstract, etc - to the sort of weird and wonderful sculptures
that might act as conversation pieces in a company's entrance hall or foyer.
It may not necessarily produce the greatest art, but the approach makes
sense to people like Hugh Stebbing, property director for Lloyds Bank, who
has come to appreciate the value of art as a motivational tool.
If Lloyds Bank employees at Hays Galleria, the trendy office and shop
development opposite the London Dungeon, have strong opinions about
anything, it is the paintings and sculptures that decorate their workspace.
In a recent questionnaire, this was the issue that eclipsed all others,
including food, lavatories and public transport.
Fortunately, most Lloyds employees like the art around them. But their
willingness to air their opinions delighted Stebbing. 'Art was a component
of the fit-out of the space,' he says of the Hays Galleria offices. 'You
only use space as a factor of production, and if artwork can provide a
happier environment for your staff, then it can enhance productivity.'
He talks enthusiastically about Faith Winter's huge sandstone sculpture of
the Lloyds horse in the bank's Bristol headquarters that fulfils the triple
purpose of hiding an electricity sub-station, proclaiming the company's
logo, and inspiring the workforce.
The second - and probably more significant - development in the growing
interdependence of art and business is the belated success of Broadgate, the
ambitious development of a 29-acre site around London's Liverpool Street
railway station. Here art, architecture and office life have become
virtually inseparable.
Passers-by are often amused and intrigued by Fernando Botero's voluptuous
giantess, the Broadgate Venus. Passing the waterfall nearby in Exchange
Square, some pause to admire the arch of Exchange House that echoes the
arches of the station beneath before moving on to puzzle at Xavier Corbero's
primitive Broadgate Family.
Initial revulsion at the rusting steel sheets of Richard Serra's huge
sculpture, the Fulcrum, outside the UBS building can eventually yield to at
least a grudging appreciation of the way it alters according to the light or
the weather, changing onlookers' perceptions without them noticing.
Stuart Lipton, the developer, talks of 'providing scale, humanity and the
genus loci that is the fundamental ingredient of successful urban design'.
Karen McCusker, a director of GRE Asset Management at 155 Bishopsgate, where
two massive Jim Dine sculptures of Venus dominate the foyer, says: 'I think
it makes a difference.'
For Harry Anderson, a partner in the solicitors' firm Herbert Smith, the
move to Broadgate was a chance to change the image of the firm - although
that wasn't the express intention.
When Anderson was entrusted with finding artworks to decorate the many blank
walls in the firm's smart new offices, he enlisted the help of art agency
Conservation Management. For two months he spent every spare moment
discussing how to fill the spaces, looking at the work of various artists,
and occasionally buying pieces at auction. The cost worked out at just over
Pounds 100 per employee - a tiny fraction of the total spent on the move.
Anderson bought nearly 200 items, ranging from limited edition prints to
original oil paintings, mixed media works and a few sculptures.
Fusty architectural prints and legal cartoons were no longer appropriate,
although some remain in the back-corridor offices at the request of their
occupants. Tall blank walls in the reception areas on each floor required
large, bright paintings, and are now dominated by impressionistic splashes
or, on one floor, a huge copper shield.
Many of the conference rooms have unusual, often abstract modern paintings,
while the dining rooms have more soothing still lives in bright, warm
colours.
'I was expecting a lot of complaints, but everyone has been surprisingly
complimentary,' comments Anderson. 'We were trying to produce an uplifting
environment. It sounds a bit pompous, but that's what we were trying to do.'
Harry Anderson's choices might not please absolutely everyone, but the
visitor moving around Herbert Smith's offices, distracted by these splashes
of colour and unusual images, pausing at the window to take in the rich
spectacle of Exchange Square, would not feel constrained by history and
tradition as in many law firms. Instead, occupants and visitors alike may
well feel inspired by the possibilities of the future.
This is only one example of art that is not just for the connoisseur. It is
for everyone, the workers included, and enlightened managers are
increasingly aware of its potential.
