FT  07 JAN 94 / Personal View: Bogus tests and classroom bedlam
So mind-numbing has been the debate in the UK over the national curriculum
and its testing arguments, so punch drunk the teachers and government, that
all and sundry have rushed to hail Sir Ron Dearing as the great educational
peacemaker. But his final report, published on Wednesday ('Education
overhaul accepted by Patten', January 6), has produced only the sketch of
his proposed peace treaty. In education, success or failure lies in the
detail, and the person who paints only with a broad brush will come a
cropper.
In two areas Sir Ron has produced sensible suggestions. Teachers have
complained endlessly about curriculum overload and over-prescription. The
Dearing report proposes to increase the teaching time available for the core
subjects of English, maths and science by reducing the compulsory element of
all the other subjects. This is also expected to free up about 20 per cent
of the timetable for locally chosen options. National tests at ages seven,
11 and 14 will also be confined to the core subjects. This is a neat way of
reconciling the government's demand for greater concentration on the core
with teachers' demands for greater freedom of choice. Whether the timetable
arithmetic will work out as Sir Ron envisages is far from clear.
More significant is the proposal that pupils between 14 and 16 should be
able to choose between 'academic', 'vocational' and 'occupational' pathways
in preparation for the post-16 study. This marks a big retreat from the
comprehensive ideal of a 'broad' curriculum to 16, tested by a single
school-leaving examination (GCSE). Sir Ron acknowledges that children differ
in ability and interests, and that making them study for too long the same
things in the same way is a recipe for boredom at the top and rebellion at
the bottom. Did we really have to go through the whole turbid process to
realise what in continental Europe has always been accepted as commonsense?
The report is weakest on methods of testing. Sir Ron's courage failed him,
because he has been baffled by the technical arguments. He accepts that the
existing 10-level testing scale is hopeless. But instead of advising that it
be scrapped he asks for three months to improve it. The 10 levels, he
suggests, should run only from ages five to 14; there should be fewer
attainment targets for each subject; individual statements of attainment
might be clustered into 'level descriptors'.
Until the intellectual weaknesses of the testing system are properly
understood, it will continue to unravel, and ministers will always be
wondering why. The statutory testing model, based on criterion referencing,
implies that judgments about pupils' performances in school subjects are
analogous to judgments about athletes' performances in athletic activities.
That is, there exist agreed sets of skills for each subject; there are
discrete levels of these skills which can be arranged hierarchically and
precisely stated; tests can be set which measure accurately the level
achieved; and the children build up skills in the order presupposed by the
levels.
All or some of these propositions are more or less false for all school
subjects, nowhere more than in argument-based subjects, where performance
needs to be judged through extended pieces of writing. My own experience on
the Schools Examination and Assessment Council convinced me that attempts to
set tasks (tests) against the required skills in history and English
literature lead to fatuous questions in the papers: questions which do not
arise naturally from the material being studied, and which no examiner would
dream of setting unless required to by law. Teachers are forced to fit their
subject teaching to the requirements of these bogus criteria. Tinkering with
a system which is logical, if unworkable, runs the risk of making it
illogical, without making it workable.
Sir Ron argues that to try anything else would be a dangerous experiment,
and that teachers are entitled to a period of peace. But it is the
criterion-referenced system which is the dangerous experiment. It was never
needed. There are well-established standardised tests for literacy and
numeracy - the foundational skills - as well as conventional examinations
for all subjects. And you cannot build stability on bedlam. The system will
collapse because it is intellectually unsound. Why not honestly admit the
mistake now, and use your powers of persuasion to win consent for something
which will work? This is the challenge Sir Ron has shirked.
The author is professor of political economy at Warwick University. He
resigned from the Schools Examination and Assessment Council in May 1993
