FT  16 AUG 94 / World Trade News: US Pushes workers' rights - Clinton ties
support for borrowing to observance of labour laws
President Bill Clinton is set to approve legislation which would make
observance of workers' rights a condition of lending by the international
lending institutions.
With no fanfare House Democrats have included in an appropriations bill a
requirement that US executive directors of the international financial
institutions push for 'policies to encourage borrowing countries to
guarantee internationally recognised worker rights.'
The provision completed its passage through Congress with Senate approval
last week.
The Clinton administration itself attempted to include labour rights as a
goal in all future trade negotiations, but was forced to retreat last week
in a deal with Republicans in order to obtain renewal of the president's
'fast-track' negotiating authority on trade issues.
The effort to make worker rights a condition of multi-lateral lending is
less controversial in Congress.
Congressman Barney Frank, chairman of the subcommittee overseeing
international development institutions, said he had the support of
Republicans on his subcommittee, when he slipped the provision into an
appropriations bill.
'What I've made clear to the Treasury is conscientious enforcement of this
(provision) is the price they'll have to pay for continued American
participation in the lending institutions,' he said.
While the US does not have formal veto power over World Bank and IMF
lending, the other executive directors are unlikely to approve loans to
which the US objects. Lending to Vietnam only began when the US finally
agreed.
The legislation calls on the US Treasury secretary to direct the executive
directors of the international financial institutions to include labour
rights 'as an integral part of the institution's policy dialogue with each
borrowing country'.
It establishes as a model the conventions of the International Labour
Organisation, which call for the right to organise unions, a prohibition on
compulsory labour and the establishment of minimum labour standards for
child labour and occupational health and safety rules.
US directors at the institutions are also required to screen programes 'for
negative impact' on workers' rights. This provision could have blocked
programmes such as the World Bank's labour reform plan for Nicaragua, which
prohibits public sector strikes, limits the right to organise unions and
discourages fringe benefits.
US funding for the multi-lateral development banks has become increasingly
unpopular. Last year, the House came within six votes of defeating US
funding for them. Mr Frank said it was saved by congressmen who saw the
possibility of shifting the institutions' policies to direct the benefits of
development to workers and the poor.
Mr Frank says the existing conditions set by the World Bank and
International Monetary Fund for loans - budget discipline, removal of trade
barriers and changes in currency supply - are no more intrusive to a
borrowing country's sovereignty than telling it to abide by internationally
agreed labour rights standards.
'We are saying if you chose voluntarily to do business with us and even
more, if you are asking us to contribute money which you will receive, we
have a right to do that,' he said.
