FT  18 AUG 94 / Shoppers pick up the windfalls: A look at a nectarine glut,
an onion drought and a tomato shortage
As statisticians mull over the detail of the latest retail prices index the
meat eaters among them are likely to be smiling while the vegetarians may
have cause to sigh.
In a month when food accounted for almost a fifth of the overall fall in
inflation the movement of prices in the UK grocery basket is proving
distinctly volatile.
On the one hand the cost of non-seasonal foods has been falling steadily in
recent months, largely due to cost-cutting in beef, pork, soft drinks and
processed foods. Non-seasonal foods were 0.7 per cent cheaper in July
compared with the previous July - their biggest annual decrease for more
than 30 years.
On the other hand the price of seasonal foods has remained relatively high.
Although seasonal foods fell 2.5 per cent in June compared with July, this
fall was smaller than normal and prices are running about 9.2 per cent
higher than last year.
The reason for these sharply divergent statistics lies partly in
retail-sector price competition - and partly in a recent spate of global
weather disasters which have left some of the fresh fruit and vegetable
market suffering.
The apple market has been badly affected by hailstorms in New Zealand. The
Central Statistical Office said yesterday that this had pushed up prices
sharply. Chile used to provide an alternative source of apples, but European
tariffs have encouraged Chilean apple producers to move to US markets,
leaving South African suppliers with a dominant position in the UK apple
market.
Onions have been another victim of the weather. Droughts in Spain have
reduced the UK's usual onion supply, so the UK is now importing its onions
from Australia - at extra cost.
The tomato market was also unusually tight last month. Mr John McGinty, CSO
statistician, said: 'The hot weather pushed the demand for tomatoes up, but
the main UK crop has not yet arrived, so prices have risen.'
Potato prices are 26 per cent higher than last year, partly because dry
weather this year has persuaded farmers that there will be little crop
surplus.
Nectarines, by contrast, have fallen in price, amid a European-wide glut.
The main reason for this is a new European Union regulation restricting the
Italian distilleries from using the fruit in spirits.
The CSO said yesterday that although these factors had contributed to the
volatility of the food price index, the main factor subduing overall food
costs, particularly for non-seasonal food, remained continued price wars
among UK retailers. In recent months there have been a series of discounts
and promotions in key sectors, such as bread, biscuits and processed foods.
Bread and cereal prices were 3 per cent lower last month than last July.
The prices of all types of meat have fallen significantly, partly because of
a recent rise in the slaughter rate, the CSO said.
Pork is 7 per cent cheaper than a year ago and bacon has fallen 3 per cent.
Although CSO statisticians admit that the price of beef has been 'all over
the place' in recent months due to the scares about BSE - or mad cow disease
 -beef prices are still running 5 per cent below their levels last year.
Economists believe that in the short term, at least, this intense price
pressure is likely to keep food prices down in coming months. But the
weather could yet give the analysts more food for thought in some sectors.
The CSO is already predicting a rise in the price of baked beans next month
 -due to a recent spate of flash floods in America.
