FT  18 JUN 94 / Compromise may help US bank bill pass soon
The US Treasury said it had resolved one of the issues holding up passage of
an interstate banking bill, but banking officials warn that negotiators are
still deadlocked over its application to foreign banks.
Bank officials said they believed the bill, which would allow banks to open
branches outside their own states, could become law as early as the end of
this month, and would certainly be passed before Congress breaks up in
August.
Treasury officials said they had reached a compromise on Thursday night with
consumer groups on the extent to which state laws would apply to banks
availing themselves of the the bill's new freedoms.
'This was the most divisive and intractable issue in the bill,' said Mr
Richard Carnell, assistant secretary for financial institutions at the US
Treasury.
Interstate banking bills have been passed by both the Senate and the House
of Representatives, but delegates from the two chambers are now locked in
negotiations on how to reconcile the differences between their two versions.
Under the compromise, state laws on consumer protection and fair lending
would generally apply to branches of an out-of-state bank just as they do
already to a bank incorporated inside the state. They would not apply if
federal laws specifically pre-empted them or if the Comptroller of the
Currency the chief bank regulator, determined they discriminated against
out-of-state banks.
Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the Treasury secretary, called the compromise 'a
significant and very positive step.' But agreement is still a long way off
on the issue of foreign banks. The Senate version of the bill would restrict
foreign banks from opening new branches in the US unless they operate
through a separately incorporated subsidiary with its own capital. While
some foreign banks have such subsidiaries, many have opened branches
depending directly on the parent company. Foreign banks say this would be a
breach of the principal of national treatment.
In a strongly worded letter to the House banking committee and the Treasury,
Mr Andreas van Agt, the European Commission's ambassador in Washington,
warned the Senate version 'might prejudice the important principles of
national treatment and freedom of investor choice ..'
