FT  20 SEP 94 / Rail negotiators look for common ground again: Long hours
and intensive debate are still needed if the dispute is to be resolved
Intensive round-the-clock negotiations lie ahead before any deal can be
achieved to end the railway signal workers' dispute.
It will take all the experience of the conciliation service Acas to ensure
that the RMT transport union and Railtrack find common ground.
Mr Jimmy Knapp, the union's general secretary, said last night: 'A lot of
tough negotiating remains to be done.' The union negotiators want parallel
but interdependent negotiations for the signal workers - both on their 11
per cent interim claim for past efficiency gains and on the company's
proposed restructuring package for the future.
This twin-track strategy will be hard to sustain once the bargaining starts,
especially as Railtrack insists past efficiencies do not justify any extra
pay rise. Much depends on whether they can reach agreement on restructuring.
The union favours change in general but the details may prove harder to
swallow.
RMT negotiators want to ensure that the signal workers receive substantial
pay rises from the savings achieved by Railtrack through modernising working
practices that are vital to its commercial success. Each item of change
could carry a price tag.
The company says its current package would bring take-home pay increases of
between Pounds 12.65 and Pounds 16.75 a week. There would be a 6 per cent
basic pay rise, a Pounds 250 one-off supplement for accepting payment
through bank transfer and further money from restructuring to be negotiated.
Mr Robert Horton, Railtrack's chairman, has insisted that the three-month
conflict has never simply been about signal workers' pay but the abolition
of working practices, some dating back to just after the first world war.
He says: 'It is an outdated structure which is inefficient, costly and
denies our signalling employees the opportunities of a varied and rewarding
career.' RMT negotiators accept this but are not going to sit back and let
the company dictate the reforms.
Mr Horton and his colleagues intend to shake up the industry by introducing
a more professional and efficient approach to pay and productivity which
matches individual performance with reward.
They say that these changes will bring earnings rises of about 10 per cent
to three-quarters of signal workers, with basic pay increases of between 13
per cent and 26 per cent. But a quarter - mainly relief signal workers
working long hours - face pay cuts. The amount of promised cash compensation
for this group could prove a hard issue to settle.
The new deal Railtrack has in mind is already prepared for negotiation with
the RMT. The total package will be self-financing and cost at least Pounds
4.3m, although that figure is flexible and looks insufficient to settle the
dispute.
There remains room for manoeuvre in negotiations over the precise pay rises
and fringe benefit improvements signal workers can expect in return for
accepting new working practices. As they will be balloted on the final
package, this will have to be reasonably generous to satisfy those who have
suffered earnings losses of more than Pounds 700 because of the strikes.
The main areas for negotiated reform that Railtrack is pressing for involve:
Replacing a mixture of supplements and bonuses with higher basic pay, which
at present accounts for only half of take-home earnings.
A cut in the number of grades from 14 to seven, with flexibility of movement
between different types of jobs.
Job evaluation and an annual individual development review.
A maximum shift of 12 hours and inclusion of Sunday in the normal working
week. The basic working week would be cut from 39 hours to 37 hours.
Role flexibility, with signal workers performing other duties such as
clerical work, cleaning signal boxes, training, driving motor vehicles and
using a range of new equipment.
The abandonment of payment in cash, and the introduction of salaried status,
which will bring improved holiday entitlements.
Removal of restrictions on career opportunities. Posts to be filled on the
basis of suitability through aptitude testing, personality tests and
interviews.
Changes in relief arrangements. Where possible, relief staff will be
allocated to boxes, enabling each box to have its own cover arrangements.
The coming meetings cannot be leisurely. Mr Horton has talked about five
days of intensive negotiations to clinch a deal.
The signal workers stand to lose pension entitlements if an interim
agreement has not been reached by September 30, as the railway industry's
pension fund is reallocated among its employees. That prospect should be
enough to add a sense of urgency to proceedings.
