FT  13 JUN 94 / Nigerian presidential poll winner eludes capture
The Nigerian military, getting tougher on the anniversary of the election it
nullified, offered a reward yesterday for the capture of Mr Moshood Abiola,
a fugitive tycoon who tried to claim his mandate by declaring himself
president, AP reports from Lagos.
General Sani Abacha, The military ruler, marked the annulment of the
presidential election a year ago with a nationwide television address during
which he threatened to punish opponents of his rule.
'. . . Choosing the path of confrontation and subversion at this time of our
national history would not be tolerated. Such acts would be sternly
punished,' Gen Abacha said.
He also promised to return Nigeria to 'genuine democracy', but like previous
military dictators who have ruled Africa's most populous nation, he gave no
timetable for this.
Mr Abiola gained the most votes in the election when the ruler at the time,
Gen Ibrahim Babangida, suddenly voided the ballots, triggering riots that
killed an estimated 200 people over three days.
Gen Babangida resigned last August, naming a civilian supporter in his
stead. Gen Abacha forced his way into power in November and dismantled the
nation's elected Senate, lower house, 30 state governments and more than 500
local legislatures.
He has made it a treasonable offence to criticise his government, and on
Saturday ordered the arrest of Mr Abiola after the businessman declared
himself president.
State media said a reward of 50,000 naira (Pounds 1,515), at the official
rate, was being offered for information leading to the capture of Mr Abiola.
Mr Isiaka Adeleke, former governor of Osun state, who lost office when Gen
Abacha dissolved all civilian political posts, said Mr Abiola was safe at a
secret location in Lagos.
He said Mr Abiola travelled on Saturday evening to a city park for a
ceremony in which he was sworn in as president. Mr Adeleke said between
2,000 and 4,000 people were present at the largely symbolic ceremony.
Gen Abacha yesterday also banned all private aircraft from leaving the
country. Mr Abiola in the past has fled to London aboard his private jet
during the year-long political turmoil in Nigeria.
Police were posted near Mr Abiola's home and office complex in Lagos and
searched the premises yesterday morning, but did not find him.
