FT  11 NOV 94 / Wholesale fruit and veg markets 'under threat'
Changes in retail buying patterns are threatening the survival of wholesale
fruit and vegetable markets, says a report released yesterday by Strathclyde
University.
The study was commissioned by the Fresh Produce Consortium. It says the
markets, which sold Pounds 2.3bn of fresh produce last year, will decline
quickly unless there are early reforms.
It predicts that the market share of wholesale fruit and vegetable sellers
will fall by 25 per cent over the next decade as more supermarkets buy
directly from growers. That translates into a sales loss for the wholesale
sector of Pounds 500m.
Britain's 37 wholesale markets such as New Covent Garden in London and
independent wholesalers sell 47 per cent of the nation's fruit and
vegetables. But Professor Susan Shaw, one of the study's authors, said they
could disappear unless they took more notice of their customers' needs and
invested in new technology.
The decline of the wholesale sector would mean a loss of variety and breadth
of choice for consumers, Prof Shaw said.
Farmers would be unable to choose an outlet for their produce and would be
in the hands of the powerful supermarket buyers.
She said wholesale markets needed to collaborate to survive as well as
sharpen up their business skills and refurbish their premises. She added:
'Many markets are dingy and depressing places in which to do business.'
Prof Shaw said wholesalers needed to band together to improve quality and
credit controls as well as invest in new technology such as better cooling
facilities.
She stressed that wholesale markets had a number of advantages because they
provided a wide choice of produce in a flexible and convenient way. However,
many of their customers were small, independent retailers threatened by the
growth of supermarkets and out-of-town shopping.
Mr Michael Jack, a junior agriculture minister, said the debate on the
future of the markets had to be wide and concluded quickly so that action
could be taken.
