FT  17 OCT 94 / Survey of Business Schools - An A-Z Guide (2): A-Z guide to
Business Schools
A
After the golden age
APPLICATIONS
In retrospect, the late 1980s look to have been a golden age for European
business schools: between 1987 and 1990, for example, MBA student numbers
grew at an estimated compound rate of 18 per cent per annum in the UK.
Recent trends, though, have been more sobering. Recession, rising job
insecurity, and industry and media criticism of the MBA's relevance have
visibly checked the expansion of traditional full-time MBA programmes.
The question now is whether the 1994-95 student intake will turn the tide.
So far, the signs are mixed. In the UK Warwick says the number of applicants
for its one-year full-time MBA programme increased by 5-10 per cent this
year and predicts 'one of the best classes ever'. Lancaster is also upbeat,
reporting a 20 per cent increase in demand for the 50 places on its
full-time course - 'to levels higher than before the recession in 1990'.
Other schools indicate that there is an increase in the numbers actually
signing on of 4 to 20 per cent.
On the other hand, London Business School, the market leader in the UK,
accepted only 140 students for its two-year full-time programme beginning in
September, against 180 this time a year ago (a figure which itself was
slightly down on 1992). London, which points out that it still had more
applicants than last year, explains the fall by its determination to select
only top quality candidates.
Insead's September intake of 235 is marginally up on last year with Ms Helen
Henderson, the school's admissions director, reporting that candidates are
'better prepared and more committed' than at the end of
the 1980s; IMD considered expanding its MBA class to two sections but is
glad it did not: its 'conversion' rate is high with only 100 offers needed
to fill 83 places this year.
While part-time programmes have generally held up better to recession, the
tentative evidence so far this year is also mixed. The Association of MBAs
suggests some employers are more reluctant to sup port their employees with
the payment of fees. Reliable distance learning figures are even harder to
establish: Amba estimates that around 4,000 new students started programmes
in the UK in 1993-94, against more than 3,100 a year before. It is too early
to gauge demand for the 'class' of 1994-95.
The big issue is quality
ACCREDITATION
Given the proliferation of schools and courses, quality control is now a big
issue in western management educ- ation. In the US the American Assembly of
Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB), which drastically revised its
criteria a couple of years ago, accredits most institutions offering the MBA
and other Masters of Management qualifications.
Europe has no single authority but the nearest equivalent is the UK-based
Association of MBAs (Amba), which administers an accreditation scheme linked
to a soft loan programme for UK students.
Amba has accredited roughly a third of the UK's 99 business schools, plus a
dozen of their leading continental European counterparts. Last year it
accredited a distance learning course for the first time.
As university institutions, UK business schools must be accredited by the
Higher Education Funding Councils, which are charged with assessing the
quality of teaching and research.
However, the funding councils' approach to inspection and assessment might
not be much help to applicants trying to choose a business school. For
teaching, the funding council for England separates university departments
into only three grades, one of which has not yet been used.
Every English business school's teaching is either 'excellent' or
'satisfactory', according to the council. Had any institution been found to
be 'unsatisfactory', the third available ranking, there would have been
serious questions over its future.
An 'excellent' rating is a genuine feather in an institution's cap, but
'satisfactory' is very broad.
B
Buzzwords buzz off
BUZZWORDS
Business schools are bursting at the seams with buzzwords.
'Internationalism', 'leadership', and 'soft skills' are three which are hard
to miss on most campuses at the moment.
The thing to remember is that many are fads - here today and gone tomorrow.
Seventy-five per cent of all quality circles begun with enthusiasm in the US
in 1982, for example, had been discontinued by 1986. The management writer
Richard Pascale neatly illustrated the point in his book Managing on the
Edge (Simon &amp; Schuster, 1990) with a graph showing the ebbs and flows of
business fads based on the frequency of citations in academic literature.
C
Both sides of the case
CASE METHOD
The case study method is the best-known - and now possibly the most
controversial - form of teaching in business schools. Pioneered in the US
and closely identified with Harvard, the term case refers to a written
description of a business situation faced by a decision maker at some point
in time. Names, places and other details are sometimes disguised but they
are almost always based on real events and real people.
The case study method has also been widely adopted in Europe, where the
undergraduate business teaching approach has traditionally been instruction
based. 'We agree that cases are a very good simulation for future settings,'
says Mr Ludo Van der Heyden, codean of Insead, which along with IMD at
Lausanne is spearheading a drive to research and publish more cases about
European companies. 'We find that students remember them and the concept
they are meant to illustrate years later.'
Nevertheless, Mr Van der Heyden feels cases should not be over-used, that
they are sometimes too long, and that they should be a vehicle for
illustrating wider issues rather than reaching a specific solution. 'A good
case teacher will not discuss a case to death. In the middle of the class he
will start generalising and moving away from the case,' he suggests.
Insead, which also favours the use of simulated games to provide what Mr Van
der Heyden calls 'a more dynamic and controlled effect,' is harnessing
computer and video technology to produce what it calls 'business navigation
cases'. In this way the school believes students can better put themselves
in the dilemma of a chief executive - with access to much more information
than would be provided by a conventional paper case and faced with a more
'real-life like' range of variables.
Recent research by the European Foundation for Management Development -
based on a survey of 86 graduate schools that provided 141 MBA or management
programmes offering masters' degrees - showed that more emphasis will be put
on the case study method, group discussion and simulations and 'other
methods' during 1994-95 courses, and less on the lecture approach and
project work.
Short of breadth
COMPANY MBAS
These are MBAs tailored specifically for a single company and are another
peculiar feature of the UK market.
Very often, part of the course is taught by company staff, for which credits
are given, with the rest done by a partner business school or university.
Academics are often critical of company MBAs. Warwick Business School, for
example, takes the view that 'single-company or single occupation MBA
programmes diminish not only that MBA programme but also its value to
students'.
Warwick argues that 'the fulcrum of the MBA's value is its breadth', breadth
which comes both from the way courses are designed and from having a rich
mix of class members whose varied backgrounds add to the learning
experience.
Among those schools active in the company specific field is Henley, with 22
programmes running at the moment for, among others, BICC, Grand Met and
Standard Chartered Bank. Lancaster runs single company MBA programmes for
British Airways and VSEL.
The club sandwich
CONSORTIUM MBA
This is really a compromise between the company MBA and a standard full-time
or part-time degree open to everyone.
The company variety (see Company MBA) can be criticised for failing to
provide the sort of stimulation that comes of having participants from
different organisational cultures; some standard MBAs are accused (by
employers at least) of being too general and insufficiently relevant to the
needs of employees.
The so-called consortium version is where a number of companies - often each
from a different sector and therefore non-competitors - club together to
find a programme which is structured round their needs. The business school
which awards the degree keeps an overall eye on the academic content of the
programme.
One of the pioneers of this approach was the City University Business
School. More than 20 companies are involved in CUBS' so-called management
MBA, including American Express, Lloyd's of London, IBM UK, Anglian Water
Services and Ford Motor Company.
Lancaster runs what it calls a multi-company modular programme for British
Airways, Royal Mail, BNFL, North West Water and British Gas, among others.
Henley has recently launched a European con- sortium MBA administered by its
associate in Munich. The programme's 15 participants come from three
different nationalities and five different pan-European multinationals
(Mercedes-Benz, Deutsche Aerospace, Continental, Union des Assurances de
Paris and Credit Commercial de France).
The burdens are heavy
COSTS
The MBA can involve a large financial sacrifice. The cost of a one-year,
full-time course in the UK can be well over Pounds 20,000, taking account of
living costs and lost earnings opportunities. A two-year course at a US
business school could cost a total of some Dollars 80,000.
Business school fees are continuing to rise, although the pace of increase
has slowed down recently, following several years of steep increases. Last
year, fees roughly rose in line with inflation.
vard, MIT, Stanford and Wharton, charge fees of about Dollars 20,000 a year.
European schools, which tend to take just a single year to complete, are
cheaper. However, a top school such as Insead costs FFr145,000.
Most UK business schools charge fees of around Pounds 6,000 to Pounds 8,000.
But there is a large range, from Pounds 5,000 for Heriot-Watt University to
Pounds 15,000 for Manchester Business School.
Fees for part-time MBAs are often more expensive than full-time courses, but
the financial pressures on the student are reduced by continuing to earn a
salary.
The heavy cost of taking an full-time MBA is one explanation why part-time
and distance learning programmes are becoming more popular. In 1992, more
than two-thirds of MBA students remained in employment while studying.
Some of the costs of pursuing a two-year, full-time MBA can be defrayed by
getting an internship in the summer vacations. Students are sometimes able
to combine studying with part-time work in two-year courses when the work
pressures are not too intense.
D
The way of the future
DISTANCE LEARNING
An almost exclusively British style of MBA delivery at the moment, many
experts feel distance learning is the way of the future. For others the very
idea of a correspondence course contradicts the classroom teaching and group
discussion approach, which they say is the essential heart of this
postgraduate qualification.
Students on a distance learning course study from home - usually on their
own in the evenings or at weekends - but they are often assigned a tutor
whom they can contact with problems and attend summer schools, weekend
seminars, and local support groups. Programmes typically take at least three
years - sometimes considerably more - to complete.
The Open Business School, whose teaching material is widely admired, is the
market leader in the UK and is expanding into Europe. More than 5,500
managers are studying for its MBA (including about 800 on the Continent). It
expects to be providing more than 20 per cent of all UK MBA graduates within
two years.
Henley Management College is well-established and was also early into the
field. It now has more than 5,000 students on its distance learning
programmes, either registered directly with Henley or through one of the
school's 19 associates around the world.
Warwick's 1,000th distance learning graduate will emerge next summer.
Another early pioneer, the school has over 1,500 students at various stages
of its three- or four-year programme, based in more than 70 countries.
Warwick is keen to stress its flexibility, pointing out that students can
start on a part-time MBA within travelling distance of the City and transfer
to, say, distance learning if moved to another part of the UK or overseas.
Heriot-Watt claims to have attracted more than 8,000 students over the last
three years, including students sponsored by multinationals such as IBM,
Toshiba and General Motors. The school says its course material is entirely
self-sufficient and that there is no requirement for tutor contact.
Kingston University, south of London, and Durham University in the north of
England are among other schools offering MBAs by distance learning.
It's too much for them
DROP-OUTS
Only a very small proportion of students drop out of full-time MBA
programmes in Europe and the US. The majority of these are probably caused
by ill-health: even at the best schools candidates who have passed the
admissions test are sometimes forced to leave if they fail to perform.
The casualty rate for part-time courses and distance learning - particularly
the latter - tend for fairly obvious reasons to be higher. Combining an MBA
course with a full-time job presents special challenges and the isolation
inherent in studying from home proves too much for some candidates.
E
Learning over there
EXCHANGE PROGRAMMES
As MBA courses try to become more international, some schools are offering
students the chance to spend a term overseas at schools to which they are
affiliated.
For example, Manchester Business School is affiliated to 40 schools
including Kellogg, Chicago and Berkeley. London Business School organises
exchanges with 25 business schools around the world.
The demand from students for exchanges, which typically occur in the spring
term of the second year, often exceeds the availability of places.
Students generally relish the stimulation of living abroad and studying at a
different school for several months. The potential disadvantages of
exchanges include incurring extra living expenses and spending time away
from the job search.
Rolls-Royce of the market
EXECUTIVE MBAS
Sometimes used in the UK as an alternative title for part-time programmes,
the executive MBA is normally used to denote the seniority of the 'students'
involved. This type of course is also generally regarded as the Rolls-Royce
of the MBA market, being aimed at high-flying executives whose companies pay
the fees.
Particularly popular in the US, these courses are typically held on Fridays
and Saturdays and in week-long 'bites' and field trips. Employers are often
attracted by an approach which combines work and theory in a potentially
valuable way.
The University of Chicago School of Business is using a newly launched
executive MBA programme at Barcelona to spearhead its international
expansion. The part-time programme - 10 modules of one to two weeks spread
across 18 months - is the first one a leading US business school has offered
in Europe that leads to a degree.
The bulk of the first intake - which had their first class in July - are
from European companies and almost all have at least 10 years of work
experience.
London Business School's next executive MBA course does not start until
January but a spokesman said that inquiries had doubled over the last year.
London also belives that companies such as Bankers Trust, Mercury, Blue
Circle and British Airways are using flexible options like its executive MBA
as a strategy for retaining high flying managers. 'This, of course, is only
feasible in a programme where participants do not leave their jobs'.
F
What banks will lend
FINANCE
The most popular method of financing a MBA is through savings although bank
loans also play an important part.
Many countries offer students help in financing MBAs through low-interest,
long-term loans offered to students either with government backing or
through private banks.
In the UK, Amba administers a Business School Loan Scheme on behalf of
Barclays and National Westminster banks.
For students doing a full-time course, the bank will lend a maximum of
two-thirds of last salary plus tuition fee for each year of study at a
reduced rate.
The repayment of the loan, which takes up to seven years, starts three
months after the completion of the course.
Take-up of the loan scheme is currently running well below levels at the
turn of the decade, reflecting an unwillingness on the part of borrowers to
take on debt and an unwillingness on the part of bank managers to lend to
MBA students without collateral.
Students on a one-year course who are not accepted for an Amba loan may be
able to apply for a Career Development Loan.
Repayment of the loans, which are organised by the Department of Employment
with Barclays, the Clydesdale Bank and the Co-operative Bank, begins three
months after the study period is completed.
Some students get financial support from employers, particularly those doing
part-time MBAs or distance learning MBAs. Amba estimates that 60-70 per cent
of finance for these courses comes from employers.
Although some employers do contribute to fees of full-time MBAs, they are
generally deterred by the likelihood that students will want to change jobs
at the end of their course.
Full-time gets shorter
FULL-TIME MBAS
The classic model for the MBA, developed in the US, is the two-year
full-time programme. While this is still the norm in North America, one year
is now much more typical in Europe.
Only London Business School in the UK, for example, now offers a two-year
course with IESE in Barcelona a rare continental example. Manchester (which
now promotes its programme as a 12-month minimum, 19-month maximum, or
15-month 'standard') and Erasmus-Rotterdam in the Netherlands have both
reduced the length of their full-time courses in response to what they say
is market demand.
Instituto de Empresa in Madrid runs a 16-month programme including four
months' paid internship in a national or multinational company.
Job insecurity and the high opportunity cost obviously have much to do with
the latest trend, but London is sticking to its guns. The school believes
that one of the problems with a one-year MBA programme is that students are
forced to start looking for a job almost from the moment they start their
course. More importantly, though, it argues that two years allows time for
more in-depth study, notably through more project work with companies.
Most one- and two-year programmes split into a set of compulsory core
courses (eg finance, marketing, operations management, followed by elective
courses (see Optional Courses). Most will include a mandatory in-company
project.
G
Not quite a welcome mat
GMAT
Pronounced Gee-mat, these letters stand for the Graduate Management
Admissions Test, a requirement for most business schools round the world.
Some institutions (notably Harvard) have devised tests of their own, but in
many cases these cover similar areas of numeracy, literacy and verbal and
numerical reasoning as the GMAT.
A GMAT score, or its equivalent, is normally the starting point of any
application for an MBA though a good result is not a guarantee to entry. Top
schools usually demand minimum score levels of at least 550-600 (out of a
maximum, though rarely achieved, 800). MIT topped a table of US schools
compiled recently by the Economist Intelligence Unit with an average score
of 680 per student, while Insead headed the European list with an average of
650.
Despite its attraction as an international benchmark, the GMAT is a
controversial admissions tool. A growing number of schools refuse to quote
their average score on the grounds that it is misleading, while some
academics say that, being only available in English, it is culturally
biased. Many schools allow for this when assessing non-white Americans.
Because of these and other worries, the GMAT has recently been revised. From
this month, candidates will for the first time face two half-hour essay
questions designed to test ability to analyse complex issues and argue a
position, as well as the traditional multiple choice questions divided into
several sections.
The test is given four times a year in January, March, June and October in
numerous centres round the world. A registration form and the GMAT Bulletin
of Information, which lists test centres and dates of tests, as well as
giving sample questions, can be obtained from the Educational Testing
Service, PO Box 6108, Princeton, New Jersey, 08541, US. In the UK there are
a number of independent MBA and GMAT training and preparation centres.
US and other influences
GRANDES ECOLES
The grandes ecoles, which like so much in France can be traced back to
Napoleon, are independent of the French universities, but closely associated
with and partly financed by local chambers of commerce through a compulsory
payroll tax on employers.
Originally set up to prepare children of wealthy industrialists and
merchants for a career in the family business, they evolved after the second
world war into much more professional and better focused management training
institutions, influenced greatly by what was going on in the US.
Today, there are 21 grandes ecoles of management which turn out some 8,000
graduates a year. Students typically follow a five-year general management
curriculum which starts immediately after the baccalaureat and which is
sub-divided into two years of classes preparatoires devoted to pre-business
school courses, a one-year foundation course and the two-year graduate
programme proper.
The qualification they receive is generally known in France as the masters
in management, and is quite distinct from the MBA. However, Paris-based HEC
(through its specialist arm the Institut Superieur des Affaires) and Groupe
ESC Lyon are among those which also run MBA courses.
Information at a price
GUIDES AND BOOKS
Useful guides include Which MBA?, by George Bickerstaffe, a fact-packed
directory of the leading MBA programmes offered by business schools and
universities around the world. The sixth edition, just published, is
available from the Economist Intelligence Unit, 15 Regent Street, London
SW1Y 4LR, Price Pounds 21.90.
The UK's Association of MBAs (see Organisations) publishes a Guide to
Business Schools, an alphabetical directory of UK and some continental and
North American schools, with a commentary by Godfrey Golzen, price Pounds
16.99.
The UK's Association of Business Schools publishes a Directory which is
issued free to all inquirers. EFMD publications (see Organisations) includes
a new edition of its Guide To European Business Schools and Management
Centres (non-EFMD members BFr3,500), a European Management Development
Directory (details of over 350 executive courses from 37 European business
schools, BFr6,000), and The Quality Assessment and Accreditation Systems for
Management Education in Europe, a 30-page overview (BFr2,000 for
non-members).
A useful source on US schools is 'The Official Guide to MBA programs'
(published by Warner Books).
The MBA Career Guide is a twice-yearly publication (annual subscription
Pounds 18.95) which reviews over 100 leading business schools. The Guide's
publishers (46 Delancey Street, Regents Park, London NW1 7RY) provides a
free clearing house service for business schools' own information packs,
GMAT training and scholarship advice.
Ex-White House speechwriter Peter Robinson has written an entertaining book
 -Snapshots from Hell - which offers impressions of his first year studying
for a Stanford Business School MBA. It is published in the UK this month by
Nicholas Brealey Publishing, Pounds 9.99 in paperback.
H
Positive contamination
HEALTH SERVICE MBAS
The changing state of the health service wrought by the government's health
reforms has, not unsurprisingly, stimulated more interest in management
development in the profession.
Health Service MBAs are taught at the university business schools of
Canterbury, Durham and Nottingham with health management electives tending
to form half of the MBA.
Most interest in health service MBAs is in part-time study undertaken over
two years.
The two-year Northern Health Service MBA at Durham is nearly two years old,
having started in January 1993. Average work experience prior to MBA study
is much higher than at most business schools - approximately 15 years with
the average age of candidates standing at 37.
The depth of work experience is a considerable advantage in boosting
academic achievement, says Mr David Stoker, MBA director at the university.
'There is a lot of positive contamination with the students learning from
each other as well as from the course.'
Typically, health electives in an MBA include such subjects as Health
Information Systems; Comparative Health Care Systems and Health Across
Europe.
Duke University's Fuqua School of Business claims, as part of its weekend
executive MBA programme, to be offering the first US programme designed
specifically to meet the needs of health care industry managers.
I
No need for nuts and bolts
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
The Information Technology MBA aims to teach effective management via the
use of IT and to make information systems play a role in corporate strategy.
The course runs at the business schools of City University in London and
Hull University.
Henley also offers the IT Hybrid Manager MBA which is built around the
consortium approach and facilitates the interaction between managers from
the IT function and from elsewhere in the organisation.
The abilities that it aims to teach are competence in the selection,
introduction and development of information systems to a level that will
make IT an effective tool of corporate strategy.
The IT MBA caters for both types of candidate - those au fait with the nuts
and bolts of technology and those who are not. Ms Anne Leeming, director of
the IT MBA at City University Business School, where IT comprises half of
the course, stresses that a technical aptitude is not essential.
'It is not a technical course. It is focused on management using IT.'
Therefore, the constant developments in IT do not invalidate a specialist
MBA in the subject. Ms Leeming says that the course has hardly altered since
it began in 1989.
The fish in the pool
INTERNATIONALISM
This is one of today's big business school buzzwords, but there is still
debate about what constitutes a truly international approach. When judging
whether a school is really international, attention should be paid to
student mix, faculty mix, cross-border links (see Exchange Programmes) and
course content.
Schools like IMD, London, Insead and Manchester typically attract a high
proportion of international students and faculty. Manchester's full time
class is roughly 25 per cent UK, 15 per cent other European Union, and 60
per cent rest of the world. IMD pays attention to the size of what it calls
'the Anglo pool' - the proportion of students from countries where English
is the mother tongue. Mr Kamran Kashani, the MBA programme director, says
that the 'pool' accounts for about 40 per cent of applications but that as a
deliberate strategy IMD makes sure that only 25 per cent of its 83-strong
class 'is in that cluster'.
Insead's fresh intake last month was 65 per cent western European (of which
a surprisingly high 9 per cent are German), 17 per cent from the Nafta
countries, and 6 per cent eastern European. The 235 students represent 33
different nationalities.
London Business School, meanwhile, has an MBA class that is 75 per cent
'overseas', much the same as last year.
Many feel the key issue is the programme content, though how this is
achieved varies widely from school to school. Some add specific
international options, others have tried to introduce an international
dimension to the whole course.
Some European schools have developed programmes whereby students can spend
terms at up to three different schools and still take the same degree. The
link between Cranfield and Groupe SC Lyon in France is noteworthy in this
context.
J
Positions vanish
JOBS
In recent years, many newly-qualified MBAs have found it a challenge to find
a suitable job.
Companies' cost-cutting and restructuring exercises have removed many of the
management positions that MBA graduates aspire to. The management
consultancies and financial services companies which traditionally recruited
large numbers of MBAs scaled back in the downturn. Even highly qualified
candidates from top business schools have suffered lengthy periods of
unemployment.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that there has been some improvement in
recruitment levels. As well as some pick-up in interest from financial
services companies and consultancies, there are signs of increased interest
from non-traditional recruiters, including the manufacturing sector.
However, finding a job requires more effort than it did in the last decade.
At a time when companies are laying off large numbers of employees, some are
reluctant to be seen to be actively recruiting MBA students. Although jobs
are available, it has become more important to seek them through alternative
routes, such as networking.
One consequence of the difficult job market is that it has blighted many MBA
students' ambitions to change career. When employers are able to choose
between numerous applicants, they tend to opt for experience.
But even when MBA graduates remain in the same career, they are often able
to move up the managerial scale. This may be accompanied by a move to a
smaller organisation. A survey of alumni conducted by Amba in 1992 found
that, before their MBA, 43 per cent were employed in large organisations and
20 per cent in smaller organisations; after the MBA those proportions were
reversed.
The same survey found that around 30 per cent of MBA graduates worked in
consultancy and finance. Some 27 per cent of MBAs were in general
management, 19 per cent in sales and marketing, 11 per cent in corporate
strategy and planning and another 11 per cent in finance and control.
For those employed while studying for a MBA, 56 per cent remained with their
existing employer for at least a year after graduating. Of those not
employed while studying for their MBA, 40 per cent did not start a job
immediately after the course's completion. On average, it took these
students 5.5 months to get a job.
The real difficulty facing those contemplating a MBA, particularly a
two-year MBA, is that job prospects are hard to calculate at the time they
embark on the course. Anyone leaving an existing job to do a MBA is taking a
gamble on the state of the job market on graduation.
An MBA with garnish
JOINT DISCIPLINE MBAS
The latest edition of Which MBA (see Guides) notes that some American
schools are offering opportunities to combine an MBA with another
postgraduate degree such as law. These joint degrees, it notes, 'are
becoming increasingly popular among both recruiters and students'.
In the UK, meanwhile, there is a tendency to specialism in some schools.
City University, for example, offers five one-year full-time programmes
which combine a general management 'core' with one of five specialisms
(finance, human resources, information technology, international
business/export and marketing). Other schools have resisted this approach
and argue that a particular emphasis can be achieved in the choice of
electives or optional courses.
K
The hilt of success
KNIGHTS
Sir John Egan (BAA, formerly of Jaguar), Sir Christopher Hogg (Courtaulds
and Reuters) and Sir Iain Vallance (BT) all got where they are with the help
of an MBA. Sir Graham Day (formerly British Shipbuilders, Rover and
PowerGen) and Sir John Harvey-Jones (former chairman of ICI) did not.
No business school deans are thought to have been awarded knighthoods.
L
Just talk in English
LANGUAGES
Most schools will demand some proof of fluency from non-native speakers
applying for an English-based programme (which the vast majority are).
While English alone is sufficient for virtually all UK schools - London
Business School which requires proficiency in another language is a notable
exception - an increasing number of British schools such as Manchester and
Dorset stress their language learning facilities. Some continental European
schools run courses which are wholly in English, but most in, say, France
and Spain require that at least some classes are also taken in the 'home'
tongue.
M
Benchmark setters
MANAGEMENT CHARTER INITIATIVE
The Management Charter Initiative (MCI) began in 1988, the creation of Sir
Bob Reid and a number of groups including the British Institute of
Management and the Confederation of British Industry.
It does not provide professional training but rather tries to foster an
interest in training and relevant qualifications among managers and
employers. MCI studies the level of training and qualifications prevalent
among managerial levels and makes recommendations for standard setting.
Its most recent work was draft standards for senior management, after having
set benchmarks for best practice for middle managers, first-line managers
and supervisors. Last month these finished trials in a variety of
organisations.
MCI's research among thousands of managers helps shape higher level national
vocational qualifications. Standards are formed from its research and passed
onto the National Council for Vocational Qualifications which sets NVQs. The
role of MCI is largely opinion-forming and quality setting rather than that
of dictating specific goals. Which NVQs managers take is entirely up to them
and their bosses. The nuts and bolts of qualification attainment are seen as
the employer's responsibility.
There is no direct link with business schools which generally tend to be
more academically oriented, concentrating largely on the MBA. Mr Andrew
Summers, MCI chief executive, says: 'We would like to see MBAs developing to
be more focused on competence as well as knowledge.'
He sees the MBA as essentially a preparatory qualification after which it is
important to demonstrate competence, something for which NVQs are designed.
Several business schools do award NVQs and the MCI does some work with
these.
MCI is non profit-making, funded by private and public sector subscriptions,
which aims to develop management skills and generally improve managerial
quality. It is backed by about 1,600 companies and the government and its
members cut right across the sectoral board; from private through public to
voluntary.
While being a national forum, the thrust of its operation is via a series of
local networks which promote activities and information among employers. The
networks often link with other interested parties in a region such as
Training and Enterprise Councils and Chambers of Commerce.
Block release for the boss
MODULAR MBAS
This is a term which can best be translated as the management equivalent of
a block release course.
Warwick Business School launched such a course in January this year which
involves participants being absent from work for 13 intensive one-week
'modules' which are spread over about three years.
One of the most established modular MBAs - designed especially for
experienced managers - is run by Ashridge Management College in
Hertfordshire.
The emphasis of the programme is on developing leadership behaviour and on
helping candidates to acquire the skills that are needed to manage, across
international and cultural boundaries.
Henley Management College in Oxfordshire was also early into the field.
Meanwhile, the Judge Institute of Management Studies at the University of
Cambridge has introduced an innovative modular structure.
This involves extended periods of full-time study which are sandwiched
between substantial work experience (for either one or two 12-month periods
depending on the option chosen), where what is learnt in class can be put
into practice.
N
Old boys on the way up
NETWORKING
In other words, this is what you know and whom you know. Networking can be
all-important for maximising the potential of a business education.
Networking means anything from genteel inquiries in a wine bar to exchanges
of CVs and job opportunities via a graduate association.
By its very nature, networking is not an organised activity although more
structures are growing and many organisations are springing up that are more
akin to a recruitment agency than the traditional word-of-mouth image of
networking.
Business schools are a useful marketplace and the largest and best-known
centre for business alumni is the Association of MBAs (Amba).
Amba membership now stands at around 8,000, as it has grown rapidly in the
past few years.
Cranfield School of Management is another important source of networks. It
is home to the Management Development Advisory Service.
Individual schools tend to be a good avenue for networking, whether they
offer a definite association or not. Schools obviously have links with
business and are often approached by companies for recommendations. Alumni
associations, however, are also targeted by schools in their fund-raising
activities.
Following the recession, networking organisations have also flourished to
serve particular specialities in business and industry.
Networking is frequently used to secure work on occasional projects as well
as permanent jobs. This pertains especially to technological related work.
Practice in lieu of theory
NVQs
National Vocational Qualifications are designed to test skills and
competence in the workplace and operate in more than 80 per cent of
occupations.
They emphasise practical skills within a job and seek a demonstration of
understanding of that job's requirements rather than theoretical
examinations.
Therefore, it is difficult to equate them directly with traditional academic
standards. But very roughly an NVQ level 1 is approximately similar to 4
GCSEs, grade D to G; NVQ 2 ranks alongside 5 GCSEs, grade A to C and NVQ 3
can be compared with 2 A levels. NVQs level 4 and 5 are harder to gauge as
they are geared towards management competence and require demonstration of a
fair amount of personal autonomy. They can be approximated with education
achieved at higher levels, not necessarily degree standards but beyond A
level.
Much of the standards set for NVQs level 4 and 5 come from management
standards laid down by the Management Charter Initiative.
The quality of NVQs, which are tested in the workplace and operate on a
fairly flexible basis with requirements varying among different occupations,
is monitored by the National Council for Vocational Qualifications. The
council, which is responsible to the government, approves and accredits the
qualification.
Accreditation lasts for five years, after which it must be renewed.
NVQs, particularly the lower levels, have been subject to some criticism
with the suspicion in academic and industrial circles that they cannot be a
substitute for traditional methods of testing knowledge.
The advantages and disadvantages of NVQs versus a more traditional
qualification such as the MBA boil down to relevance. Managers may want more
practical expertise in addition to straightforward academic knowledge or in
some circumstances they may need people-based abilities and utilitarian
aptitude in preference to theoretical achievement.
O
Amba and acronyms
ORGANISATIONS
The Association of MBAs (15 Duncan Terrace, London N1 8BZ, Tel:
071-837-3375). Founded in 1967 by a group of British graduates recently
returned from leading US business schools, Amba's original aims were to
promote management education in the UK and to develop an information and
social network for business school alumni.
Today Amba also performs a quality controlling role for UK and continental
institutions (see Accreditation), runs an annual reception for business
schools and potential recruits, and publishes a Guide to Business Schools
(see Guides).
The Association of Business Schools (344-354 Gray's Inn Road, London WC1X
8BP, tel: 071-837-1899). With 100 business school members, the ABS is in
effect the trade association for the UK management education industry. Its
aims include promotion and government lobbying, but its most visible
contribution is a Directory of members and the courses they offer (see
Guides).
The European Foundation for Management Development (40 Rue Washington,
B-1050, Brussels, tel: 322 648-0385). EFMD - a European forum for
information, research and best practice in management development - has in
the past discussed the idea of common European standards for accreditation.
The consensus now is that Europe is not a single model and that national
norms and mutual recognition are the way ahead.
P
How most people do it
PART-TIME MBAS
Most business schools run part-time MBA courses; indeed most MBA degrees in
the US, the UK (Europe's largest market) and Asia are now awarded to
part-time students. Part-time MBAs fall into a number of sub-categories,
some of which (Executive MBAs, Distance Learning and Modular MBAs) are
discussed elsewhere.
The most common part-time MBA courses - from City University in London to
Esade in Barcelona - are taught after working hours a couple of evenings per
week and/or at weekends, with occasional residential periods thrown in for
more in-depth study. 'Students' on part-time programmes are often older and
more experienced than their full-time counterparts. Many managers, though,
find it hard to set aside time to study at the same time as holding down a
challenging job - hence the appeal of the modular approach.
A hands-on alternative
PROJECT APPROACH
In their third term, MBA students often become mini-consultants, dealing
with a company's marketing challenges, expansion opportunities, management
dilemmas. Alternatively, part-time students may undertake a specific task
for their company which will be appraised as part of their MBA.
This is the project approach which forms the practical application of MBAs
at almost all business schools. The project approach, which deals with real
situations, has prospered in UK business schools.
It contrasts with the case study approach, championed especially by Harvard
business school. Case study methods tend to require a response to
theoretical situations; project approaches are the hands-on alternative.
Both are meant to test the student's ability to synthesise the various
aspects of the course. They will need to exercise ability in most of the
core subjects covered; determine the relevance of each one in the given
situation and act accordingly.
Business schools often invite smaller companies to take up consultancy
services from students undertaking their third term project. For the company
it can prove a very cost-effective method of receiving such services from
people who are not that far from going into such roles on a permanent basis.
Cranfield School of Management is unusual in not making the project an
obligatory part of the MBA. A full-term project can be undertaken but the
school finds that students prefer to take more electives. Cranfield is the
only business school to offer an academic year of four teaching terms and
according to Mr Colin Gordon, director of the full-time MBA, students are
drawn to the centre because they can maximise their theoretical learning.
'Many have a number of years' experience in work and feel that they benefit
more from the various electives. They do some project work that lasts three
to four weeks and often feel that this is enough.' The proportion of
students who do choose to take the full-term project option is very small.
To manage the state
PUBLIC SECTOR MBAS
Aston, Henley, Birmingham and Exeter in the UK offer MBA programmes in
public sector management.
Several others (eg Bradford, South Bank and Strathclyde) lay on specialist
modules in this area. Cranfield runs a course for the Ministry of Defence
which combines the general core of its full-time MBA with a number of
specialist electives.
Q
Emphasis on experience
QUALIFICATIONS
The qualifications required for MBA students have changed over the past few
years. More emphasis is placed on experience of work than was the case a few
years ago when it was a reasonable rule of thumb among business schools that
an MBA was usually bolted straight on to a first degree.
The average age for candidates beginning a full-time MBA is 28; for those on
a part-time course it is 30-32 and for those distance learning it is
considerably more.
Qualification requirements tend to be a first degree and about three years'
experience in work. In exceptional cases candidates with work experience but
no degree are accepted by business schools although they only make up about
2-3 per cent of MBA candidates.
And Mr Roger McCormick, director-general of the Association of MBAs, issues
a general note of caution against business schools willing to accept
candidates without work experience. 'In spite of their ability, those
without relevant experience will probably find that their peers are critical
of them,' he says.
A GMAT is not a necessity for all business schools. If a candidate does
elect to take the GMAT in preparation for an MBA then it is worth
remembering that a business school will expect a good result, or a good
reason why a high figure has not been attained.
The MBA is a multidisciplinary generalist degree that should not require
specialist knowledge to study for. However, in practice the modern MBA
programme is heavily quantitative: anyone with limited skills in mathematics
will struggle.
As for the value of an MBA once that qualification is obtained, Mr McCormick
believes it is a solid foundation which will facilitate advances later. 'An
MBA is generalist which has its use in the long term. It is not intended to
provide an immediate springboard but to prepare someone for a role in senior
management later on.'
MBAs are not graded. A candidate achieves a pass or a fail; there are no
classes as with a first degree.
It is difficult to rank MBAs and Mr McCormick flinches at the thought,
although of course business schools have varying reputations and that may
have a bearing on employers' considerations.
Specialist MBAs are just that, an industry or sector-tailored qualification.
They are not considered of greater value than a traditional MBA. In fact, Mr
McCormick warns of the danger of MBAs which are too hybrid, as opposed to a
core MBA with speciality components tacked on.
'There is a bit of a trend to tart up specialist MScs as MBAs,' he says.
R
OK for those at the top
Rankings
Published rankings have been common in the US for some years - the Business
Week survey is the most widely quoted and probably the most reputable - but
European business schools have traditionally shied away from league tables.
That said, there is a strong view that proper rankings would make a
contribution to a more efficient and well-informed market place if the right
methodology could be found.
Most of the attempts so far are superficial, either because they concentrate
only on one aspect of a business school portfolio (eg research reputation,
MBAs, executive programmes) or because the method of assessment is flawed.
Even schools which publicly 'knock' the idea of rankings will use them in
their promotional material if they are shown in a good light.
S
Rewards diminish
SALARIES
The years when MBAs could be sure of a large rise in salary as a result of
gaining their qualification have gone. The premium attracted by the
qualification has declined, perhaps reflecting both recession and a changing
balance in the supply and demand of MBAs. Some students have even
experienced unemployment and pay cuts as a result of taking the MBA.
One of the difficulties facing MBA graduates is that management consulting
and the financial services industry, which was traditionally considered a
route to a top salary, cut back sharply on recruitment in recent years. Many
graduates have turned to small and medium-sized companies, where salaries
are generally lower than those than in large organisations.
The financial case for the qualification has lessened over the past decade.
In the first half of the 1980s, students could expect an average increase in
salary of 40 per cent as a result of taking a MBA, according to an Amba
survey. By 1991, the figure had fallen to 16.5 per cent.
A later survey, in June 1992, showed that 30 per cent of MBAs earned between
Pounds 30,000 and Pounds 40,000 a year. Seven per cent reported salaries of
less than Pounds 20,000 and, at the other end of the scale, 8 per cent had
salaries over Pounds 70,000 and 3 per cent earned more than Pounds 100,000.
The majority of MBAs were eligible for pension, a company car, private
medical insurance and a performance-related bonus.
Apply early if in need
SCHOLARSHIPS BURSARIES SPONSORSHIP
A limited number of scholarships and bursaries is offered by business
schools. These are usually targeted at people with special merit or need. It
is important to apply early for awards, which are often listed in the
school's brochure.
Some students are sponsored by their employers to do a MBA. But it may be
difficult to persuade an employee to pay the fees for a full-time course,
not least because most students contemplate a career change at the end of
the course. Sponsorship is generally limited to part-time, distance learning
and company programmes in which the student remains in employment.
A comprehensive list of grants, scholarships and awards is available in the
Grants Register, published by Macmillan Publishers of Basingstoke, which is
available in most large libraries.
Institutions which offer relevant scholarships include the Association of
Commonwealth Universities, the London Chamber of Commerce &amp; Industry, Rotary
International, Royal Academy of Engineering, the American Association of
University Women, British University North America Club and the English
Speaking Union of the Commonwealth.
Some awards are specifically directed towards minorities or women. Thus,
Cosmopolitan magazine offers a bursary for studying at Insead.
Further information from the Fulbright Commission, Doughty Street, London
WC1.
Cosmopolitan picnics
SOCIAL LIFE
Pressure of work can militate against an active social life for MBA
students; indeed for all but the most gifted it may be a contradiction in
terms. However, student clubs, student government and community activities
are all possible outlets for surplus energy and provide an opportunity to
test newly acquired leadership and negotiation skills.
Most schools will help organise sports, such as tennis, while parties with a
country theme are a favourite of classes with a wide international student
spread.
T
Courses may qualify
TAX RELIEF
The principle of tax relief for MBA courses appears to have been conceded in
the UK - but its application still remains unclear. The concession -
extending relief for individuals paying their own vocational training bills
to graduate and postgraduate courses consistent with level five of the
National Vocational Qualifications system - became effective in April.
The issue is obviously an important one for business schools at a time of
flagging demand for full-time MBA courses. It was also highlighted by an
All-Party House of Commons Trade and Industry Committee report which
expressed the view that it was 'unfair and damaging that individuals paying
for training are treated less favourably for tax purposes than companies
doing so'.
An Inland Revenue spokesman told the FT earlier this month: 'It is up to the
training organisation to say whether it (the MBA) could lead to an NVQ.'
Asked whether claiming relief was worth a try, he replied: 'Yes'.
U
Influx to act as stimulus
UNDERGRADUATE COURSES
There is more to business schools than MBA courses.
Government statistics show that business studies is the fastest-growing
undergraduate degree course. Youngsters, many with vocational business
qualifications, are keen to take courses in management and business rather
than economics, where numbers are dropping.
Courses at undergraduate level are still far less popular than MBAs. Last
year business studies accounted for 17 per cent of all higher degrees
awarded at 'old' universities - excluding those upgraded from polytechnics
in the last two years - but only 4 per cent of first degrees, according to
the Universities Statistical Record.
But the number of business studies undergraduates rose by 9.9 per cent last
year, to 17,200, while most 'new' universities are offering business
degrees, often in combination with other subjects.
Universities hope that the influx of undergraduates will act as a stimulus
to improve the teaching of business. However, a business studies degree is
unlikely ever to be regarded as a stepping stone for an MBA. Instead,
business degrees, particularly from new universities, are intended to
provide well-qualified middle managers.
Business schools are also diversifying into providing shorter courses for
middle managers later in their careers, often helped by government funding
for training. For example, Warwick University's Centre for Small and Medium
Sized Enterprises operates the 'Host Initiative'. This takes redundant
senior executives from large companies in the area, such as Rolls-Royce and
Rover, gives them a training course for a few months to update them on
management theory, and then sends them to placements with small companies.
The scheme recently found permanent employment for its 100th executive. This
benefits the local economy as smaller companies attempt to fill the gap left
by the contracting car builders, and the government will encourage similar
schemes elsewhere.
V
Entrepreneurs in the making
VENTURE CAPITAL
A type of finance which has been of keen interest to MBAs and other business
school graduates (though latterly the recession may have dented their
enthusiasm). Surveys show that more than 90 per cent of MBA applicants cite
career change as a motivation for going to business school and that 5 per
cent end up being self-employed after their studies.
Entrepreneurship has been a notably popular optional course (or elective) in
recent years.
W
Childbearing disadvantage
WOMEN
Many business schools are concerned about the low percentage of women they
attract, which is generally less than 25 per cent.
There are some exceptions. The schools which recruit the highest percentage
of women students are Ashridge at 50 per cent, Monaco at 47 per cent and
Toronto at 46 per cent, according to the Which MBA? guide.
Before 1976, women were virtually unrepresented among MBA graduates,
according to Amba. Over the next 13 years, the proportion of women taking
MBAs grew steadily until it reached about 20 per cent; since 1989, it has
plateaued.
Explanations for the low proportion of women vary. Some schools believe it
is in line, or even above, the number of women expecting to reach senior
management positions. 'While women still represent a minority of MBAs, the
proportion is relatively large compared with the overall management
positions occupied by women,' says Amba.
Another explanation is that women in their late 20s - a common age to take a
MBA - are often considering a break in their career to start a family. Some
schools are trying to promote the idea that women who take career breaks to
bring up a family might find an MBA a way back into the job market.
Forty per cent of women managers who responded to a survey conducted by City
University Business School felt that schools could do more to promote the
benefits of an MBA to employers.
The authors agreed that schools need to reassure women that an MBA adds
value to their careers, and that the difficulties of attendance facing many
women at the traditional age of 29-32 should be acknowledged. 'Promoting an
MBA as something a woman may consider during a career break or moving
towards a modular system whereby an MBA can be taken over a longer period
are strong options for the future', they concluded.
X
Titles of no degree
X-RATED BUSINESS SCHOOLS
Students or prospective students should be very wary of institutions
offering MBAs in the UK which are not validated by a university.
Regular MBA employers have a good idea which programmes are respectable  -
they will certainly shun the 'degree mills' around the world which award
MBAs on payment of fees but which require limited, if any, academic input
from the candidate.
Although an American business school may well be accredited at home by the
American Assembly of Collegiate Schools of Business, approval by that body
of its affiliates outside the US does not necessarily follow.
In France, intending applicants could check for membership of the Chapitre
des Grandes Ecoles though Insead, one of the best-known international
schools, is outside the university system.
On the whole, the more stringent and demanding the entry requirements of a
business school, the higher up the quality ladder a programme is likely to
be.
Y
Passport may be invalid
YUPPIE DEGREE
In the second half of the 1980s the MBA attracted the nickname (mainly in
the US) of 'yuppie degree'. For many, it seemed an automatic passport to red
braces, high salaries and fast cars. That image, however, has had to be
revised in an era of more sober expectation, greater management complexity
and softer leadership styles.
Z
For designer mugs
ZARF
According to Collins' English dictionary the Zarf is a Middle Eastern
holder, usually ornamental, for a hot coffee cup. It is an essential piece
of 'kit' for the ambitious MBA student.
 ---------------------------------------------
     MAIN QUALIFICATION BEFORE BUSINESS
                SCHOOL (1992)
 ---------------------------------------------
Engineering                    27 per cent
Science; maths                 19 per cent
Business                       14 per cent
Economics                      11 per cent
Arts; languages                10 per cent
Social sciences;                9 per cent
politics; philosophy
Accounts; finance               8 per cent
Computing                       4 per cent
Statistics                      2 per cent
Law                             2 per cent
Others                         15 per cent
 ---------------------------------------------
Percentage of MBA graduates with a
qualification in subject (Some respondents
had qualifications in more than one subject)
 ---------------------------------------------
Source: Amba
 ---------------------------------------------
 --------------------------------------------------
         EMPLOYMENT CHANGES AFTER MBA
 --------------------------------------------------
Changed employer within 3 months        28 percent
Changed employer within 12 months       11 percent
Became self-employed                     5 percent
Remained with existing employer         56 percent
 --------------------------------------------------
Source: Amba
 --------------------------------------------------
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                 HOW STUDENTS FINANCE THEIR MBA PROGRAMME
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      North                 Rest of
                       World         America     Europe      world
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Self-financed*           80             86         77          71
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
              IF SELF-FINANCED, HOW WAS THE MONEY RAISED***
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Bank loan                28             33         25          18
Redundancy pay            2              1          4           1
Savings                  41             36         45          53
Parental help            17             17         17          17
Spouse support            7              7          7           6
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
*Percentage of respondents
***Importance accorded by students to each.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Which MBA?
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
               JOBS OF RECENT MBA GRADUATES BY SECTOR (%)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                   World     North America     Europe    Rest of world
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Consultancy           17          17             17           13
Banking/finance       25          30             20           23
Manufacturing         19          19             22           11
Other                 40          34             45           53
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Which MBA?
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
      AVERAGE STARTING SALARIES OF RECENT GRADUATES (IN DOLLARS )*
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
North America                Europe              Rest of world
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Chicago          65,000      IMD       75,000    Macquarie      52,447
Kellogg          65,000      INSEAD    67,050    AGSM           45,454
Stanford         65,000      ISA       63,345    Melbourne      45,454
Duke             60,800      London    58,100    Otago          35,393
Columbia         60,000      ESC Lyon  55,743    Sydney         31,468
Berkeley         60,000      Aston     52,150
Carnegie Mellon  59,732      City      52,150
UCLA             59,200      EAP       50,675
Georgetown       58,764      Warwick   50,612
Darden           58,000      MBS       49,170
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
*Data supplied by schools, converted using average rates for January
1994; data not available for all schools.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Which MBA?
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
