FT  21 SEP 94 / Personal View: Blueprint for a European government
A recent report on European integration from the German Christian Democrats
recommended that 'the Commission . . . take on the features of a European
government'. Such a prospect will cause anxiety among members of the
European Union wishing to see it develop a decentralised structure. So what
approach should they take to this CDU suggestion?
One answer would be to do nothing and hope the recommendation fades away.
However, in view of suggestions elsewhere in Europe, including the European
parliament's view that the Commission's powers be increased, that would be
unwise. The alternative would be to accept that the functioning of the EU's
key institutions needs to be reviewed. As part of such a review, the
Commission's role would need a thorough examination, and the 1996
inter-governmental conference provides the opportunity.
There are two views of the future role of the Commission. One is that it
should increasingly take on the character of the 'government' of Europe. The
other is that it should become a more effective manager of the Union's
programmes. The two views conflict. They reflect different assessments of
where the weaknesses lie in the Union's present institutional arrangements,
as well as fundamental differences about where institutional
responsibilities for core functions in the Union should lie.
The role of a modern government is to determine the direction of public
policy and, where legislation is necessary, to initiate, prepare and attempt
to carry through that legislation. There are two bodies that can potentially
perform this role in the European Union. One is the Commission. The other is
the Council of Ministers, acting in the light of more general guidelines set
by heads of government.
The role of manager of public programmes is carried out in modern government
either by specialised agencies or within the departments of the civil
service. The view that the Commission should develop as 'manager' envisages
it as an agency of government (Council of Ministers) and in the role of
civil service. This does not necessarily mean that the Commission would
become directly responsible for the execution of policy in all areas. Much
of the responsibility must continue to rest with member states. However, the
Commission would need to develop its role as 'honest broker', mediating
policy differences between member states.
There is a reasoned case for not developing the Commission as Europe's
government. Any democratic government would require electoral legitimacy.
The Commission could not continue as an appointed body. It would have to be
elected either by the European parliament or by direct popular vote in the
Union (most plausibly, through an election to select its head). In the first
case, parliament would gain a level of control over the government unmatched
by any other democratic representative assembly. In the second case, to vest
such powers in a single person would seem a colossal mistake in the light of
Europe's history. Either 'solution' would be enormously central-ising.
The case against the Commission developing as the government of Europe
cannot simply rest on a negative agenda. The capacity of the Council of
Ministers to set policy and to run business in a more orderly way will need
to improve. This will call for changes in voting, in the presidency
arrangements and in the Council secretariat.
Developing the Council of Ministers as the government of Europe also raises
questions about democratic legitimation. The Council cannot be dismissed by
the directly elected European parliament. Thus there would develop a
separation of powers more akin to the American system than the 'fusion' of
powers often held to be characteristic of parliamentary democracies.
National parliaments would have a role in the legitimation of policies
carried into the Council by their own ministers. This in turn means that the
relationship between national parliaments and the European parliament would
have to be much more carefully struc-tured.
If some member states wish to run ahead of the rest and implement their own
view of the institutional development of Europe, as suggested by the CDU
document, they should be aware that such action is likely to divide Europe
again. The concept of a multi-track, multi-speed Europe is one of managed
differences. To assign responsibility for core functions in a way which also
affects key institutional relationships could, however, lead to unmanageable
divergence. Nobody, least of all the German Christian Democrats, really
wishes to see this happen.
The author is deputy director of the European Policy Forum
