FT  06 JAN 94 / Arts: China's 'Gone with the Wind' - Cinema
FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE (15) Chen Kaige
CARLITO'S WAY (18) Brian De Palma
MAC (18) John Turturro
MALICE (15) Harold Becker
Chen Kaige's Farewell My Concubine has been compared - by foes as well as
fans - with Gone With The Wind. A sumptuous, switchbacking ride through
Chinese history from 1925 to 1977, the film lasts three hours, boasts a
giddily flamboyant cast of characters and stops off for showdowns at almost
every main station in China's 20th century story.
Japanese invasion (1937); Japanese surrender (1945); Communist takeover of
Beijing (1949); Cultural Revolution (1966); and finally the false dawn of
post-Mao 'liberalisation' (1977). No wonder both audience and characters
look travel-exhausted by the close. Chen's previous work, which included
Yellow Earth, King Of The Children and the majestically gnomic Life On A
String, was in a contrasting Oriental-inscrutable mode. You had to scratch
the austere parchment to find the feelings underneath.
Here emotions are worn on sleeves and sleeves are of dazzling-coloured silk.
Dieyi (Leslie Cheung) and Xiaolou (Zhang Fengyi) are the two Peking Opera
actors whose lives, loves and hates we follow through 50 turbulent years. On
stage Dieyi's feminine beauty has condemned him, in an all-male theatre
tradition, to play Queen to Xialou's King. Off-stage he plays queen with
equal expertise. His unrequited passion for Xialou modulates between lofty
stoicism and envenomed jealousy and finally leads - we have reached the
moral horrors of the Cultural Revolution - to his denouncing of his
beloved's ex-concubine wife Juxian, played with flashing cheekbones by
Chinese superstar Gong Li (Raise The Red Lantern).
The curtain falls on two suicides, a nation in ferment, and clouds of opium
smoke swilling about the stage from the drug-addicted last act. Some have
cried 'melodrama'. But the movie's large-breathed hyperboles create their
own oddly compelling rhythm and vision: compelling enough to have gained
last years Cannes Golden Palm ex aequo with The Piano. And the interplay
between historical backdrop and human foreground is persuasive even when
Chen takes liberties to set up frequency vibrations between the two.
The film shows its surest touch in the first scenes: Dieyi and Xialou as
children at a Peking Opera school. Chen makes the cruelties and disciplines
at this artistic forcing-house seem at once monstrous and matter-of-fact.
Boys chosen to play females are forced to repeat over and over 'I am by
nature a girl'. Bodies are rendered elastic by ruthless Procrustean
exercises. And when one boy hangs himself, Life Just Goes On. (Chen
punctuates this death with a perfect surreal detail: a dusty fold-up wooden
stage crashes down in the background, inexplicably, like a fist from God.)
The power of this first sequence energises and legitimises the scenes to
come. It shows us the appalling and readies us for the worse: the streets
thundered through by Japanese troops, the light-raked show trials, Dieyi's
lonely drift into drugs or opportunist sexual servitude. (The film shows how
political fear can make mind and heart and body bow to what is expedient
from regime to regime).
But the childhood scenes also introduce us to the miraculous - a cloud of
butterfly kites dancing outside the school gates when two boys open them to
play truant - in preparation for the marvels of defiant grace wrought by Art
out of Life. Farewell My Concubine, which takes its own title from that of
the Peking opera Dieyi and Xialou most often perform together, is itself a
hybrid of the real and visionary. Its flourishes and extravagances are as
integral to its stratagem as its grim counting off of historical milestones.
Life, Chen tells us, does not 'imitate' art, nor art life. In the mind of a
nation dazed by history, life and art are inextricably intertwined as part
of the common dream.
Life and art are both out to lunch in Brian De Palma's Carlito's Way. This
is the film of a director still seeking career re-entry after the mishap of
The Bonfire Of The Vanities. His last film Raising Cain was a brain-teasing
thriller that met no response at the box-office. So Mr De Palma has decided
to run for cover and remake, in all but name, his 1983 remake of Scarface.
Al Pacino, drugs, gangsters, murder feuds and a we-mean-business running
time (2 1/2 hours) ensue. Mr P plays Carlito Brigante: black-bearded,
snappily dressed and trying to 'go straight' in 1970s East Harlem after five
years in prison, except that as he tells his improbably longsuffering
girlfriend Penelope Ann Miller, 'I gotta do just this one thing to get out'.
(Help a friend with a prison rescue.)
'Get out,' he means, of the criminal milieu. Which makes it odd that the
first thing our new crime-resistant Mr Pacino does is to buy into a
gangster-infested nightclub with his crooked lawyer friend Sean Penn
(scarce-recognisable in curly red wig and gold-rim specs). Soon - to
Carlito's surprise if not to ours - there is blood in the Martinis and
bullet-holes in the chrome-and-cream decor (designer, Richard 'Cotton Club'
Sylbert). And the prison rescue bid looks horribly as if it might go wrong .
. .
David Koepp's script is based on two novels by Justice Edwin Torres. If he
had made it three novels, we might have had some real crazy-quilted
incoherence. Instead we have the sense that pages are being turned and books
swapped as turgid dialogue (Pacino and Miller) alternates in random rubato
with sudden fizzes of violence or Method acting (Pacino and Penn). As for
the climax, another De Palma suspense-and-action special set in Grand
Central Station (see The Untouchables), it seems like a director's
despairing attempt to use old glories to add lustre to a stubbornly dingy
project.
Mac comes to us from another Italian-American playing delicate career moves:
actor turned first-time film-maker John Turturro. Mr T, he of the black
wire-wool hair and frightened rabbit eyes, was the title hero of Barton Fink
and the gibbering execution victim in Miller's Crossing. Now he stars as a
self-made builder in 1950s Queens, New York: one of three career-sharing
Italian brothers who rage, joke, love, squabble and occasionally apply
mortar to brickwork.
Turturro's Mac is based on his own father and is wonderfully fullblooded.
Building, for this man, is not a job but a mythology. He lectures his
siblings on Romulus and Remus. And as mishaps accumulate - Mac
near-bankrupted in a bidding war for land, a worker tumbling from a roof,
the brothers splitting up after a quarrel - he is right out there in the
street raving and orating about the sanctity of Work.
The film could have been written by Arthur Miller and directed by Federico
Fellini. Fellini would have loved the touch of the dead father turning to
his pallbearing sons to deliver his last work-proud message: 'I built this
coffin]' And Miller - whose Eddie Carbone in A View From The Bridge would
happily break grissini with these New York Italian brothers-in-sweat - would
enjoy the heady mixture of dynastic tragi-comedy with work-ethic moralism.
Who is expected to enjoy Malice only Hollywood's arcaner market-research
departments could tell us. Category: thriller. Sub-category: 'lodger from
Hell'. When Dr Alec Baldwin, a gifted sawbones with a tendency to float from
town to town, moves in with married couple Bill Pullman and Nicole Kidman,
who could anticipate that suspense, terror, insurance fraud, marital
breakdown and a near-fatal hospital operation will ensue?
Almost anyone could anticipate most of these. Not just from Jerry
Goldsmith's eerie, mocking music but from Harold (Sea Of Love) Becker's
eerie, mocking direction and from Alec Baldwin's ditto, ditto performance.
George C Scott and Anne Bancroft appear, looking mildly shellshocked in
guest roles. The script by Aaron Sorkin (A Few Good Men) stumbles about
between coincidence and contrivance. And after several reels set in modest
suburbia, the finale takes place in a storm-besieged cliff-edge mansion
which would seem over the top in an Edgar Allan Poe film.
