FT  07 APR 94 / Kenya central bank defrauded of Dollars 210m
Kenya's monetary authorities yesterday revealed that the central bank was
defrauded of Dollars 210m (Pounds 141m) last year - an amount equivalent to
6 per cent of the country's gross domestic product - in what probably counts
as the biggest embezzlement of public funds in Kenya's history.
As a result, the central bank recorded a net loss of 4.5bn shillings (Pounds
47m) in the year to June 1993, according to the bank's auditors. The losses
were incurred in foreign exchange trading and on unsecured advances to three
local banks which have ceased operations.
Mr Micah Cheserem, who became the central bank governor in July, after the
losses were detected, says his main priority is to recover KSh6bn owed to
the central bank. Mr Amos Wako, the attorney-general, has meanwhile launched
an investigation into the financial activities of the local Exchange Bank,
which is in liquidation.
Mr Cheserem says the central bank entered into a forward foreign exchange
contract with Exchange Bank last April in which the central bank advanced
KSh9.9bn against a future payment of Dollars 210m. Subsequently, it is
claimed, central bank officials and Exchange Bank conspired to erase the
latter's liabilities by setting up bogus bank accounts in the name of the
central bank with two international banks in London.
The alleged fraud was discovered when the International Monetary Fund
questioned the apparent Dollars 210m central bank funds held abroad. 'The
accounts were discovered to be false, in an apparent attempt to conceal the
fact that Exchange Bank had defaulted on the contract,' Mr Cheserem said in
an interview yesterday.
Mr Cheserem is surprised that such a large contract was approved at a time
when Exchange Bank was already under investigation for the alleged
falsification of export documents for a related company.
The central bank ordered Exchange Bank into liquidation last year after an
independent audit of its activities. The audit has never been made public,
compounding the widespread belief that senior politicians in the ruling Kanu
party benefited from Exchange Bank's activities.
Former central bank employees are being questioned in connection with the
affair.
