FT  19 FEB 94 / The lady's not for turning: Burma's detained opposition
leader poses a dilemma for the junta
Most of her compatriots still believe in her, foreigners still admire her,
and the military junta which put her under house arrest four and a half
years ago still does not have a clue what to do with her.
The events of this week have confirmed that Ms Aung San Suu Kyi, the
detained Burmese opposition leader, is both the only credible voice of her
country's battered pro-democracy movement and the main obstacle preventing
the junta from gaining international respectability.
Mr Bill Richardson, the US congressman who visited Ms Suu Kyi this week and
took her a letter of unqualified support from President Bill Clinton, left
in no doubt that her commitment to bring democracy to Burma had not been
blunted by captivity.
'She is a woman of towering intellect and strength of conscience,' he said,
noting that she rose daily at 4:30am to exercise and meditate. 'As an
American politician I would hate to run against Aung San Suu Kyi.'
Burmese politicians feel the same: her party, the National League for
Democracy, won 80 per cent of the seats in a national election in 1990 even
though she and other NLD leaders were already under arrest.
The armed forces, which had killed hundreds of civilian opponents during an
uprising two years earlier, were convinced their allies would win at the
polls. Aghast at the NLD victory, they decided to ignore the result and
continue ruling Burma through the junta, the State Law and Order Restoration
Council (Slorc).
In many ways, the Slorc is more secure than at any time since it was formed
in 1988. Ethnic rebel groups along the borders - such as the Karen and the
Kachin - have been pressed by their former patrons in Thailand and China
into negotiating ceasefires with the Slorc after decades of guerrilla
warfare.
The economy, boosted by private-sector investments from Singaporean, Thai
and western companies, is beginning to recover from a long period of
stagnation and decline. Asian governments, particularly China and Singapore,
are scornful of western concerns about human rights in Burma and sell
weapons to Rangoon.
Outspoken opponents of the regime have been jailed, driven into exile or
terrified into silence.
Burma's generals, however, want more: they want foreign aid from Japan and
the west, and they want recognition for their ham-fisted attempts to
engineer a new constitution that would allow them to run the country in a
less overt way than they do today.
The continued detention of Ms Suu Kyi, winner of the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize,
makes any improvement in foreign relations which could lead to infusions of
western aid improbable.
If the Slorc releases her, on the other hand, it fears she would immediately
become the focus of a new pro-democracy uprising. She refuses to win her
release by agreeing to go into exile.
Faced with this dilemma, the Slorc has dithered. Last month Lt-Gen Khin
Nyunt, the intelligence chief known as 'Secretary-1' who is regarded as the
most powerful member of the junta, led Japanese journalists to believe that
Ms Suu Kyi might be freed in July after five years of detention.
Burmese officials promptly denied she would be released, but the junta
removed the unsightly pillboxes guarding her house on University Avenue.
Then Mr Richardson was allowed this Monday to pay her a visit - the first by
a foreigner apart from her English husband and children - with all the
attendant publicity such a meeting entails. Ms Suu Kyi sent a message to her
supporters: 'Be courageous and democracy will win.'
Mr Richardson also met Lt-Gen Khin Nyunt, who told him that a final decision
about her detention had not been taken. The next day, Col Kyaw Win, Lt-Gen
Khin Nyunt's deputy, announced that she would be held at least until next
year.
Backed by the Clinton administration, Mr Richardson took up Ms Suu Kyi's
suggestion that she should have talks with the Slorc as a way of trying to
resolve the stand-off be-tween the armed forces and their opponents.
Lt-Gen Khin Nyunt replied that the Slorc would consider a meeting between
himself and Ms Suu Kyi as long as it was not a 'political dialogue'.
But it is hard to see what the Slorc could hope to gain from such an
encounter. She has long expressed a desire for talks, and the meeting would
therefore be seen as a victory for her as well as recognition of her
standing in Burma and abroad.
Some of her former NLD colleagues have been bullied into participating in a
national convention organised by the Slorc, charged with rubber-stamping a
new, pro-military constitution (one dissenter who urged delegates to stand
up for democracy was jailed for 20 years).
But Ms Suu Kyi, daughter of Gen Aung San, who led Burma to the brink of
independence from Britain, in public would doubtless dismiss the convention
as 'an absolute farce' - as she did during her meeting with Mr Richardson.
That would contradict the Slorc's relentless propaganda and embarrass Asian
governments such as Thailand's, which profess admiration for the junta's
'democratisation' process.
Whether the Slorc decides to free her or continue detaining her without
trial, and whether or not Lt-Gen Khin Nyunt decides to meet her, there is no
indication that the junta is prepared to yield any power to the democratic
opposition. It is equally unlikely that Ms Suu Kyi will abandon her
democratic ideals.
