FT  05 SEP 94 / FT Guide To The Haiti Crisis
Haiti is an impoverished Caribbean backwater of 5.5m people. What has it
done to deserve such international attention?
A military coup in September 1991 ousted Haiti's first democratically
elected president, Rev Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who had swept the polls with
67 per cent of the vote only ten months earlier. Aristide, whose short reign
was dogged by intrigue and conflict, fled to the US and was replaced by a
repressive, violent junta headed by Gen Raoul Cedras. The coup coincided
with a revision of US foreign policy. Although the US had supported the
autocratic regime of Francois 'Papa Doc' Duvalier (1957-71) and then his son
Jean-Claude 'Baby Doc' Duvalier (1971-86) during the Cold War, in the 1990s
an anti-democratic coup in America's backyard was a serious affront.
Thousands of Haitian refugees fleeing to Florida provided President George
Bush and then President Bill Clinton with another compelling reason to seek
a solution to Haiti's troubles.
Have economic sanctions been tried?
The Organization of American States (OAS) declared an embargo immediately
after the coup in 1991. It had little impact initially but in recent months
the Haitian economy has all but collapsed. The United Nations estimates the
unemployment rate is about 80 per cent. Food prices have rocketed; a sack of
flour cost 450 gourdes on August 22, up from 120 gourdes two weeks earlier.
Haiti's poor have borne the brunt of the embargo and the military leadership
is thought to be cushioned from its effects.
What efforts were made to solve the problem diplomatically?
In early 1992, the OAS negotiated the Washington Protocol which proposed
establishing a new government and, after a few months, Aristide's return to
the presidency. Haiti's Congress dismissed it. Then, the UN brokered an
agreement, signed in July 1993 by Cedras and Aristide to restore the
president by October 30 of last year. Haitian toughs on the Port-au-Prince
quayside, apparently backed by Cedras, humiliatingly rebuffed a US troop
ship on a mission to assist Aristide's return. Last week, the UN declared
the latest peace mission had failed because the military leadership refused
to talk to its representative.
So the UN decided to take action?
Yes, on July 31, the security council voted for the US-conceived Resolution
940, which sanctioned a multinational force to 'use all necessary means'
(for which read, an invasion) to remove the military leadership.
What kind of military intervention is envisaged ?
Pentagon officials estimate an invasion force of less than 15,000 soldiers
(mostly from US, but also from Argentina, Britain, and four countries of the
Caribbean) could defeat the 7,500 ill-trained Haitian army in less than a
week. Cedras' military is understood to be equipped with only six
lightly-armoured vehicles less than five 105-millimetre artillery guns, two
Italian training aircraft and a navy of four patrol boats. 'On a good day,
two work,' according to a Pentagon official.
Is the invasion imminent?
After Resolution 940 was passed, the flood of Cuban refugees diverted US
State Department attention. Yet tough talk last week from John Deutch, US
deputy defense secretary, reopened speculation that the invasion may come
soon.
Other dates to bear in mind are:
October 12 - the end of Cedras' three-year term as commander-in-chief and an
opportunity for him to leave with full military honours.
November 8, congressional and gubernatorial elections in the US could weigh
in the political calculations for the Clinton Administration.
December 1995 - Aristide's term as elected president runs out.
Once Aristide was restored, what then?
The UN security council expects a 6,000-strong peace-keeping mission to
remain until February 1996. The World Bank has calculated that Aristide's
government would need Dollars 555m in its first year just to return Haiti
back to pre-1991 levels of poverty.
What does President Clinton stand to gain from an invasion?
It would help to shore up the his relations with black critics in Congress.
A swift and successful operation abroad would help the Administration's
foreign policy reputation and Clinton's image before a tough couple of
months pursuing his domestic agenda on Capitol Hill. The Administration will
also be glad to be rid of the turbulent priest, Father Aristide. He has been
a tough client. pleading for action but then not endorsing an invasion.
