FT  11 NOV 94 / Shell dips as Asia margins tighten
Production losses from the recent oil strike in Nigeria and tighter refining
margins in Asia caused third-quarter profits for the Royal Dutch/Shell group
to ease back 1 per cent to Pounds 853m.
Shell shares closed 8p down at 711p, after the company reported a 3 per cent
drop in net income for the nine months to Pounds 2.38bn on an estimated
current cost of supplies basis, similar to a replacement costs measure.
Shell, in common with other integrated oil companies, experienced a strong
cyclical rebound in chemical earnings during the third quarter.
Rising volumes and lower operating costs resulted in chemicals' earnings of
Pounds 158m, against a Pounds 168m loss last time. Shell said it was
optimistic that demand would grow as world petrochemicals' markets continue
the recovery in line with stronger economic growth in the main
industrialised economies.
The rebound in chemicals failed, however, to offset tigher refining margins
in Asia, where Shell has extensive downstream interests.
High refining margins in the region drew in imports of refined products from
Middle East producers such as Kuwait. New refinery capacity in the area
eroded margins further, although Shell predicted an improvement in the
fourth quarter.
Total oil product sales were up 8 per cent outside the US, with increases in
Asia and Latin America offsetting a decline in Europe.
The third-quarter results were also depressed by the effects of the Nigerian
oil strike this past summer. The loss of production from Shell's large
onshore fields in Nigeria caused worldwide net equity crude oil production
in the quarter to fall by 2 per cent to 1.69m barrels a day.
Exploration and production earnings fell 37 per cent to Pounds 350m. The
loss of Nigerian output coincided with this year's highest world crude oil
prices.
It also lowered cash flow to Pounds 5.6bn, compared with Pounds 5.8bn last
year.
Shell expects crude oil prices to firm in the fourth quarter, when demand
usually increases because of the onset of winter in the northern hemisphere.
But it noted that price movements were also dependent on the actions of the
Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries at its meeting later this
month.
Capital expenditure and exploration spending for the nine months rose 10 per
cent to Pounds 4.6bn. Total debt remained relatively modest at Pounds 8.2bn,
with a total debt ratio of 18.4 per cent.
Lex, Page 18
