FT  24 OCT 94 / Hitching a ride on the corporate gravy train: Diane Summers
considers where to draw the line on freebies
When does an expenses-paid trip, a day at the races or a night at the opera
stop being part of normal public or corporate life and start to look like
sleaze?
Even the most junior manager is likely to have been faced at some time with
a freebie dilemma.
The gift of a calender from a supplier will probably not cause a second
thought, but what about a case of wine? A nice lunch to keep in touch with a
client is one thing, but does a free golfing trip to somewhere warm add up
to an improper inducement, or just a longer opportunity to cement relations?
Journalists are faced with an abundance of freeloading opportunities. The
'Private Eye test', which is the standard in operation at the Financial
Times, can be adapted for use elsewhere when it comes to deciding whether a
gift, meal or trip is acceptable or sleazy. To apply the test, visualise
whether a mention of the arrangement in Private Eye would cause
embarrassment.
Lobbyists and public-relations specialists also have reason to consider
these matters more than most. Mr Mike Beard, president of the Institute of
Public Relations and head of PR at Taylor Woodrow, the construction company,
has developed a couple of useful tests of his own.
The first is the 'means test'. He draws the line at entertainment 'way
beyond the level the person would normally be able to afford for
themselves'. This level will vary with the individual. A steak in a wine bar
at lunchtime is not beyond the means of most journalists but, said Mr Beard,
'if you want to talk to the chairman of a major company on a piece of
business, you may have to meet him in more expensive surroundings'.
The second is the 'wow test'. When you open an envelope containing an
invitation you either groan or you say 'that's nice', said Mr Beard. But if
you find yourself saying 'wow', then it is time to consider.
It also pays to do an audit from time to time, to check that entertaining is
reciprocal, he said. 'The rule in my department is that we're quite happy to
be bought lunch by our suppliers but we sometimes buy them lunch back. You
must not have a relationship which is too oppressive.'
In Mr Beard's view a night at the opera, with a ticket for an accompanying
partner, is particularly useful when overseas visitors need to be
entertained in the evenings - although Mr Beard is more likely to be spotted
at a rock concert. 'I can't stand opera, to be honest. A rock concert is
low-cost and it's a bit different.' Taylor Woodrow also arranges weekend
outings to theme parks for contacts. 'We have a little barbecue and it's a
chance to talk to them - the cost is incredibly modest. We're buying a bit
of their private time to talk to them about the company,' said Mr Beard.
But in the experience of Mr David Willis, who runs a corporate hospitality
business, there is little point trying to encroach on people's private time.
Hospitality should aim to be in the hours the boss is paying for.
Mr Willis said: 'Sunday is absolutely out. The hard-working executive is
locked away with his family, mowing the lawn and polishing the Daimler.
Saturday is possible if it's a really monster event, like the cup final, or
the rugby international. But people view both offering and accepting
hospitality as part of work.'
Even though such events are seen as part of work, very little work is
actually talked about, said Mr Willis, a director of the National Sporting
Club. 'It's almost infra dig to do any selling at a hospitality event. The
idea is to get Ron and Brenda out for a jolly good day, pour a lot of
champagne down them and give them a few tips for the Derby winners. They
then feel good about you, and the next time you or your sales rep calls
you'll be received in front of the competition.'
The cost of corporate hospitality at top sporting events can approach
Ritz-bill proportions these days. Mr Willis said that it cost upwards of
Pounds 1,500 a head to entertain at the last Wimbledon men's finals, but
'people pay if they've got major international customers coming into London
for deals that are worth millions.'
The British may frown on cultures where baksheesh and special favours to
family members are an expected part of business life. But it would seem that
British standards are, in turn, frowned on by the Japanese and Americans.
According to Mr Willis the Japanese are notably absent from the hospitality
scene. While they will visit clubs in their own time they are shocked by the
notion of taking a working day off to go to a sporting event.
In his experience 'Americans would think it barmy to spend thousands of
pounds at Wimbledon. An MD of a big American company might entertain a
senior partner at the ball game, but they'd buy each other a hot dog and sit
in the public seats. How near you are to the Royal Enclosure, and all those
other layers of importance, is very British.'
Mr Willis said a few companies, such as the supermarket chain J. Sainsbury,
actively discouraged employees from receiving such hospitality. But in his
view 'most Brits don't have a problem on the morality or ethics side of all
this'.
For those who do, the 'Private Eye', 'means' and 'wow' tests remain
reasonable starting points.
