FT  03 SEP 94 / Investment doubts raised over plan for small companies
market
London Stock Exchange proposals to help small companies raise capital were
given a cautious welcome yesterday but there were strong doubts that the
proposed new market would interest institutional investors.
A leaked draft of a consultative document due to be published next week
suggests the stock exchange is planning to set up a lightly regulated
Alternative Investment Market.
The exchange hopes the new market will provide existing small companies with
a market for their shares and new companies with a way of raising capital
that is far less costly than a flotation on the Official List.
Mrs Katie Morris, chief executive of CISCO, the City Group for Smaller
Companies, welcomed the exchange's move. 'We are delighted to see that after
two years and hard lobbying we are seeing some action,' she said.
But some venture capitalists who are keen for an alternative to the Unlisted
Securities Market (USM), particularly for rapidly growing hi-tech companies,
were more cautious.
'I wonder if institutions will be willing to get involved in a market that
is not policed as well against fraud as the main market or the USM,' said Mr
Ronald Cohen, chairman of venture capital group Apax Partners.
Some investors believe that young growing companies in the UK are failing to
raise venture capital because there is no exit route to a regulated but
easily accessible market such as NASDAQ in the US. The proposed market would
be a modified version of the exchange's occasional trading facility - the
rule 4.2 market - which already allows the trading of shares in a very
lightly regulated market.
The stock exchange says European Union rules are forcing more regulation on
this market. Next week's proposal will form part of the stock exchange's
seven point programme announced in April to help smaller companies.
Mr David Macnamara, a director of Winterflood Securities, market makers in
smaller company shares, commented: 'We are very interested in any new
smaller company market, provided it is regulated properly.'
Some investment firms have already launched funds which are intended to
concentrate on companies traded on the 4.2 market and its successors.
Serious Money, Weekend Page II
