FT  12 JUL 94 / Survey of France (12): Media alliances forge ahead - The
communications industry is now largely free of state controls
When a furious Andre Rousselet last stormed out of a February board meeting
at Havas, the powerful media and leisure group of which he was once
chairman, it marked the end of one era for the French communications
industry and the beginning of another.
Mr Rousselet was protesting against the surprise announcement that, without
his knowledge, Havas had finalised negotiations to form a group of
shareholders in Canal-Plus, the pay-TV station he had founded in 1984. His
walk-out was shortly followed by his resignation as a director of Havas and
then as chairman of Canal-Plus.
His departure cleared the way for Havas and its partners - France Telecom,
the telecommunications group behind the Telecom 2 French satellite
television service which had just agreed to become one of Havas's minority
shareholders, and Generale des Eaux, the industrial concern with extensive
interests in cable television - to take control of Canal-Plus. It should
also - or so the Havas faction hopes - enable them to dominate the
development of the communications industry into the next century.
France has always prided itself on its technocratic prowess. Successive
governments have invested heavily in ambitious technology and engineering
projects: from the construction of the train a grande vitesse high speed
rail network, to the installation of France Telecom's Minitel interactive
computer system. They have also been willing to support ailing areas of
technology-linked industries such as some parts of the Thomson electronics
empire and the heavily loss-making Bull computer group.
The excitement generated by the emergence of the new multimedia industry in
the US has triggered a similar surge of enthusiasm in France among the
companies that participated in the liberalisation of the old
state-controlled broadcasting system during the 1980s. These companies -
which include Lyonnaise des Eaux, the utility group, the Bouygues
construction concern, the Luxembourg-based CLT media company, the Chargeurs
industrial group and Matra-Hachette, the electronics and media conglomerate,
as well as Havas, Generale des Eaux and France Telecom - are now wrestling
for pole positions in the French multimedia arena.
The central theme of developments in the communications industry during the
1980s was the dismantling of the old state controls.
This process was begun by the socialist administrations of the early 1980s
and continued by the centre-right coalition government in the middle of the
decade. It involved the creation of new media entities, such as Canal-Plus
and the French cable television system. It also included the privatisation
of a number of important media companies including Havas and TF1, the
country's largest television channel.
Some of these initiatives have been resounding successes. Canal-Plus is only
10 years old, but has been so successful that it is regarded as a worldwide
role model in pay-TV. It has also expanded into other countries and into new
areas of the media, notably into film production and satellite channels.
TF1 has been similarly successful, having flourished in the private sector
to increase its share of the viewing and advertising revenue largely at the
expense of France 2 and France 3, its state-controlled competitors. M6, one
of the new private sector television channels launched in the 1980s, is
finalising plans to go public.
Yet other ventures have been expensive failures. La Cinq, another new 1980s
channel, collapsed two years ago leaving heavy losses for its main
shareholders (including Matra-Hachette and Silvio Berlusconi, now prime
minister of Italy). Meanwhile the French cable television system is still
struggling after years in the red.
In short, the progress of the French communications initiatives of the 1980s
has at best been erratic. However, liberalisation of the old
state-controlled broadcasting system, coupled with the development of new
areas such as cable, did flush out the main participants in the development
of the new multimedia industry. The protagonists have been hastily forging
alliances over the past few months, from which they will fight for market
dominance.
The Canal-Plus crisis was a critical event in the creation of these camps.
It now seems fated, as Mr Rousselet feared, to become a pawn in France
Telecom's multimedia strategy.
It has also become the focus for one of France's multimedia factions:
composed of Havas and Generale des Eaux as well as France Telecom. This
group is now pitted against the combination of TF1 and Lyonnaise des Eaux.
Hovering on the sidelines are CLT and Matra-Hachette, together with
Chargeurs, one of France's leading film producers and a long term investor
in Rupert Murdoch's BSkyB channels which are relayed by Telecom 2's
arch-rival, the pan-European Astra satellite service.
They wait anxiously for France's multimedia battle to begin in earnest. Yet
the most anxious observer of all is the French government which, despite the
1980s liberalisations, has kept a tight rein over the media, to the extent
of infuriating its EU partners with protectionist policies.
French protectionism is now under attack both from the rising tide of EU
regulations and the ineluctable internationalisation of European media. The
French might have drawn up their multimedia battle lines, but they are
unlikely to be allowed to wage the war entirely on their own terms.
