FT  22 APR 94 / Survey of Egypt (18): Plans look pretty good on paper - The
'new communities'
The scale of Egypt's population problem is awesome. By the government's own
reckoning, 98 per cent of the country's 61m population live in just 4 per
cent of its area - along the Nile valley and in the Delta.
But the rich farmland in the Nile Valley is fast being destroyed. From the
train window going north to Alexandria or south to Luxor, it is easy to see
how new breeze-block houses and signs of urban development are eroding the
land on which the mass of the population depend for survival.
Many of the so-called sweet water canals are stagnant and polluted, blocked
by construction as Cairo and other cities spread outwards. In some districts
of Cairo, itself choked by its 12m population - four times the size of 30
years ago - the population density is now 29,000 per square kilometre.
According to the ministry of new communities, Egypt's population has risen
from some 11m in 1900, to 44m in 1981, to 61m today. It will be 70m by 2000
if the growth continues at the present rate of 2.3 per cent a year. (Even if
the growth rate were reduced to 2 per cent, that still means more than a
million extra mouths to feed every year.)
For many years the government has had an overall plan to spread development
over the country as a whole, to take pressure off the Nile Valley and the
Delta. For this purpose the country has been divided into six areas: the
full length of both sides of the Suez canal; the northern coast from
Alexandria westwards; the entire western desert bordered by Libya to the
west and Sudan to the south; the full length of the Red Sea coast; the Sinai
peninsula, and the Aswan High Dam area.
The plan looks good on paper, but it is too enormous an undertaking - with
Egypt's limited funds - to meet immediate needs. For the last 15 years the
emphasis has been on building new desert cities partly supported by land
reclaimed for agriculture. But it is a desperate race against time.
The government well knows how urgent the demographic problem is; it
symbolically acknowledged as much in last October's cabinet reshuffle, when
the present ministry for new communities emerged in its own right.
The government's plan to spread the population is divided into three
'generations' of new desert communities (see map). The first consists of
seven new cities - with a hard core of four, where many industries have
already been started in response to government incentives.
The four most advanced cities are 10th of Ramadan (named after the date in
the Islamic calendar when Egypt launched the successful attack, in October
1973, against the Israelis entrenched behind the Bar Lev line on the eastern
bank of the Suez Canal). Sadat City; 6th of October city; and New Borg Al
Arab.
10th of Ramadan city is about 55 kilometres east of Cairo on the road to
Ismailiya and the Canal zone. Covering an area of about 48 sq kms, it has a
target population of 500,000 people. About 100,000 (37,000 workers and their
families) are already installed. The ministry claims there are 535 factories
in operation, with an annual output of about Dollars 850m.
Sadat City, off the Cairo-Alexandria road, is spread over a similar area and
has the same target population. Its present population is about 29,000
workers and their families. The city's 96 factories have an annual output of
less than Dollars 200m.
6th of October City is intended to be the western anchor of a new east-west
growth corridor in the greater Cairo region - and to relieve growing
population density away from the Pyramids Plateau, west of Cairo. It also
has a target population of 500,000, but it still only has about100,000. New
Borg Al Arab, some 60 kms from Alexandria, has a similar target and actual
population figures as the previous three; it has an actual annual output of
some Dollars 180m.
Established industries - food-processing, pharmaceutical industries,
consumer durables and electronics - include many joint ventures with foreign
companies which have responded to the government's offer of a 10-year tax
holiday, cheap land and new infrastructure. The prospect of employment has
attracted abundant skilled labour. All four cities produce about Dollars
1.3bn worth of goods a year, exported to other Arab states.
The other three 'first generation' cities are smaller in scope. 15th of May
city, east of the heavy industrial area of Helwan, has a target of 250,000
inhabitants and covers an area of some 27 sq kms. New Damietta, on the north
coast, has a similar target population but is less advanced. New Salhya, in
the eastern part of the Delta, is planned as a centre for agro-industries
and service industries with a population of about 70,000.
The second generation of cities, El Obour, Badr, New Nobaria, and New Beni
Suef/New El Menya are less advanced, although construction has started. The
third generation of cities is either at the detailed studies phase, or basic
infrastructure is being provided.
A feature of all the established new cities is relative freedom from the air
pollution which characterises Cairo, and the relative cleanliness of the
streets. But - to western eyes at least, both in Sadat City three years ago
and in 10th of Ramadan today - there are endemic problems of poor
maintenance and low quality public services. Landscaping is basic.
Maintenance is simply shoddy. It is a question of priorities - of how much
can be achieved, given Egypt's limited resources.
Up to the end of last year some Dollars 3bn had been invested in industrial
projects in the first generation cities. They employed some 170,000 people.
Not the least of the problems facing their successful development is the
question mark over the government's sustained willingness to appoint the
right people to oversee the programme and leave them alone to get on with
it.
The ministry for new communities shows all the signs of a new bureaucracy
getting itself comfortably installed in a makeshift ministry building.
Priority seems to have been given to the quality of the wood panelling on
the upper ministerial floor and to the long lines of individual petitioners
awaiting the attention of the minister, Mr Mohamed Suleiman.
Traditional Egyptian bureaucratic methods do not bode well for the future of
the new cities. If a visitor to the ministry fails to spot, in the derelict
lobby, the small lift reserved for direct access to the ministerial floor,
he may find himself on one of the 'lesser' floors, where presumed staff
wander round chatting or sit reading newspapers. It would seem that real
work is left to a small number of dedicated - and very harassed-looking -
staff on the top floor.
