FT  20 MAY 94 / Survey of World Taxation (5): Transferring the pain - How
companies switch profits to low tax areas
International transfer pricing is perhaps the single most important
recurring issue in the international tax context. It has long been an
instrument of multinational companies in maximising their global after-tax
profits by attempting to shift income from high to low tax areas.
For more than 60 years, the arm's length standard has been almost
universally accepted as the measure for determining the proper level of
charges between related entities in different countries.
The concept is simple: related parties should be treated for tax purposes as
if they are unrelated in settling the proper level of charges. However, the
application of the concept has been far from simple. While a number of
different methodologies have been developed, no single approach is
applicable in all circumstances and, even if a particular method is agreed,
there is no single correct 'arm's length price'. Although the issue has been
around for a long time, it has only recently been elevated to an important
political issue centred on the US.
Unitary taxation which has been adopted by a number of states seeks to
ignore the arm's length principle and to allocate income of multinational
businesses according to a fixed formula.
This issue has now become enormously complex and highly politicised.
California and other unitary states have amended their unitary tax law to
meet some of the criticisms that have been levelled by multinational
companies and foreign governments.
Much of the debate has centred around the key case of Barclays Bank v
California. Although the decision awaited from the Supreme Court now only
covers past taxes, it has become something of a political hot potato.
The Bush Administration supported foreign companies and governments in
condemning unitary taxation. The Clinton Administration on the other hand
has been supportive of the California position. In Washington, unitary tax
is also now being discussed in some circles as a solution to transfer
pricing at the Federal level.
Foreign companies are accused of manipulating prices in relation to their US
operations, allegedly to deprive the US Treasury of vast amounts of money.
Although more sober, considered opinions have tended to discount the
estimates given, the political perception remains that the US is being
plundered and that existing rules are inadequate to deal with this.
The reality may be somewhat different. Although legislation embodying the
arm's length principle has been seen by most governments as a defensive
method against price manipulation by multinational companies, a new
perspective has emerged recently.
Governments hard pressed for revenues are seeking transfer pricing as a
possible revenue source. The attraction is that no tax increases need be
legislated and the idea that foreign companies are not paying their fair
share of taxes wins more votes than domestic tax increases.
Although the US Administration has taken an increasingly tough line, the IRS
has been somewhat unsuccessful in persuading the US tax courts to accept
their views on pricing in specific cases.
Evidence of the heights of desperation in dealing with this is shown by a
statement of Senator Carl Levin before the Senate Committee on Governmental
Affairs that a formulary apportionment method needs to be developed 'to get
us out of this transfer pricing problem'.
The IRS has deployed considerable resources into international transfer
pricing. The US rules have been tightened considerably and the penalty
provisions have become a significant issue for foreign companies doing
business in the US. At the same time, armies of tax professionals are now
engaged in advising on transfer pricing or locked in dispute with the IRS.
Traditionally, disputes as to which country should be entitled to tax
profits have been resolved using the competent authority provisions of tax
treaties.
These are confidential government to government negotiations. However, there
have been several transfer pricing disputes recently which have been aired
in public. The Japanese Government's proposed Dollars 145m tax adjustment
for Coca Cola is a good example.
Some commentators have noted that the amount of the assessment is virtually
identical to the refund of Japanese tax agreed as a result of competent
authority proceedings in November 1993 involving Nissan motors.
AIU, the US insurance company has also announced publicly the result of
competent authority proceedings between the US and Japanese tax authorities
which has resulted in a repayment by Japan's national tax administration.
Other transfer pricing issues involving the company are still being
discussed between US and Japanese competent authorities.
One ray of hope emanating from the US is the Advanced Pricing Agreement
(APA). Taxpayers, the IRS and possibly authorities in other countries enter
into an agreement on acceptable transfer pricing policies and levels. The
first such agreement involving Apple Computers, the US and Australia has
been in place for some years.
Recently, multi-country APAs have been signed in the area of global trading
in financial instruments. Countries outside the US in the leading financial
centres have reacted favourably to advanced pricing agreements between the
countries concerned and the taxpayer on allocation of profits, particularly
in the area of global trading.
This is an area where it is often difficult to allocate profits given the
nature of the business and tax authorities along with taxpayers see this as
a method of avoiding protracted resource consuming disputes.
Transfer pricing issues are not restricted to the US. Although the issue is
an important one in Europe, it has not received the public attention that it
has commanded in the US. It continues to be an issue in developing
countries. China, for example, has recently introduced a transfer pricing
provision as part of its tax reform programme, although many developing
countries still rely heavily on currency controls to regulate transfer
pricing.
Notwithstanding these problems, virtually all countries outside the US are
committed to the arm's length standard and the game will continue to be
played between taxpayers and tax collectors in the foreseeable future.
