FT  19 JUL 94 / US and Nato likely to expand role in Bosnia
The US and Nato can be expected to deepen their involvement in the Bosnian
crisis, regardless of the fate of the latest peace plan, according to senior
western officials.
The Moslem-led Bosnian parliamentary assembly in Sarajevo yesterday voted to
accept the peace plan. The Bosnian Serbs, at their assembly in nearby Pale,
adjourned late last night without making a decision. Earlier Mr Radovan
Karadzic, their leader, had told the assembly that acceptance of the plan
would be 'less honourable' than rejection.
Mr William Perry, US defence secretary, said as he began a tour of seven
Balkan countries the US was ready to send a 'significant number' of troops
to Bosnia if the peace plan won acceptance, while Washington would also
accept an expanded military role in the event of renewed fighting.
US officials said that, if an agreement were to take hold, President Bill
Clinton would propose despatching at least 15,000 US troops, to make up
about half a peacekeeping force. In the event of the plan's failure, the US
air force would be involved in tougher policing of no-fly zones and safe
areas.
At Nato headquarters in Brussels, officials said they were considering three
scenarios for deeper involvement, following their talks with the senior
members of the UN operation to former Yugoslavia over the weekend.
One was a heavy Nato engagement on the ground in implementing a peace plan
which had won broad acceptance by the parties.
The second was increased use of Nato air power to minimise the extent of the
fighting, while retaining some UN presence on the ground. This would go
ahead if the outside powers which have been working for a settlement in
Bosnia resign themselves to a less ambitious goal than full-blown peace.
They may attempt to confine fighting to thinly populated areas.
For the past three months, Nato has reserved the right to establish 'total
exclusion zones' - where heavy weapons would be subject to air strikes - in
the UN-designated safe areas of Zepa, Srebrenica, Tuzla and Bihac.
This would mean extending a principle that has already been applied in
Sarajevo and the enclave of Gorazde.
Nato could also establish an exclusion zone in the bitterly disputed area
round the town of Brcko, a key point in the corridor that links the Bosnia
Serbs with their kinsmen in Serbia. But that move would require a new
resolution of the UN Security Council.
In a third scenario, the UN may decide to pull its troops out of Bosnia and
it might then require help from Nato, including air cover, to carry out the
withdrawal.
All three scenarios were discussed at weekend talks between Admiral Leighton
Smith, Nato's commander in southern Europe, and the two top UN officials in
former Yugoslavia: Mr Yasushi Akashi of Japan and France's General Bertrand
Lapresle.
In the past, high-level discussions between Nato and the UN about Bosnia
have been abrasive affairs. But alliance officials insisted the two
institutions were now working in much better harmony.
