FT  05 MAR 94 / Leading Article: A question of risk
When central bankers gather in Basle on Monday for their monthly meeting at
the Bank for International Settlements, they are widely expected to discuss
the role played by hedge funds during the recent upheavals in the markets.
Given the lack of knowledge about these largely unregulated and heavily
borrowed outfits, that is no bad thing. But the central bankers might be
well advised to spend more time on the growth of proprietary trading,
whereby supposedly more conventional members of the banking fraternity have
been backing speculative positions in the markets with their own capital.
Both commercial banks and investment banks have reaped a rich harvest from
trading in bonds over the past three years. This was partly because fixed
interest paper underwent a fundamental and continuing valuation adjustment
on the basis of the profound disinflationary forces that were sweeping
through the world economy. But it also reflected the fact that the US
Federal Reserve chairman Mr Alan Greenspan had signalled to the banking
community that it could mismatch the maturity of its assets and liabilities
to an unusual degree without losing any sleep at night.
As long as the Fed was seeking to recapitalise the banks after the debt
binge of the 1980s, it was safe to borrow short from depositors and invest
longer in US Treasury stock. In effect, it offered a cast-iron safety net to
bankers and anyone else who chose to exploit the speculative opportunity in
a yield curve where short-term interest rates were significantly below
long-term rates.
What has become apparent since the Fed changed the direction of monetary
policy early last month is that this seemingly riskless form of speculation
was a much more potent influence on bond markets than anyone had recognised
at the time. That is one of the messages in the market shakeout.
Dangerous activity
No one in world bond markets is cushioned from risk any longer. The Fed's
gigantic exercise in market rigging is over, and borrowing for speculation
in fixed interest paper is a dangerous activity again. Because they are so
highly leveraged, the hedge funds were quick to feel the pain from the Fed's
small increase in rates and to appreciate that the rules of the game had
changed. But there is plenty of anecdotal evidence that the response from
commercial bankers has been slower.
In large organisations, success provides the material for the creation of
bureaucratic empires; and bureaucrats do not find it easy to curtail their
own activities. The risk is that, while central bankers are busy worrying
about the counterparty risk that commercial banks run in dealing with hedge
funds, the proprietary traders in their own backyard may have failed to
adjust their activity to a new level of risk.
Remain stagnant
None of this means that underlying economic factors are irrelevant to recent
events in the markets. The rise in real bond yields around the world from 3
per cent to 3 1/2 per cent clearly owes a great deal to fears that the US
recovery will spark some renewal of inflation. Technical factors, on the
other hand, provide the more plausible explanation for the way European bond
and equity prices have fallen more than those in the US over the past month.
And it is hard to believe that the world is heading for a serious capital
shortage when fiscal policy is being tightened across the Group of Seven
industrialised countries, with the exception of Japan, and the European and
Japanese economies remain stagnant.
The disinflationary story remains solid enough. The problem for markets is
to work out what level the story implies for bond yields now that the
pursuit of capital gains on leveraged bond portfolios has ceased to be a
leisure activity. The problem for businessmen is to adjust their investment
plans to realistic expectations about future returns. All the signs are that
they take a different view, in Britain at least, from the bond markets.
To take an obvious recent example, National Westminster Bank still feels
that it can achieve a return on equity of 17.5 per cent when the gilt market
is assuming a long-term rate of inflation of about 4 per cent. If the gilt
market is right, NatWest will have to take exorbitant risks to achieve that
return. Leading British industrialists appear to be similarly reluctant to
reduce target rates of return, which says little for the credibility of UK
monetary policy. Who has it wrong - bond market investors or business
leaders?
There can be no short-term answer to that question, any more than there can
be an early end to the market upheaval that followed the Fed's change of
monetary course. Market psychology is entirely defensive, with good news
precipitating price falls just as readily as bad news. The panic that
followed the publication of freakishly bad German money supply figures this
week was a measure of the nervous temperature of this market. The tectonic
plates continue to shift.
