FT  04 OCT 94 / UK Company News: Research spending pushes up losses at
Chiroscience
Chiroscience Group, the biotechnology company which floated in February,
yesterday unveiled a divisional restructuring and plans to acquire a
manufacturing plant.
The move follows a six-month operational review by Mr John Padfield, chief
executive, who is determined to broaden the group's customer base. 'We must
refocus the group to maximise our opportunities,' he said.
The company has been reorganised into two operating divisions: one focused
on manufacturing synthons - the chemical components used by drug companies
in new products - and the other on developing its own drug portfolio.
Mr Chris Evans, the company's founder and chief scientist, will no longer
have a role in the day-to-day management of the division but will oversee
'strategic issues' as a non-executive director.
Among these, the group has identified Levobupivacaine, its single isomer
local anaesthetic, as a potential 'blockbuster' in a market worth an
estimated Dollars 200m a year. It is discussing collaborative ventures with
several leading drug companies to further develop the drug, which has begun
phase two clinical trials.
It is also confident that Dexketoprofen, its anti-inflammatory drug, will
begin to contribute profits next year following its anticipated launch by
Menarini, Italy's largest domestic drugs company.
Research spending helped push up pre-tax losses from Pounds 1.33m to Pounds
3.75m in the six months to August 31, in line with expectations. Costs were
partly offset by gross profits of Pounds 391,000 (Pounds 745,000), but the
figures were dented by administrative expenses of Pounds 814,000 (Pounds
437,000) following increased recruitment.
Costs will increase further in the second half as another 60 staff are hired
to boost research. After this year's Pounds 45m rights issue, however, the
company still has Pounds 34m (Pounds 8.6m) in cash and investments to fund
future expenditure.
Turnover was Pounds 757,000 (Pounds 1.34m) and losses per share 5.5p (4.7p),
with no dividend.
