FT  25 NOV 94 / Leading Article: Question of confidence
The small world of British politics has still not fully accustomed itself,
two and a half years after the general election, to the fact that the
government has an overall majority of less than 20. That makes parliamentary
life more interesting. It obliges the government to deal carefully with its
backbench supporters, and on occasion to take notice when even a tiny group
of them feels strongly enough to consider voting with the opposition on a
contentious issue, such as Post Office privatisation.
But it also obliges those backbenchers to weigh the consequences before
carrying their independence into the division lobby. If they cause the
government to be defeated more than once or twice, or on issues that are
central to its programme, they not only reduce its capacity to govern (as
Congress habitually does to US administrations) but also, since the UK is a
parliamentary democracy, undermine the very basis of its existence as a
government, which is the fact that it commands a majority in the House of
Commons. That is why the government not only can but must call for a vote of
confidence when it faces possible defeat on a substantial issue. It needs to
know whether it still has a parliamentary majority or not.
In the present case, the government is clearly right to treat the European
Communities (Finance) Bill as an issue of confidence. This bill is required
to give effect to an agreement Mr Major negotiated two years ago, at a
summit meeting held under his presidency. The agreement was regarded at the
time as a successful resolution of a difficult issue, and advantageous for
Britain in that it involved a smaller increase in EC resources (to which
Britain is a net contributor) than some other member states wanted. Some
Conservative backbenchers do not share that assessment, but they should
accept that negotiating such agreements is a quintessential government
responsibility. In such a negotiation, Britain expects its partners to
deliver what they agree to, and they have a right to expect the same. A
government that cannot rely on a parliamentary majority to implement such a
commitment is not an effective government, or even a legitimate one. The
issue is indeed one of confidence, and can only be treated as such.
If a prime minister loses the confidence of the House, he has two options:
to resign, or to go to the Queen and seek a dissolution. In this case he has
clearly indicated his intention to do the latter, and on Tuesday night Mr
Kenneth Clarke revealed that the cabinet as a whole had agreed on this
course. In these circumstances, and so long after the last election, it is
most unlikely that the Queen would refuse to follow her prime minister's
advice. The electorate would thus be the final arbiter - an arbiter with
which, at the present moment, few Conservative MPs are eager for a premature
encounter. Mr Major can therefore await the vote of confidence with
confidence.
