FT  05 SEP 94 / Media Futures: Interactive child's play - Victoria Griffith
assesses the boom in learning programs
The advent of CD-Rom and sharply falling prices for powerful multimedia
computers have triggered a boom in children's learning programs.
Parents are investing in software and CD-Rom programs that teach their
children reading, mathematics, geography, foreign languages and other
skills. The programs often include dazzling animation, sound, and motion
picture clips to capture the attention of their young users.
The US market for children's educational software and CD-Roms grew an
estimated 25 to 30 per cent last year, according to the consumer research
group Packaged Facts, and has now reached about Dollars 1bn in annual sales.
The number of companies in the market is also increasing strongly, with
start-ups like San Francisco-based Big Top Productions now putting out
titles and giants like IBM and Microsoft moving in. Microsoft launched a new
line of home educational software last year, and IBM, already active in the
schools market, hopes to launch products for the home shortly.
Better and cheaper technologies have paved the way for this boom in
business. Multimedia computers, powerful enough to store the large amounts
of information necessary for capabilities like animation and digitised
speech, can now be bought for as little as Dollars 1,200.
CD-Rom may be even more important to growth. 'CD-Rom is a vital enabling
technology,' says Harry Wilker, senior vice president of Broderbund, a major
learning program producer. 'It allows us to deliver inexpensively a lot of
stuff - video, sound, and so on - to the consumer.'
CD-Rom is prompting especially rapid growth in the pre-school market. 'Very
young children don't have the text and motor skills required to use the
older, less sophisticated programs,' says Robert Davidson, president of
Davidson &amp; Associates, which excels at mathematics programs.
Frustration over increasingly violent video and computer games has also
fueled the educational program surge. 'There is a backlash against violent
games and parents are searching for alternatives,' says Hope Neiman, vice
president of marketing for Knowledge Adventure, an educational program
maker. 'The philosophy is that if children are going to play with games
anyway, they might as well play with something they can learn from.'
The most successful learning programs are convincingly disguised as games.
In Reader Rabbit 1 by the Learning Company, for instance, the animated
Reader Rabbit pronounces three-letter words children choose with their mouse
on the screen. The popular geography program Where in the USA is Carmen
Sandiego, by Broderbund, encourages children to locate places in
detective-like fashion.
With technologies improving rapidly, the market is set for change over the
next few years.
The next step will probably be programs that allow users to connect to other
players or databases. Davidson, for example, plans to launch an adult
program, War Craft, this autumn which can connect two players via a modem.
Although the game's title sounds violent, the company says it resembles a
game of chess. The company hopes to launch similar products for the
children's market soon.
'There is a deeply felt need to socialise through these programs,' says
Wilker of Broderbund. 'The expansion of this to more than one computer - so
children in two different households can play with each other - is
inevitable.' Manufacturers also foresee an onslaught of educational programs
that allow users to access databases through on-line services.
Digitised voice and voice recognition technology will play a role in the
industry's development. 'Voice recognition technology is important for our
language programs,' says William Dinsmore, president and chief executive of
the Learning Company. 'In one or two years, we believe it will be a big part
of our mix.'
While growth has been strong, most people in the industry believe it has a
long way to go before it reaches maturity.
With technology improving rapidly, the children's educational sector will
probably ride the boom for some time to come.
