FT  28 MAY 94 / The Nature of Things: Superbug scenario
Media hysteria about the flesh-eating superbug, Streptococcus A, has
surpassed all previous medical scare stories. Legionnaire's disease,
meningitis, salmonella and listeria could not produce headlines like this
week's 'Killer bug ate my face' and 'Eaten alive'.
Beneath the hype, however, there is scientific concern that acute infections
 -almost conquered by antibiotics and other medical advances earlier this
century - are re-emerging as a serious threat to public health.
Streptococcus is one of the most common bacteria. Microbiologists estimate
that about one person in 10 is infected at any given time. Usually there are
no symptoms; sometimes it produces a sore throat ('strep throat').
But streps can also cause a terrifying variety of diseases, depending on
which toxins they release. They were responsible for two of the great
killers of the pre-industrial world: pueperal (childbed) fever and scarlet
fever. Streps can also bring meningitis or serious blood poisoning.
The streps that newspapers have called flesh eaters cause a disease known
officially as necrotising fasciitis - though this week's best description of
it was 'galloping gangrene'. The bacteria release a toxic cocktail of
enzymes which destroy muscles and the fibrous tissues around them.
In the most severe cases, flesh can turn black and die at a rate of an inch
per hour. The only hope of saving the patient is to carry out emergency
surgery - cutting out the infected tissues - and give heavy doses of
antibiotics.
Microbiologists have recognised necrotising fasciitis for many years as an
extremely rare complication of Strep A. According to the Public Health
Laboratory Service there are about 10 cases a year but these normally occur
in isolation, with no evidence of the infection passing from one patient to
another.
So the medical alarm bells started to ring when doctors noticed an apparent
cluster of cases in the Gloucester area. Seven people there have suffered
from necrotising fasciitis this year, three of whom died. Did this show that
Strep A was becoming more contagious?
Tests have shown that all the Gloucester cases were caused by genetically
different sub-types of Strep A. The conclusion is that the cluster was a
tragic coincidence.
Meanwhile all the publicity, combined with an alert from the PHLS, has
brought to light more than a dozen recent cases of necrotising fasciitis
elsewhere in Britain; altogether 11 deaths have been attributed to the
disease in the UK this year.
During the week the media shock waves spread to other countries, which began
to examine their own Strep A statistics. Australia, for example, reported 10
to 15 cases a year of necrotising fasciitis, and Germany 30 to 40 a year -
about half of whom died.
But the disease is not officially 'notifiable' anywhere, so the figures are
not reliable. The consensus is that lethal streps are slowly becoming more
common worldwide.
Scientists believe that specialised bacteria-infecting viruses called phages
play an important role in bacterial evolution, carrying genes for virulence
and toxin production between different strains and even different species.
The forces driving the process remain a mystery, however.
This week newspapers have almost certainly cried 'plague' about the wrong
bug. Staphylococcus bacteria already kill far more people than the streps
and they have developed more resistance to antibiotics.
No one knows what real superbugs, if any, are going to emerge. Streps are a
remote possibility. A virulent staphylococcus resistant to all antibiotics
is rather more likely. But perhaps the microbiologists' worst nightmare is a
highly contagious new influenza virus causing a pandemic of pneumonia; it
would not eat flesh but could drown millions in their own body fluids.
Imagine the headlines then.
