FT  14 SEP 94 / Leading Article: Canada crumbles
The Canadian dollar soared to a seven-month high yesterday after the
separatist Parti Quebecois won a comfortable majority in the Quebec
legislature. This was not just another instance of markets believing that
bad news is good and vice versa. Nor does it reflect a belief that Canada
would be better off without Quebec - though that belief is held by an
increasing number of English-speaking Canadians, particularly in the west of
the country. In fact the markets had discounted the PQ's victory well in
advance. What they were reacting to was the narrow margin of that victory in
actual votes, which confirmed opinion poll evidence that most Quebeckers do
not want independence. Only 30 per cent (against 56) say they would vote yes
if a referendum were held now.
The new government is pledged to hold such a referendum in 1995. Quebeckers,
unlike the Czechs and Slovaks two years ago, will not be swept into divorce
by their elected leaders without a chance to say whether that is what they
really want. Yet the markets may be too hasty in assuming that the PQ will
be unable, after a year in office, to drum up a majority for independence.
Unaided, no doubt it would be. But it may get decisive help from disgruntled
English-speaking Canadians; and from the federal prime minister, Jean
Chretien, whose interest and duty alike are to hold Canada together, but who
commands little respect in his native Quebec. What drove Czechs and Slovaks
apart was not so much the ambition of their leaders as each side's
irritation at the other's unwillingness to accept or even understand its
priorities. Between Quebec and the rest of Canada a similar deadlock has
developed, as the failure of the Meech Lake and Charlottetown agreements
showed.
Both sides may feel, after another year of acrimonious negotiations, that
separation has a lot to be said for it. There is no risk of a Yugoslav-style
conflict. North America would not be so different with four states from what
it is with three. This indeed has been a big part of the PQ's argument,
similar to the 'Scotland in Europe' slogan of the Scottish National party.
Yet it cuts both ways. If Quebeckers wish to retain the same passports,
currency and trading arrangements they now have, will the pain and confusion
involved in even the most 'velvet' of divorce proceedings - the wrangles
over natural resources and public debt, the me-tooism of the indigenous
peoples, the orphaning of the Atlantic provinces, including New Brunswick
with its substantial French-speaking minority - really be worthwhile? Once
they had done it, many Canadians - and many Quebeckers - might have
difficulty in remembering why.
