FT  28 FEB 94 / FT Guide to the Week
28 MONDAY
The root of a relationship
Britain's prime minister John Major, on a visit to the US that he hopes will
revitalise the 'special relationship', will have his first meeting with
president Bill Clinton in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, one-time home of Mr
Major's grandfather. Later in the day, they move to Washington. Bosnia and
Northern Ireland are likely to figure strongly in their discussions.
EU enlargement: Midnight is the deadline for the terms of entry of Norway,
Sweden, Finland, and Austria into the European Union to be agreed by all
sides.
Greek embargo: EU opposition to the trade embargo on the Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia will be reiterated by UK foreign minister Douglas Hurd
at a meeting with Greek prime minister Andreas Papandreou in Athens.
Indian budget: Finance minister Manmohan Singh presents the annual budget,
which is expected to set out the government's plans for further economic
reform. Cuts in corporate taxes, reductions in import duties, and measures
to curb government borrowing are all expected.
Walvis Bay handover: Walvis Bay, Namibia's only deep-water port, which has
remained a South African military enclave since Namibian independence in
1990, is due to be handed back to the Namibian authorities.
South Africa's parliament meets in Cape Town for the last time before the
country's first all-race elections on April 27. It will rubber-stamp the
constitutional changes approved in multiparty talks last week.
Middle-East peace talks, due to reconvene today, have been thrown into
confusion following last week's massacre by an Israeli settler of
Palestinians in a mosque in Hebron on the occupied West Bank.
Scott inquiry: Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary and former
defence secretary, gives evidence to Lord Justice Scott's arms-for-Iraq
inquiry. He will be asked about why he signed a public interest immunity
certificate restricting government information being made available in the
trial of three UK businessmen arrested for illegally exporting arms to Iraq.
Romanian strike: Alfa Cartel and CNSLR-Fratia, Romania's two largest union
blocs, have called a general strike aimed at pushing the government into
agreeing the 1994 collective labour contract, speeding-up reform and
improving social security.
1 TUESDAY
S African crisis meeting
Nelson Mandela, African National Congress leader, and Chief Mangosuthu
Buthelezi, head of the Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom Party, are due to meet in
an effort to prevent violence developing into civil war.
It will be their first meeting since constitutional negotiations deadlocked
and Chief Buthelezi said he would boycott the April elections. The chief
insists that only such a meeting of leaders can resolve the impasse.
However, past encounters between the two have yielded little.
North Korea has agreed to allow a United Nations team in today to inspect
its nuclear installations. Under the deal, North Korea will have high-level
talks with the South and the US, who will cancel their Team Spirit joint
military exercise.
Japan business survey: The Bank of Japan publishes its quarterly Tankan
survey of business confidence, the most authoritative official report on the
short-term economic outlook. It is likely to be gloomy, increasing pressure
for a cut in official interest rates, but will nevertheless be closely
watched for any glimmers of recovery.
Hungary eyes the EU: Hungarian prime minister Peter Boross visits Bonn at
the invitation of Chancellor Helmut Kohl. Hungary has spoken of applying for
European Union membership as early as July. At any rate, the two will
consider how to open the EU to more products from eastern Europe.
German strike vote: Engineering workers in the state of Lower Saxony begin
three days of voting on whether to hold their first big stoppage since 1984.
If 75 per cent vote in favour, they will down tools from March 7. But both
union (IG Metall) and employers are under growing pressure to get back to
the negotiating table before then.
Insider dealing regulations come into force in the UK, bringing the gilts,
Eurobonds and derivatives markets into the net for the first time. The
regulations, part of the Criminal Justice Act, were introduced to implement
an EC directive on insider dealing. The authorities expect the changes to
have little impact in practice and do not believe they will make successful
prosecutions any easier.
TUC rebirth: John Monks, general secretary of the Trades Union Congress for
the past six months, unveils the re-launch of Britain's flagging trade union
umbrella organisation. He has already announced the biggest shake-up of its
internal structure since the 1920s. Today he will preview a series of events
designed to show the TUC transforming itself into an effective lobbying
group for all workers.
US gun law: The Brady Gun Control Law comes into force, setting a five-day
delay when buying a handgun.
2 WEDNESDAY
Hurd faces Pergau quiz
Douglas Hurd (left), UK foreign secretary, will appear before the Commons
Select Committee on Foreign Affairs. He will be cross-
examined for 2 hours about the Pergau dam affair. Mr Hurd will be asked why
he gave approval for aid to Malaya to build of a hydro-electric dam. A top
Whitehall official later described the move as an 'abuse' of the overseas
aid budget.
He will also be asked whether the linkage of the aid offer to the sale of
Pounds 1.3bn of defence equipment to the Malaysians broke long-established
government guidelines.
Hong Kong budget: The Hong Kong government presents its annual
budget. It had forecast a deficit of HKDollars 3.36bn (USDollars 466m), but
thanks to a combination of unspent funds and higher economic growth  -
allied to rich pickings from stamp duties collected on the colony's buoyant
property and stock markets - it is now expected to reveal a surplus which
could be as high as HKDollars 20bn.
German rail link plan:
The German cabinet is due to decide whether to go ahead with the Transrapid
magnetic levitation hovertrain project. That would provide a service linking
Berlin and Hamburg with monorail trains running at up to 500kph.
UK monetary policy: Kenneth Clarke, UK chancellor of the exchequer, and
Eddie George, governor of the Bank of England, hold their monthly monetary
meeting. The quarter-point base rate cut following their February meeting
was poorly received by the markets. Since then, some weak economic
statistics have made the cut look better timed, but there is concern about
the possibility of a rise in interest rates.
Mozambican refugees: The United Nations high commissioner for refugees
Sadako Ogata visits Mozambique to review the plight of refugees.
Sam Wanamaker: The life of the US-born actor and director who died last year
will be celebrated at a service in Southwark Cathedral, south London. His
lifelong ambition was to build a working replica of Shakespeare's Globe
Theatre. There will be a collection to aid the reconstruction which is in
progress near the original site.
3 THURSDAY
Bundesbank council meets
The Bundesbank council meets for its routine fortnightly session, with
observers forecasting no further interest rate changes. The February 17
decision to cut the discount rate by 50 basis points to 5.25 per cent,
intended to remind the world that short-term rates were still on the way
down, had already anticipated the easing in inflation reported last week.
However, the 'special factors' which bloated money supply growth to 8.1 per
cent in December are apparently still at work, and economists suggest the
provisional numbers for January M3, due on Monday or Tuesday this week, will
be even worse.
Accountants celebrate: The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland
celebrates the 500th anniversary of the first documentation of double-entry
book-keeping today and on Friday. The Festival of Accounting in Edinburgh
brings together academics and practitioners to discuss the work of Friar
Luca Pacioli, the Venetian monk who published the basis of modern accounting
techniques in 1494.
Further events are planned in Italy later this year.
Saleroom: In certain circles, Barbra Streisand is as celebrated for her art
nouveau and art deco objets d'art as for her singing. She has spent more
than 30 years assembling one of the finest collections, including works by
Galle and Tiffany. However, it is to be sold at Christie's in New York today
and Friday because, Streisand says: 'I want to simplify my life'. The sale
should raise at least Dollars 4.5m.
The highlight is a Tiffany cobweb lamp, one of only a dozen made by the
American master, which carries an estimate of up to Dollars 1m. One of the
finest paintings by Tamara de Lempicka, 'Adam and Eve' (detail below),
should reach Dollars 800,000.
4 FRIDAY
Kravchuk visits Clinton
President Leonid Kravchuk of the Ukraine arrives in Washington for a
long-awaited official visit (to March 7). The trip was earned by assuring
President Bill Clinton that the country's nuclear arsenal would be
dismantled.
Mr Kravchuk has astonished his hosts by announcing he will not stand for
president in the June elections. Without Mr Kravchuk at the helm, Ukraine's
parliament might change its mind and retain a few weapons.
US economic data: Monthly payroll employment figures are the single best
guide to US economic trends. Today's data for February will be affected by
arctic weather in much of the country, but should show a bigger increase
than the disappointing gain of 62,000 in January.
Economists at Merrill Lynch are looking for a rise of about 150,000, in line
with the average monthly increase last year. The jobless rate, 6.7 per cent
in January, is unlikely to change much.
Cricket: South Africa play Australia in Johannesburg in the first test (to
March 8).
5-6 WEEKEND
Gulf council ponders oil
Oil ministers from the six members of the Gulf Co-operation Council,
including Saudi Arabia, meet on
Saturday. The continuing weakness of world oil prices will be top of the
agenda. The session will be the first of several meetings among oil
producers in the run-up to the March 25 meeting of the Organisation of
Petroleum Exporting Countries.
Snow business: Alaska's 1,100-mile Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race starts on
Saturday, with the finish likely on March 16 in Nome.
Five Nations' rugby: France play England in Paris and Ireland play Scotland
in Dublin.
Moldovans vote in a referendum on independence and territorial integrity on
Sunday.
NEXT WEEK
Monday is the deadline set by General Sir Michael Rose, United Nations
commander in Bosnia, for lifting the Serb siege of Tuzla and its airport.
Compiled by Patrick Stiles.
Fax: (+44) (0)71 873 3194.
