FT  09 JUN 94 / Technology: Shop-till-you-drop at the touch of a button -
Electronic retailing is set to revolutionise buying. Richard Tomkins begins
a new series with a glimpse into the future of the interactive era
Damn, Michael thinks, thumping the vehicle's control panel. It is a sunny
Sunday morning and he is driving out of town to visit his parents. But
suddenly, it occurs to him: it is Father's Day and he has forgotten to buy a
present. What to do?
Stopping the car, he reaches forward, flicks a switch and watches a screen
light up. 'Computer,' he says, 'it is Father's Day. Suggest a present for my
father.'
'A tie,' a disembodied voice replies.
'Oh, most original. Why?'
'He bought a suit on May 20.'
'Yes, and he bought a tie to match it.'
'Incorrect. He bought two.'
Michael thumps the control panel. 'Well, then, what in heaven's name is the
point of buying him another?'
'He liked three.'
'All right,' Michael sighs. 'Show the tie he wanted, but didn't buy.' Pause.
'Show it worn by my father, with the suit.'
The tie is expensive: the computer's records say this is why his father
didn't buy it. But it looks good with the suit . . . very good. It should do
the trick.
'Show locations in this area where I can pick up this tie now.' The names
and addresses of three outlets appear, the last of them only a short way off
Michael's planned route.
'Order this selection. Gift wrap for Father's Day. I'll collect at pick-up
point three in 30 minutes. Charge to Visa. Oh, and computer?'
'Yes?'
'Shut up.'
This is shopping in the 21st century: when the trudge round the stores has
been replaced by the speed and convenience of computer-aided selection in
the home, car or office. Retailing in the traditional sense will long since
have given way to fibre optic cables and multi-media technology.
Or will it? Shops may have changed over the years, but their fundamental
role as places where people go to choose and buy goods is almost as old as
civilisation itself. Are they really to be made redundant by electronic
retailing?
Right now, it may not seem so. True, home shopping is already a reality in
the US, but it is a primitive affair. Programmes offered by the two main
home shopping channels, Home Shopping Network and QVC, simply parade goods
in front of viewers in the hope that something might take their fancy, and
take credit card orders by telephone. They account for less than 0.2 per
cent of US retail sales.
But this may be about to change. With US telephone and cable television
companies investing billions of dollars to provide Americans with two-way
data communication, consumers will no longer be the passive recipients of
sales pitches for goods that do not interest them. Soon, they will be able
to tell their television sets to show them things they want to buy, and
order them at the touch of a button.
In the early days of this interactive era, a typical home shopping channel
will probably allow consumers to enter an electronic shopping mall featuring
a number of stores selling different kinds of merchandise. Viewers will
select the store they want to enter; choose the department that interests
them; go to the items they want to view; then, after calling up any product
information they require, press a button to transmit an order.
Very soon, the system will move on to a more sophisticated level by building
up personal profiles of users through their buying habits. For example, it
will quickly learn viewers' measurements, so enabling it to order clothing
in the correct size.
It will also pick up their favourite colours and their tastes in fashion,
music, or food, so that it can offer increasingly tempting products while
learning not to waste their time with unwanted goods. It will have a pretty
accurate idea of what they can afford, too.
Beyond this, it does not require a great leap of imagination to see the day
when virtual reality enters the world of electronic retailing. At a simple
level, consumers will be able to try on clothes at home by watching
computer-generated images of themselves (or indeed, someone else) wearing
them. Later, instead of watching a television screen, people will probably
be able to don a virtual reality helmet and gloves, then transport
themselves into the stores of their choice. They will roam the virtual
aisles, examining virtual goods and quizzing virtual sales assistants for
more information if required.
But what of traditional shops? Will a place remain for them in this
interactive era?
The answer is almost certainly yes, for at least three reasons. One is that
there are many goods that people will still prefer to touch and feel, or try
on for size, before purchasing. Another is that, until science devises a
method of transporting matter instantly through space, electronic shoppers
will still have to suffer the frustration of waiting for their goods to be
delivered. And a third is that, in a world where so many work and leisure
activities are conducted through a television screen, people may simply go
crazy if they are left without an excuse for getting out of their homes.
Equally, however, it seems certain that shops will change. The accountancy
firm Coopers &amp; Lybrand, which recently conducted a Dollars 1m (Pounds
600,000) survey of the outlook for retailing in the 21st century, predicts
that stores will respond to the threat from home shopping by combining
retailing with entertainment.
If, as seems likely, this proposition is correct, the US already offers a
glimpse of the future in the form of Mall of America, a vast complex on the
outskirts of Minneapolis combining 400 stores with a seven-acre theme park.
But on a smaller scale, food stores might offer cookery lessons, record
stores might offer live music, or clothing stores might offer fashion shows.
This, of course, will take up space. But according to Jacquelyn Bivvins,
marketing manager of Coopers &amp; Lybrand's retail programme in New York, this
is something retailers will have in abundance. As with electronic shopping,
detailed analysis of customers' buying habits will allow retailers to build
up much more accurate pictures of who their customers are and what they
want. The result will be a big reduction in inventory on the sales floor.
Another space-saver could be manufacturing at the point of sale. Customers
at branches of Blockbuster Entertainment, the US video store group, are
already selecting compact discs or video games and having them made while
they wait. Bivvins sees no reason why shirts, to take a random example, or a
myriad other goods, should not eventually be custom-made to order on the
spot.
Technology will bring other changes, too. Those who today complain that they
can never find a sales assistant when they want one will probably never see
one at all in the next century: instead, they will turn to an on-screen
electronic assistant for advice. Men might pick a suit and ask the screen to
show them images of all the shirts in the store that go with it. Women might
go to the hairdresser and ask the screen to show them what they would look
like with different hairstyles.
Arguably, the form of retailing that could change the most is the
supermarket - not least because it is the format most likely to suffer from
the home shopping revolution. The mind-numbing task of replenishing the
larder with basic foodstuffs is perhaps the one that lends itself most
easily to substitution by technology. In the interactive age, it will be a
simple matter for householders to order goods electronically for home
delivery, and have the same order repeated automatically every week unless
amended or cancelled.
Supermarkets, however, will undoubtedly use technology to fight back. For
example, customers will no longer be required to load up trolleys with
goods. Instead, stores will display just one example of each product, and
customers will walk around the store with an electronic wand, waving it
across a barcode on the shelf to order and pay for each item. The order will
be put together by automatic shelf pickers behind the scenes, and the
customer will either pick it up at the exit or have it delivered.
Things may turn out rather differently. Carol Farmer, whose Florida-based
company Carol Farmer Associates forecasts consumer trends, thinks people
could become so exhausted by the bombardment of visual information coming to
them through their screens that they could begin to view conventional
shopping as an escape.
Consumers may welcome the prospect of wandering around a quiet, relaxed,
screen-free store with real humans on hand to help and advise, she says.
'The atmosphere will be deliberately calming, the environment will be very
soothing, because everybody will be visually brain-dead from all this
virtual shopping that they can do if they want to. This sort of shopping
will be the antithesis of it.'
It also makes sense to be cautious when it comes to some of the wilder
prognostications about the interactive future. As Farmer puts it: 'I think
the trend towards this kind of technology is unstoppable, but it really does
depend on the makers' ability to make it user-friendly, and they haven't
been very good at that in the past.
'I mean, it's still very hard to program a VCR, and VCRs have been around
for years.'
