FT  20 APR 94 / Pressure mounts on Major for cabinet shake-up
Mr John Major is being pressed by close colleagues to respond to the
government's expected heavy defeat in the European elections with the most
radical cabinet shake-up of his premiership.
Senior Conservatives believe that a reshuffle which could see the departure
of up to five cabinet and many more junior ministers might also mark the
return of at least one of the political heavyweights of the 1980s.
Lord Walker and Lord Howe, two of the longest serving ministers in Lady
Thatcher's cabinets, are being canvassed as potential candidates for the
party chairmanship and the leadership of the House of Lords.
Senior party officials have also floated the idea that the employment
department and the cabinet post of employment secretary could be scrapped to
make room in cabinet for Sir Norman Fowler's replacement as party chairman.
Sir Norman intends to stand down in July.
Whitehall officials last night strongly rejected the idea, but the party
insiders said the department's responsibilities could be split between trade
and industry, education and social security.
No firm decisions have been taken about the timing of the reshuffle beyond a
decision by Mr Major to reject the idea of announcing the changes before the
June 9 European elections.
Some insiders believe it should follow within days of the poll. Others are
arguing it should be delayed until July to avoid charges that Mr Major had
been 'panicked' into hasty changes.
But the intensity of informal discussions in 10 Downing Street points to a
more radical shake-up than hitherto anticipated. There are plans also to
strengthen the prime minister's team of personal political advisers. Aides
want Mr Major to replace Mr Graham Bright, his parliamentary private
secretary, with a much more powerful political figure.
Mr Major is being warned the reshuffle will be crucial to maintaining his
authority during the expected onslaught on his leadership after the June
poll. Friends of Mr Michael Heseltine and Mr Kenneth Clarke have been joined
recently by supporters of Mr Michael Portillo in informal assessments of
their chances in any leadership contest.
Four middle-ranking ministers have emerged at the top of Mr Major's list for
the cabinet: Mr Stephen Dorrell, financial secretary to the Treasury, Mr
Jonathan Aitken, defence minister, Mr Brian Mawhinney, the health minister,
and Mr David Davis, public services minister.
With a clear-out of many middle and junior-ranking ministers, that would
allow Mr Major to make promotions from the restless Tory backbenches.
Likely high-level casualties are Mr Peter Brooke, heritage secretary; Mr
John MacGregor, transport secretary; and Mr John Patten, education
secretary. Lord Wakeham, leader of the Lords, has indicated he might decide
to stand down while Mr John Gummer, environment secretary, is also seen as
vulnerable.
Crime crackdown urged, Page 8
