FT  22 NOV 94 / Ambitious for global growth: The success of UK investment
bank BZW
This has not been a happy year for UK investment banks.
Since the tightening of US monetary policy in February started to disrupt
financial markets and deny the banks easy trading profits, firms such as SG
Warburg have disclosed sharply reduced profits and announced plans to
tighten their belts. The upset has renewed doubts that any UK investment
bank has either the capital or the expertise to rival large US firms such as
Goldman Sachs.
Yet Barclays de Zoete Wedd, the investment banking arm of Barclays, has
survived the turmoil with plans for expansion intact. Its trading technology
and innate caution have brought profits of Pounds 194m in the first half of
1994, despite the difficult trading conditions. And it has started a review
that is likely to lead to a push into the US capital markets.
Created in the run-up to the Big Bang deregulation of the City of London in
the mid-1980s, BZW started a long way behind established UK merchant banks,
such as Warburg. However, it could yet emerge with the best claim to be a
global investment bank.
It has been helped by three strengths:
Innovation: the firm was formed when Barclays acquired stockbroker de Zoete
and Bevan and equity marketmaker Wedd Durlacher and combined them with its
own relatively weak merchant bank. As a newcomer, BZW had to devise and sell
new products to gain business.
'We were not able to grow like a classic UK merchant bank, so we had to do
it the other way round,' says Sir Peter Middleton, BZW's chairman.
Rather than waiting for companies to ask it to raise debt or equity on their
behalf, BZW approached them with ideas that it believed would attract
institutional investors. Last year, for example, it advised 19 UK companies
on issuing enhanced scrip dividends to reduce their tax bills.
'You sit at the cross-roads between issuers and investors listening to the
babble, and you try to pick out strands,' says Mr Amir Eilon, joint head of
BZW's debt capital markets group.
Consistency: it has not attempted to establish trading arms outside the UK
except in countries where it has built up a business in originating and
underwriting securities.
'There is no point in setting up a huge, powerful infrastructure for selling
equities if you do not have a sensible flow of primary business,' says Mr
Graham Pimlott, BZW's head of merchant banking.
This has limited opportunities in some of the fastest expanding markets, but
means that once BZW has moved into a country, it is likely to stay. In
Japan, for example, it has maintained its presence despite making poor
returns after the downturn in equity markets.
'We do not believe in pulling out of things because of a temporary loss of
business or momentum, so we are careful about entering in the first place,'
says Mr Jonathan Davie, head of equities.
Risk management: BZW has powerful software to manage risk that helped
prevent trading losses in this year's difficult conditions. 'This year, we
have been very good at managing risks down in uncertain markets,' says Mr
Andrew Bruce, head of risk management.
The technique should also help allocate capital to activities with the
highest returns, one reason why Barclays has brought its lending to large
companies outside the UK under BZW's control, and is moving towards the same
approach for UK companies.
Yet for all these strengths, BZW also faces obstacles. The largest one is
its weakness in advising big UK companies on corporate strategy, an activity
that generates income in secondary activities.
Mr Pimlott assesses BZW's position in the field as being 'at the bottom of
the first division, but very much in it'. Mr David Band, chief executive,
admits progress has been slower than originally expected because of
entrenched loyalties to other banks in the UK market.
Comparing BZW with Warburg, Mr Band says: 'We have got the products and are
building the clients, while they have got the clients and are filling in the
products.' But displacing old-established firms such as Warburg as advisers
is a hard task. 'There is a system of appointed merchant bankers and
brokers, and you usually only get the chance to dislodge them when they have
mucked something up, or there is a conflict,' says Mr Band.
Another difficulty is BZW's lack of a strong arm issuing and trading US
equities and bonds, which limits its claim to be a global player. At the
moment, it has small US bond operations, and sells only European and Asian
equities there. It has just launched a review to find a way of correcting
this, and must choose between trying to grow the business organically,
forming a partnership with a US investment bank, or possibly acquiring a
smaller US securities house.
However, BZW has one advantage over competitors: access to capital from the
parent bank. This gives it the strength to expand through acquisition, and
allows it to operate with less day-to-day capital than free-standing rivals.
Mr Chris Ellerton, a bank analyst at Warburg, estimates that BZW would
require more than twice its level of equity capital if it operated as an
independent firm and wanted the capital strength of JP Morgan, the US bank.
Its ability, as a subsidiary of Barclays, to operate with less day-to-day
capital tends to flatter its profits. BZW reported a 42 per cent return on
net assets last year, making it hugely profitable. But the figure would have
been lower if it had operated with the amount of capital needed to stand
alone. Rivals also argue that profits are inflated by the integration of
Barclays' money markets and foreign exchange operations within BZW.
Its dependence on Barclays for capital backing creates a further obstacle in
establishing a clear image for BZW with potential customers. Mr Band says
that it has further to go in this regard, including disclosure of more
financial information than the bare pre-tax profit published at the moment.
'I think we'd be perceived as more valuable if people knew more about how we
were made up,' he says.
Yet BZW's greatest weapon against US investment banks may be outside its
control. If European capital markets be-came less fragmented, and a stronger
pool of institutional investment funds developed, Europe could start to
rival the US as a target for companies raising capital. This would help
leading European investment banks drum up business from those companies.
Until that happens, BZW and its European rivals will find it a struggle to
become true global players.
