FT  06 AUG 94 / Hopes improve for IRA ceasefire
The British and Irish governments have not ruled out the prospect of an
imminent IRA ceasefire in spite of Sinn Fein's rejection of the Downing
Street declaration and a subsequent upsurge in sectarian killings.
Officials think a ceasefire declaration might be made in the period between
the 25th anniversary of the deployment of British troops in Ulster on August
14 and the first post-summer meeting of the British cabinet in September.
Such a move would increase pressure on the government to admit Sinn Fein,
the IRA's political wing, into talks on the province's future while falling
short of London's demands for a permanent cessation of violence.
The Irish cabinet is due to hold its first meeting after the holidays on
August 31.
It is thought that even if the ceasefire was not time-limited, the IRA would
reserve the right to retaliation for attacks on its members.
Loyalist paramilitaries are said to be in no mood to call a halt to their
armed campaign after the recent IRA killings of two men identified as
leaders of the Ulster Freedom Fighters, an outlawed Loyalist group.
Loyalist violence in the province continued yesterday when police found a
body which the outlawed Ulster Volunteer Force said it had dumped on the
outskirts of Belfast. The UVF said the man had been shot for passing
information to the IRA.
Although Whitehall officials remain guarded about the chances of a
breakthrough, their assessment of the situation is less gloomy than two
weeks ago, when Sinn Fein's dismissal of the joint declaration as inadequate
was greeted with anger.
Senior Irish officials are understood to have contacted London in the
aftermath of the Sinn Fein conference at which its response was decided to
advise that the position was not as bleak as portrayed and to urge
restraint.
Recent days have brought a series of cautious but generally upbeat comments
by Sinn Fein leaders, culminating in Mr Gerry Adams's disclosure that he had
discussed a ceasefire with the IRA before the Letterkenny meeting. Mr Adams,
the Sinn Fein president, said the peace process remained 'firmly on the
tracks' and would not be derailed.
London has used the period since the Sinn Fein conference to try to press
ahead with the search for a deal between Ulster's constitutional parties.
