FT  17 MAY 94 / UK Company News: Fenner surges to Pounds 2.9m as recovery
gets under way
The management of Fenner said yesterday that it was seeing the first signs
of the promised turnround at the Hull-based industrial products group.
For the half year to February 28 pre-tax profits rose from Pounds 105,000 to
Pounds 2.91m, including a gain of Pounds 795,000 from the sale of two
operations in South Africa.
Performance had improved in all divisions and the return to positive
earnings per share had allowed it to resume interim dividends via a 0.5p
distribution.
The figure took account of an exceptional charge of Pounds 2.06m (Pounds
1.4m), most of which related to the group's reorganisation of its power
transmission division, which involved the closure of a plant in China. Last
year Fenner was approached by a possible buyer of its power transmission
business, but talks broke down in December.
Mr Mark Abrahams, finance director, said it seemed prospective buyers were
unlikely to offer an acceptable price, so the group would concentrate on
improving the division's performance. Power transmission incurred a small
operating loss of Pounds 300,000 on sales of Pounds 33m, but was now trading
profitably.
The fluid power division increased sales from Pounds 11m to Pounds 14m and
new products increased its market share, particularly in the US. Operating
profits rose to Pounds 1.2m (Pounds 800,000). Significant growth in both the
US and UK helped the group's niche polymer businesses raise sales from
Pounds 17m to Pounds 19m and operating profits from Pounds 1.8m to Pounds
2.3m.
Conveyor belting's sales were flat at Pounds 13m, with a drop in orders from
British Coal being offset by stronger overseas sales in the US and
Australia. Operating profits rose from Pounds 800,000 to Pounds 1m.
The group said its South African businesses had again performed well in
recessionary conditions. with the political uncertainties not having had any
significant effect.
Earnings of 0.65p compared with losses of 4.65p last time.
COMMENT
Fenner has clearly turned the corner. Polymers and fluid power are going
well, particularly in the US, and conveyor belting has performed creditably
overseas. Power transmission is being held on to unless or until someone is
prepared to pay a decent price. Profits should rebound sharply, thanks to
the elimination of restructuring charges and lower interest payments. The
return to profitability in the UK after three years will also lower the very
high tax charge. These positives are partly offset by the group's exposure
to South Africa, with the allied political and foreign exchange risks.
Profits are forecast to recover to about Pounds 7.5m in the current year to
August, but an expected Pounds 11m the following year puts the shares on an
undemanding multiple of about 14.
