FT  07 JUL 94 / Jordan, Egypt to join Gaza talks
Israeli and Palestinian leaders yesterday agreed to invite Egypt and Jordan
to join them in a conference on Palestinian refugees and to create joint
committees to discuss unresolved issues on the Gaza-Jericho accord and the
transfer of civilian responsibilities to Palestinians in the rest of the
West Bank.
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Mr Shimon Peres, his foreign
minister, met Mr Yassir Arafat, leader of the Palestine Liberation
Organisation, in Paris yesterday.
After their first meeting since their May 4 agreement in Cairo on
self-government for Gaza and Jericho, they were due last night to resume
their discussions in the French capital.
The two sides remain in disagreement over the number of Palestinian refugees
displaced by the 1967 war, with Israel apparently putting the number at
200,000; the PLO estimates the number at 860,000.
Mr Arafat said his meeting with Israeli leaders had been 'positive and
fruitful'. But he called on Mr Rabin to show 'more co-ordination and
comprehension' to reinforce the peace agreements, first signed last
September in Washington.
He said he had raised the issue of Israel's detention of Palestinians and
its 'isolation of Jerusalem' from the peace process.
Reuter adds from Tunis: A member of the Palestinian authority set up to run
the Gaza Strip and Jericho will attend a business meeting in East Jerusalem
on July 20, he said yesterday.
Mr Ahmed Korei, better known as Abu Ala, who is in charge of economy and
trade in the Palestinian authority, said he had accepted an invitation to
address a meeting expected to be attended by 500 Palestinian businessmen
from the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Last month, one of his colleagues, Mr
Nabil Shaath, in charge of international co-operation, gave up a planned
visit to Jerusalem after protests by Israeli radicals.
King Hussein of Jordan began talks in Cairo with Egypt's President Hosni
Mubarak on Amman's accelerated peace process with Israel, due to pick up
later in July. Jordanian officials said King Hussein wanted to strengthen
his country's ties with Egypt ahead of the first Jordanian-Israeli
negotiations later this month.
An Israeli army officer was killed by guerrilla shelling on an Israeli
position in south Lebanon yesterday, an army spokeswoman said.
