FT  20 AUG 94 / Mexican Elections: Mexico poll monitors unhappy - Citizens'
group voices concerns over fairness of voting
The leading citizens' group monitoring tomorrow's presidential election in
Mexico has declined to endorse the electoral process, which it said could
not be described as fair. 'We conclude that the conditions that would allow
the electoral process of 1994 to be qualified as free or dependable are not
in place,' a report from the Civic Alliance, a group of non-government
organisations and individuals established to promote democracy, said
yesterday. But the report recognised advances in electoral conditions which
opened the possibiliity that the election result could be 'relatively
credible'.
The ruling Institutional Revolutionary party (PRI) goes into the election as
strong favourite. But Mr Cuauhtemoc Cardenas of the leftist opposition
warned in yesterday's La Jornada there would be 'confrontation' if the
elections were not clean. Some government officials say they are concerned
Mr Cardenas may denounce the election as fraudulent before voting has ended.
The Civic Alliance's main criticisms fall into three categories: media bias,
campaign financing, and unpunished violations of electoral laws.
'The bias of the media is without doubt one of the largest obstacles to the
credibility of the electoral process,' the report concludes.
Campaign finance rules had been changed but were still inadequate. This 'was
one of the most important aspects of the electoral campaign', yet it was
impossible to make an independent evaluation of campaign spending 'because
there are no mechanisms to determine how much each party spends'. The PRI
has massively outspent its rivals.
The group's concerns over the lack of enforcement of the electoral laws have
been echoed by Mexico's independent election magistrates, who have sharply
criticised the government for dragging its feet in implementing key aspects
of the new electoral law.
The magistrates, who were approved by all the political parties and have a
controlling vote on the board of the Federal Electoral Institute, have
publicly attacked the Attorney-General's office for not giving more support
to the special prosecutor for electoral crimes. The prosecutor has fully
resolved only one case.
'It is unthinkable that the prosecutor does not have his budget,' said Mr
Santiago Creel, one of the six magistrates. 'This is undermining confidence
in the system.' The Interior Ministry responded to the criticisms by
promising all allegations would continue to be dealt with after the election
and by increasing resources available to the prosecutor's office.
