FT  09 MAY 94 / Survey of Biotechnology (7): Just out of the starting blocks
 -Low R&amp;D spending is Japan's main weakness
Japanese biotechnology is scarcely out of the starting blocks. It has been
left standing by the US and even lags behind Europe. Yet most Japanese
pharmaceuticals research directors believe biotechnology will be key to the
next generation of medicines.
'We're witnessing a revolution in the methodology of making drugs,' says Dr
Masahiko Fujino, general manager, discovery research division at Takeda,
Japan's biggest drugs company. 'Biotechnology and the understanding of human
genes is creating a completely different concept. In the past drugs were
designed to be tested on animals. Many compounds that might have proved safe
and effective in humans were rejected, and many that were valid in animals
just did not work in humans,' he explains.
'Now we are designing drugs for humans,' says Dr Fujino. 'There will be an
increasingly high probability - maybe 50 per cent - for drugs to pass
toxicology. That's double the present rate.'
Dr Masaji Ohno, managing director of R&amp;D at Eisai, says: 'We're well
behind.' He believes Japanese companies may be able to do create some
innovative work by the beginning of the next century.
A few companies have attempted to remedy their deficiencies by setting up
separate biotechnology units. Most, however, have tried to incorporate the
technology in their research and development division.
'We are producers of medicines. If a science leads us to a potentially new
drug, we will try to increase our knowledge,' says Dr Yohihiko Baba,
director of the Sankyo research institute. 'Merck and Glaxo can afford to
concentrate on the technology and then the products. We can't'
The weakness of Japan's biotechnology expertise is a reflection of the more
general weakness of Japanese pharmaceuticals R&amp;D. In some areas, such as
antibiotics, cholesterol-lowering medicines and allergy treatments, Japanese
scientists are among the world's leaders. But the main weakness of Japanese
R&amp;D is that companies spend too little.
Their spending, when expressed as a percentage of sales, is not poor. Takeda
invests 8.2 per cent of its turnover on R&amp;D, Fujisawa 14.8 per cent, Sankyo
9.6 per cent, Eisai 13.2 per cent, Shionogi 11.8 per cent, Daiichi 12.3 per
cent. That compares favourably with Merck, the biggest US drugs group with
R&amp;D spending at 11 per cent of sales, and Glaxo, Europe's biggest company at
18 per cent.
But Japanese companies limited exposure overseas means their overall sales
are low and amounts spent on R&amp;D are tiny. While Merck spent Dollars 1.17bn
on R&amp;D last year and Glaxo Dollars 1.1bn, Takeda, the largest Japanese
company, spent only Dollars 557m, and not all of that on medicines. Sankyo,
Fujisawa and Yamanouchi all spent less than Dollars 400m, and Eisai,
Shionogi and Daiichi invested less than Dollars 300m.
Inadequate R&amp;D spending is reflected in the number of scientists in R&amp;D.
Merck has 1,700 scientists in research alone, excluding development. Takeda,
has 1,200 in R&amp;D combined, while Sankyo has between 1,200 and 1,300 in R&amp;D.
Daiichi employs 600 researchers and 130 scientists in development; Eisai has
420 people including administration in clinical development, safety and
formulation, and 220 scientists in discovery; and Yamanouchi has 1,320 in
R&amp;D. Glaxo employs some 7,500 scientists.
Much research is also poorly directed. While considerable lip-service is
given to the need for innovation, many R&amp;D directors are more interested in
what they call 'survival' products. These are compounds with only small
improvements on previous therapies that, in the past, could be used to
side-step the Japanese Ministry of Health and Welfare's price cuts every two
years.
Unlike their western competitors, Japanese groups have proved reluctant to
rationalise their therapeutic areas, reallocating scarce resources to areas
such as biotechnology.
When challenged why his company persists in antibiotics, a low-margin,
highly competitive arena, Dr Fujino at Takeda explains the company has an
historical responsibility. 'If Takeda doesn't give up, maybe the others
will.'
Few Japanese companies have made up their for lack of biotechnology
experience by links with US and European boutiques. In part this is a
reflection of their insularity. Few companies have R&amp;D centres outside Japan
(although some have links with overseas research institutions). Sankyo, for
example, has only 15 R&amp;D scientists in the US, and about 165 in Germany,
almost all in development. Takeda, Japan's largest group, has no research
centre outside Japan, although it is considering setting up a unit at a UK
university.
The links that have existed between Japanese drugs groups and western
biotechnology companies have been fraught. Sankyo's relationship with
Celltech, the UK biotechnology group, was not successful, says Dr Masonori
Saeki, director of the R&amp;D planning department, 'partly because the success
rate is not high. But a relationship like this is like a marriage. The human
factors are very important. In addition, the economic factor is decisive,
both sides have to have a financial incentive to make it work.'
Clearly, some Japanese groups, given their conservative practices, feel ill
at ease with the high-risk, high-reward approach of the US biotechnology
industry. Some companies, such as Takeda which has had links with Chiron,
have been bruised by their experiences.
'These relationships were not very successful,' says Dr Fujino. 'I do not
believe links with biotechnology groups will lead to much.'
Daiichi says it has abandoned its links with US biotechnology boutiques. 'We
did have a relationship with Calbio working on Alzheimer's. But Alzheimer's
proved very difficult and we have further plans to link,' says Dr Hiroyki
Nagasako, board director for corporate planning at Daiichi.
