FT  25 OCT 94 / A diluted Beveridge
The overriding reason why capitalism is regarded with such moral distaste
is, 'quite simply, the inequality to which it leads, which is widely felt to
be unjust and intolerable'. The author of that observation is not some
raving Leftie. It is not even yours truly. It is Lord Lawson, in a
commentary on a recent pamphlet1. I remember visiting the former chancellor
following some of his Budgets and being struck by his seemingly puzzled
response to the simple question: 'What do your measures do for the least
well-off?' We know the answer: since 1979 successive Conservative
governments have engineered a huge redistribution of wealth and income from
the poor to the rich.
Much of the familiar evidence to this effect is rehearsed in Social Justice,
the report2 of a commission set up by the late Mr John Smith in 1992, after
he became leader of the Labour party. The Tories' principal engine for
widening inequalities is the tax mechanism. Top rates of personal income tax
were cut, most dramatically by Lawson, N, in 1988. Taxes on consumption have
more than doubled. In consequence, the net disposable income of the least
affluent tenth of the population was squeezed, certainly in relative terms
and in many instances absolutely. 'Today,' says the social justice
commission, whose chairman is Sir Gordon Borrie, 'the gap between the
earnings of the highest-paid and those of the lowest-paid workers is greater
than at any time since records were first kept in 1886.'
So we can take it, can we not, that the advice given by Sir Gordon and his
colleagues is that the evil work of the 1980s must be undone the minute a
Labour government takes office? Presumably the scaffold beckons, or the
tumbrils; surely at the very least the dungeons? Well, actually, no. The
suggestion is that there be a 'maximum tax bill', which would limit the
proportion of any individual's total income which could be paid in income
tax and national insurance contributions combined to 50 per cent. Half. The
multiest of millionaires can keep the other half. Whew] Admit it. You, I,
Nigel Lawson and King Midas would settle for that. In case Labour's putative
chancellor misses it, the page, Mr Gordon Brown, is 390.
There are many such nuggets in this thought-provoking report, some of them
similarly flavoured. A minimum wage? Yes, but, er, not too much. Say Pounds
3.50 an hour. Workfare? No - but, instead, what are called in the United
States 'welfare to work' schemes. 'Of course, someone who unreasonably turns
down a job or training offer cannot expect to continue claiming full
benefit,' says the commission. Means-tested benefits? No, never - well, yes,
for the affluent. Top-rate taxpayers might be taxed on child benefit (within
the 50 per cent ceiling?), while pensioners of ample means would be
ineligible for the proposed new higher-rate top-up state pensions.
In short Social Justice is the very model of a modern moderniser's manual.
It might help the new Labour leader to capture his party. It castigates the
unregulated free market, yet declines to return to the socialist nonsense of
earlier years. It implicitly regrets the errors of the 1970s, when Labour
was last in charge, yet says of the 1980s that 'the neo-liberals' medicine
has proved worse than the disease'. We'll leave that debatable judgment to
the historians. The question is, what about the present decade, and the one
to follow?
It would be nice to say that Sir Gordon and his happy band have provided us
with a satisfactory answer. Alas, they haven't. They have set out the pieces
of a puzzle that some of us have been reading about and sometimes even
writing about for years. The welfare state that evolved from Sir William
Beveridge's report of November 1942 is certainly in need of revision.
Beveridge could assume full employment; we can at best aspire to it. He took
it for granted that wives would return to stove and hearth after the war; we
are blessed with 1990s womanhood. He saw social insurance as a safety net of
manageable proportions; we know it to be an unstoppable, money-guzzling
leviathan. Then Britain was the mother of an empire; now it is the unruly
stepchild of the European Union.
Sir Gordon's commission calls enticingly for a readjustment, a renewal of
British economic and social policy. To that end, it provides a bran-tub full
of ideas, many of them Clintonesque, from which Labour may draw. These beads
are drawn together on a string labelled 'investors' Britain', a concept
combining 'the ethics of community with the dynamics of a market economy'.
This turns out to mean goodies like universal nursery schooling, a 'learning
bank' to ensure the availability of education and training during breaks in
employment; an 'intelligent welfare state' whose purpose is to encourage
people off the dole and into jobs, fair taxation, and a great many other
improvements to life, the universe and everything.
Such promised delights are not to be sneezed at, but can we believe that
Labour could deliver them, even in the 15 years allowed for? 'We are not . .
. a commission of economists,' say Sir Gordon &amp; Co, and thank heavens for
that. It would help, though, if they confessed to just a little numeracy.
The Beveridge report is filled with sums. They all turned out wrong in the
end, but precise columns giving totals in and totals out do add
verisimilitude to even the most alluring social blueprints. To say this is
not the same as supporting the inevitable Conservative sneer about what
taxes go up or what service is cut to pay for this or that. It is just that
the days when you could plausibly offer broad sweeps of history without the
backing of narrow calculations are long gone.
Labour will doubtless address such quibbles in its election manifesto, a
document that may be influenced by but is not likely to be congruent with
the social justice report. The party knows that it must support free trade,
low, albeit 'fair' personal taxation, minimal inflation, and the market
economy. What we will get is an undertaking by sensible politicians of
moderate persuasion to iron out the rough edges of capitalism, to make it
less red in tooth and claw. Perhaps that will ease Lord Lawson's mind.
1 A Moral Basis for Liberty, IEA, 2 Lord North Street SW1P 3LB. 2
IPPR/Vintage paperback, 418 pages, Pounds 6.99
