FT  10 SEP 94 / Coalmines to receive bids from at least 15 groups
Intense competition is developing in the battle to gain control of British
Coal's mining assets on privatisation of the industry later this year.
With just four days to go before the government deadline for accepting bids
closes, it seems certain that each of the five 'core' regions on offer will
attract at least three tenders, and in some cases considerably more.
Scotland and South Wales, both rich in high-quality opencast reserves, are
likely to attract the largest number of bids - up to nine in each case. The
other regions are based around Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire and north-east
England.
Of the 25 companies or consortia that received government approval to bid
earlier this summer, at least 15 are likely to bid for one region or more.
The likely level of bidding presents a sharp contrast to gloomy predictions
made within the industry last year and the year before when mining was in
sharp decline.
While pit closures have caused ministers acute political difficulties, they
have enabled the government to reduce the industry to a size that matches
more closely the demand for coal and is therefore more marketable.
One disappointment for the government is that RTZ, the only international
coal company qualified to bid, seems unlikely to submit tenders, even though
it has been looking actively at what is on offer.
Electricity generators National Power and PowerGen are also likely to stay
out of the fray.
However several large construction companies are thought to be bidders.
Taylor Woodrow is understood to be considering tenders in partnership with
Kier Mining, while Wimpey is linked to Powell Duffryn, the engineer, for a
bid in South Wales. Miller Group has teamed up with Ryan Group, the mining
company, for an assault on Scotland. Amec, another construction company, is
thought unlikely to submit comprehensive tenders for the two regions for
which it has qualified to bid.
Apart from Ryan, which is also aiming at the north-east region with Alcan
Aluminium of Canada, mining companies making bids include RJB Mining, which
is expected to tender for all five regions, and Coal Investments.
CI is in a consortium with the Union of Democratic Mineworkers, which wants
the central north and central south regions. NSM, another coal company, is
considering whether to take up its option to bid for all five regions.
Other bidders include three management buy-out teams.
Bids are also being invited for seven stand-alone pits that have been
mothballed by British Coal following closure. One definite bidder is an
employee buy-out team at Tower Colliery in Mid Glamorgan, where former
participants are prepared to invest Pounds 8,000 each in the venture.
