FT  04 MAY 94 / Nervous Jericho prepares to greet liberation
Palestinian schoolchildren armed with brooms began collecting rubbish from
the dusty streets of Jericho yesterday to celebrate today's planned signing
of the Palestinian self-rule agreement, Julian Ozanne reports.
Under the agreement, Jericho, a sleepy, palm-fringed town which claims to be
the oldest city in the world, will become the seat of the Palestinian
administration and home to Mr Yassir Arafat, the symbol of Palestinian
nationalism.
At the Israeli police post in the heart of the city, once the target of
Palestinian resistance, schoolchildren collected stones from under coils of
razor wire. Nervous Israeli soldiers armed with automatic rifles watched
from observation towers. But instead of throwing the stones, the children
carted them away to a nearby rubbish tip.
At a schoolteacher's house, youths were busy preparing banners which read:
'South Africa last week - Palestine today.'
Many of Jericho's 14,000 residents believe they are about to witness a
fundamental turning point in their lives after 27 years of Israeli
occupation and centuries of foreign domination. Within 21 days of today's
signing, Israeli troops are scheduled to complete their withdrawal from the
Gaza Strip and Jericho - the first Israeli surrender of Palestinian lands
occupied in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War.
'When the agreement is signed and the Palestinian police arrive it will be
the beginning of our liberation. The beginning of the liberation of
Palestine,' said Mr Isaac Shawa, a shopkeeper.
But although there are hopes in Jericho, there are also deep fears and
worries about the future. Many Jerichoans remember December 13 when they
prepared to celebrate the beginning of Israeli withdrawal and nothing
happened. The Israeli army exacerbated suspicions yesterday when it closed
the town to visitors.
More worrying is the response of young extremists of the Hamas Islamic
Resistance movement. 'When Arafat comes here we will put a bullet between
his eyes,' said Khalil, a garlic seller.
Ominous signs for future Arab-Jewish relations were also on show on the
outskirts of Jericho, where Jewish settlers protesting against the agreement
blocked a road with burning tyres and clashed with police. Some settlers
said they would not obey any orders from Palestinian police.
The army stopped Jewish settlers travelling through Jericho. For Arab and
Jew at the military checkpoint it seemed the agreement was heralding divorce
rather than co-existence.
