FT  02 SEP 94 / Catholic killed in Ulster on first day of IRA ceasefire:
Major 'livid' over prisoner transfer to N Ireland
The first day of the IRA ceasefire in Northern Ireland ended last night with
the killing of a Catholic man in north Belfast and a shooting in another
Catholic area of the city.
The incidents appeared to damage seriously any immediate prospect of
loyalist paramilitaries ending their campaign of violence.
The shootings came as a political row erupted over transfer of four
Republican prisoners from the mainland to jails in Northern Ireland only
hours after the start of the IRA ceasefire.
A 'livid' Mr John Major ordered an urgent inquiry into the decision to move
the prisoners, which threatened to put the high-risk UK-Irish peace
initiative under renewed pressure by undermining efforts to reassure
unionists that no secret deals had been entered into in return for
Wednesday's IRA announcement.
Meanwhile, the prospect of face-to-face meetings by the end of the year
between Sinn Fein and the British government moved closer as London
acknowledged that amplifications during the day by republican leaders showed
they were 'moving in our direction' over the permanency of the IRA
ceasefire.
Police said the man who died last night was a 32-year-old unemployed
labourer. They confirmed that the victim was a Roman Catholic.
In a second incident, a car was fired at in in the Old Park area of north
Belfast, and a person claiming to represent the loyalist terror group, the
Ulster Freedom Fighters, telephoned BBC Radio Belfast to say they had
carried out that shooting.
Downing Street said the decision to transfer the prisoners to Northern
Ireland had been taken by officials without reference to ministers.
But Mr Derek Lewis, director-general of the Prison Service said the decision
to transfer a total of 14 prisoners - including the four moved today - was
made in June by Mr Michael Howard, the home secretary.
He said the timing of the transfers, once the decision had been made, was
the responsibility of the prison service and had been determined by
'practical' considerations.
Among the prisoners transferred was Mr Patrick Magee, who is serving a life
sentence for his involvement in the Brighton bomb which devastated the Grand
Hotel during the Conservative conference in 1984.
The transfer was immediately attacked by Lord Tebbit, the former
Conservative cabinet minister, who was badly injured in the blast. He said
it was either 'an early reward for the IRA or crass political incompetence'.
As the debate continued over whether the IRA had declared a permanent end to
its armed campaign, Downing Street emphasised that the three-month countdown
to talks with the IRA's political wing would not begin until the
organisation's intentions were 'utterly clear'.
But Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, who does not share Downing
Street's caution, said the controversy over the omission of the word
'permanent' from the IRA's ceasefire statement was over.
He used a state-of-the-nation speech to urge all parties to show imagination
and flexibility. Nobody, he said, should diminish the potential of the
ceasefire 'by trying to interpret it as anything other than what it is'.
His comments followed an article by Mr Gerry Adams in The Irish Times in
which the Sinn Fein president said: 'Albert Reynolds, Dick Spring, John Hume
and others have responded positively and correctly to the IRA announcement.'
In a further republican amplification, Mr Martin McGuinness, a member of
Sinn Fein's governing executive, said the organisation was committed to 'a
complete cessation of military operations under all circumstances'.
Meanwhile, in London, Mr Michael Mates, the former Northern Ireland
minister, said he thought the countdown to talks between London and Sinn
Fein should begin at once. 'I would think it is not unreasonable for the 90
days to start now,' he said.
In Washington, there was little tangible evidence that the US was putting
flesh on its promise of support to the peace process.
In the past, US president Bill Clinton has expressed interest in a visit to
Ireland, and there was some preliminary discussion earlier this year of
adding Ireland to his itinerary for one of his two trips to Europe. No plans
yet exist.
Page 9
Business hopes for up to 30,000 jobs
Media ban may be lifted
Siege mentality takes a grip on Protestants
Peace still not guaranteed
Observer Page 15
