FT  24 MAR 94 / Rail union warns of wide disruption
A summer of widespread disruption on the railways over the move to
privatisation was threatened yesterday by Mr Jimmy Knapp, general secretary
of the RMT rail union.
He said that his union was in potential conflict with British Rail on five
issues that could bring one-day strikes, overtime bans and work-to-rules. Mr
Knapp said: 'Trouble is going to break out if BR do not come to terms with
us. There is a genuine fear of the future among my members.'
On Tuesday the union's members at BR will receive ballot papers for a strike
ballot over the issue of job deployment between BR and the new publicly
owned body Railtrack that takes over maintenance of the track and signalling
on April 1.
The union wants a promotion, transfer and redundancy agreement to continue
covering staff who move to work for Railtrack so they can seek future jobs
in British Rail, something BR is refusing to accept. RMT also intends to
ballot its 5,000 signalling staff after the rejection by BR of an 11 per
cent interim pay demand for them in return for recent productivity
improvements. Their pay differential has narrowed and they want to restore
it.
Mr Knapp added that the union and BR have also failed to agree on the
security of new employment contracts that 30,000 track maintenance and
renewal workers will have after privatisation. He said the union was also on
a collision course with BR over the future of negotiating procedures with
the move to decentralised pay bargaining and the end of national
negotiations.
The RMT is insisting on a 'substantial' pay offer for all its members
working at BR when the present agreement ends on April 4. It has a
difference of view with BR over the transfer of staff pensions after
privatisation.
Unions representing 5.5m public-sector workers agreed yesterday to call a
day of action on a weekend in July and a week of demonstrations and other
protests in the autumn against the government's three-year pay bill freeze.
