FT  22 APR 94 / Australian securities suit filed against Spalvins
The Australian Securities Commission yesterday filed a suit against Mr John
Spalvins, who built up the Adelaide Steamship group in the 1980s, as well as
four other former directors of the company and Deloitte Haskins &amp;
Sells/Deloitte Ross Tohmatsu, the former auditors of the group.
The ASC, acting on behalf of the Adsteam group, is demanding that ADollars
340m (USDollars 246m) be repaid to the company - an amount which it claims
is equivalent to 'improperly paid dividends and interest'. The suit is a
civil action, and while claiming that the defendants breached their
fiduciary duties or were negligent, does not allege any criminal behaviour.
In the action, filed in the Federal Court in Adelaide, the ASC maintained
that the former directors and auditors caused Adsteam's profit for 1990 to
be overstated by at least ADollars 518m in the accounts.
The accounts, to year-end of June 1990, and certified in the following
October as 'true and fair' by the directors and auditors, said that the
company had 'achieved its 14th consecutive record profit for ADollars
220.3m, notwithstanding high interest rates and the difficult economic
climate in Australia'. Yet, as the ASC notes, a month later the company's
share price had dropped to 35 cents - compared with ADollars 3.53 when the
results were announced - and Adsteam entered into an arrangement with its
bankers.
Since then, management of Adsteam has changed and attempts have been made to
restructure the group. However, the company has continued to struggle with
its heavy debt levels, which still stood at ADollars 1.7bn last November.
Attributable losses over the three years to end-June 1993 have totalled
close to ADollars 2bn.
The ASC alleges that, when reporting the ADollars 220.3m profit, directors
and auditors failed properly to account for various loans and inter-company
transactions.
The watchdog goes on to claim that the former directors authorised ADollars
228m to be paid in interim and final dividends in relation to the 1990
financial year, in breach of their fiduciary duties and provisions of the
state's companies code.
The ASC added that it was 'in no way' criticising the present directors or
the group's current business activities. If the action is successful and
damages are awarded, the money will flow back to Adsteam.
