FT  28 APR 94 / International Bonds: Good demand for Elf Aquitaine's
FFr1.5bn issue
With the US Treasuries market closed for a national day of mourning for
former US President Richard Nixon, activity was thin and only a handful of
issuers braved the sluggish market.
The day's largest deal was a FFr1.5bn issue of 10-year 7 per cent bonds for
Societe Nationale Elf Aquitaine. According to a syndicate official at lead
manager Societe Generale, the paper met good demand from domestic investors.
Credit Local de France increased its outstanding issue of 5 1/4 per cent
bonds due December 1999 by another Ecu100m to total Ecu400m. The deal got a
muted response, with some dealers arguing that the coupon compared
unfavourably with recent Ecu paper, such as the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development's 6 per cent five-year bonds.
Noodle giant PT Indofood Sukses Makmur, a member of the country's largest
conglomerate, the Salim group, plans to go public on July 7 by floating 21m
shares or 2.75 per cent of its enlarged share capital, Reuters reports.
Indofood issued Dollars 500m of exchangeable bonds due 1997 in late March
via UBS which pay a step-up coupon of 3.5 per cent in the first year, 5 per
cent in the second year and 6 per cent in the third year. The bonds are
convertible to Indofood shares eight months after approval by the capital
market supervisory agency (Bapepam). A full conversion would represent about
18 per cent of the company's paid-up capital.
Standard &amp; Poor's has placed its AA- and and A-1 ratings of BAT Capital
Corporation, A-1 rating on BAT International Finance and AA- rating on
British-American Tobacco Investments - all guaranteed by BAT Industries - on
credit-watch with negative implications. About Dollars 2.9bn of long-term
debt is affected.
The move follows the announcement that BAT Industries plans to acquire
American Tobacco for Dollars 1bn in cash.
'The proposed acquisition would increase BAT's exposure to the extremely
competitive US tobacco market which is currently facing a number of
challenging issues,' the agency stated.
In a related move, S&amp;P placed its AA- claims-paying ability rating of Eagle
Star Insurance Company and its AA- financial strength rating of Eagle Star
Life Assurance Company on credit-watch with negative implications.
Historically, a key factor in both insurance company ratings has been the
firmly-stated commitment of BAT, their ultimate parent, to financial
services, and its provision of tangible support and maintenance of strong
capital at the Eagle Star group, S&amp;P noted. 'Any material diminution of
BAT's financial flexibility may affect its ability or willingness to
continue to provide similar levels of support to the insurance group going
forward,' it said.
