FT  10 JUN 94 / Arts: Sharp little shocker - Opera
Since Peter Maxwell Davies wrote The Lighthouse 14 years ago, the little
opera has had many more performances abroad than here. The Music Theatre
Wales revival, brought from Stuttgart and Swansea to the Queen Elizabeth
Hall on Tuesday, is not only timely - Max's 60th birthday is approaching -
but highly expert and effective. It goes to the Oxford Playhouse this
Sunday, and the Cheltenham Everyman on July 10; there will be a further tour
in the autumn.
The tale was inspired by a real-life 1900 mystery, the disappearance of all
three keepers from the Flannan Isle lighthouse - leaving everything behind
in perfect order, 'Marie Celeste'-style. In the Davies scenario there are
burgeoning psychological frictions between them, shut up together as they
are. As nerves become rawer, there are confessional reminiscences, and
ultimately an explosive folie a trois.
Before this main act, 'The Cry of the Beast', comes a shorter Prologue in
which the same three singers are impersonal officers giving evidence at the
later court of enquiry (enlivened by stage flashbacks). Davies exploits the
parallelism neatly: indeed, the construction of the entire piece is notably
taut and clever: the keepers' warring characters touched in by economical
strokes, the spooky atmosphere generated by a mere dozen players with a
kaleidoscopic variety of colour and attack.
Michael Rafferty conducts with a sure hand, and Michael McCarthy's
production is no less confident. Simon Banham's skeletal light-house makes a
perfect setting. The trio of singer-actors is first-rate: Henry Herford as
the volatile Blazes, hag-ridden by a brutal childhood, Philip Creasy's naive
Sandy, Kelvin Thomas's religious nut Arthur. At the climaxes of both acts,
however, Ace McCarron's bold lighting goes so far over the top that many of
us shut our eyes tight while it lasted  - not a dramatic effect, just
physiological.
Certainly Maxwell Davies' score enriches the schematic action. It focuses
it, orders it, lends it a fine haunted aura. Whether it deepens it is
another matter. Significantly, each light-keeper's revelatory monologue is
set as a parody in Max's 1970s vein - a gleefully black G. &amp; S. number, a
soulful Edwardian ballad, a Sally Army hymn. His favourite tics of that time
recur: the mistuned upright piano, the lightly sinister celesta and
marimbas, the hyper-vibrato solos for mawkish brass.
By the time the really distressful exposures begin, the music is too far
into Hammer-film horror (long, shivery string tremoli, muffled threats in
the bass, snapping percussion) to do anything more for the individual
characters. The net effect is of a shaggy-dog story recounted as Grand
Guignol. For practical reasons, MTW has preferred to insert an interval
between prologue and main act; but that leaves the opera somewhat
over-stretched, prompts expectations of something more searching than it
pretends to deliver.
At a dense, continuous hour-and-a-quarter it would display its astringent
virtues still better. A one-acter need not aim at the psychological depths
that an evening's-length opera might explore. There are different things to
be done on the narrower scale: think of what Ravel managed with L'Heure
espagnole, a mere 'vaudeville'] In The Lighthouse, Maxwell Davies does some
of them with such lean, incisive brilliance that it may prove to outlast
grander pieces with more humane ambitions.
