FT  31 MAY 94 / Letters to the Editor: Weak grounds for single currency
defence
Sir, Michael Prowse is quite wrong to argue that 'Nearly all economists
agree that (a single currency) would considerably enhance the commercial
attractions of a single European market' ('No sympathy for Eurosceptics',
May 30). Most economists would in fact agree that the merits of a single
currency depend on the technical question of whether or not Europe is, in
the jargon, an 'optimal currency area'.
Given the nature of Europe's sclerotic labour markets - lack of labour
mobility in particular - it is actually quite hard to think of the EU as
something technically suitable for monetary union. Countries that have
similar economic structures may benefit from a common currency but even then
only when other conditions - such as fiscal union - are in place.
The technical issues associated with the creation of a single currency are
often lost in the wider debate over the political attractions of a monetary
union. Eurosceptics have two arguments. First, the EU is not a collection of
similar economies (far from it). Second, Emu is in fact all about political,
not economic, ambitions. Many economists would agree with, for example, the
recently expressed sentiments of Paul Krugman (perhaps the leading economist
of his generation). This is where he explicitly acknowledges the technical
deficiencies of a monetary union but goes on to argue that he nevertheless
thinks a single currency would be a good thing because of the benefits that
would flow from the implied - and necessary - degree of political union.
This is the more honest approach: the agenda for Emu is explicitly political
and is all about federalism; you either want to be part of that or you
don't.
Mr Prowse would have a stronger case if he simply admitted that his belief
in federalism leads him to conclude that the economic risks associated with
a common currency are worth running. Defenders of the single currency are on
very weak ground if they base their arguments on economics alone.
Chris Johns,
chief economist,
Bank of Ireland,
La Touche House,
International Financial
Services Centre,
Custom House Docks,
Dublin 1,
Republic of Ireland
