FT  23 MAR 94 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals (6): Disappointment over policy
document - Peter O'Donnell examines whether the European Union is helping
European drug companies / The European drug industry, a suitable case for
treatment?
Should the European Union be helping the European drug industry - and if so,
how?
This question will echo around European capitals over the coming months,
provoked by a policy document finalised in early March by the European
Commission. But on the basis of the initial responses to the Commission's
paper, the echoes may be a little muted.
For a start, 1994 seems rather late in the day to be addressing such a
fundamental question. Over more than three decades, the attention of
legislators in Brussels and Strasbourg has focused repeatedly on different
aspects of medicines - such as marketing authorisations, patent extension,
drug promotion, or cancer research.
Now, all of a sudden, a broad industrial policy is needed, says the
Commission, since the framework within which pharmaceutical companies
operate 'has been profoundly shaken,' by rising research and development
costs, the emergence of new technologies, and the international trend
towards mergers and restructuring.
Secondly, the recommendations the Commission is making are very finely
nuanced. From the cautious title - a 'communication on the outlines of an
industrial policy' - through to the hesitant conclusions, the Commission
makes so many careful genuflections in so many different directions that the
document provides little clear lead for any kind of action.
The discussion of policy skates over a wide range of issues: industry
performance, public health policy and social security spending, research
funding, national sovereignty and subsidiarity, competitiveness and
competition.
But the Commission fails to offer any effective resolution of the tensions
it alludes to, notably between cost-containment and research funding: it
goes no further than the observation that 'the legitimate concern to limit
public expenditure must not be allowed to jeopardise the future of
pharmaceutical research in Europe.'
And most of what it prescribes is little more than anodyne 'intensification
of dialogue with the member-states' on a range of uninspiring administrative
matters such as consolidation of existing legislation, establishment of the
new European Medicines Agency, and promotion of research co-ordination.
Not surprisingly, European drug companies have not been dancing in the
streets to celebrate a new dawn for high-technology medicines. Industry
trade associations and senior company executives who have been closely
involved in the evolution of this policy outline are muttering
diplomatically about the need to study the document closely before judging
it, or they point politely to some of the positive statements that the
Commission has incorporated about the value of the industry to Europe's
economy and its citizens' health.
'It may prove to be a useful vehicle for a dialogue to develop an industrial
policy,' conceded Chris Dalton of Zeneca. There is no disguising the intense
disappointment felt throughout the research-based industry, however.
Privately, drug company managers admit that the policy document contains
much less than they had hoped for - 'this is a wasted opportunity,' one
remarked sadly after leafing through the document.
Others voice the fear that 'this is unlikely to have any influence or
produce any change.' And some talk defiantly of the policy outline 'needing
a lot more work on it.' The US companies in Europe are already writing to
the Commission to express their dissatisfaction.
The disappointment is all the more acute because the European drug industry
felt until early 1994 that it was going to come out of the exercise with a
much stronger, pro-industry document.
Following a 1991 undertaking from Commissioner Martin Bangemann to back the
industry in its battle for better public understanding, a select task force
of drug industry experts from Hoechst, Glaxo, Rhone-Poulenc, Merck, Sharp &amp;
Dohme and the Swiss firms worked with officials from the Commission's
industry affairs services all through 1993, under Bangemann's auspices, to
produce a suitable draft.
By early 1994, the document was ready. Its chief importance - certainly for
the industry - was that it addressed the most serious concern of
research-based drug companies: national controls on pricing and
reimbursement. It did not go quite as far as the drug firms wanted, but it
clearly recommended economic deregulation, with free pricing for new
products, a phasing in of more general price liberalisation, and increased
patient co-payment to move drug reimbursement further away from political
control.
Drug companies felt that at last they were to be given a weapon to battle
against discriminatory and anti-competitive national health policies. The
quid pro quo for this liberalisation was to be additional stimulation of
competition from generics and parallel imported medicines, spurred by more
comparative information for doctors and the public on drugs and drug prices.
But shortly before the full Commission was asked to endorse the Bangemann
draft, the document was ambushed by a loose coalition of member states,
generic drug companies, consumer organisations, and other Commission
services who felt that they were being rail-roaded when this text was
revealed to them at such an advanced stage of drafting.
'National health services are being asked to adapt to the needs of the drug
industry,' one outraged official commented. Spearheaded by Social Affairs
Commissioner Padraig Flynn (who is also responsible for the EU's embryonic
health policy), an intensive intra-Commission horse-trading exercise built
new provisions on health, employment and social economy considerations into
the policy outline. And it reduced to mere platitudes nearly everything that
the industry had tried carefully to build into it.
The resulting dilution satisfies no-one - except the member states, who will
now retain almost unconditionally the autonomy they prize in managing their
own health care budgets, including drug pricing and reimbursement regimes.
'We weren't looking for handouts - just for deregulation,' says Anne Polya
of Pfizer, plaintively.
But generic drug companies are not happy either. Greg Perry of the European
Generics Association criticises the lack of provision for generic companies
to prepare copy products during the last year of a product's patent term, so
that copies can be launched immediately on patent expiry - 'without this,
there is going to be no real increase in generic use,' he says.
Even the consumers find the document ultimately unhelpful. Luc Joossens, a
Brussels-based consumer spokesman on health affairs, says: 'This is now so
vague it goes nowhere.' He had been hoping for clear commitments to increase
incentives for generic prescribing and dispensing, and to provide clear and
comprehensive data on drug consumption.
Optimists within the Commission believe the document can still serve a
useful purpose by stimulating an informed discussion in the European
Parliament and in the Council of Industry Ministers of the Twelve.
'Nothing of real substance has been removed from the policy outline,'
according to Fernand Sauer of the Commission's pharmaceutical industry unit.
He believes that the agenda it sets may lead national governments to take a
fresh look at how to make the most of the asset that the drug industry
represents for Europe.
While Brussels has no competence to oblige member states to act in this
field, a discussion of this type 'may also induce them to voluntarily
eliminate any distortions of the functioning of the internal market.'
