FT  16 SEP 94 / World Trade News: Seeking (nearly) free labour with fair
trade - Washington's quest for middle ground on workers' rights abroad
It is a rare official of the Clinton Administration who does not declare
some measure of commitment to the promotion of worker rights abroad.
But courting US business and backing its export drive, particularly in
emerging markets, has recently seemed the higher priority, particularly
since President Bill Clinton 'de-linked' China's human rights policies from
the annual US renewal of its Most Favoured Nation trade status.
In setting out its position on workers' rights, the administration has
searched for middle ground. Mr Robert Reich, the US labour secretary who is
perhaps its most eloquent spokesman on the issue, told a congressional
sub-committee in June that 'as economies become increasingly interwoven with
each other, we must either actively accept some share of responsibility for
how our economic partners conduct their affairs, or else passively accept
complicity'.
Some labour practices, such as prison or slave labour and some forms of
child labour, 'simply place countries outside the community of civilised
nations', he said. While he rejected poverty as a valid pretext for
restricting union activity, he also insisted that 'it is neither fair nor
realistic to insist that labour standards within developing countries must
be identical to those in richer countries'.
The administration has pushed hard for the inclusion of labour rights in
trade negotiations. But it has earned criticism internationally,
particularly from developing countries, and scorn from both sides of the
political spectrum at home, which see the administration as trying to occupy
an unprincipled and ineffective centre.
Mr Mickey Kantor, the US trade representative and a former lawyer for
migrant farm workers, pushed hard to get labour rights on the agenda of the
new World Trade Organisation, successor to the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade, but he has only won agreements to debate the issue. Republicans
and the business lobby forced him to drop labour rights from the
administration's proposed fast-track negotiating authority for future trade
negotiations. When several outraged Democrats protested, the administration
was forced to abandon the entire battle for fast-track. It was a defeat for
key foreign policy and trade initiatives in Asia and Latin America.
While the focus has been on trade and labour rights, congressional Democrats
succeeded in getting legislation passed which requires US executive
directors of the multilateral development banks to push labour's goals
through their lending. Mr Jerome Levinson, former general counsel of the
Inter-American Development Bank, has been a leading advocate of the policy.
In a recent report by the Labour-backed Economic Policy Institute, Mr
Levinson called for the elevation of worker rights to the same order of
priority as investment incentives.
The policies of the developments banks are 'indifferent at best to abuses of
worker rights in the borrowing countries', he said. 'The World Bank seems to
have a positive aversion to independent trade unions that can bargain
aggressively for their members.'
Administration officials are much milder in their endorsement of worker
rights as a lending condition. It is thought that they will not take 'a
heavy hand' on worker rights but will try to persuade borrower countries to
move towards 'normally accepted standards'.
They believe development banks can narrow the gap between rich and poor by
increasingly concentrating their efforts on social investment.
They are proud the IADB will now commit 50 per cent of its new loans to
health, education, worker retraining and other social programmes, and the
Asia Development Bank has committed 40 per cent.
But US officials are also pushing for milder lending conditions than those
that forced poor countries to throw open their import markets and slash
their spending on, among other things, health and welfare programmes.
'We know austerity isn't a substitute for adjustment,' said one official.
'We've learned that the quality of deficit reduction matters.'
The official said it would be 'terrible if the banks supported the bad guys,
the anti-union side, when a little more union power ought to be good'. He
said that unions have been 'a positive force' in the industrialised
countries but 'there are obviously dangers of labour rights being used as a
pretext for protectionism'.
Mr Levinson sees the administration's efforts as 'window dressing'. These
initiatives will not get to the core of the problem, which is economic
policies which widen the gap between rich and poor and frown on 'direct
government measures to redress poverty and income equalities'.
As far as Congress liberals are concerned the thrusting of worker rights on
to the development bank agenda is their 'opening shot' on behalf of labour.
Congressman Barney Frank, chairman of the House subcommittee which oversees
the development banks, is inviting to Washington in November key members of
parliaments from around the world. The agenda will be further reform of the
big multilateral lending institutions.
