FT  02 FEB 94 / Romania reverses economic decline
Higher output from privatised farms and new enterprises helped reverse
Romania's steep five-year economic decline last year. But the slow pace of
reform provides a shaky basis for sustained recovery and rising inflation
clouds the future, according to figures released yesterday by the national
statistics commission.
Consumer price inflation jumped to 296 per cent last year from 199 per cent
in 1992, more than four times higher than any other central European country
outside former Yugoslavia. The commission blamed high inflation on
inefficient state monopolies, price liberalisation and the continuing
devaluation of the Leu, the national currency. The Leu closed at an all-time
low of 1,480 to the dollar yesterday, down from 460 in January 1993.
Overall GDP grew by 1 per cent, to the equivalent of Dollars 1,089 (Pounds
726) per head, compared with a drop of 15 percent in 1992. Industrial
production rose by 1.3 per cent, but stocks of unsold goods remained
equivalent to around one month's production.
Agriculture and private sector growth were the main reasons for the increase
in GDP, the commission said. Agricultural production rose by 12.4 per cent
while the private sector increased its share of GDP to 30 per cent, up from
26 per cent in 1992. It accounted for around 80 per cent of agricultural
output and more than half of retail sales and services.
The commission said high inflation meant that real wages dropped by 15 per
cent to around half of 1989 levels.
The government's failure to halt the decline in living standards and speed
up reform hassparked off a growing wave of popular discontent around the
country in recent weeks and increased pressure on the ruling Party of Social
Democracy in Romania (PSDR) to form a broader governing coalition.
Trade unions confirmed yesterday they would go ahead with a one-day strike
on Friday, following last week's one-hour strike in which more than 1m
workers participated.
They say they will launch a general strike later this month if the
government does not agree to accelerate reform and establish a minimum wage
at 60 per cent of the average wage. They say they will not support the
governing coalition while the PSDR is negotiating with former communists and
hardline nationalist parties.
In rural areas, farmers have stepped up their demands for faster
implementation of the land law. Fewer than a fifth of farmers have received
full titles to the property returned to them under the 1991 law.
