FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (3): Reforms at a high price - The economy
/ Estonia is the first and only economic success story to emerge thus far
from the wreckage of the Soviet Union
Backed by a strong, convertible currency, and wedded to balanced budgets and
fiscal rectitude, a small band of young and determined economic policy
makers has managed to throw off the legacy of Soviet rule and open Estonia
up to trade and investment from their Baltic neighbours and the world
beyond.
Industrial output has been climbing steadily since February last year,
contributing to a 3 per cent rise in the gross domestic product after three
years of sharp declines. Overall GDP is expected to grow by 5 per cent in
1994, boosted by a fast-growing service sector, rising foreign investment,
mainly from Finland and Scandinavia, the privatisation of hundreds of former
state enterprises and an explosive growth in new private businesses.
Economic activity is heavily concentrated on Tallinn, the capital, in which
a third of the population of 1.6m live.
Provided relations with Russia can be kept on an even keel, the city can
look forward to a prosperous future as a 'Baltic Hong Kong,' blessed with
the deepest ice-free ports in the region and perched just beyond the western
extremity of virtually land-locked Russia.
Three years ago, such optimism would have appeared preposterous - Mikhail
Gorbachev, the last Soviet president, warned Estonians and other
independence-minded Baltic states that divorce would mean economic disaster.
Well over 90 per cent of Estonia's foreign trade was conducted with the then
Soviet Union which supplied energy and raw materials as well as a wide range
of intermediate industrial goods.
The World Bank and other institutions warned that Estonia would need to seek
Dollars 1bn in foreign financing to make up for hidden Soviet subsidies and
argued against leaving the rouble zone.
For a time it looked as though the Cassandras from east and west might be
right. In 1992, industrial production slumped 38 per cent, inflation soared
to 1,069 per cent and only an emergency shipment of 100,000 tons of heating
oil from Finland prevented thousands from freezing to death - literally, in
the case of the old and infirm.
But right in the middle of Estonia's annus horribilis an event of crucial
importance took place. On June 20, 1992 the central bank initiated monetary
reform by introducing the kroon, a new and independent currency fully backed
by gold and foreign currencies. It was pegged to the D-mark at a fixed rate
of 1 DM=8 EEK. Up to 1,500 roubles per person were exchanged at 10 roubles
for one kroon, equivalent to the D-mark-Rouble parity on the day.
Since then, the kroon's fixed exchange rate with what is still Europe's
strongest currency has been the principle anchor of economic policy. By
adopting a currency board system Estonia's monetary reformers effectively
put the economy back on the gold standard of yore and laid the basis for
what has become one of Europe's strongest currencies.
Inflation last year was reduced to 36 per cent, economic growth is on a
rising track and foreign trade doubled in volume.
Finland has replaced the former Soviet Union as the main trade partner. More
than 40 per cent of all imports now flow through Finnish ports only 80km
away across the Gulf of Finland.
Russia remains an important trade partner but took only 38 per cent of
Estonian exports last year, compared to 95 per cent in 1991. It supplied
only 30 per cent of Estonia's imports, mainly oil and gas, compared to 85
per cent three years ago.
But the reforms which are transforming the economy have come at a high
price. Average real incomes shrank dramatically over the last two years,
accompanied by a rapid increase in income differentials.
The young, multi-lingual, entrepreneurial types in the new banks and
enterprises enjoy high and rapidly rising incomes.
Civil servants, teachers and workers in the old-style state-owned
enterprises, many of them ethnic Russians, have seen their incomes fall. An
estimated 20 per cent of the 1.6m population live on or below the poverty
line.
Official statistics may tell only part of the story, however. Ms Marju
Lauristin, the minister of social affairs, estimates that income from wages
and salaries only accounts for 55 per cent of average family income.
Part-time jobs specially in the fast-growing service sector help make up the
difference.
In spite of all the wrenching changes in this small economy, however,
unemployment has been kept remarkably low - although employment in the
official, still largely state controlled sectors of the economy, has fallen
steeply.
Soviet Estonia boasted 850,000 jobs, but only 635,000 official work-places
remain. Despite this shrinkage in the old economy of large textile and
engineering plants, oil shale mines and related heavy industry, only 16,000
workers, between 2-3 per cent of the work force, are officially unemployed.
A further 45,000 are registered as semi-employed.
Low unemployment is partly a function of definition. After six months
looking for a job, the unemployed are struck off the unemployment pay
register.
Pockets of high unemployment certainly exist, especially in rural areas and
in the heavy industrial areas which were built in the Soviet period and
staffed largely by ethnic Russians.
However, thousands of new jobs have been created in the fast-growing
construction, transport, private retail and other service sectors.
Tax evasion is widespread in the vibrant new capitalist economy. But recent
tax reforms, introducing VAT and simplification of the income tax structure
by imposing a flat rate 26 per cent personal and corporate income tax, have
been designed to broaden the tax base.
A reform of the social security system this year will create a
self-financing health and pension system based on employer and employee
contributions.
The aim is to free-up the budget for more productive infrastructure and
other investments.
