FT  24 SEP 94 / Sport: Oh lucky man - Soccer / Keegan's Newcastle
Tyneside is gripped by mania. Newcastle United lead the league. One Geordie,
among the Arsenal fans in the West Stand at Highbury on Sunday, explained
that if he wanted to see his team play he had to travel to away matches to
do it. His brother said: 'Seeing Newcastle on top of the table seems unreal.
It's like having a Labour Government with a thumping majority.'
Tyneside has not been touched by football glory for 20 years. In 1974,
Newcastle reached the FA Cup final. They were outplayed by Liverpool and
lost 3-0. Kevin Keegan inspired the winners and scored twice. The game
represented a turning point for both clubs.
Liverpool had won the league two years earlier, but the cup victory
signalled the start of a period of unprecedented domination. In the next 15
seasons they won 10 league titles, they also won four European cups; the
first inspired by the irrepressible Keegan, the last three master-minded by
his replacement, Kenny Dalglish.
Newcastle went into decline. They sold Malcolm MacDonald to Arsenal and
Terry McDermott and Alan Kennedy to Liverpool and were relegated in 1978 -
one year before the last Labour government fell. They returned to the first
division in 1984, inspired by Keegan, Chris Waddle and Peter Beardsley. The
euphoria was short-lived. Keegan retired. Dalglish, now manager of
Liverpool, bought Beardsley. Newcastle were relegated again in 1989. By
February 1992 they had slid into the debt and to the bottom of the second
division. The club turned to Keegan again.
Just as Keegan, the player, provided the yardstick by which Dalglish was
measured. So Keegan the manager must measure himself against what Dalglish
has achieved. Dalglish was more extravagantly gifted but lacked the
ebullience which made Keegan a talisman wherever he played. Dalglish won 102
caps for Scotland, yet, unlike Keegan, a sense of underachievement hangs
over his international career.
A similar doubt surrounds his time as manager of Liverpool. He managed the
club to three championships, the side of 1987-8, was perhaps the greatest
Liverpool team. Yet he could not avert the decline of the Liverpool empire.
At Blackburn, Dalglish has hardly put a foot wrong. Arthur Cox and Roy
MacFarland at Derby, Graham Turner and Graham Taylor at Wolves, have also
spent heavily from the pockets of benefactors, without lifting their clubs
out of division one. Dalglish steered Blackburn to promotion within eight
months of arriving and then to second place in the Premiership. But he
plodded up the ladder. Keegan scampered.
The team Dalglish built with Jack Walker's gold, possesses a leaden quality:
witness their grimly uninspired 1-0 loss to Trelleborgs of Sweden in the
UEFA Cup. On the same night Newcastle gave a golden performance away to
Royal Antwerp. Newcastle won 5-0. They have won all six league games,
scoring 22 goals and are four points ahead of Blackburn at the top of the
table. They are playing dazzling football. Today they are at home to
Liverpool whose fans could remind Keegan that Newcastle will not be a great
team until they can sustain their form in the first eight matches over eight
months.
Even so Keegan's achievement is already striking. He took over at Newcastle
four months after Dalglish did at Blackburn. And he took over a team much
lower down the league. Dalglish has spent about Pounds 30m in three years.
Keegan has spent Pounds 17m in 30 months. But where Dalglish has bought blue
chippers and bargains. Keegan has gambled - but then taking over Newcastle
when he did was a gamble.
Dalglish spent Pounds 2.2m on Tim Flowers, an England goalkeeper. Keegan
spent Pounds 300,000 on Pavel Srnicek from the Czech Republic. Srnicek
dominated at Arsenal. Dalglish spent Pounds 8.3m on his two first-choice
forwards, Alan Shearer and Chris Sutton. Keegan has spent just over Pounds
6m on Beardsley, Andy Cole, Robert Lee and Ruel Fox. Beardsley was 32 and
Newcastle's chairman, Sir John Hall, opposed the deal. Cole had played just
one top-division game and had a poor personal reputation.
Players blossom at Newcastle. At Norwich, Fox rarely ran at defenders. This
season he is a born-again dribbler. Cole is now creator as well as
goal-scorer. Lee, who scored roughly a goal every five games at Charlton, is
emerging as a game-winner, scoring eight goals in eight games.
Newcastle's success is based on more than an eye for untapped talent. The
team has a style. Where Blackburn are solid and functional, Newcastle have a
distinctive personality.
Last Sunday they posed insuperable problems for one of the league's most
sophisticated defences. Newcastle are not the only team in the Premier
League dedicated to attack, they are not the only quick, intelligent,
passing team. Cole is an exceptional goal-scorer, but there are half a dozen
of them in the division. What makes Newcastle special is their relentless
running - into attack and back into defence - and the ability of their front
four to dribble.
A good passing game is based as much on the effort of the players off the
ball as the perception of the man with it. On Sunday, one sweeping Newcastle
counter-attack ended with John Beresford, the full-back, appearing unmarked
at the far post to make a header. He then turned and sprinted back 90 yards
to his defensive position. Opposing defences must chose between picking up
the runs from deep of Beresford, Marc Hottiger, Scott Sellars and Philippe
Albert and double-marking Cole, Beardsley, Lee and Fox.
For Arsenal, Martin Keown marked Cole, while Tony Adams burst forward into
the space in front of the penalty area from which Beardsley, in particular,
likes to plot mischief, to break up attacks. Cole did not score but Keown,
stretching and twisting all afternoon, did, twice, in his own net.
Newcastle's other goal in a 3-2 win came from a generously-awarded penalty,
but Keegan brushed aside suggestions that his team had been fortunate.
Football coaches who want their players to shoot more tell them they must
buy tickets to win the lottery. Newcastle's ceaseless, sharply-pointed
attacks bring a lot of tickets. They are bound to earn themselves some luck
and Keegan has always been a lucky man.
