FT  14 FEB 94 / Leading Article: Littlechild's power gamble
The British government's decision in the late 1980s to privatise the power
generation industry as a duopoly has been a costly error. Consumers have
been charged more for their electricity than they would have been in a more
competitive market. To free themselves from the generators' market power,
regional electricity companies made premature investments in gas-fired
plants. As a consequence, thousands of coal miners lost their jobs.
Last week's deal between Prof Stephen Littlechild, the electricity
regulator, and National Power and PowerGen will do nothing to repair the
damage of the past. What it may do is make things better in the future. But
even that is far from certain.
The reason for some hope is that Prof Littlechild has focused on the heart
of the problem: the fact that National Power and PowerGen own virtually all
the country's coal and oil-fired plants. These have higher running costs
than the nuclear and gas-fired stations owned by competitors and so, under
the complex pool system, are the last to be brought on stream as demand
mounts. Control of this marginal plant effectively enables the duopoly to
fix prices not just in the pool, the wholesale spot market for electricity,
but also for longer-term contracts.
Under the deal with Prof Littlechild, National Power and PowerGen have
agreed over the next two years to sell 6,000MW of plant, equivalent to six
large stations. The hope is that the new owners of this capacity will bid
vigorously to keep prices low. In the interim, there will be a two-year
price cap, cutting pool prices by up to 7 per cent.
The price cap will benefit large industrial users, which often buy
electricity direct from the pool. Smaller companies and residential
customers, though, will get little immediate relief. Their prices are
largely determined by five-year contracts put in place at the beginning of
last year.
Not ideal
Although the prices in these contracts are even higher than pool prices,
Prof Littlechild decided not to revise the terms. This is largely because
the government brokered the contracts when it was trying to find a way out
of the 1992-93 coal crisis.
Prof Littlechild's resort to price control is not ideal. Price regulation
can make a market less flexible and competitive. However, in this instance,
it can be defended as a purely temporary measure while the divestment
process is completed.
The bigger question is whether the disposal of 6,000MW of plant or roughly
10 per cent of England's generating capacity will be enough to curb the
duopoly's market power. Prof Littlechild thinks it will. Once competition
from new gas stations, Nuclear Electric and imports from France and Scotland
is included, the duopoly's share of generating capacity will fall to under
50 per cent.
Too optimistic
However, it would be wrong to be too optimistic. Nuclear Electric, gas
stations and imported electricity may dent the duopoly's market power, but
not by much given that they do not own marginal plant. And, though the new
competitors created after the duopoly's divestments will be in a better
position to influence prices since they will probably own marginal plant, it
remains to be seen whether two minnows will be sufficient to restrain the
market power of companies many times their size.
Why, then, did Prof Littlechild not insist on a much more ambitious disposal
programme? That would have broken the duopoly's power for good.
The answer is almost certainly that to do so would have required a referral
to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission. Not only would that have delayed
any benefit to consumers. Prof Littlechild, who must have been acutely aware
of ministers' recent refusal to back an MMC recommendation to break up
British Gas, could not have been sure of the outcome. An MMC referral would
also have postponed the government's plans to sell its remaining 40 per cent
stake in the generators.
There is something to be said for clinching a deal now rather than gambling
on a monopoly investigation. But Prof Littlechild has also gambled that the
sale of a handful of stations will be sufficient to curb the generators'
power. Customers can only hope his gamble pays off.
