FT  07 FEB 94 / Leading Article: EBRD's priorities
The last four years have demonstrated that establishing liberal capitalism
in eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union will be a task with many
interruptions. The fission of the Soviet empire has made the policy
environment much more complex. It has exposed a sharp economic downturn, and
a kaleidoscopic diversity of regional structures.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development was set up in 1991 to
assist post-communist transformation. But on this unfamiliar terrain, it has
seemed too cumbersome to play an effective role. Mr Jacques de Larosiere,
who took over last autumn following the resignation of Mr Jacques Attali,
has recognised the bank's organisational shortcomings, and taken steps to
remedy them.
The latest move to increase EBRD staff in its offices outside London,
following the operational streamlining announced in November, goes in the
right direction. Deploying in the field sufficient numbers of high-grade
employees with a talent for channelling the EBRD's funds and expertise
towards potential customers is an obvious priority.
Hiring more young deal-makers with on-the-ground knowledge should allow the
EBRD to compete more successfully with western merchant banks offering
advice and loans to the private sector in former communist countries. At the
very least, the EBRD's fees can be expected to be less than those of Wall
Street and City rivals. More generally, decentralisation should allow the
bank to gear its activities more closely to countries' varying needs.
At the helm of a bank with 56 public sector shareholders, Mr de Larosiere
must serve many masters. He cannot avoid dashing some expectations. The
EBRD's purpose is neither philosophical nor charitable. It must offer its
shareholders a return on its Ecu10bn of subscribed capital. The bank was
widely criticised last year for slow disbursement of funds, and has since
accelerated distribution of loans and equity. Yet the EBRD's recent request
for compensation over its payment of Dollars 30m for a 20 per cent stake in
the Czech national airline underlines how judgments can come unstuck. The
EBRD's start-up activities may lead to a greater degree of write-offs than
revealed hitherto. Up to now, Mr de Larosiere's approach has shown the right
mix of flair and commonsense. To assure the bank's future, he will also
need, during the next few years, to show results.
