FT  15 SEP 94 / Survey of Northern Ireland (2): A puzzle for the economists
 -Prolonged peace could bring a 'peace dividend' - or, some warn, a 'peace
deficit' / The Northern Irish economy is recovering faster than the British
economy as a whole
It is probably not surprising that peace should be as divisive amongst
Northern Ireland's economists as 25 years of violence has been amongst the
population at large. The 'issue' in Northern Irish economic circles at the
moment is the impact on the economy of a prolonged, hopefully indefinite,
period of peace. It is best summed up by the question: 'Is there going to be
a peace dividend or a peace deficit?'
There are some facts about the situation accepted by both sides in the
debate, including the fact that the Northern Irish economy has been buffered
from the worst of the recent recession by a Pounds 3bn to Pounds 4bn a year
subsidy from the British Exchequer.
It is also accepted that the Northern Irish economy is recovering faster
than the British economy as a whole. This is particularly obvious in key
measures such as Northern Irish production output and manufacturing
industries output, which, on an indexed basis, have been ahead of Britain
since mid-1990.
Although unemployment in Northern Ireland remains the highest in Britain, at
just under 13 per cent, employment has remained stable since 1990, despite a
significant decline in Britain.
In fact, looking back, it is debatable whether Northern Ireland had a
recession at all. If you take a decline in GDP over two successive quarters
as a definition of a recession, then it definitely did not have one.
However, what economists do not agree on is that peace will benefit the
economy and support the recovery.
Dr Graham Gudgin of the Northern Ireland Economic Research Centre is one of
the doubters - 'security-related expenditure accounts for about one third of
the Pounds 4bn annual subvention . . . there is a huge question mark as to
whether the north would be allowed to keep that money if peace broke out.'
The possible benefits to the Northern Irish economy of increased tourism and
other aspects of peace, would not outweigh the effect of losing the subsidy,
he believes.
Up to 20,000 well-paid jobs in the security forces and related areas could
be lost, predicts Dr Gudgin. The type of jobs that are supposed to replace
them, particularly in areas such as tourism, will be relatively low-paid, he
points out.
The government, not surprisingly, is much more positive and the Minister of
State at Northern Ireland's Department of Economic Development, Mr Tim
Smith, has cited unpublished research showing that 'over a number of years'
the net effect of peace will beneficial in job terms.
A similar stance has been taken by the Confederation of British Industry in
Northern Ireland, which estimates that job growth through inward investment
will quadruple from about 500 per year to 2,000 over a two-to-three year
period, while perhaps another 70,000 jobs will be created in the tourism
industry.
One economist who is very positive about the impact of peace is Mr Douglas
Hamilton, who works with the Government policy advisory group, the Northern
Ireland Economic Council.
Mr Hamilton believes there would be a tremendous boost to industry from
operating in an environment not tempered by a political climate of violence
and conflict.
'The troubles did not really lead to companies pulling out, but to a
situation where they do not operate under normal conditions,' he claims.
Mr Hamilton also believes that there would be pressure on the British
government to let the Northern Irish economy down gently, by phasing-out the
payment gradually and creating a reconstruction or redevelopment fund.
Although the British government has not committed itself to such a fund,
there have already been suggestions of increased aid from the United States
and the European Union.
The US is considering donating up to Dollars 150m over two to three years
through the International Fund for Ireland. The fund was established by the
British and Irish governments in 1986 and raises money in North America and
Europe for projects that encourage reconciliation and economic regeneration.
The president of the European Commission, Mr Jacques Delors, has said the
European Union may increase the size of the donation it makes to the
International Fund.
There will be fundamental changes in the Northern Irish economy, which has
many structural weaknesses, if peace becomes permanent, believes Mr
Hamilton.
Paradoxically, it was the structural weakness that led to the admirable
performance of the Northern Irish economy during the recent recession,
according to Mr Hamilton. The under-developed nature of Northern Ireland's
financial services industry and the dynamics of its property market, with no
appreciable shortage of private sector housing, meant that the boom in
personal credit that led to the British recession, bypassed Northern
Ireland. The absence of speculative pressure on house prices meant that
people in Northern Ireland had nothing like the level of personal debt that
people in the South of England had when high interest rates hit at the end
of the 1980s.
The distorted nature of Northern Ireland's employment patterns, with the
government employing roughly 200,000 out of a total workforce of about
800,000, had a strong buffering effect also, explains Mr Hamilton.
In addition, the exceptionally high level of grants that have been available
in Northern Ireland since the start of the troubles - up to 40 per cent of
capital expenditure - meant that Northern Irish companies went into
recessions very well capitalised and with less debt than most British
competitors.
The strong performance of Northern Ireland's manufacturing industry is not
merely accidental, points out Mr Gudgin. As a sector, it is less dependent
on the British market than most companies in the UK.
Sales to Britain only account for one third of output, compared to two
thirds for most British industry. In addition, wage levels in Northern
Ireland have fallen by about 10 per cent below British levels in the last
ten years, due mostly to unemployment and the end of collective wage
bargaining, says Dr Gudgin.
One area in which Dr Gudgin and Mr Hamilton do concur is in their caution
when it comes to predictions for the Northern Irish economy. In the absence
of any appreciable peace dividend, both economists find it hard to accept
that the North will out-perform Britain in the long term.
'Northern Ireland follows the British cycle,' explains Dr Gudgin, but he
adds: 'If wage advantage and other advantages can be maintained, there is
evidence that there will be something of a long-term improvement in the
competitive position.'
