FT  15 FEB 94 / Councils warn of Pounds 1bn reform cost
Reorganising local government in rural England will create costs that could
not be repaid until 2004, the Society of County Treasurers warned yesterday.
It estimates that the costs of making the change from the present two-tier
system of counties and districts to all-purpose unitary authorities will be
about Pounds 1bn - equivalent to about Pounds 27m for each county.
Using the Local Government Commission's most optimistic estimates for annual
savings once the reorganisation has been carried out - Pounds 4.5m for each
county - this would mean that the costs would take until 2004 to repay. The
new structures are supposed to be introduced in most areas in either 1996 or
1997.
Authorities will meet transitional costs by borrowing from the government.
The society says that on the assumption that the interest rate is 6 per
cent, this would push final repayment back from the financial year 2002-03
to 2004-05. But if savings were only Pounds 2m per county area, repayment
would be delayed from 2010-11 until about 2020.
The treasurers also predict serious problems in Somerset, where all the
county's Conservative MPs oppose plans for reorganisation. Sir John Banham,
chairman of the commission, has proposed that the county should be split
into three unitary authorities, with the long-term financial impact being
anything from an annual saving of Pounds 3m to annual costs of Pounds 2m.
Mr David Nicholson, the Conservative MP for Taunton who is one of the most
vehement opponents, said: 'This is yet further evidence that this whole
upheaval in local government will cost council taxpayers more.'
Assuming that savings are in the middle of this range at Pounds 1m a year,
the treasurers say the cost of interest payments on loans to pay for the
transitional costs would exceed the savings.
The Association of District Councils, which strongly supports the creation
of unitary authorities, said that savings could be found by selling
redundant properties, and predicted overall savings from the review of
Pounds 16m a year after five years, once the new structure was established.
It said the Audit Commission had valued county councils' total stock of
property at Pounds 40bn, and transitional costs could be met by realising
just 1 per cent of this.
However, the treasurers do not believe that these sales will be possible.
Their report says: 'Where authorities choose to rationalise accommodation -
perhaps to a central location - history shows that the costs of new
headquarters (probably in the main population centres) tends to exceed any
realisable sales receipts as only the least suitable, marginal accommodation
would be released.'
Mr Robert Jones, the Conservative chairman of the Commons environment
committee, and a former vice-president of the Association of District
Councils, yesterday added to calls for the review to be radically altered.
Writing in House Magazine, which is distributed to MPs, he says: 'My advice
to ministers would be to relax the timetable and to ask the commission -
under a new, less bombastic and more listening chairman - to examine only
those areas where there is clear discontent with the present structure or
boundaries.'
