FT  27 JUL 94 / Leading Article: Old Lady at three hundred
At 300 years of age the old lady of Threadneedle Street has a new vitality.
Mr Eddie George, the governor, enjoys a public influence over British
monetary policy unequalled at least since the days of Montagu Norman. The
Bank must show it deserves the position history has given it.
Over the half century since its nationalisation, the Bank has been a silent
accomplice to a fraud. That can be the only just description for a 30-fold
reduction in the value of its liabilities. It is little wonder that
governments have lost so much of their credibility. Not only have they
perpetrated theft on a scale unmatched by any private fraudster, but full
employment, for which the value of the pound was sacrificed, has been
further from achievement in recent years than in any previous period, with
the arguable exception of the 1930s.
Fortunately, recognition that this has been a mistake is now widespread.
Chastened by a series of disasters that ended with sterling's summary
expulsion from the ERM in September 1992, the government has handed an
exceptional degree of influence over monetary policy to the Bank. Armed with
the 1-4 per cent inflation target, the Bank's inflation report and, most
important, with the publication of minutes of meetings between himself and
the chancellor of the exchequer, the governor has, if not the power to
decide, at least the power to destroy Mr Clarke's credibility.
Mr George must now prove he has both the courage to use his influence and
the wisdom to use it wisely. He does have the right instincts. In Mr Rupert
Pennant Rea, a controversial appointment as deputy governor, he also seems
to have the right assistant. Unlike his boss, the deputy is interested in
management. By focusing the bank's structure on the tasks of monetary and
financial stability, Mr Pennant Rea has helped provide the appropriate
framework for a re-invigorated Bank.
For all that, the Old Lady is assured of no comfortable future. The quality
of its judgement of monetary policy is on test as it has not been since the
early 1930s. Under the cover of secrecy, it has avoided blame for the
disasters of recent decades. That is a luxury it no longer enjoys.
Even the Bank's role in supervision is on trial. This is not only a question
of recovering its reputation after the harsh report by Lord Justice Bingham
on its handling of the BCCI closure. It is also one of whether hands-on
banking supervision is desirable at all.
As Mr Donald Brash, governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, has noted
in a recent article in the FT, 'depositors might well argue that, since the
public sector established the rules within which banks must operate, and had
access to vastly more detailed information on bank financial strength than
was available to the public, the public sector has a very strong moral
obligation to protect depositors in the event of a bank failure.' It is
partly for this reason that his country has moved to market-based banking
supervision. The Bank of England argues that New Zealand is a free-rider on
the supervisory activities of others. The question remains, however, whether
supervision improves the safety of banks, without also increasing the claims
of depositors upon the supervisor.
The Bank may even find itself swallowed up within what it seems bound to
regard as a premature move to economic and monetary union within the
European Union. That judgement would almost certainly be right, but it would
still be a mistake to assume such a move cannot occur this decade. Would the
UK have the nerve to stay outside? If not, the Bank of England might have
gained only an Indian summer of visible influence over monetary policy. Be
it short or not, let it ensure this is a bright one.
