FT  18 MAR 94 / Technology: Counting the cost - As electricity deregulation
begins in the UK next month, David Lascelles looks at a new generation of
meters
In a tastefully converted barn at Odiham in Hampshire, a computer screen
shows the map of a residential area north of Bristol. At the touch of a
button, the screen prints up real-time details of electricity consumption in
any of 30 houses in the area - not just voltage, but wattage and whether the
electricity being used is inductive or reactive.
More than that, the computer can print out the consumption record for
several days in 11-minute blocks, providing a detailed history of each
household's life patterns (the exact identity of each household is not
disclosed during demonstrations).
The experiment is being conducted by a new company called Remote Metering
Systems (RMS) in conjunction with SWEB, the Bristol utility, to test a new
generation of metering and communications technology. Each house has a novel
type of electronic meter with a communication device which sends messages
along the electric wires.
This technology is being developed in anticipation of the deregulation of
the electricity market which starts this April and will be completed in
1998. By then, every household in the country will be able to buy its
electricity wherever it wants.
Metering is a key part of the revolution because it will provide the means
to manage an electricity system with multiple suppliers to millions of
households. The electricity will still be delivered to each household down
the wires of the local regional electricity company (REC). But each supplier
will need to know how much power to put into the system to meet customer
needs.
Electricity is already being sold in 30-minute lots to big industrial
customers. Households will probably deal in four-hour lots, but the new
meters will still have to measure their consumption by the half hour because
that is how electricity is traded in the wholesale market.
RMS was formed at the end of 1992 by six electricity companies headed by
Scottish Hydro-Electric and a group of experts in high-speed mains
signalling technology. 'All this has vast implications for the management of
the electricity system, distribution costs and households,' says Nigel
Brown, managing director.
If the Bristol experiment is a success, RMS will install several thousand
remote metering systems in a selected area of Scotland, and commercial
production of the technology will begin. But it is not the only experiment
going on.
Southern Electric, based outside Maidenhead, in Berkshire, and Scottish
Power, have teamed up with Itron, a US company, to adapt 500 meters in both
southern England and Scotland so that they can be read remotely every 30
minutes. Instead of using the mains, these meters will transmit their
signals via satellite and telephone links to computers at the two companies'
headquarters.
Although testing the technology is a key aim of the experiment, one of the
main purposes, according to Stuart Broomfield, Southern's director of
customer services, is to see whether it is commercially feasible. That
points to the real issue: cost.
New electronic meters cost more than Pounds 50 each. Although this cost
would, in the first instance, be borne by the electricity company (household
meters belong to the local distributor), it would ultimately be passed on to
the consumer in the form of higher electricity prices. But why should an REC
want to pay for everyone to have a new meter unless it saw benefits for
itself, possibly in the form of automatic meter reading, or better load
management?
Alternatively, a householder might want to buy a new meter in order to be
able to shop around for electricity. But would he spend, say, Pounds 70 in
order to achieve a 5 per cent saving on a Pounds 300 bill? Traditional
meters cost only Pounds 20 and last 60 years, so the motive to change has to
be strong.
Andrew Forrest, marketing manager for GEC Meters, says: 'Research bears out
that the number of customers seriously interested in saving money is going
to be less than 10 per cent.' GEC is trying to get round the cost problem by
marketing an attachment which can read a standard meter and transmit the
information back to base. This would cost about Pounds 30-Pounds 40,
depending on whether it sent its messages by wire or radio.
Schlumberger Industries, another meter manufacturer, is stressing the
cost-saving aspects of new meters. 'We look at this very much as part of
revenue-collection for suppliers and cost messages for consumers,' says Tom
Mahoney, managing director.
A further cost is the transmission of the data. RMS says its form of power
line communication system costs about Pounds 12 to install, in addition to
the meter.
But Forrest is doubtful about power line technology: 'It works out more
expensive than you'd expect, and it's fraught with technical difficulties.'
He favours the telephone system. Brown agrees that his technology may be
more expensive than, for example, radio, but he emphasises the value of a
two-way communication system which can not only read the meter but also give
it instructions.
The electronic link could be used to provide alarm services, or enable
electricity suppliers to offer interruptible supplies to consumers who were
willing to have inessential equipment switched off at peak hours in exchange
for lower tariffs.
All forms of meters would also enable householders to have live meters on
the kitchen wall showing exactly how much electricity they are using at any
time.
At the moment, though, the market is at a standstill because all potential
purchasers of new meters are waiting to see the rules of the pricing game.
These are being determined by Stephen Littlechild, the electricity industry
regulator, who is conducting a review of electricity distribution pricing
which will be completed in the summer.
In a discussion document on metering two years ago, he hinted that the
review might produce changes in the electricity pricing formula to enable
electricity companies to recoup the cost of installing new meters.
Littlechild believes modern meters hold the key to a competitive market.
