FT  08 JUN 94 / Government to fund rise in students
The government is funding an 8.6 per cent expansion in the number of
students enrolling at English further education colleges next year, which
already stands at 2.75m.
The announcement by the Further Education Funding Council for England, the
quango which controls budgets for the sector, signals the government's
continued determination to cut the number of 16-year-olds dropping out of
education.
Colleges were removed from local education authority control and set up as
independent corporations in April last year. This is the second full year of
funding from the council. It intends to direct funding towards specific
courses next year, after it has consulted local employers.
The total number of students in the sector - which covers vocational
education and adult education, A-levels and some degrees - is planned to
increase from the equivalent of 863,000 full-time students this year to
934,000 next year.
But officials believe colleges will overshoot targets, and come closer to
recruiting 950,000, as any extra recruits will attract extra 'demand-led'
funding. Total funds are Pounds 2.4bn, a 6 per cent increase on 1993-94.
If part-time students are included, total enrolment at the colleges could
exceed 3m.
'Payment for results' has been introduced to the new funding system, which
penalises colleges if students drop out of courses early or fail them.
Colleges also now have a greater incentive to recruit part-time students,
after complaints from employers that colleges were preoccupied last year
with recruiting 'cheaper' full-time A-level students.
Under the complex methodology adopted by the council, funding is provided
for 'units' of education which the college provides. Each unit is supposed
to be of equal cost. Thus a two-year BTec national diploma is worth 168
units, while a BTec first diploma, usually completed in one year, is worth
only 84 units. An A-level, normally taught in a classroom and therefore
cheaper to provide, is worth 56 units.
Expensive courses which require workshops or laboratories are worth more
units. The council believes it has valued units this year in such a way that
colleges will receive funding for the precise cost of each course. Units are
lost if students drop out or fail, and added if they pass their
qualifications.
Officials said they would consult local Training and Enterprise Councils and
local employers to see if colleges should be stimulated to offer particular
courses. This could be done next year by allocating courses extra units and
making them more profitable.
Ms Ruth Gee, chief executive of the Association for Colleges, which
represents college principals, said the announcement was 'very promising',
with 86 per cent of colleges receiving the funding they had requested in
full.
She added that the plans to encourage particular courses, coupled with the
competitiveness white paper published two weeks ago, marked 'a shift in
regional policy, and almost the reintroduction of sub-regional planning'.
