FT  10 AUG 94 / Telephone sales of life insurance set for reform
A new regime to regulate the sale of life insurance and pension policies
over the telephone came a step closer yesterday, as financial watchdogs
began sifting through responses to a consultation exercise launched last
month.
While some aspects of the discussion paper will attract wide support, there
is likely to be concern among some life companies at the proposed ban on
offering for sale over the telephone anything less than the range provided
by agents.
A number of large life insurance companies are looking at telephone selling
of financial services, which they see as a low-cost distribution channel.
The consultation was ordered by Lautro, the life industry regulator, but the
analysis of responses will be passed to the Personal Investment Authority,
the new watchdog to protect the private investor.
The PIA board will address telephone marketing later this year, as part of a
broader study of how to regulate retail financial services as technological
advances are made.
Lautro's consultation paper admits that selling over the telephone is not
conducive to providing advice across a large product range, especially where
some policies are complicated and can involve several different options.
But it says there is no question of life companies being allowed to offer
fewer products in telesales than they do through sales agents who operate on
the basis of face-to-face interviews with clients.
This could add significantly to the length of telephone calls with clients,
and could mean that a sales agent might have to conclude a long call by
suggesting a face-to-face meeting to talk about a more complex product which
could not easily be explained on the phone.
GA Life is among the companies already selling simple, single-premium
investment products, but not its full range of policies, by phone. The
company said yesterday that the way this issue was handled would determine
how successful telephone marketing proved to be.
Life companies are more likely to support other proposals in the paper,
including the suggestions that all telephone operators should be trained as
sales agents, and that all telephone conversations between sales staff and
customers should be recorded.
A tape recording of the conversation would mean that it should be clear if
the sale had been conducted properly.
