FT  30 AUG 94 / Fleets fight in over-fished waters: Fishing disputes have
risen up the diplomatic agenda. FT reporters examine the conflicts worldwide
Ten Taiwanese fishing vessels impounded by Indonesia, British fishing nets
slashed in the Bay of Biscay, Japanese fishermen shot at by a Russian
gunboat, and an Icelandic trawler and Norwegian coastguard vessel exchanging
fire - in the past month, fish have been prompting diplomatic incidents and
this shows no sign of ending soon.
Fears are growing that over-fishing is depleting even the most abundant
species, while governments have so far failed to agree on ways to halt
disputes. Canada, which has suffered some of the sharpest recent declines in
its fish stocks, told a United Nations conference this month in New York
that the oceans were 'in crisis'. However the conference, attended by more
than 90 governments, ended on Friday night without consensus on how to
conserve the seas' resources.
Nearly 30 separate conflicts have flared in the past year over rights to
fishing. The catalyst for the disputes is that the amounts of fish caught
appear to be declining in the past few years, following four decades of
explosive expansion.
According to the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation, catches have risen
more than fourfold from 1950 to a peak of more than 90m tonnes in 1989. But
although precise figures are hard to establish, there are signs that
worldwide catch levels have since dropped by several per cent.
That halting of the industry's expansion, many fear, reflects the growing
scarcity of many types of fish. Environmental groups paint a vision of the
oceans in the next century as a desert. Western countries may see staples of
the kitchen cupboard such as tuna become expensive delicacies, they warn.
Asian and African governments are also becoming alarmed: fish accounts for
between a fifth and a third of the animal-derived protein in their
countries' diets, UN figures suggest, compared to only several per cent of
those in Western countries.
Scarcity of some species has forced fishermen and consumers to turn to new
types of fish. According to Greenpeace, while catch levels rose by a third
during the 1980s, almost all of that rise came from just five species:
Alaskan pollack, Chilean jack mackerel, Peruvian anchovies, and Japanese and
South American pilchards.
The huge increase in the catch of fish since the 1950s has been driven
partly by new technology. Fishing fleets home in on schools of fish using
sonar and radar. Winches and motors to haul drift nets, which can contain
more than 40,000 pounds of fish, have become more powerful, while nets have
become longer, with the inclusion of nylon fibres which reduce tearing. Nets
now frequently have mouths tens of metres wide, and can stretch for hundreds
of metres.
But environmentalists also attribute some of the increase in catch levels to
the changes in international fishing regulations more than a decade ago. The
1982 Law of the Sea pushed the boundaries of national waters outwards from
12 miles offshore to 200 miles.
The new rules, which brought more than three quarters of the world's fish
within national waters, was followed by a doubling of the size of the
world's fishing fleets, according to the UNFAO. Overcapacity - the total
number of vessels is estimated at some three million - has pushed many parts
of the industry into loss. According to the UNFAO, fishing fleets spent some
Dollars 92bn in 1989. Revenue figures are hard to establish with precision,
but UN figures and industry analysts suggest that they amounted only to some
Dollars 70bn.
Much of the shortfall is plugged by billions of pounds in government
subsidies. European Union countries alone spend nearly Dollars 600m a year,
according to UN estimates. Countries fear that if they surrender national
fishing rights they could lose tens of thousands of jobs. There is no
shortage of examples to fuel their anxiety. At least 20,000 people working
in the traditional cod fisheries of Newfoundland have been put out of work
since the Canadian government banned fishing in 1992 in an attempt to boost
depleted stocks. The government has since paid more than CDollars 1bn
(Pounds 400m) to support these communities.
The bitterest international rows in the past year have focused on
'migrating' fish such as tuna and swordfish which travel thousands of
kilometres through the high seas to feed and spawn. The past year's disputes
have also including rights to 'straddling' fish such as cod, herring and
some types of squid, which migrate between coastal and international waters.
Mr Satya Nandan, Fiji ambassador to the UN and chairman of the conference,
said last week that the required backing of two-thirds of the delegates
should be achievable as 'the overwhelming majority want a binding solution'.
Governments meet again in six months time. If the frequency of conflicts
stays at its present level, they will have every incentive to overcome those
differences.
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Troubled waters: fishing disputes, clashes, poaching and piracy over
                 the past year
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
1.   US / China: Former threatens latter with possible trade sanctions
     over failure to bring fishermen into line with United Nations
     driftnet ban
2.   Alaska: US fishermen set up blockade in support of demands for
     greater compensation following poor pink-salmon seasons due to
     the Exxon Valdez oil-spill disaster
3.   Ecuador: Conflicts within national industry between commercial
     operations and traditional small-scale fishing
4.   Caribbean: Poaching by the region's local industry and illegal
     fishing by Japan, Russia, Taiwan, US and Venezuela
5.   Patagonian Shelf: Illegal fishing by Taiwanese and South Koreans.
     Argentinian gunboat sinks Taiwanese vessel after hot pursuit
6.   South Georgia: Illegal fishing by Russians and Chileans in 200-
     mile zone
7.   US / France: Former accuses later of refusing to honour
     international agreements to conserve bluefin tuna
8.   Flamish Cap / Grandbanks: Canada arrests the Kristina Logos,
     with Portugese crew sailing under Panamanian flag, for fishing
     banned sizes of flounder, cod, plaice and redfish
9.   ICCAT area: Stock depletion from over-fishing by ICCAT members
     and from illegal fishing by non-parties to ICCAT, the
     international agreement to protect Atlantic tuna stocks
10.  Senegal: Local industry protests that it is threatened by
     illegal fishing by European Union vessels
11.  Ireland: Irish accuse Spain of illegal fishing in European Union
     conservation zone
12.  Bay of Biscay: British, French and Spanish fishermen in dispute,
     sometimes violently, over methods used to catch tuna
13.  Channel Islands / Isles of Scilly: Disputes between British and
     French lead to French trawlers' being excluded from rich lobster
     and other shellfish grounds
14.  Scotland: Fishermen attack Russian trawler, destroying Pounds
     250,000-worth of cod
15.  Smutthulet area: Iceland and Norway in dispute over Artic rights
     in this so-called Escape Hole region outside control of Norway
     and Russia
16.  BIOT area: Japanese longliner caught fishing illegally in British
     Indian Ocean Territory
17.  Kerala: Traditional small-scale fishing under threat from area's
     emerging industrialised operations
18.  Bay of Bengal: Pirate attacks on shrimp trawlers
19.  Straits of Malacca: Malaysia confiscates illegal surimi trawlers
20.  China / Vietnam: Long-standing dispute over rights exacerbated by
     Vietnamese arrests of Chinese vessels. Each accuses the other of
     illegal fishing
21.  Indonesia / Taiwan: 10 Taiwanese boats with 100 crew detained for
     allegedly fishing with improper licenses
22.  China / Taiwan: Poaching and piracy by both. Reports of violent
     clashes leading to injuries and sometimes deaths
23.  Peanut Hole: Russia fires at Japanese vessels for encroaching
     into its Exclusive Economic Zone
24.  New Zealand: Dispute with foreign fleets over bluefin stocks,
     especially over Japanese fishing
25.  Chatham Rise: New Zealand protests against illegal fishing,
     especially off Chatham Rise. Also seizes Ukranian and Russian
     vessels in hoki fishery
26.  North Pacific: Six North Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission
     vessels sighted driftnetting illegally
27.  Bering Sea: Poaching by non-parties to international agreements.
     South Korea and Taiwan criticised
28.  Donut Hole: Russia accuses US of illegal fishing in Bering Sea.
     China, Japan and South Korea also reportedly involved in illegal
     operations
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
