FT  19 APR 94 / Technology: Battling the weak link - Poor R&amp;D in Japanese
drugs companies is limiting overseas expansion
International expansion is the proclaimed policy of most of Japan's top
drugs groups. The strategy is motivated by a desire to reduce their
dependency on a domestic market that is under attack by a rolling barrage of
healthcare reforms.
But the ability of Japanese groups to compete effectively in world
pharmaceuticals may well be undermined by structural weaknesses in their
drugs research and development capabilities.
There is some good basic research in Japan. The country's expertise in
allergies, asthma, antibiotics and cholesterol-lowering drugs is widely
recognised. However, it lags badly behind the US and Europe in the
increasingly important field of biotechnology.
'Biotechnology will have an important role in contributing to drug
discovery,' says Teruhisa Noguchi, executive vice-president of R&amp;D at
Yamanouchi. 'But Japan is not very strong in biotechnology. We are sending
many of our young scientists to the US to study and then bringing their
experience back. But the relationship is still one of American teacher and
Japanese pupil.'
Masaji Ohno, managing director of R&amp;D at Eisai, agrees: 'We are well behind,
but by the beginning of the next century, we may be able to create some
original work.'
A few Japanese groups have attempted to remedy their deficiencies by forming
links with western biotechnology groups. These have not always been
successful.
Yoshihiko Baba, director of Sankyo's research institute, describes the
modest achievements of his company's links with US and British biotechnology
boutiques: 'To be honest they did not really thrive. I suppose it is partly
because the chances of success were not very high in the first place. But we
learnt you have to make sure the human side of the relationship works and
that both sides need a financial interest in making the alliance a success.'
Hiroyki Nagasako, director for corporate planning at Daiichi, adds that it
is also necessary to have in-house expertise to choose the right companies
and manage the relationships. 'We do not have these skills. It is an
expensive business and you can waste a lot of money,' he says.
Japan's weakness in biotechnology would not be so important if the drugs
groups' traditional R&amp;D were stronger. The main problem is lack of
investment. The industry spends a reasonable proportion of sales on R&amp;D.
Fujisawa invests 14.8 per cent of its sales, Takeda 8.2 per cent, Sankyo 9.6
per cent, Eisai 13.2 per cent, Shionogi 11.8 per cent and Daiichi 12.3 per
cent. But because the groups' sales base is so small, the actual amounts
available for R&amp;D remain pitiful compared with western organisations. Only
one Japanese company, Takeda Chemical, is rated in the world top 20 drugs
groups by sales, and only four Japanese pharmaceuticals companies are in the
top 30.
Takeda spent about Dollars 600m (Pounds 410m) last year on R&amp;D, and not all
on pharmaceuticals. That compares with Roche of Switzerland, which invested
Dollars 1.2bn, and Glaxo of the UK which spent Dollars 1.1bn. Sankyo
invested Dollars 375m, while Eisai, Shionogi and Daiichi all spent less than
Dollars 300m.
Moreover, Japanese companies' R&amp;D funds are not always spent productively.
In the past, much of the money was allocated to developing 'me-too'
compounds that cannot be marketed internationally. This is partly the result
of the system of biennial price cuts set up by the Japanese ministry of
health.
Kunio Takeda, president of Takeda Chemical, explains that in order to
counter the cuts: 'Manufacturers resorted to launching modified
(non-innovative) compounds to conserve development costs and time. Such
policies are likely to damage the industry.'
This syndrome led to a massive rise in the number of new chemical entities
developed in Japan in recent years. The increase was mistaken by some
observers as an explosion in innovative research. Between 1975 and 1989,
Japanese companies launched 212 new chemical entities. But only 42 were sold
in five or more important overseas markets. Just four Japanese drugs were in
the world's top 50 medicines sold in 1990, according to Donald Macarthur,
author of Japanese Pharmaceutical Expansion into Europe, a Financial Times
management report.
'Although the number of new chemical entities coming out of Japan has
expanded rapidly in recent years, most were 'me-toos' - without any great
additional benefit in safety and efficacy. The Japanese companies have real
problems selling most of their compounds overseas,' says Jacques Racloz,
president of Sandoz Pharmaceuticals in Japan.
The 'me-too' syndrome may be changing, however. 'Japanese opinion formers
say we have to create new original compounds - that is the only way to
overcome the price-cutting system. Innovative compounds won't be subject to
the discounts that lead to the price cuts,' says Ohno.
Hitoshi Oyashu, managing director of R&amp;D at Fujisawa, agrees: 'Like it or
not, 'me-too' drugs will no longer prosper - either in Japan or
internationally. We have to adopt a high-risk, high-reward strategy.'
Nevertheless, in spite of the rhetoric of innovation, Japanese companies'
discovery efforts remain woefully unfocused. While most European groups of a
comparable size are narrowing their attention to three or four therapeutic
areas, many Japanese groups remain committed to a large number.
Baba disputes that this lack of focus is a weakness.
'There are two ways of conducting discovery. Either you focus from the very
start or you look at a wide range of areas and then concentrate. We follow
the second school. We like to have as wide a range of leads as possible.
It's very risky to concentrate on only a few fields,' he says.
Even when Japanese drugs groups do have good compounds capable of competing
internationally, they lack development resources overseas to exploit them
properly. Daiichi, for example, has only 11 development scientists in the
UK, none in Germany and four in the US.
Sankyo is one of the most advanced groups in this field, with about 15
development staff in the US and 150 based in Munich. The company is
conducting clinical trials on an anti-depressant in Germany independently of
Japan.
In the past, Japanese groups have missed the opportunity of using their
breakthrough compounds to create an international development and marketing
network. Rather than using the prospects of large sales from a breakthrough
drug to construct an international presence, as SmithKline French did with
its top-selling drug Tagamet in the 1980s, the Japanese tend to license the
medicine to other groups.
Sankyo, Japan's biggest drugs group, licensed Mevalotin, a cholesterol
medicine which during 1992 was the world's 18th best-selling medicine, in
most countries and so has only limited international sales. Fujisawa says
its experience with the antibiotic Cefamezin, sold in 70 countries, was
'extremely painful'. The highly successful drug generated limited income for
the company because lack of an international marketing organisation meant it
had to license the drug out.
One route used by Japanese companies to by-pass this problem is contract
research organisations. Mitsuhiko Sentoku, board director of planning and
development at Daiichi, explains that Cravit, an antibacterial agent, and
one of the group's most promising drugs, is being developed by contract
research organisations in Europe.
A few companies are now trying to use their innovative compounds to begin
building an international development and marketing capability. Fujisawa,
for example, is attempting to develop its immuno-suppressant, Prograf,
internationally at its own facilities in Chicago and Munich.
The future for most Japanese pharmaceuticals companies remains grim.
Analysts forecast the domestic market will be stagnant for the rest of the
decade. The ability of Japanese drugs companies to export their way out of
difficulties is restricted. And with a lack of innovative compounds and
limited international infrastructure, Japan's global reach in
pharmaceuticals looks likely to remain severely limited.
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
               Japanese R&amp;D spending in pharmaceuticals
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Yen bn                1989    1990    1991    1992    1993
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Takeda Chemical       48.6    49.5    55.4    59.7    62.2
Fujisawa              24.4    27.6    29.3    37.4    39.8
Sankyo                24.8    26.3    29.1    35.5    38.5
Yamanouchi            22.2    26.2    28.3    32.0    36.0
Eisai                 27.4    29.4    30.2    30.5    31.0
Shionogi              22.7    24.5    28.0    29.0    28.3
Daiichi               18.5    21.0    22.7    24.3    26.0
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Lehman Brothers and Financial Times
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
