FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (30): Organs of democracy - The press
flourishes in a babel of languagues
About 20m newspapers are sold in India every day. This may seem small in
relation to a population of some 900m, but it is still a lot of newspapers,
and the total is growing.
The market is diverse, intensely competitive and, for successful
proprietors, highly profitable.
In Maharashtra, the state of which Bombay is the capital, 62 daily
newspapers are published, with a total circulation of more than 3m,
according to Indian Newspaper Society figures. More than half of these
publications are in Marathi, the most commonly spoken local language, but
there are also dailies in Gujarati, Hindi, Sindhi and Urdu as well as
English. A dozen English-language dailies are available in New Delhi.
Overall, India boasts 369 daily newspapers in a total of 18 languages. Add
to that a vibrant magazine market: the fortnightly India Today, for example,
publishes editions in five languages with a total circulation of around 1m.
Although the biggest selling newspapers are mostly in local languages, those
in English tend to attract more advertising and thus to be more profitable.
Increasingly, the trend has been for one English-language newspaper to win
dominance in each individual city, and thus to be a strong cash producer for
its owner.
The Times of India, for example, commands the market in Bombay but its
desperate efforts have failed to dislodge the Hindustan Times from the top
position in New Delhi. The Deccan Chronicle controls Hyderabad, the Deccan
Herald dominates in Bangalore, and the Hindu in Madras. Calcutta has seen a
fierce battle between the Statesman and the Telegraph, with the latter
recently seeming to emerge on top.
Cutting across the trend in general interest dailies, newspaper groups have
been seeking to establish broader national markets for business dailies.
Most successful has been the Economic Times, published like the Times of
India by by Bennett, Coleman &amp; Co. It prints in six centres and has an
aggressive pricing policy.
Some newspaper editors feel, however, that the American-style trend towards
dominance of single newspapers in cities has been at the expense of quality
and independence. Increasingly, the proprietors style themselves as the
editors of their newspapers. Nevertheless, many newspapers are full of
irreverent comment and incisive reporting.
Confidence in the industry's prospects is underlined by the fact that new
publications are constantly being launched. Most recently, the Madras-based
Hindu has begun a business newspaper, Business Line, and Mr MJ Akbar,
formerly editor of the Telegraph, has founded the Asian Age, which has the
innovative twist of being printed in both Delhi and London.
Given this editorial and commercial vigour, it is surprising to find
sections of the Indian press so fearful about the possible lifting of a ban
on foreign companies owning equity in the Indian media. They are worried
that the Indian press will be swamped by foreigners and that Indian culture
and sovereignty will be undermined.
The issue has been stirred by the plans of several foreign groups to invest
in India. The Financial Times proposes to establish a joint venture with
Ananda Bazar, a Calcutta-based group which publishes the Business Standard
newspaper. Time Warner of the US wants to publish an Indian edition of Time
magazine in collaboration with Living Media, publisher of India Today.
However, all such proposals are on hold because of the ban on foreign
ownership imposed by prime minister Mr Jawaharlal Nehru in 1955. Mr PV
Narasimha Rao, the present prime minister, has indicated that he favours
lifting the ban in line with the government's liberalisation of other
industries. But he clearly wishes for a public debate to be played out
first.
Supporters of the ban see Indian politics rapidly being affected by foreign
interests if it is lifted. Frontline, a left-wing magazine, argued in
September that if foreign media were allowed entry, 'the propaganda role
played by the press in India will become much more emphasised, given the
ideological and political agenda of these powerful transnational interests'.
Although the government is seeking to keep the issue out of parliament on
the grounds that the ban was an executive decision, there has been lively
discussion in parliament. Mr Chandra Shekhar, a former prime minister, said
in August: 'The entry of foreign newspapers would strike at our
civilisation, our culture, our traditions, our politics, our freedom of
expression.'
Mr Jaswant Singh, deputy parliamentary leader of the opposition Bharatiya
Janata Party, wrote that foreign media 'cannot improve the quality of our
print media, our newspapers, our magazines, journals or periodicals in any
significant manner. They will, however, constrict the existing cultural
space of India.'
That the ruling Congress party was divided on the issue became clear in
August when Mr Chandulal Chandrakar, a former journalist who is now the
party's spokesman, said in parliament that 'if the foreign newspapers come
here there will be pressures on us every day. It is therefore my ardent plea
that there is no need to invite foreign newspapers and their proprietors to
India.'
However, Mr Chandrakar made an embarrassing about-face when he announced a
few days later that party committees studying the issue had determined that
foreign entry would do no harm. 'After careful and detailed study of the
newspaper scenario in the country and the changes in the environment it is
felt that the Indian press can successfully compete with the foreign press
and no-one should object to its entry slowly and gradually.'
Commentators who favour lifting the ban point out that foreign newspapers
are already freely available in India and that Indian newspapers make
liberal use of copy syndicated by foreign publications. Millions of Indians
tune in daily to Star Television, owned by Mr Rupert Murdoch, particularly
its Hindi language channel, Zee TV, of which Mr Murdoch owns half.
It is also argued that foreign companies could wait a long time to earn a
return on their investments given the already intense competition -
especially on price - in the Indian market.
However, emotional arguments stressing the specialness of the 'fourth
estate' have been stirred by the Indian media groups which feel vulnerable
to foreign entry.
Mr N J Nanporia, a veteran former newspaper editor, wrote in the Independent
that these arguments were essentially baseless. There had been, he said, a
'deliberate creation of a fear which would not otherwise exist'. The
suggestion that Indian culture was so fragile was a denigration, not a
defence, of India's tradition.
Mr Nanporia argued that the idea that the nation needed protection from a
free flow of information and opinions was the basis of the 1955 ban but was
incompatible with economic liberalisation.
Other commentators argue that Indian newspapers, which have argued for
liberalisation in other industries, should not seek protection for
themselves. Mr Sunil Sethi, a columnist, noted that foreign investment had
pushed Indian industry to compete. 'To now stand up and say that the advent
of foreign newspapers will subvert India's future is a huge betrayal of
national self-confidence or the spirit to excel. Who's afraid of
competition?'
