FT  04 FEB 94 / Iraq trial statements 'inaccurate'
A senior Whitehall official wrote inaccurate draft witness statements before
the Matrix Churchill trial under advice from government lawyers, the Scott
inquiry heard yesterday.
Mr Tony Steadman, former head of the Department of Trade and Industry's
export licensing unit, said that in July 1991 he had resisted advice from a
Customs investigator that he should downplay the extent of the government's
knowledge of Matrix Churchill's operations.
Mr Steadman said: 'I was unhappy about that because the intelligence we had
was greater than what was being said.'
Subsequently, however, Mr Steadman agreed to a request from a Treasury
solicitor that he delete a reference pointing to ministerial knowledge of
the military uses of export licences they were approving.
Questioned by Lord Justice Scott and his counsel Miss Presiley Baxendale QC,
he said that the statement with the deletions was inaccurate, but he had
agreed to them after assuming 'there must have been good reason for them'.
The final version of the witness statement had some of the deletions
reinserted after Mr Steadman had received different advice from a senior
lawyer acting for Customs.
The advice was that a witness statement which hinted at intelligence
knowledge of Matrix Churchill's operations would ensure that the trial judge
would agree that not disclosing Whitehall documents to the defence was
justified on security grounds.
He then admitted that even the final witness statement was inaccurate
because it omitted the fact that he had seen intelligence reports warning
that Matrix Churchill machine tools were being supplied to Iraq's missile
programme.
Mr Steadman said at the time of signing his witness statement he had not
thought of the intelligence reports.
The inquiry was adjourned until next Wednesday when Lord Justice Scott is
expected to question the Sir Robin Butler, cabinet secretary, on issues
including the accountability of ministers, the use of intelligence and the
duties of civil servants.
Mr John Major, the prime minister, has told the judge that ministers are
responsible for the acts of civil servants, although officials must share
some responsibility.
