FT  27 MAY 94 / Property: User unfriendly - An industry accused of being at
odds with its customers
'At present, the property industry bears analogy to the old discredited
economies of east Europe, where customers were provided with what the
factories found most convenient to produce.'
Sir James Blyth,
chief executive of Boots
The property industry may have escaped the scrutiny in the UK Department of
Trade and Industry's white paper on competitiveness, but as the above
comment demonstrates, it has no grounds for complacency.
Speaking at a conference on Property in the Economy in Cardiff on Monday,
Sir James Blyth attacked the property industry's lack of regard for the
needs of its customers.
At a time when the rest of the commercial world is becoming more flexible
and responsive to customer needs, the property industry has become more
rigid and uniform, Sir James said. The industry has allowed itself to be
dominated by the needs of its financiers, leading to a lack of flexibility
and innovation in the leases it offers tenants.
The traditional institutional lease, with its 25-year duration and
five-yearly, upward-only rent reviews, has led to distortions in the market,
he said
'In the UK much of the economic success of the past decade has come from
freeing up the supply-side of the economy, and from recognising the
pre-eminence of the customer. It is important that property, too, responds
to these imperatives if the UK economy is to expand further,' Sir James
added.
It is a familiar theme. The possibility that the workings of the commercial
property market damage the wider economy has been raised repeatedly over the
past couple of years, by academics, businesses, lobby groups, the Bank of
England and the government.
The Department of the Environment has consulted widely on the case for
reforming a number of the industry's practices, including outlawing
upward-only rent reviews and confidentiality clauses, which restrict the
available information on rent reviews. The Treasury is also thought to be
concerned that upward-only rent reviews may be at odds with its
anti-inflationary policies.
The government has already accepted the case for reforming the current law
on privity of contract, under which a tenant bears the responsibility of
paying rent if a lease has been passed on to another tenant who subsequently
defaults.
Property investors oppose government intervention in the industry. Many
investors fear that legislation could scare away institutions. There is a
precedent: in 1965, institutions virtually abandoned the residential
property market following pro-tenant legislation. Developers and investors
require a reasonable return over a sufficiently long period to justify
capital investment; restrictive legislation could deter many developers from
making long-term investments.
The government may be dissuaded from enacting restrictive legislation if it
can be persuaded that the industry can sort out its own problems.
Landlords and tenants, for instance, may be able to reach a compromise over
the length of leases. Most institutions are content with 15-year leases and
would even accept 10-year ones. The 1980s property glut has given tenants a
strong bargaining position, forcing landlords to agree to short leases, with
regular break-options.
Even if landlords and tenants reach a compromise, the sector remains open to
attack, as its problems extend beyond lease structures.
Its past mistakes are all too visible: the glut of offices in central London
is evidence of that.
The UK arguably invested too much on new buildings in the second half of the
1980s, at the expense of other forms of investment. Britain had the highest
increase in non-residential building investment of any of the Group of Seven
economies and the lowest rise in investment in plant and machinery.
Yet many argue that a far greater problem facing the industry is the time
lag between planning and completing a speculative development. The risk that
economic conditions can change radically in the time a building is under
construction makes the industry highly cyclical, prone, for example, to
periods of over-supply.
A recent report on property cycles published by the Royal Institution of
Chartered Surveyors, recommended that the industry should consider how 'the
speed of the development responses could be accelerated, how market signals
could be read with greater circumspection and how other ways of meeting
occupier requirements, such as custom building, could be encouraged'.
Responding to these suggestions would help introduce more stability and
might also deflect charges that the industry undermines the health of the
economy as a whole.
