FT  23 SEP 94 / Ashdown hints at pact with Labour
Mr Paddy Ashdown yesterday wound up the most fractious Liberal Democrat
conference since 1989 by signalling his hopes that party would provide the
reforming edge in a post-election partnership with Mr Tony Blair's Labour
party.
In a coded message to Mr Blair Mr Ashdown said the Liberal Democrats had
'enough confidence in our own strength to make common cause with others to
achieve the best for the future'.
He told the final session of the conference that the main question facing
the party was what sort of government it wanted after the next general
election. The answer was one in which the Liberal Democrats provided key
policies.
His attempts to keep the idea of co-operation alive did not, however,
disguise the gloomy assessment of senior party figures that this week's
gathering has been the worst since the conference which followed the
break-up of the old Liberal-SDP Alliance five years ago.
To a polite if far from ecstatic reception from party activists, Mr Ashdown
said the party's 'historic role' was to act as the catalyst for
constitutional change in Britain. That meant the dismantling of the
'centralised state' and the entrenchment of a pluralistic political culture
through a proportional voting system.
The implicit offer to Labour of a longer-term alliance to deprive the
Conservatives of a fifth term in office in return for PR was accompanied by
a call for a cross-party approach to the National Health Service to test
Labour's intentions.
But faced by a conference which saw his leadership defied in two
embarrassing votes over social and economic policy, and which exposed clear
divisions over political strategy, Mr Ashdown ducked an explicit offer of an
anti-Tory pact.
Mr Ashdown warned delegates - after their decisions this week to back the
decriminalisation of cannabis and vote in favour of a minimum wage - that in
the run up to a general election the party must focus on the concerns of
voters rather than on peripheral internal debates.
But to avoid another backlash from anti-Labour party activists, Mr Ashdown
chose deliberately not to spell out any details of his strategy to secure
closer co-operation between the two parties.
Instead he set a series of benchmarks against which he insisted Mr Blair's
intentions would be judged. Warning that a Conservative victory would
prolong the 'disaster' of one-party rule, Mr Ashdown said it would be
equally damaging if it were replaced by 'candy-floss' visions and
'candy-stick' promises.
Those who claimed 'to stand for progress and a modern Britain' had to
endorse a market-based economy built on enterprise as the only route to
prosperity.
Labour should also indicate that it was willing to build on rather than
reverse the reforms of the public services.
On Europe it should recognise that Britain's future would be safeguarded
only by co-operation with its European Union partners. But above all Mr
Blair should commit his party to 'fair votes' - the Liberal Democrat term
for a proportional voting system at Westminster.
