FT  16 AUG 94 / Nigerian newspaper closed by military
Nigeria's military regime yesterday stopped publication of the country's
leading liberal newspaper, the Guardian, in the tense run-up to today's
hearing of Mr Moshood Abiola's treason trial.
The Guardian reflects growing opposition to General Sani Abacha's
government, especially in Mr Abiola's native south-west, and has criticised
annulment of Mr Abiola's election victory last year and his arrest in June.
Mr Abiola was charged with treason after declaring himself president.
The closure underlines the weak position of civilian ministers in the
provisional ruling council. The publisher of the Guardian is Mr Alex Ibru,
the interior minister.
Sunday's edition of the Guardian alleged that the government's hard line
against civilian opposition is dictated by traditional rulers and other
powerful interests among the Hausa-Fulani tribes in the north, which has
dominated government for most of Nigeria's recent history.
Despite attempts by the Nigeria Labour Congress and the constitutional
conference delegates to mediate, the government has refused unconditional
release for Mr Abiola, who says that he will not accept bail if there are
strings attached.
At today's hearing, the judge in the high court, which has been specially
convened in Abuja for this case, will rule on the defence petition that the
court has no jurisdiction to try it and that the charges be struck out.
Strikes which have paralysed the commercial capital Lagos and the rest of
the Yoruba-speaking south-west are partly suspended until today's hearing.
Recent demonstrations in Lagos have led to violence and dozens of civilian
deaths. Last month in Abuja police shot and killed demonstrators near the
high court.
The strongest threat to the government comes from the strike by the oil
workers which has disrupted fuel supplies and forced multinational oil
companies, which produce Nigeria's main export, to cut production by at
least one quarter of its 2m barrels a day capacity.
The oil workers say they will not return to work until the military hand
over power to a civilian government led by Mr Abiola.
