FT  11 JAN 94 / Thai unions to seek 8% rise in minimum pay
Thai trade union leaders have demanded an 8 per cent rise in the minimum
wage for workers and threatened to call a general strike on May 1, labour
day, if their demands are not met.
Thailand's trade unions are notoriously weak and divided - it is estimated
that less than 5 per cent of the total workforce is unionised  - but
employers are worried by recent successes of industrial workers and unions
in securing wage rises above the inflation rate.
Unskilled labour in Thailand is about five times as expensive as in China,
Vietnam and Indonesia, and some investors are moving labour-intensive
operations in textiles and shoe-manufacturing from Thailand to those
countries.
Many Thai employers and small foreign companies pay their employees less
than the legal minimum, but multi-national corporations with reputations to
protect usually abide by the law.
A group of five trade unions has agreed to demand a 10 baht (26p) increase
in the minimum daily wage, which would raise the pay of a worker in Bangkok
or the surrounding area to 135 baht from 125 baht; minimum wages in other
regions are slightly lower.
They say they have based their demand on the growth rate of the country's
economy; this is running at about 8 per cent a year, while inflation has
fallen to 3.5 per cent.
The 10 baht claim is regarded in Thailand as a moderate opening bid by the
standards of previous negotiations. 'I think this is a bargaining
statement,' said Mr Chalongphob Sussangkarn, human resources director at the
independent Thailand Development Research Institute. 'This year their demand
seems to be more moderate.'
Thai trade unions, which suffered under a succession of military regimes,
are able to operate more freely under the present democratically-elected
government; the ruling coalition is in the process of rescinding a ban on
trade unions in state enterprises.
Union power, however, is undermined by Thailand's reserve of poor, rural job
seekers who migrate to the cities, whereas Malaysia and Singapore are short
of workers.
