FT  03 MAY 94 / Leading Article: The business of smoking
The acquisition of American Tobacco by BAT Industries is at first glance a
perverse step. For one thing, it appears contrary to BAT's strategy of
diversifying away from cigarette sales into financial services. For another,
BAT is investing in the US tobacco market at a time when sales are declining
and the anti-smoking climate is shifting from determined to downright
zealous.
Yet BAT has benefited from the adverse circumstances - as its share price
rise shows. Fears over the future of the US market mean that the price paid
for American Tobacco is cheap at under 10 times earnings. The acquisition
should allow BAT to strengthen its market position through efficiencies in
marketing and sales. In spite of falling sales and the price war launched
last year by Philip Morris, tobacco continues to produce strong cash flow.
This cash can be used to diversify out of tobacco. BAT continues to look for
opportunities in financial services. American Brands, former owner of
American Tobacco, has built up a strong portfolio of other consumer brands.
But the collapse of communism creates enormous opportunities for companies
that remain in the tobacco business. Markets such as China and the former
Soviet Union are now opening up with fast-growing sales.
The tobacco giants would be unwise to assume that they can indefinitely
expand the market for their products, however, even in less developed
countries. The health consequences of smoking on those who indulge in it are
now undisputed and clear. As life expectancy in such countries lengthens,
the cost in premature deaths and medical treatment will become evident.
Restrictions on sales and marketing will follow.
Anti-smoking activists
The rapid change in thinking in the US should be a warning of how fast the
climate for smoking can change, even in a country with a substantial tobacco
industry. The election of President Bill Clinton has ended a period in which
anti-smoking activists had minimal impact and US diplomats did their best to
open foreign markets for their tobacco companies. Far-reaching measures now
proposed could restrict smoking to the privacy of the home, the car or
special smoking rooms sealed off from the rest of the world.
Given the growing evidence on the health impact of smoking on non-smokers,
it is certainly sensible to ensure that the latter can avoid 'passive
smoking'. The threat of litigation will compel employers to protect their
non-smoking employees from tobacco smoke. The prevailing mood may also lead
businesses such as restaurants to segregate their smoking customers. Smokers
in public places will face increasing restrictions at the behest of the
non-smoking majority.
Draconian measures
Yet some of the more draconian measures now proposed are unlikely to be
effective. Punitive taxation, for example, is tempting because it bears
heavily on 'sinners'. It can also be shown to reduce consumption and deter
young people from the habit. Excessively high taxes, however, also increase
the sort of cross-border smuggling that recently forced Canada to cut its
tobacco tax.
Even more drastic attempts to treat tobacco like other dangerous drugs is
likely to make control more difficult. Banning other widely-consumed drugs
such as marijuana has not significantly reduced their consumption. It has,
however, removed them from controls over distribution, to the advantage of
those who sell more dangerous substances. As with alcohol prohibition in the
US, the main beneficiaries are criminals.
Nor is it clear that complete bans on advertising are efficacious (other
than in defending state tobacco monopolies against foreign competitors).
There is some evidence that smoking may increase in countries with bans
because of the disappearance of the anti-smoking messages that
advertisements are normally required to carry.
Reducing the number of smokers and the amount of smoking is a legitimate and
worthwhile aim of public policy. But pragmatism is needed in chosing the
means. And success is likely to be gradual, a fact that allows the tobacco
companies very many more profitable years before their market disappears
completely.
