FT  12 MAR 94 / As They Say In Europe: Sons of Amon Goth queue for tickets
The sins of the fathers are being visited on the sons, and grandsons, in no
uncertain terms these days. The latest manifestation is the Schindler's List
phenomenon. The Holocaust is now enshrined in a Hollywood epic, a fact that
has caused some to object, and others much heartache and heartsearching.
Liberation dedicated six pages on one day alone to the film and its
ramifications. The Lisbon weekly Expresso devoted a full 15 pages of its
review section not only to the film but also to a lesson in history for an
audience geographically as remote as one could be in Europe from the events
recounted.
In Austria, a country in which recent history has been overlooked, the
Vienna city government reserved 7,500 cinema seats for schoolchildren free
of charge.
In the German press there are even now some old scores to be settled: there
is scarcely a mention of the sadistic camp commander, Amon Goth, who plays
such a large part in the film, without the ascription, Der Wiener - the
Viennese. There is no end to the research. The Tageszeitung of Berlin found
survivors in Florida who knew Schindler after the war and those who could
testify how unloved the man was in his own community.
In Switzerland, the Neue Zurcher ran a feature on an overlooked hero,
Berthold Beitz of the Krupp concern, who saved many Jews in what is now
Ukraine. The paper was fascinated by two questions: how had Alfred Krupp
been able to become one of the richest men in the world having been
convicted of the exploitation of slave labour? And how could the Nazis have
acted 'without any economic logic' in pursuit of their programme?
It is evident that the present generation in western Europe, at least, finds
the story incomprehensible, except in the sense that it is known to have
happened. There is a suggestion that Schindler's List gains impact from
events in Bosnia but the truth is probably the other way round.
In eastern Europe the position is murkier. The communists concealed the
reality of the Final Solution by turning it into a tale of communist heroism
in the anti-fascist struggle. Today those societies are having to come to
terms with problems that were ignored or rejected. Thus in the Czech
republic there is agonising over the law on the restitution of Jewish
property which presents entirely different problems from those associated
with property confiscated by the communists.
The Russian news agency, Tass, described the film as 'documenting one German
man's effort to help Jews trapped in Hitler's Germany'. Poland is where the
events occurred and the film was made and reaction there has been mixed.
There is pride that Poland and Poles should have played a part in making the
film, and there is anger that it highlights Polish anti-Semitism. One paper,
Slowo, said Nazi officials were portrayed in a sympathetic light compared
with the Poles. Slowo has it in for Schindler himself: he was 'a spy in
Poland before the war'. And he 'saved only those who were rich', a charge
which must be absurd as the victims had already been robbed.
The film critic of Rzeczpospolita wondered why it had been left to Hollywood
to produce the definitive film. 'Had one to be, perhaps, at a distance,
physically withdrawn from Cracow, Auschwitz, Plaszow? Or was it, perhaps,
essential to await Spielberg's talent? I feel, nevertheless, some pain and
some shame that it was not a Pole, someone from here, who dared to tackle
the subject.'
In much of the former communist world the story creates difficulties. In
some countries today to have had a record of working for the Nazis is a
certificate of anti-communism. Ordinary patriotism was suppressed by the
great slab of imperial socialism for 40 years and, today among the etiolated
weeds of nationalism creep those who thrived in the dark. There will be some
watching Schindler's List, in eastern Europe particularly, who will side
with the perpetrators rather than the victims.
But the question remains: why it should have taken so long for the events to
make such an impact.
Those who were responsible have now passed from positions of power and
influence. If you were a servant of the Reich and 20 in 1944 you were among
the last who could have behaved abominably. Today you would be 70. For three
or four decades after the war, the truth was kept at a distance as veterans
of mass-murder and collaboration took their positions at the helm of
industry, the judiciary and the civil service.
Today they have retired and horrors are revived that should have been
confronted a generation ago. As a result it is the grandchildren who suffer
a confrontation with history that the authors were spared.
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.
