FT  21 SEP 94 / Survey of Logistics (5): UK security tightened -
Airfreighting
New UK airfreight security measures are proving a headache for shippers,
forwarders and airlines, making their operations more complex and
potentially more expensive.
This is happening at a time when airfreight service operators are handling
higher cargo volumes as trade recovers from world-wide recession and when
the industry is meeting customers' demands for better quality services.
Under the UK security regulations introduced in June, forwarders have to
obtain a Department of Transport listing as a security-approved air cargo
agent. They also have to vet regular exporting customers for classification
as a 'known shipper'.
Shippers and forwarders who do not qualify on those counts are likely to
find their cargo subjected to much stricter security checks by the airlines,
with resulting delays.
So far, the regulations appear to have caused few serious problems. One
difficulty, though, centres on the apparent requirement for shippers to
enter separate security agreements with each forwarder used.
At the time of writing, forwarders were seeking a meeting with the
Department of Transport to clarify that issue. Companies freighting goods by
air are also still keeping a close watch on airline security screening
surcharges for cargo not originating from 'known' shippers.
Some airlines have already introduced such charges, typically involving a
minimum fee of Pounds 4 plus 2p per kilo above that minimum level, to cover
the cost of implementing new security systems and checks. Others, though,
are holding back until they see how the system settles down.
Meanwhile, the volume of freight is continuing to increase. The
International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) says air cargo traffic
worldwide rose by around six per cent last year compared with a one per cent
growth in the number of passengers. Aircraft manufacturer Boeing is
predicting an average 6.5 per cent a year growth in world airfreight over
the next 20 years.
As a result of the present upturn, individual airlines are this year
hurriedly adding capacity on particularly busy cargo routes and adding new
cargo-handling facilities.
British Airways, for example, is considering further expansion of its
chartered freighter operations. Worldwide, BA currently operates freighter
flights on nearly 20 sectors a week, despite not actually owning any
all-cargo aircraft. Those services are in addition to the carrier's
large-scale global airfreight operations involving the use of bellyhold
space on its passenger aircraft.
BA is also planning to start main construction work on a new Pounds 150m
world cargocentre at London Heathrow in the first half of 1995. The facility
will be designed to handle up to 1m tonnes of cargo a year, twice the
capacity of the carrier's existing centre.
BA's annual cargo revenues for the year ending March 31, 1994, rose by over
16 per cent to Pounds 461m and volumes were up by 14 per cent to 607,000
tonnes. The improvement continued in the current year's first quarter: cargo
revenue for the three months to end-June was up 18 per cent to Pounds 130m,
with volumes up to 171,000 tonnes, 20 per cent more than the same period
last year.
The cargo business is also growing fast at British Midland, the UK-based
domestic and European regional airline, with volumes up 45 per cent so far
this year.
Nevertheless, shippers are still pressing for improved service levels. In
particular, they want more time-definite movements.
One of the big long-running complaints from shippers and their agents, the
forwarders, against the airlines is that cargo is often not flown as booked.
That occurs mainly because much of the world's airfreight is flown in the
bellyholds of scheduled airline passenger aircraft - a recent air cargo
industry survey commissioned by the Reed Travel Group found that 82 per cent
of airfreight is carried that way. Such cargo is sometimes offloaded from
the aircraft to accommodate unexpectedly high passenger loads and resulting
increased baggage. With shippers and their customers often running very
tight production/delivery schedules, the resulting delays can cause serious
problems.
This has helped international express companies or integrators such as DHL,
Federal Express, United Parcel Service (UPS) and TNT Express Worldwide, some
of which run their own aircraft and therefore have greater control of the
freight, to capture a lot of traditional airfreight traffic over the last
decade.
More recently, some of the leading forwarders have begin to think of
developing more time-definite services of their own. Danzas, the
Switzerland-based international forwarding and transport organisation, is
currently developing scheduled, door-to-door delivery services between
Europe, the Far East and North America under the product name Starconnect.
Like many other leading international airfreight/air forwarding companies it
is also focusing on the development of much more wide-ranging logistics
services.
Last year, for example, Air Express International bought an oceanfreight
service business called Votainer and is now planning to develop its
intra-European express system Pandalink into a global operation. It claims
its customers are increasingly demanding a broad range of logistics services
from one supplier and will take their business elsewhere if they do not get
it.
Mr David Beatson, president and chief executive officer of Emery Worldwide,
another leading international airfreight company, also makes the point that
simply moving freight is no longer good enough to meet shipper demands.
'Today, carriers like Emery must demonstrate how they can adapt and deploy
their resources to help customers shorten supply cycles and streamline
distribution networks so that costs are reduced and products arrive at the
ultimate customer faster and more efficiently than ever before,' he says.
In that context, the airfreight industry as a whole is stressing the further
development of electronic data interchange (EDI) and other computerised
information technology systems. Increasingly, the emphasis is on systems
which can communicate with a wide range of parties for functions such as the
booking of cargo and consignment tracking.
There is also an increasing tendency for airfreight service suppliers to
work openly with other operators, sometimes even potential rivals, to
produce the overall solution demanded by their customers.
UK-based forwarder MSAS Cargo International claims to be an example of that
trend. Says Mr Douglas Ash, chief executive: 'If the customer wants a
service which we can provide more easily by utilising one of the
integrators, then we will do that. And we won't hide the fact from the
customer - we will tell them it is the better way to service that particular
part of their business.'
