FT  15 NOV 94 / Survey of Computers in Finance (2): Keeping customers happy
 -New approaches to retail banking
Ten years ago, Ken Pilbeam was head of marketing at Compucard, a project to
promote telephone shopping. It was an era of unbridled optimism - and Mr
Pilbeam shared the common dream of technology sweeping through the retail
sector to revolutionise the most mundane purchases.
Today, he is head of operational systems management at Barclays Bank, and
despite commanding a formidable arsenal of technology, Mr Pilbeam is no
longer an IT visionary - 'with the remote shopping idea in the '80s, we
encountered significant consumer resistance. We didn't realise that social
interaction is important, that people want to get out and about when they
shop.'
This has proved a useful lesson for Mr Pilbeam: under the Pounds 100m
Customer System Project, 1,100 Barclays branches have joined a new approach
to the retail customer. A central database has been constructed to hold 14m
customer records. The big idea is to pull together previously separate
processes, such as current account versus deposit, and replace them with one
flow of data relating to each individual.
The Customer System is aimed at eliminating the delays that characterise
opening a new account. Rather than take forms from a customer, then process
the risk involved and get back to the customer after an extensive credit
check, Barclays wants to be in a position to approve and issue an account
number on the spot.
A central index held on an IBM 3090 mainframe at the bank's Gloucester data
centre is accessed via smaller IBM RS 6000 processors at each branch. The
central index integrates data from customer accounts at branch level,
Barclaycard and the bank's financial services operation. This goldmine of
information is also a mountain of data to store. The database alone holds
the equivalent of 72m sides of A4 paper.
Although the end-product should make itself felt at branch level, Barclays'
has had to take a strategic view of the IT requirement that powers the
Customer System. Huge quantities of data are best handled by a combination
of mainframe computer and dedicated storage capacity. The Gloucester data
centre, run under the aegis of Barclays' IT arm, Barclays Computer
Operations (BCO), has installed extra storage capacity.
US data storage specialist EMC supplied a Symmetrix 5500 system.
Essentially, a sophisticated series of interlinked hard disks similar to
those found in an office PC, the Symmetrix provides an electronic filing
cabinet that holds data for the IBM mainframe.
This box cost Pounds 750,000 including maintenance over a five-year period.
It is not wholly dedicated to the Customer System, but with a storage
capacity equivalent to 10,000 desktop PCs, the EMC 5500 illustrates the kind
of technology that is necessary to keep a huge retail project
up-and-running.
If this impressive investment is to pay off, the retail customer must sense
the bank is offering a reliable service. Sudden interruptions to normal
service attributed to the catch-all excuse 'the computer is down' are fatal
to customer relations in a competitive high-street market.
Keith Durham, a customer account executive at Barclays' Cheshire computer
centre, has studied the options for Business Resumption Planning Procedure
(BRPP). In the event of a big systems failure at Gloucester, the operation
could be run off another mainframe site within a couple of hours.
This is the dramatic end of BRPP. What it really boils down to is having
paper forms under the counter to cope with any collapse in the branch server
 -'we don't want our staff to have to twiddle their thumbs while customers
wait for a service. You've got to have procedures in place to handle any
type of failure,' says Mr Durham.
Telephone banking services such as Midland Bank's First Direct or TSB's
Teleservice are being touted as the obvious direction for retail banking.
Multimedia branches offering an array of automated terminals that stretch
existing Automated Teller Machine (ATM) technology into the world of
interactive video and live links to financial advisers are under review by
most large banks.
The Nationwide Building Society has been running a pilot remote banking
installation in Aylesbury, using technology from Siemens-Nixdorf, for the
last year.
In Italy, a large number of institutions compete in the retail banking
sector. So national branch networks are not as extensive as in the UK where
the historic competition has been between four operators. Italian banks have
been swift to install automated branches designed by Olivetti as a
comparatively cheap means of rapid expansion.
The impetus behind these developments is cost. A presence on every high
street is expensive in terms of real estate and staff salaries. One of the
Italian automated branches will cost around Dollars 1m to build and equip.
Reliability is a key component of retail banking. Pilbeam expresses
reservations about automated branches running intelligent multimedia
terminals - 'the technology is still not perfect. Even if the failure rate
is only one per cent, that can put people off. There will be resistance
until it becomes the norm.'
Barclays appears to be steering clear of the herd instinct in retail
banking. By putting appropriate data at the disposal of branch staff, it is
gambling that the customer still wants a human face behind the counter.
Relegating the computer terminal to a vital supporting role may prove to be
a crowd-puller.
