FT  15 OCT 94 / Arts: Smiles, sambas and psychotic behaviour
It is difficult to know quite what to make of the Brazilian Grupo Corpo,
installed this week at Sadler's Wells. It looks like the product of a Jekyll
and Hyde experiment in some remote part of the Amazon. Just before curtain
rise the members of a dance troupe drink a potion and proceed to scare the
living daylights out of an audience with a display of ferocious tosh, while
giving a Mozart Mass a thorough going-over. But the dancers return after the
interval, all smiles and samba rhythms, to win us with charm and pretty
dances. It is psychotic behaviour of the most inexplicable kind.
So I interpreted the events of Wednesday evening. The company is nearly 20
years old, and was seen briefly with Dance Umbrella here a decade ago. Its
founder-choreographer is Rodrigo Pederneiras, and it is he who gives the
troupe its split-personality. His Orphanage Mass is a capoeira attack on
Mozart, feet flying, the music knocked for six.
Curtain-rise brings a view of men and women, dingily clad, lurching in a
curious high-shouldered gait towards one of those backdrops of eroded
masonry that would make any self-respecting surveyor tell you of 'very
serious problems with rising damp'. More serious is the fact that we are in
Kylian-country, where the angst is high as an elephant's eye, and no good
will come of anything. Nor does it. The cast look like inmates of a home for
the criminally insane, and behave thus. Wild activity from women in those
long suicidal frocks that are de rigueur in films about institutional life.
The men wear sack suits and blank expressions, and rampage. Life is very
fraught.
Pederneiras has a few anxious movement ideas, which he tacks onto Mozart,
though musical form and the matters of a sacred text go largely unregarded.
I suppose if your idea of spectator sport is visiting a mad-house, then the
piece has a certain allure. I thought it an interminable, flailing bore, in
which the cast unleashed megatons of energetic gloom. At the interval, I was
ready for hemlock.
But the sun does come out. Pederneiras' second piece in the programme is
Nazareth - not, happily, another exercise in religiosity, but a tribute to
Ernesto Nazareth, composer of a legion of delightful salon pieces. These
have been brilliantly re-worked by Jose Miguel Wisnik, put in a mixer,
re-shaped, and orchestrated with tremendous wit. The rhythm is that of the
maxixe, best known in the 1920 but intoxicating still. The dancers look
handsome, amusing, alert. The dances, somewhat repetitive, keep then on the
jolly hop and explore social and folk-movement attitudes very neatly. It is
merry, if over-long, and the dancers (clearly well-trained) have tremendous
fun embroidering samba steps and playing with the wonderful rhythms of the
score. The setting, of 14 large fabric roses, excellently lit, is beautiful,
and by Fernando Velloso. Hyde has been vanquished.
Sponsored by Banco do Brasil; Cultura Inglesa.
