FT  13 DEC 94 / Work to stop on last nuclear power plants: End of an era for
electricity generation in US
An era of nuclear energy will draw to a close in the US next year when the
Tennessee Valley Authority, a government-owned electricity generator, halts
work on the last three nuclear reactors under construction in the US.
The TVA announced yesterday that it would not complete a half-built reactor
at Watts Bar in Tennessee, or two reactors at Bellefonte in Alabama, though
it expects to start another virtually complete Watts Bar reactor next
autumn, joining three reactors already in operation.
'We are still in the testing phase for Watts Bar 1. I believe that will be
the last stand for this generation of nuclear power in the country,' said Mr
Craven Crowell, the TVA chairman.
The authority will decide next year what to do with the three reactors, one
of which is 88 per cent complete.
Mr Crowell said that he had a duty at least to look for financial partners
who might want to complete the reactors, though he thought it improbable
that he would find any.
'I don't hold out great hope,' he said. 'It just costs too much to build a
nuclear plant.'
The partially completed plants could be converted, however, to another
energy source such as natural gas.
The decision to halt construction was driven by the need to do something
about the TVA's heavy debt burden, which now totals Dollars 26bn (Pounds
16.6bn). Perhaps Dollars 17bn of that can be attributed to the ambitious
nuclear construction programme which the TVA began in 1966.
'One third of our operating costs goes towards paying interest on our debt,
and the debt has been driven by nuclear construction,' Mr Crowell said.
Under the new policy announced yesterday, the TVA will stop adding to its
total debt no later than October 1997, and will maintain an internal debt
cap about Dollars 2bn to Dollars 3bn below the ceiling of Dollars 30bn set
by the US Congress.
Nuclear reactors are usually more expensive to build than fossil fuel
electricity generation plants but they use less fuel. Even so, ever tighter
safety standards have increased construction costs, and also have required
utilities to spend more money on adding safety features to their existing
reactors.
In addition to that, the federal government's inability to come up with a
long-term storage site for highly radioactive nuclear waste has left nuclear
generators wondering what to do with their spent fuel.
The nuclear energy industry, however, argues that advanced reactor designs
can provide competitively priced electricity and are essential to the
long-term US energy security.
Mr Crowell, however, says that the TVA cannot continue to pile up debt by
pursuing an out-of-date nuclear policy, and must get its costs down in the
shorter term, in preparation for deregulation of the electricity industry.
He believes that privatisation of the TVA is unlikely, nevertheless, because
of its nuclear division.
