FT  31 MAY 94 / Chaos is the new order for economic planning
Want to run a company? A country? the Treasury? Then rip up the planning
sheets and embrace creative chaos.
That is the message of a book from the Institute of Economic Affairs, the
free market think-tank that supplied Baroness Thatcher with many policy
ideas.
After decades in which economists have built convoluted mathematical models,
the book argues that long-term economic planning is based on a huge academic
illusion.
The argument is based on 'chaos theory', the scientific theory that opposes
the idea espoused by scientists since Isaac Newton that the universe is a
predictable place governed by simple rules.
Chaos theorists argue that disorder is the norm and that even simple
processes can yield a random outcome.
The concept is already in use: the London meteorological office incorporates
chaos theory in weather forecasts; some personal finance managers use it to
explain the stock market; it is used to help design washing machines; and
British innovators claim to have used it for developing bed springs. Mr
David Parker and Mr Ralph Stacey, authors of the book, argue that the
principle should be applied to economic planning.
Mathematical models can never capture the complexities of the world, the
authors say, so businesses and governments should accept that economic
forecasts are an art rather than a science. They should abandon
neo-classical economic thinking and embrace the chaos-driven theories of
'Austrian' economics, with its 'themes of spontaneous self-organisation,
enterprise and creative destruction'.
The political implications of that may have left even Lady Thatcher uneasy.
Governments should abandon market planning or even economic 'fine tuning'.
Companies should accept that they cannot plan for the long term, and the
Treasury should endorse institutional anarchy to allow creative change from
below.
The authors themselves refuse to predict how the government may react to
this - they note that since the future is unpredict-able, forecasts would be
mis-guided.
Chaos Management and Economics, by David Parker and Ralph Stacey, Institute
of Economic Affairs, 2 Lord North Street, London SW1P 3lP. Pounds 9.
