FT  08 JUL 94 / Bretton Woods (50 years): Rules needed for new age - John
Williamson continues the Bretton Woods series
When the Bretton Woods conferees concluded their deliberations of 50 years
ago, they thought they had created a new international monetary system to
replace the monetary anarchy of the 1930s, and a new bank that would replace
the international capital market which had been killed off by the defaults
induced by the Great Depression. The Bretton Woods monetary system died in
the early 1970s. The international capital market confounded the conferees'
expectations. It revived to a point where it at least matches its golden age
before the first world war. The contribution of the World Bank to
international lending is now marginal.
The remaining legacy of the Bretton Woods conference is the two large
bureaucracies known as the International Monetary Fund and World Bank. Since
the original remit of both institutions has vanished, and bureaucracies are
inherently unlovable, it is not too surprising that there are suggestions to
abolish them.
But the '50 years is enough' campaign is orchestrated by those who are not
necessarily dedicated to the objectives that both organisations are now
pursuing: helping poor countries catch up with rich ones and assisting
former centrally planned economies to make the transition to a market
economy. Both have, in fact, exhibited a substantial measure of flexibility
in adapting their operations to evolving circumstances. The task of
development, or of making the transition from communism to the market
economy, would be even harder without the technical expertise and financial
support the Bretton Woods institutions provide.
Since the 1970s, however, both the fund and the bank have been providing
increasingly similar support to the same group of countries. Given the
overlap, thoughts of merging them inevitably arose. They are less easy to
dismiss than calls to abolish them.
The only convincing answer to those subversive thoughts would be a return by
the IMF to the monetary vocation for which it was created. Its current role
of fostering macroeconomic discipline in non-industrial countries would then
revert to being a by-product of its central task of overseeing the
international monetary system, rather than the be-all and end-all of its
existence.
There are reasons for believing such a return could improve world economic
performance. The heyday of the Bretton Woods system, from the end of the
postwar recovery in the late 1950s until the late 1960s, was the best decade
the world economy has experienced. It was a golden age in terms of the speed
and wide distribution of growth, with low inflation and payments imbalances
that caused concern but, because of that, did not build up large debt
overhangs threatening prosperity.
This impressive performance was aided by the opportunities of catch-up
growth in Europe and Japan, the scope for exploiting the first, easy stage
of import substitution in developing countries, the inheritance of low
inflation, and the absence of big economic shocks. Nevertheless, the Bretton
Woods system, with its dedication to balance-of-payments discipline and
equilibrium exchange rates, alongside full employment, helped.
While the years since 1971 have not yielded disasters comparable with the
1930s, the cup is no more than half full. A massive overvaluation of
sterling in the early 1980s destroyed far too much of British manufacturing.
In the mid-1980s, there was an equally large overvaluation of the dollar,
the reaction to which threatened the international trading system.
Happy-go-lucky attitudes toward payments imbalances led directly to the
international debt crisis, which cost much of the developing world a decade
of progress. The attempt to freeze European exchange rates prematurely led
to a far deeper recession than would otherwise have occurred. These ills
were not unavoidable; they were not avoided because there were no rules of
the game as appropriate to their era as the Bretton Woods rules were to the
1960s.
Bretton Woods rules cannot be resurrected, primarily because capital
mobility has made it very difficult to manage exchange rates with narrow
bands and occasional jumps in central rates. But that is no reason for
failing to design rules that would be equally appropriate to our age.
Such rules should provide for a system of 'target zones' for exchange rates,
with central rates set for consistency with satisfactory medium-run
macroeconomic outcomes and regularly revised to prevent their becoming
outdated. Concerted intervention, backed up, when necessary, by changes in
interest rates, could prevent rates leaving the zones even under the current
situation of high capital mobility, provided intervention did not occur
until it was virtually certain that the market had overshot.
Ideally, there would also be international pressure for responsible fiscal
policies, meaning far smaller budget deficits over the cycle, combined with
active anti-cyclical stabilisation. It is difficult to envisage this
happening soon. But politicians are searching for institutional mechanisms
that will tie their hands with respect to fiscal policy. Why not offer them
a way of committing themselves to economically sensible rules, instead of to
balanced budgets or the arbitrary Maastricht limits?
In a recent speech at the Institute for International Economics, the
managing director of the IMF stated that he yearned for more currency
stability. He also declared that, in many ways, circumstances were now
propitious for movement in that direction. The obstacles, he implied, lay in
the continuing resistance of many of the member countries.
It would have been an ideal 50th birthday present for the IMF if the most
powerful and most resistant of those members, the Group of Seven leading
industrial countries, had invited the managing director to their Naples
summit this weekend specifically to explore ways of rebuilding an
international monetary system worthy of the name, in whose management the
IMF would once again have a central role.
The memory of Bretton Woods would be even better honoured if the summit
asked what else needed to be done to update the international economic
system. So far as the World Bank is concerned, there is nothing that could
not be remedied by having a president who had spent a lifetime in economic
development.
The Bretton Woods twins are about to be joined by their long-lost sibling, a
World Trade Organisation, to ensure countries take account of the global
interest in liberal trade. But the agenda has broadened since then. There is
also a need to create a Global Environmental Organisation, to ensure that
similar account is taken of environmental spillovers.
The author is a Senior Fellow at the Institute for International Economics,
Washington DC. Previous articles in this series appeared on June 28 and 21
