FT  07 JUN 94 / Eastleigh runner-up may get a prize: Why coming second in
Thursday's by-election is important for Labour
There are few prizes for coming second in politics. But tell that to Ms
Marilyn Birks, the Labour party candidate in the Eastleigh by-election on
Thursday, and you will be met with a look of disbelief. Labour has never
worked so hard in a seat which it knows it cannot win. Along with the
Conservatives, it privately conceded victory to the Liberal Democrats long
ago.
But coming second is everything for Labour in this by-election contest,
called after the death in February of the Conservative MP Stephen Milligan.
Its claim to be the main party of opposition in the south, as well as being
the dominant party in the north and inner cities, is to be put to the test.
If it can prevent its vote being squeezed and come second with about 25 per
cent of the vote it will be able to portray the result as the beginning of
the end of the Liberal Democrat claim to be the only party of opposition in
southern England.
It is true that the best scenario for Labour would still see the Liberal
Democrats overcoming a Conservative majority of 17,702, no small achievement
even by the recent standards of humiliating Tory by-election defeats.
Also - as Mr David Chidgey, the Liberal Democrat candidate, pointed out -
Labour would do well to learn from the Liberals that coming second in
British politics is never good enough.
Nevertheless, Labour's performance is likely to be judged against the target
it has set itself - to push the Tories into third place.
Only last week Mr Tony Blair, the favourite for the Labour leadership, told
a rally in Eastleigh that Labour was proud to be campaigning in the south of
England.
His comments were not lost on the audience. It has become something of a
novelty for Labour to take a by-election seriously in a Conservative-held
seat in the south. But not any more. Mr Blair had come to draw the line at
Eastleigh - the party must come second.
It is a risky strategy, which was to some extent forced on the party by the
fact that the constituency is next to Southampton, where Labour won the
Itchen constituency at the 1992 general election and failed by just 1 per
cent of the vote to capture Test. The Woolston ward of the city is part of
the Eastleigh constituency.
In the 1992 general election Labour increased its share of the vote in
Eastleigh from 16.7 per cent to 20.7 per cent at the expense of the Liberal
Democrats, who saw their share of the vote fall from 32 per cent to 28 per
cent.
To some extent Labour's strategy has already paid off. Its vote does not
look like collapsing. Although the Liberal Democrats recently took a council
seat off Labour in its Woolston stronghold, there is evidence that many
voters in the council blocks neighbouring Southampton remain loyal to
Labour.
Mr John Prescott, the likely challenger for the Labour leadership from the
traditionalist wing, received a sympathetic hearing when he visited the
Aercon group of companies, which make ducting and fittings, in the northern
part of the constituency.
One of the group directors said he was 'minded to vote Labour' after hearing
Mr Prescott field questions from the workforce. Most employees willing to
talk politics said they were planning to do the same.
Mr Blair's rally in the Fleming Park sports centre attracted more than 1,000
Labour supporters. As a morale-raising event it was a great success,
complete with band, balloons and US-style razzmatazz. But as an indication
of Labour's potential strength in the constituency it was less useful - many
of those attending the meeting had driven from Southampton.
In the Comrades and Unity workingmen's clubs there is still talk of voting
for the Liberal Democrats as the party best-placed to take the seat. One or
two of the regulars said they would vote Labour if they knew for sure that
the Conservatives would lose.
To this end Mr Bruce Grocott, the MP minding the Labour candidate, angrily
accused the Liberal Democrats of publishing misleading material showing
Labour in third place after the council elections. He argued that Labour
secured 25.1 per cent across the constituency compared with 24.4 per cent
won by the Conservatives and 50 per cent for the Liberal Democrats.
His message was simple - voters disillusioned with the government can risk
voting Labour without letting the Tories back in. But as things stand, not
enough voters appear willing to take that risk.
