FT  05 FEB 94 / Fashion: The global wardrobe in the office - New York
Although what you wear to the office in New York is serious business (as is
almost everything else in this workaholic city), Gotham's executives are not
peacocks.
True, chic office garb does exist, but generally only in the creative
professions such as fashion, advertising, entertainment, publishing and the
media. In the three businesses that dominate New York working life -
banking, stockbroking and the law - conservative dress still rules.
For men, that means sober two-piece suits, white or blue shirts, suspenders
(for holding trousers, not stockings, up, although you never know), dark
socks and sensible shoes. The pattern is broken in summer, when blue blazers
with beige/cream trousers and expensive leather loafers are favoured by
those seeking the full 'preppy' look.
Ties remain the quintessential symbol of male individuality, and the 'aren't
I daring with my bright patterned Mickey Mouse silk tie?' brigade is alive
and well. Flashy neckwear is about the only trend from the 1980s that has
not gone the way of shoulder pads and company Porsches.
Women have to be more conservative than men in their dress. Again dark suits
are everywhere, but in recent years more fashionably-cut combinations have
begun appearing on a brave few. Outfits can be looser (physically and
metaphorically) in summer, but the proper New York woman will still wear
hose (tights) to the office.
The one feature that most differentiates New York from overseas cities is
what people wear on Friday. For a growing number of companies in the
metropolis and across America, Friday is designated 'dress-down day'. This
means employees are allowed to wear casual clothes - sports jackets,
cardigans, polo shirts, slacks, etc. The result has been a lot of offices
staffed by Perry Como lookalikes.
Dress-down day has become such a fixture that even some of Wall Street's
finest have experimented with it, albeit none too successfully. It seems
that there is something undignified, un-American almost, about the sight of
someone trading billions of dollars in currencies while wearing a Hawaiian
shirt, baggy shorts and deck shoes without socks.
