FT  14 JUN 94 / Obituary: Jan Tinbergen, a father of econometrics
Jan Tinbergen, the distinguished Dutch mathematical economist, socialist and
pacifist, has died at the age of 91. Tinbergen won the first Nobel memorial
prize in economics in 1969, jointly with the Norwegian Ragnar Frisch,
principally for his seminal work on the application of statistics to
economics. His work in this area, for the League of Nations between 1936 and
1938 and published in 1939, marked the birth of modern econometrics.
Tinbergen brought three fundamental attributes to his work in economics and
economic policy: his training as a mathematical physicist at Leiden
University, his social idealism, and his conviction that a better world
could be created by applying reason to the operations of government. Of his
intellectual power, personal benevolence and moral rectitude there was never
the slightest doubt. But his faith in the capacity and benevolence of the
state now looks a little naive.
Even econometrics, in whose early development Tinbergen played so great a
part, was (and, to an extent, still is) controversial. The first of his two
volumes for the League of Nations, on fluctuations in investment, was
reviewed quite critically by the British economist John Maynard Keynes. But
Tinbergen had the last laugh. His second volume presented an economy-wide
model of business cycles in the US. Models of this kind were the vehicle
through which Keynesian economics was subsequently implemented.
Today's economic forecasting industry owes its existence to Tinbergen's
pioneering work. But he also made substantial contributions to the modelling
of economic growth and to theories of policy formation, economic development
and personal income distribution.
His most important contribution, after that to econometrics, was the
demonstration that, in general, the achievement of a given number of policy
objectives requires as many independent policy instruments. This conclusion
was reached in parallel by the British economist (and Nobel-laureate) James
Meade.
Tinbergen was born in The Hague on April 12, 1903, into a remarkable family
of scholars. One of his brothers, Nikolaas (Niko), won the Nobel Prize for
biology in 1973; another became a professor of zoology.
Tinbergen refused compulsory military service in 1927 and was sent to work
for almost a year as a prison administrator and research assistant at the
official statistics bureau, the CBS. After gaining his doctorate in physics
from Leiden in 1929, he went back to work at the CBS, where he started
research into economic dynamics and statistical modelling of economies.
After leaving the League of Nations, he returned to the Netherlands, staying
with the CBS until the end of the second world war.
Then, he was appointed head of the newly-established Dutch planning and
economic advisory body, the CPB. He resigned from the CPB in 1955, to become
a full-time professor at the University of Rotterdam (where he had been
part-time between 1933 and 1955). In 1973 he moved to the University of
Leiden, before retiring in 1975. He served as an adviser to the World Bank,
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, and UN bodies.
