FT  19 SEP 94 / Hong Kong election draws strong turnout
Nearly 700,000 people turned out to vote yesterday in Hong Kong's first
fully democratic elections under British rule, undeterred by threats from
Beijing to overturn the result of the poll when China resumes sovereignty in
1997.
An exit poll conducted by TVB, a local television station, found that 70 per
cent of those who voted said they were not concerned by China's stated
intention to overturn the election.
Mr Chris Patten, the colony's governor, said the turnout underlined that
local people wanted a say in how their community was run. The vote was the
mark of an 'open, self-confident and plural society', he said.
The strong voter turnout - numbers were more than 50 per cent up on a
similar poll in 1991 - was seen by analysts as indicative of strong support
for Mr Patten's political reforms. Mr Stephen Tang, a political analyst,
said China should reconsider its plan to dissolve Hong Kong's political
structure.
China legislated this month to hold fresh elections for all three tiers of
representation in Hong Kong after it takes over in 1997. Last year talks
between London and Beijing broke down when the two were unable to agree on
the terms of the last elections to be conducted under British rule. Mr
Patten proceeded with measures to establish an election infrastructure which
he claimed was fair, open and acceptable to the people of Hong Kong.
China for its part set about appointing advisers to inform Beijing about the
concerns of ordinary people.
As part of the Patten plan, two further sets of elections will be held in
Hong Kong next year, culminating next September in polls for the Legislative
Council, the colony's lawmaking body.
In yesterday's poll 756 candidates contested 346 seats which comprise 18
district boards. None of Hong Kong's political parties fielded enough
candidates to win a simple majority.
The number of voters was about 250,000 more than the turnout in a similar
poll in 1991. Then voters were electing two-thirds of the colony's district
boards, or local councils, with the remainder appointed by the government.
However, as a percentage of Hong Kong's registered voters, yesterday's vote,
at 33.1 per cent of the electorate, was only ahead marginally of that
achieved in 1991. Hong Kong electoral rolls are not kept up to date.
Candidates estimated that up to 20 per cent of the roll was inaccurate.
Picture, Page 4
