FT  20 APR 94 / Clinton backs wider Nato powers: Moscow calls for
international summit to solve crisis in Bosnia
President Bill Clinton backed a major extension of Nato air power last night
as part of a package of military and diplomatic initiatives aimed at forcing
the Bosnian Serbs back into talks.
A senior White House official, who said the plan would be discussed with
Nato allies, said the president was in favour of a proposal from Mr Boutros
Boutros Ghali, the UN secretary-general, to expand the threat of Nato air
strikes to help protect civilians in all six UN-declared 'safe areas' in
Bosnia - including the eastern Moslem enclave of Gorazde which is on the
point of falling to Serb forces.
The UN mandate is currently restricted to calling for close air support to
protect UN peacekeepers on the ground.
The US initiative emerged after the second of two meetings on Bosnia which
Mr Clinton held with foreign policy advisers. Earlier Ms Dee Dee Myers, his
press secretary, said he believed a negotiated settlement was 'the only way
to end the cycle of violence'.
Mr Clinton said that a proposal from Russia's President Boris Yeltsin for an
urgent summit between Russia, the US and the European Union to solve the
worsening situation in Bosnia 'deserves serious consideration'.
Mr Yeltsin has previously suggested a summit but, coming amid growing calls
for action, the intervention marks a sharp reversal in Russia's previous
sympathetic treatment of the Bosnian Serbs. He urged them to stop their
attack on Gorazde, while Mr Andrei Kozyrev, the foreign minister, warned
Serb forces not to 'test the patience of the world community'.
Last night Bosnian Serbs signed an agreement with the UN to cease fire
immediately around Gorazde and allow deployment of UN peacekeepers. Their
forces had continued to fire on Gorazde yesterday and, as a measure of their
disdain for threats, they also raided a UN encampment near Sarajevo and took
possession of 18 anti-aircraft guns handed to the UN six weeks ago.
UN officials said later that the Serbs had begun to return the weapons.
Also, eight UN military observers, out of more than 50 detained by the Serbs
last week, were freed from house arrest.
In London, Mr John Major said that Britain's objectives in Bosnia had not
changed. He told the Commons this did not alter the 'fact that we wish to
secure a complete ceasefire' but said it was important to be sure there was
general will to provide resources 'before we make any blanket assurances'.
Russia vents fury on Bosnia Serbs, Page 2
UN's odd couple, Page 22
