FT  06 JUL 94 / Walesa in threat to resign over abortion reform
President Lech Walesa has threatened to resign if he is forced to accept an
easing of the country's strict anti-abortion laws voted through recently by
parliament. The governing centre-left coalition has also come under fire
from the Catholic church for postponing the ratification of the concordat, a
treaty with the Vatican, which defines the church's status in Poland.
President Walesa, the father of eight, earlier this week refused to accept
an easing of Poland's tight abortion laws voted in by parliament and said
that he would resign rather than sign the new laws.
Under the constitution parliament now has to muster a two-thirds majority to
overrule a presidential veto and should it be successful the president would
have no choice other than to sign the new law or resign and call an
election.
Earlier this month 241 deputies in the lower chamber voted in favour of
liberalisation allowing women to ask for abortions in 'difficult personal
and economic circumstances'. With 107 against and 32 abstentions this was
only around 10 votes short of the two-thirds majority needed to overrule the
veto.
The ban on abortion, except in cases where the mother's life is endangered,
came into force in March 1993 and saw the number of legal abortions cut from
11,640 in 1992 to 777. Last year the number of births fell, due to
demographic and social factors, to 493,000 from 519,000 the previous year.
Should President Walesa, who is riding low in the popularity ratings, decide
to call an election on the issue he would be pushed to win a majority.
According to recent polls around 30 per cent of voters want to keep
restrictions in place while 56 per cent were in favour of liberalisation.
Meanwhile, Cardinal Jozef Glemp, the Polish Primate, has said he is not
'afraid of war' over the delay in the ratification of the concordat,
Poland's treaty with the Vatican.
Last week, parliament voted to postpone the ratification until a new
constitution was in place next year. The concordat, which includes the
church's right to teach religion in state schools and opens tax loopholes
for the clergy, is deeply unpopular with the former communist Left
Democratic Alliance coalition partner, which believes it gives the church
too many rights. The co-governing Polish Peasants' party is more inclined to
accept the treaty.
Both agreed to postpone ratification in order to avoid increasing tension
within the coalition.
