FT  02 MAR 94 / 'New primitives' drive Serb professionals abroad: Those who
cannot abide the profiteers and extremists
From ballerinas and basketball players to electronics experts and surgeons,
the rump Yugoslavia's professional class is being decimated by emigration.
While no official figures are available, more than 100,000 Serbs are
believed to have left the country since the collapse of the Yugoslav
federation, many of them young men avoiding conscription.
'What's most disturbing is that those leaving are middle class people whose
skills and ideas will be crucial to rebuilding the country once UN sanctions
are lifted,' says Mr Ratomir Tanic of the Civil Alliance, a democratic
opposition party.
South Africa and Zimbabwe, where immigration regulations are comparatively
relaxed, have attracted the largest numbers of Serbian emigrants. Getting to
Canada and the US, where there are well-established expatriate communities
from the former Yugoslavia, is more difficult except for students, say
would-be migrants.
Most young migrants are university students, but some Serbian parents are
spending their hard currency savings to send teenaged children abroad to
finish their secondary education under exchange programmes which have not
been affected by the UN embargo.
'School in Belgrade is getting impossible. You can't get there because the
buses aren't running; kids mess around in class because they don't see any
future in studying and the teachers can't handle it. I want to get out,'
says Ms Ljubica Petrovic, 16, who hopes to finish high school in Canada.
Yet just before Yugoslavia broke apart, prospects for professionals had
rarely looked brighter, under a short-lived reformist government that tried
to promote private business, fiscal modernisation and the restructuring of
the banking system.
However, the impact of UN sanctions has been almost as devastating for the
fledgling private sector as for large state enterprises, where managers'
responsibilities have virtually disappeared as exports halted and workers
were sent home on 'technical leave'.
Hyper-inflation in Serbia and Montenegro eroded savings and forced families
to sell their assets to finance their children's studies abroad, at the same
time removing any incentive for private investment.
The government's new economic programme, which imposes much higher taxes on
private businesses, is expected to drive more people away.
'I don't think there's any understanding of what small entrepreneurs have
been trying to do to keep things running despite sanctions,' says Mrs
Mirjana Blagojevic, a travel agent who used to work for JAT, the former
Yugoslav national carrier. 'The new taxes will wipe out practically all my
profit margin and may send me into retirement abroad.'
The increasing influence of what Belgrade's professional class calls the
'new primitives', the profiteers making money out of sanctions-breaking and
the war in Bosnia and the self-avowed nationalists who have taken senior
jobs in the public administration, has also speeded up the exodus.
'Whether it's the universities, the medical system or the media, there's no
pretence of jobs on merit any more. They mostly go to people close to the
socialists (of President Slobodan Milosevic),' Mr Tanic says. 'In business,
we're moving towards a Latin American situation of powerful criminal groups
effectively controlling the economy.'
The rump Yugoslavia's isolation has already affected the quality of medical
services, for example, although drugs and medical supplies are exempt from
sanctions.
The Child Heart Foundation, set up in Belgrade two years ago to carry out
open-heart surgery, is struggling to survive. Its founder, Dr Vladimir
Hrujak, says two members of his team have found jobs abroad, while funding
has been cut.
'It's a battle to keep going, professionally. In this branch of medicine you
need to keep in close touch with what's happening abroad and I can't do that
any longer. I might be able to get a medical job somewhere abroad, but I
wouldn't be doing heart operations any longer,' Dr Hrujak says.
