FT  25 AUG 94 / Technology: A hidden killer waits to strike - Clive Cookson
continues a series on drug discoveries by looking at ways to fight off
fungal infections
Fungi fight on both sides in the war between people and pathogens. They have
provided several of the most valuable antibiotics used to control bacterial
infections but they are themselves an increasingly important target for the
pharmaceutical industry.
Hospital doctors are alarmed by the rising incidence of life-threatening
fungal infections in cancer and transplant patients, whose immune systems
have been depressed by chemotherapy, and in people with Aids. Although there
are no reliable estimates for the number of people worldwide dying from
fungi, doctors are beginning to think of them as a hidden killer.
According to a survey by the US Centres for Disease Control, the rate of
fungal infection almost doubled from 2.0 to 3.8 per 1,000 hospital patients
between 1980 and 1990. A German study of all autopsies carried out in
Frankfurt showed an even faster increase in invasive fungal infections: from
0.4 per cent in 1978-82 to 1.2 per cent in 1983-87 and 2.4 per cent in
1987-92.
Contributing factors include antibiotic treatments, which wipe out bacteria
and leave the field clear for competing fungi, and the increasing use in
hospitals of intravenous catheters - tubes which provide a route for
infections into the body - as well as the growing number of
'immuno-compromised' patients.
To meet the need, anti-fungal drug sales are expanding fast. Datamonitor,
the business research company, puts the annual growth rate at 19 per cent,
with the world market projected to increase from Dollars 2.5bn (Pounds
1.6bn) in 1993 to Dollars 4.9bn in 1997. Another research company, Frost &amp;
Sullivan, estimates that the US anti-fungal market will grow from Dollars
1.1bn in 1993 to Dollars 2.1bn in 1999.
On the supply side, the market growth is being driven above all by Diflucan,
launched by Pfizer of the US in 1990. Analysts expect Diflucan, which was
developed at Pfizer's UK research centre in Sandwich, Kent, to become the
anti-fungal sector's first Dollars 1bn-a-year drug.
Before Diflucan, the leading treatment for systemic anti-fungal disease  -
serious infections in which microscopic fungi have spread right through the
patient's body - was amphotericin B, an old drug associated with severe
toxic side-effects.
Diflucan has the potency of amphotericin B, with fewer side-effects. It can
be given as an emergency injection to treat life-threatening infections, or
taken by mouth as long-term therapy by immuno-compromised patients who need
to keep fungi at bay.
Although Diflucan was a great improvement on previous treatments for serious
fungal infections, it is far from perfect. The most serious drawback is that
Diflucan does not have a sufficiently broad spectrum of activity. It works
well against Candida, the yeast which is the single most prevalent fungal
pathogen in human beings, but it is much less effective against Aspergillus,
the second most common one. And, ominously, there are signs that
Diflucan-resistant strains of Candida are evolving.
Therefore Pfizer is developing follow-up drugs to hit fungi that do not
respond well to Diflucan. So are several other companies that do not have a
significant presence in the anti-fungal market today but are attracted by
its potential, including Zeneca and Glaxo of the UK and Eli Lilly and Merck
of the US.
Most anti-fungal drugs belong to a class of chemicals called azoles.
Diflucan is an azole. So are Sporanox, Nizoral and Daktarin, the three drugs
sold by Janssen, the Belgian subsidiary of Johnson &amp; Johnson, which is
number two in the anti-fungal market behind Pfizer.
Janssen's biggest development effort at the moment is focused on extending
the uses of Sporanox, which was launched in 1989. Mike Emanuel, the
company's UK research director, says the drug's great advantage is its broad
spectrum of activity, including effectiveness against Aspergillus.
Azoles work by blocking the synthesis of ergosterol, a fungal hormone that
is essential for the maintenance of cell membranes. They have also been
developed by agrochemical researchers to combat fungal diseases in cereals
and fruit.
There are several more azoles in the development pipeline, including one
from Pfizer and another from Zeneca, in Phase II clinical trials. David
Denning of Manchester University Medical School, scientific adviser to the
Fungal Research Trust, is involved in the clinical trials of both Pfizer's
and Zeneca's new azoles. 'They could be useful drugs but I don't think
either is going to be a giant leap forward,' he says.
'What we need is a drug with a completely new mode of action - and that is a
tall order, because a lot of the fungal cell processes are the same as in
mammalian cells,' Denning says. 'Another difficulty is that fungal cells
have a thick coating of sugar molecules; we have to find a chemical
structure that will get through the wall without causing damage to human
cells.'
One fruitful development is the re-formulation of amphotericin B, in a way
that reduces its side-effects while retaining its potency. Two US companies,
Vestar and Liposome Technology, have encapsulated amphotericin B in
microscopic fatty particles called liposomes; these release the drug more
slowly into the patient's body and reduce its toxicity. The products -
Vestar's AmBisome and Liposome's Amphocil (marketed by Zeneca outside North
American and Japan) - have recently been licensed for use against severe
infections that do not respond to other drugs.
The best-selling non-azole drug is Lamisil, launched by Sandoz of
Switzerland in 1991. Whereas Diflucan aims mainly at systemic internal
infections, Lamisil's primary market is the treatment of skin, nail and hair
infections.
These external infections by dermatophyte fungi affect 10 to 15 per cent of
the population, according to David Pearson of Sandoz. Although not
life-threatening, they can be irritating and disfiguring and are extremely
hard to clear up with conventional drugs.
Lamisil, which can be taken by mouth or applied as a cream, is very
effective at eradicating dermatophyte infections. But it is also turning out
to have a broader spectrum of activity than Sandoz originally expected, with
potential for treating some systemic infections too. 'We're forecasting
sales of more than Dollars 800m a year for Lamisil by 1998-99,' Pearson
says.
Chemically, Lamisil is an allylamine. It interferes with ergosterol
production, like the azoles, but at an earlier step in the biosynthetic
pathway. The effect, according to Sandoz, is that Lamisil is 'fungicidal' -
it actually kills them - whereas azoles are just 'fungistatic', keeping the
fungi under control. Therefore patients treated with Lamisil are less likely
to relapse after treatment stops.
'In principle the distinction between fungicidal and fungistatic drugs is
very important,' says Roderick Hay, professor of cutaneous medicine at Guy's
Hospital, London. 'But in practice there is little clinical data yet to show
that it makes any difference.'
Meanwhile, the search continues for entirely new drugs.
At Imperial College, London, Tony Barrett is running a particularly active
anti-fungal chemistry programme. Promising compounds being investigated by
his group include: papuamine, a powerful fungicide produced naturally by
tropical sponges; papulacandins; hennoxazole A; and FR-900848, a research
compound from Fujisawa of Japan.
An elegant approach is to use fungi themselves as a source of new
anti-fungal drugs. It has yielded several promising research leads for Myco
Pharmaceuticals, a Massachusetts biotechnology company.
'There are an estimated 1.5m fungal species worldwide,' says William
Timberland, Myco's vice-president for research. 'Because fungi are competing
with each other in natural eco-systems, one would expect them to produce
anti-fungals to protect themselves from other species.'
The series continues next month by focusing on drugs that act on the immune
system.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
World market for major anti-fungals
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                     Sales(Dollarsm)
Company              Brand           Generic          1993  1997  2002
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Pfizer               Diflucan        fluconazole      634   950  1,000
Johnson &amp; Johnson    Sporanox        itraconazole     125   250    330
Sandoz               Lamisil         terbinafine      122   236    257
Johnson &amp; Johnson    Nizoral         ketoconazole     275   310    230
Bayer                Canesten        clotrimazole     150   170    182
Roche                Loceryl         amorolfine        34    84    101
Bayer                Microspore      bisonazole        76    97    100
Schering Plough      Lotrisone       clotrimazole     106   120    100
Johnson &amp; Johnson    Monistat/       miconazole       125   110     80
                     Daktarin
Bristol-Myers Squibb Fungazone       amphotericin  B   60    50     40
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Total market                                        2,464 4,890    N/A
                                                             Forecast
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Datamonitor
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
