FT  08 MAR 94 / Drug companies face cuts in sales
The suggestion in the Audit Commission's report that doctors should change
their prescribing practices could mean sharp cuts in UK sales for several
drug companies.
The largest single saving would be the Pounds 100m which the report says is
wasted by giving patients unnecessary anti-ulcer drugs when they have milder
complaints such as dyspepsia.
Ulcer drugs Zantac, made by the UK's Glaxo, and Losec, from Sweden's Astra,
are the two top-selling drugs in the UK with combined sales of more than
Pounds 300m a year, according to figures from analysts at Lehman Brothers.
With other conditions which require drugs treatment, substitution of
alternative or unbranded drugs could achieve annual savings of Pounds 75m,
the report says. Some Pounds 8.8m a year could be saved on one SmithKline
Beecham drug alone: heart treatment Tenormin is the 12th most prescribed
drug with sales of Pounds 30m a year. It costs up to four times as much as
its unbranded alternative.
The drugs companies argue that the report is flawed in detail and
conception. Glaxo said that Zantac can legitimately also be prescribed for
conditions other than ulcers, and added that some 4,500 people in the UK die
from ulcer disease each year which 'suggests an under-treated, not
over-treated, area'.
However, Glaxo is among the companies which could benefit from the Audit
Commission's recommendation for increased spending on steroids to ward off
asthma attacks. It has the three top-selling asthma drugs in the UK with
sales of almost Pounds 200m a year, almost two-thirds of which are steroids.
Substituting generic drugs for branded versions would affect some companies
disproportionately. The NHS would save Pounds 2.7m a year by substituting
the generic ibuprofen for Boots' Brufen, one of the company's biggest
selling pharmaceuticals. Almost all of Boots' UK drug sales of about Pounds
33m have generic alternatives and would suffer if more generics were
prescribed.
Fisons, and to a lesser extent Reckitt and Colman, are in a similar
position. Of non-UK companies operating in the UK, American Cyanamid's sales
could be hit most if generic substitution of branded products were
increased. Its antibiotic Minocin, which is the 19th best seller in the UK
with sales of Pounds 26m a year, has several generic alternatives.
Most non-UK companies put their selling efforts into patent-protected drugs.
Even here the report says that money could be saved because a new generation
of anti-depressives, which include Seroxat from SmithKline Beecham and
Prozac from Eli Lilly, are up to 10 times as expensive as older drugs but no
more effective.
