FT  04 JUN 94 / D-Day's absent friend: Consigned to the periphery of the
D-Day anniversary, Germany has emerged as the greatest power in a united
Europe. Quentin Peel explains what the Germans think of it all
Field Marshal Erwin Rommel, the legendary 'Desert Fox', and commander of the
main German force in Normandy at the time of the D-Day landings, would be
astonished, if he were alive today, that Germany has survived at all. He
would be even more baffled, says his son, Manfred, to find it a prosperous
and democratic federal republic.
'At the end of 1943, he had found out so much about the concentration camps,
and the extermination of the Jews, that he was convinced Germany was
condemned to total destruction,' says Manfred.
Field Marshal Rommel never lived to see the day. He was critically wounded
in Normandy on July 17,1944 by a low-flying Allied fighter and evacuated to
Germany. By October, he had been implicated in the July 20 plot to
assassinate Hitler, and was persuaded to commit suicide rather than face a
show trial.
He would no doubt have been equally baffled to see his son, who was 15 years
old when he died, as Lord Mayor of Stuttgart for the past 20 years, a pillar
of Germany's post-war liberal democratic establishment in one of its
wealthiest regions.
'During the Allied invasion, my father had decided that on his own
responsibility he would surrender,' he said. 'That was why he had to be
removed. Yet he could not imagine that Germany would get so much
constructive help after its defeat from its own opponents. He could not have
dreamed that it would eventually become the prize pupil of America.
'After the first world war, one could argue about whether the Germans were
guilty. After the second, it was completely clear - and yet our enemies
behaved generously, and it proved a huge success.'
Germany was not invited to join the allies in the flag-waving nationalism of
their 50th anniversary celebrations of the D-Day landings. Yet the bulging
prosperity on the streets of Stuttgart - the headquarters of Daimler-Benz as
well as the US Seventh Corps - leaves little doubt that 'Germany lost the
war, but won the peace.'
Germany's re-emergence as the dominant economic power in Europe has been
accompanied by a great inner search for a new national identity and pride, a
debate about the dangers of nationalism and a huge effort to find its proper
equilibrium in the centre of Europe.
This old debate is now sharply focussed by the barrage of D-Day
commemorations and the other anniversaries culminating in the victory
celebration on May 8, 1995. Should Germans remember this date as as defeat
or as a liberation from the Nazi dictatorship?
This question has especial poignancy at a time when the Berlin Wall is just
a gap in the landscape across the nation's future capital. And a unified
Germany has recovered its sovereignty in international affairs. Yet, it
lacks a unifying sense of national direction.
The spate of racist violence against foreigners in Germany after
unification, and some signs of a revival of far-right political parties in
local elections, has brought the debate on Germany's national identity under
close scrutiny. Yet it remains a confusing debate for Germans east and west,
let alone for foreign observers.
One year ago, a senior adviser to Chancellor Helmut Kohl argued urgently
that failure on the part of his western allies to invite him to Omaha beach
could cost him victory in this year's general election. The chancellor, he
said, had dedicated his political career to the vision of reconciliation, of
the new Germany being inextricably bound into the twin alliances of Nato and
the European Union. To be snubbed at such a key celebration could be
politically disastrous.
Yet Kohl is most unlikely to have sought an invitation - conscious of having
failed to get one 10 years ago at the 40th anniversary. Any such suggestion
diplomatically faded as it became apparent that even his great ally,
President Francois Mitterrand, was not politically ready or able to extend
the veterans' day parades to include the losing side. Most Germans find it
fairly understandable, even preferable.
'You would hardly expect the French to attend a celebration of the battle of
Waterloo,' says Joachim Fritz-Vannahme, for 10 years a German foreign
correspondent based in Paris for the newspaper Die Zeit. 'It is a military
event, and we were the ones who received a military defeat,' says Renate
Schmidt, vice-president of the German Bundestag, the lower house of
parliament, and leader of the opposition Social Democrats in Bavaria.
'Military events are not my type of commemorations.'
Yet others, including some unlikely allies for the chancellor, regret the
day as a missed opportunity, and a sorry demonstration of the revival of
nationalism around the world.
'The greatest mistake was not to invite both the Germans and the Russians,'
says Daniel Cohn-Bendit, the former hero of the 1968 student barricades in
Paris, son of Jewish refugees from Germany, and now a leading intellectual
force of the German left. 'D-Day is the day of the beginning of liberation
from fascism and totalitarianism. It isn't the victory of the French,
British and Americans against the Germans. They also had to fight French
collaborators and Belgian collaborators.
'The way D-Day will be celebrated is a victory for nationalism, and a black
day for Europe.'
For Cohn-Bendit, however, the most important question for Germans is not
whether the political establishment is invited to attend, but whether they
see the day as liberation or defeat.
The concept of liberation has already been widely accepted. In an opinion
poll published this week in Die Woche, the German weekly newspaper, 69 per
cent said they saw the end of the second world war as liberation rather than
defeat, 13 per cent disagreed, and 14 per cent were undecided. A similar
figure of 67 per cent said they would not have liked to live in Germany if
the Nazis had won the war, and 64 per cent said it was 'good' that Germany
had lost.
President Richard von Weizsacker, the retiring head of state, strongly
articulated this view in a remarkable speech to the Bundestag on May 8,
1985. Yet his successor, Roman Herzog, still felt constrained on the subject
when he was elected last month.
Hildegard Hamm-Brucher, the grand old lady of liberal politics in Germany,
and a rival candidate for the presidency, sees the continuing debate as 'a
sign of precisely how little we have come to terms with this period of our
history. We still don't trust ourselves to say it was the liberation we
never could have achieved on our own.
'If only we could have got rid of Hitler and his criminal band with our own
hands, but we did not.'
She is profoundly concerned at the revival of a debate over Germany's
national identity: 'It worries me very much,' she says. 'There is a strong
feeling of this 'We won the peace'. It could be a good feeling, if it is
combined with modesty and gratitude. But when people like our new right-wing
groups try to cut out all the past, and say Germany is unconquerable, that
means the creation of a dangerous new myth.
'The second myth is that the Jews were not exterminated, and that once again
the Jews are guilty of everything. Something went wrong in telling our
children and grandchildren about it. It is wrong to transfer the feeling of
guilt to young people. They should not feel guilty. It is rather a question
of feeling responsibility for the future, and learning from these historical
disasters. It is a question of learning, and making sure people don't forget
it.'
The conservatives are not the only ones to debate national identity in
Germany. Former Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, for one, believes this is one of
the big questions facing the nation.
'Only after unification in 1990 did the Germans on either side understand
that they were not easily communicating with one another, as between
brothers and sisters. They had lived under diverging influences for almost
half a century,' he says.
'The east Germans did not know until 1990 that their idea of what it means
to be a German was different from what a west German thought. West Germans
have no idea of what life was like under Ulbricht in Dresden.'
Before unification, West Germany's sense of national identity was
deliberately submerged in the country's commitment to west European
integration. Its self-image was best summed up by Professor Karl Dietrich
Bracher of Bonn University, who described it in 1986 as 'a post-national
democracy among nation-states.' East Germany was dedicated to a communist
vision of internationalism, however spurious that may have been.
'We (Germans) want to harness ourselves in Europe. We don't want to
dominate,' says Renate Schmidt. 'We know that dominance brings unrest, it
disturbs the peace. The difference between Britain, France and Germany is
that Germany has been a nation for the shortest time. Many of you don't
understand our debate over federalism. We are profoundly federal. There are
many different identities: Bavarian, Saxon, Hessian, you name it.
'We don't want to be a great nation. We want our economic power to be
controlled within Europe. We regard the revival of nationalism in other
countries, not in Germany, without any pleasure.'
Helmut Schmidt, like Kohl, was committed to the idea of Germany being 'bound
into' the European Union, although he argues that it is as much out of
self-interest as altruism.
'It is not necessarily only in order to restrain ourselves, but also to
prevent coalitions against Germany from ever happening again,' he says.
'Our geo-strategic position in the centre of Europe is almost unique, shared
only by the Poles. When they were weak, they suffered from invasion: by the
Swedes, by the Turks, by the Hungarians, by Genghis Khan, by the French
under Louis XIV and then Napoleon (who is still a great hero to them).
'But then when the Germans became strong, they pushed out from the centre
towards the fringes. They had been doing this in the early Middle Ages. Then
again after the turn of this century.
'Bismarck in his later years understood the difficulties of this
geo-strategic situation, and tried in a very English way, very
pragmatically, to maintain a balance of power in Europe, in order to prevent
a coalition against Germany.
'We are not acting simply from idealistic reasons in saying Germany must
bind itself in (to Europe). I am relying on very solid historical
experience, which makes it clear to me that we have to bind ourselves in to
greater entities in order to avoid repetition of the grave mistakes under
Kaiser Wilhelm II and the unbelievable crimes under Hitler.'
He is uncertain if the argument is enough to persuade good Germans to remain
good Europeans.
Robert Leicht, editor in chief of Die Zeit, is more sanguine. 'Our European
commitment for decades has been a compensation for the fact that we didn't
have a decent nation state,' he says. 'We were discredited by Hitler and
divided by the Cold War. The consensus on Europe was the only building left
to live in.
'The question after 1989 is whether this is a real consensus, or was it a
psychological or tactical smokescreen? My answer so far is that the basic
(European) conviction is much stronger than I supposed.'
Professor Heinrich August Winkler, of the Humboldt university in former East
Berlin, sees two great challenges to Germany in the immediate future, which
are not necessarily easy to reconcile.
'On the one hand, it has to hurry along the inner, psychological unification
process, which in view of four decades of mutual alienation means nothing
less than rebuilding the German nation. On the other hand, the Europeanising
and Westernising of Germany, probably the most effective insurance against a
relapse into German nationalism, has to proceed.'
When Herzog was elected to be the next German president, many on the left
decried his apparently conservative credentials. Yet his statements on
nationalism have been clear. 'I do not believe that national feeling, or
even national pride - a concept which I treat with extreme caution - can
still be a motivating factor for our people,' he said. As for the idea that
the German people share a 'common blood' - still enshrined in the legal
definition of a German national - he said it would only be entertained by an
unreconstructed Nazi.
In his acceptance speech, he stressed one quality he hoped to see in Germans
above all else - what he described as being unverkrampft. He admitted
afterwards that the concept could scarcely be translated into English ('You
aren't verkrampft,' he said apologetically.) It most nearly means being
'relaxed', although literally it is the quality of 'not being cramped up'.
He was clearly referring to the whole debate over national identity, who won
the war, and who won the peace.
For Daniel Cohn-Bendit, the answer is straightforward enough. 'We will only
be genuinely unverkrampft once we can talk freely of D-Day or May 8,' he
says, 'and if we can see them as events of liberation. That is true for us
all.'
D-Day books, Page XV
