FT  11 MAY 94 / Survey of Spain (2): The nationalists are the powerbrokers -
One political cycle may have ended. But when will the next begin?
Mr Jose Maria Aznar, the leader of the opposition, says that the general
elections last June marked the end of a political cycle and the start of a
new one. He implies that the day when he will take power as head of a
centre-right Partido Popular (PP) government is at hand.
The first assertion is indisputably true, for last year's vote ended the
overall parliamentary majority that Mr Felipe Gonzalez, the Socialist prime
minister, had enjoyed over three terms since 1982. But the timing of the
next cycle is open to doubt - quite apart from the inevitability of the big
swing to the PP that Mr Aznar takes for granted.
Opinion polls indicate that the PP opposition is likely to win June's
European elections and that the Socialists will suffer their first
nationwide electoral defeat in 12 years. But Mr Gonzalez, although he is
short of a parliamentary majority can in theory stagger on until 1997.
This seems to be what Mr Gonzalez wants to do. Corruption scandals have
severely dented his credibility but he is hoping that over the next two
years the economy will recover sufficiently to bring him, or his anointed
successor in the socialist party, back to power.
But even with expert corruption damage control, the prime minister can only
stagger on in theory. Mr Gonzalez does not, in fact, control the timing of
the next cycle, any more than Mr Aznar does. The powerbrokers of domestic
politics are Mr Jordi Pujol, leader of the Catalan nationalists, and to a
lesser extent Mr Javier Arzallus, the leader of the Basque nationalists.
When a hung parliament was returned after last June's elections, the 17
representatives of Catalonia's Covergencia i Unio (CiU) group in parliament
and the five members of the Basque Nationalist Party (PNV) joined forces
with the 159 Socialist deputies to ensure the necessary majority in the
350-member legislature for Mr Gonzalez's investiture as prime minister for a
fourth term. After long negotiations between Mr Gonzalez's Socialists and Mr
Pujol's CiU, the Catalan nationalists subsequently voted alongside the
socialists to push the government's budget through parliament last autumn
and its labour market reform legislation in the spring.
The prime minister needs the nationalist votes to remain in power - just as
the opposition leader needs them to prevent the Socialist government serving
out its full term. A Catalan and Basque defection to Mr Aznar's 141-strong
PP camp in parliament would sooner rather than later trigger a mid-term
general election.
There is nothing intrinsically worrying about a parliament in which a
minority party, or in this case two minority parties, can make or break
governments. But the situation in the Madrid parliament is different.
Fundamentally, Mr Gonzalez and Mr Aznar subscribe to the same agenda. Mr
Pujol and Mr Arzallus share a different one.
The two nationalist leaders make no bones about the fact that their guiding
political principle is an ever-greater degree of home rule for Catalonia and
for the Basque country respectively. As powerbrokers, the Catalan and the
Basque nationalist parties are in an ideal position to exert the leverage
which will further their political aims.
To push through legislation, Mr Gonzalez he has often had to resign himself
to painstaking horse-trading on a case-by-case basis. As a result of the
budget negotiations, Mr Pujol obtained a measure of fiscal autonomy for the
Generalitat, the Barcelona-based Catalan government. He will certainly want
more this coming autumn (under the present arrangement the Generalitat keeps
15 per cent of the income tax raised in Catalonia) when the 1995 budget is
debated.
Meanwhile, the PNV has abstained from further support for the government and
Mr Arzallus has recently stepped up his nationalist rhetoric to emphasise
Basque separateness. This is because elections to the 75-member Basque
parliament are scheduled for October; this regional poll pits the PNV
against the Socialists, the other main party in the area.
Mr Arzallus is right to be concerned that PNV votes will be lost to Basque
radicals and to the conservative PP if his mainstream Nationalist party
continues to back the Socialist government in Madrid. Mr Pujol, who shares
the Basque leader's Christian Democrat policies, will face the same worry in
the spring of 1996, when elections to the 135-member Catalan parliament take
place, because the CiU's main rival is also the Socialist party.
The consequences of a hung parliament and of nationalist party powerbrokers
are only now beginning to be properly digested by analysts.
It is very possible that neither the socialists nor the PP, that is to say
the national parties as opposed to the nationalist parties, will in future
elections obtain the sort of commanding majority that from 1982-93 allowed
Mr Gonzalez to dictate terms to the Pujols and the Arzalluses of Spain's
political establishment.
This means that, whether they like it or not, Mr Gonzalez and Mr Aznar will
have to accept the inexorable drift towards federalism of Spanish politics.
It is Mr Pujol who best understands - or at least best explains - what
Spanish-style federalism could mean.
The Catalan leader will continue to press for fiscal autonomy for his
region's 6m population and he will also step up his campaign to make Catalan
the language used in the area's schools.
But his central ambition is a loosely federated Spain in which the Spanish
monarch is not King of Spain but King of 'the Spains' - reigning over a
federation of nationalities.
Mr Arzallus's authority extends over an area where nationalism has more
confrontational overtones. Radical Basques, who represent at least 15 per
cent of the area's 1.2m electorate, seek secession from Spain; they give
political respectability to the ETA organisation which has been responsible
for about 600 deaths in its 25-year-old campaign for Basque independence.
On practical issues, for example, Mr Arzallus wants Basques to have sole
prerogatives over the area's ports and airports and over social security
budgets for the elderly and the unemployed. In all, there are 54 devolution
'chapters' that the PNV has placed on the negotiating table.
But the Basque leader's ideal is to have an enlarged Basque country,
incorporating parts of south-west France and the adjoining Spanish province
of Navarre, forming a Basque nation within the European Union. A former
Jesuit and very much a realist despite his rhetoric, Mr Arzallus will settle
for sort of monarch-viceroy relationship that is championed by Mr Pujol.
Unsurprisingly, Mr Gonzalez and Mr Aznar discuss in private the dangers of a
drift towards a federalism and jointly exploring what they call a 'unity of
criteria' over the new framework of Spanish politics. They want to agree on
ground rules which will allow them to say 'enough is enough' to nationalist
pressure.
Neither politician relishes the prospect of Catalan or Basque parties
setting the timing of political cycles. Nor are Mr Gonzalez and Mr Aznar at
all comfortable with a leverage which allows the nationalists to pursue
their separate agendas.
