FT  27 JUL 94 / Three ex-premiers back plan to set up new party in Japan
Three former Japanese prime ministers have agreed in principle to try to
form a large centre-right party, a step towards the regrouping of Japan's
fragmented political opposition.
Mr Toshiki Kaifu, a pioneer of political reform who left the ruling Liberal
Democratic party last month; Mr Tsutomu Hata, leader of the Japan Renewal
party, the linchpin of the last coalition government; and Mr Morihiro
Hosokawa, head of the Japan New party, met this week for their first
discussion of joint policies.
Their lunchtime meeting, at a Tokyo hotel, is the fruit of four weeks of
behind-the-scenes preparation by party officials, led by the JRP's Mr Ichiro
Ozawa, the former coalition government's backroom strategist. Such senior
figures would only meet if officials had already come to an outline
agreement to join forces. Speaking in Washington, Mr Ozawa said he aimed to
form the new party, to be larger than the LDP, by September.
The partners agreed to Mr Kaifu's proposals that the new party should
support Japan's participation in the prevention of international disputes,
uphold the Japan-US security treaty as the staple of Asian regional
stability, and that it should promote UN controls on the arms trade. On
domestic policy, Mr Kaifu called for deregulation and reductions in Japan's
high consumer goods and land prices.
Broadly, the trio advocates a higher profile for Japan in international
affairs and more radical economic deregulation than the current
one-month-old conservative administration.
Mr Kaifu appears to have become the trio's informal figurehead. He was the
previous coalition government's candidate for prime minister, in a
parliamentary vote won late last month by the combined forces of the LDP and
Social Democratic party. Mr Kaifu was LDP prime minister for just over two
years until 1991, when he lost office because of his party's reservations
about his eagerness to reform the corrupt political system. In the event,
the first non-LDP government for 38 years, under Mr Hosokawa, achieved
parliamentary agreement on reform plans similar to Mr Kaifu's.
If the blueprint for the new party does turn into reality, it will confirm a
trend seen by many political observers for the present web of political
alliances to simplify into two or three groups. These would include the LDP
and the new centre-right party, similar to the US Republicans and Democrats,
plus a left-wing fringe.
