FT  29 JAN 94 / UK halts Bosnia aid after worker killed
Britain yesterday suspended all official aid convoys throughout the former
Yugoslavia after gunmen, believed to be Moslems, shot dead a British aid
worker and wounded two others as they tried to escape, in the central
Bosnian town of Zenica.
Only hours after the incident, three journalists working for Italian state
television were killed in fighting in the south-western Bosnian town of
Mostar, which is under siege by Bosnian Croat irregular troops.
The Italian Foreign Ministry said the three - a reporter, a cameraman and a
sound technician for the state broadcasting organisation RAI - were killed
during a mortar attack in the Moslem-held eastern part of the town.
The British aid workers, employees of the Overseas Development
Administration, were abducted in Moslem-controlled Zenica by a group of
uniformed men with assault rifles, according to Ms Sylvana Foa, spokeswoman
for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
'The way it was described to us in the first report (by the two survivors)
was that it was a gang, an armed gang,' she said. 'I don't think this is the
policy of any government to do something like this.'
After being seized in their Range Rover outside the European Union's relief
warehouse in Zenica, the Britons were driven out of town and ordered out of
their vehicle. The 'bandits' beat them and robbed them.
One of the Britons, Mr Paul Goodall, was shot dead immediately while the
other two ran away towards a river. Both of them were shot and wounded, but
managed to escape.
Mr Goodall was the 11th aid worker to be killed in the former Yugoslavia.
The UNHCR is also considering whether to suspend its aid operations in the
area, as it did for a month after an aid convoy driver was shot dead in
October, according to the organisation's spokesman in Sarajevo, Mr Ron
Redmond.
'What we have now is people attacking their own military as well as our own
(UN) people. We're extremely concerned about that, and obviously if this
kind of thing continues, we are not going to be able to operate,' Mr Redmond
said.
