FT  27 APR 94 / Leading Article: Eurosuperman step forward
The next president of the European Commission, to be chosen in an obscure
political bargaining process in the next two months, will take over as the
European Union's chief executive at a crucial juncture in its history. At a
time when the US is hesitating over its future commitment to Europe, and the
regions east and south of the EU's borders are threatened by instability, it
is more vital than ever that the Union be vigorous and outward-looking. A
correspondingly open debate is required about the selection process. It is
time to set out the essential criteria that should govern the choice of the
person who, during the next five years, will represent Europe within the
continent and on a wider stage.
The president will take the helm when the EU's objectives are becoming more
disparate, more important, and more controversial. Disparate, because the EU
is shifting away from an exclusive focus on deepening co-operation among the
12 as it tries to extend integration northwards and eastwards. Important,
because EU membership is the main hope of future prosperity and stability
for central and eastern European countries formerly separated by cold war
division. Controversial, because many EU's objectives, or at least those
spotted among the confusing verbiage of the Maastricht treaty, have aroused
widespread public scepticism. Expectations of a sizeable anti-Maastricht
vote in the European parliament elections in June reflect not only the
effects of recession, but also the perception that those who govern Europe
are out of step with the governed.
Exceptional talents
The successful candidate will need to build on the strengths demonstrated by
Mr Jacques Delors, the incumbent since 1985. Mr Delors has for the most part
mounted an effective synthesis of policies that were practicable and
desirable, above all in launching and carrying through the single market
process, as well as presiding over reforms of the Community budget.
In three vital areas, the new president will need exceptional talents.
First, he (this time round, it seems unlikely to be a she) will need to be a
supreme administrator, capable of managing more efficiently a Commission
bureaucracy employing 10,000 people and with an annual budget of Ecu70bn.
Streamlining the Commission will be a priority after next year's planned
enlargement.
Second, in the economic field, the successful candidate must reinforce the
EU's support for an open world trade system and policies that avoid
subjecting wealth-creating business to unnecessary regulation. The emphasis
on labour market flexibility in Mr Delors' white paper last year was a step
in the right direction. More strong guidance from the top will be needed if
Europe is to catch up its competitive lag with the US and south-east Asia.
Political adroitness
Third, the next leader in Brussels will require political adroitness and
vision to foster accord on future priorities among the main member states. A
constructive partnership among Germany, France and Britain, in areas ranging
from defence and security to monetary policies, has been impeded by the
strains of post-cold war upheaval. The oppportunity for reaching consensus
will, however, improve as the European recession ends. Drawing up an
effective post-Maastricht agenda will be easier if the governments emerging
from elections in Germany and France during the next 12 months take a fairly
relaxed approach over the timetable for monetary union.
Of the three main candidates for the Brussels job currently in the running -
Mr Jean-Luc Dehaene from Belgium, Mr Ruud Lubbers from the Netherlands, and
the UK's Sir Leon Brittan - none matches perfectly the exacting criteria set
out above. All display tough-mindedness, but none can claim to combine broad
appeal with visionary thinking. Unburdened by government office, Sir Leon
has at least done Europe a favour by running an open campaign for office.
The job of running the Commission is much too important to be determined by
a selection procedure with the transparency of a papal election. When the EU
decides its next but one Commission president, in 1999, the post should be
chosen through an open election process.
