FT  31 OCT 94 / Equity Markets: Report on BT reveals the secret of global
success - International issues
It's not often that the tactical decisions made during a tricky global share
offering are made public. So a report from the National Audit Office
offering a bird's eye view of what made the UK Treasury's sale last summer
of its third and final stake in British Telecommunications 'a success' is
required reading indeed.
Between the date the sale was announced in November 1992 and the date the
shares were priced in July 1993, existing BT shares held their market value
relative to the FT-SE index. The shares were sold at no discount to the
market price, earning the Treasury almost exactly the Pounds 3.8bn it had
hoped to make.
The report might make instructive reading for Japan's Ministry of Finance,
which is considering how it ought to organise future privatisations
following the poor reception given its partial privatisation of Japan
Tobacco last week.
Broadly speaking, global book-building, pioneered in the US, requires
sustained marketing by a selling syndicate before any shares are priced at
all. During the book-building process, bids are received for shares and the
price and actual allocations are set with respect to visible market demand.
Because the ultimate proceeds to the seller are dependent upon the trading
price for existing shares immediately before pricing, global book-building
exercises can be vulnerable if shareholders or others engage in
short-selling or in outright share sales.
It was this point which made the UK government's BT3 sale so controversial
and almost from the start, SG Warburg, global co-ordinator for the deal, was
embroiled in controversy.
In the weeks leading up to the sale of 1.31bn shares in BT in July 1993,
there were charges and counter-charges of attempts to manipulate the BT
share price, both by institutional investors and Warburg.
In that environment, the fact that the sale raised Pounds 3.79bn for the
Treasury while most institutional investors surveyed viewed the sale as a
success, is an achievement.
The NAO report, issued last week, lists three key factors contributing to
this success.
First, the Treasury and its advisers, Warburg, kept the markets in the dark
about exactly how many shares were going to be offered to international
investors. They were told the amount they could buy would depend on the
level of domestic demand.
Second, the sales and commission structure was such that the firm which
worked the hardest to sell the shares could receive the commission, even if
ultimately the bid to buy shares was booked through another firm. The NAO
study shows that while 57 per cent of allocations to institutions were
booked through Warburg, it only earned 36 per cent of the sales commission.
Third, the Treasury and Warburg went to great lengths to ensure that those
who had sold BT shares before the offering would be denied the opportunity
to buy new ones.
It was this final effort which caused such friction between UK institutional
investors and Warburg. The NAO report contains the startling admission that
the Treasury went so far as to discuss asking the financial regulators to
give it information about who was selling BT shares so it could deny them
allocations from the offering. After hearing from its own lawyers that this
was clearly illegal, the Treasury considered other methods.
In the end, the Treasury and Warburg had to content themselves with an
undertaking by the Stock Exchange to monitor large transactions in BT shares
in the run-up to pricing. The rancour among institutional investors showed,
although the report suggests this may have actually deterred some sales.
