FT  28 SEP 94 / ICI and EniChem to float EVC in Amsterdam
EVC International, a European plastics joint venture between ICI of the UK
and Italy's EniChem, plans to float about 60 per cent of its share capital
on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange in a deal likely to value the company at
more than Fl 1bn (Pounds 365m).
The flotation is scheduled to take place in November. EVC is Europe's
biggest maker of polyvinyl chloride with about 19 per cent of the market and
sales last year of Fl 1.9bn.
Half of the flotation proceeds, between Fl 600m and Fl 700m, will represent
the sale of new shares. The other half will be of shares owned by ICI and
EniChem, whose combined stake will fall to about 40 per cent.
ICI will take an exceptional write-down of Pounds 125m as EVC's balance
sheet is restructured. Mr Alan Spall, finance director, said this was
largely a book adjustment as the way in which the accounting for EVC's
assets had changed.
ICI and EniChem will undertake not to sell additional shares until after
EVC's results for 1995 are published in early 1996.
The PVC market, in common with that for other plastics, has been in deep
recession since the end of the 1980s. EVC has made heavy losses since 1991.
The price has recovered to a level last seen in 1991 thanks to higher demand
from the construction and building materials sector, which accounts for 61
per cent of EVC's sales.
EVC is registered in Amsterdam. Its operations are co-ordinated from
Brussels, and it has plants in Germany, Britain, Italy, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland and Austria. Mr Nigel Taylor, finance director, said that
Amsterdam had been chosen for the flotation to underline EVC's pan-European
character.
The flotation will consist of two institutional share offers, for Dutch and
international institutions, as well as a retail share offer in the
Netherlands. SG Warburg Securities and UBS will act as global co-ordinators,
while ING Bank of the Netherlands will handle the Amsterdam listing.
Mr Ettore dell'Isola, chief executive officer, said EVC would use its part
of the proceeds to reduce debt, giving it a debt-to-equity ratio of less
than 30 per cent.
Lex, Page 26
