FT  03 OCT 94 / Tragedy overshadows PM's demise: John Lloyd talks to
Estonia's ousted leader whose success was clouded by secret deals
After last week's tragic events in Estonia, the fall of Mr Mart Laar, prime
minister of the country for two years, has been sidelined. The sinking of
the ferry Estonia revealed a country still uncertain of its capacities to
absorb the technical, organisational and moral consequences of the disaster:
but the forced resignation of Mr Laar has so far shown a political nation
determined to observe a constitutional order still in its infancy.
Estonia is by some way the most successful of the former Soviet states in
sloughing off a forced Sovietisation, and Mr Laar, in what was by
post-communist standards a long premiership, was the central figure in the
success. Dr Werner Unger, the former German ambassador to the European
Commission, in Tallinn last week to advise on the country's efforts to
accede to the European Union, ran through a checklist of achievements: 'A
pluralistic democracy, a market economy, liberalised trade, 60 per cent of
enterprises privatised, GDP growing, unemployment (1.8 per cent) much lower
than western Europe, no budget deficit, public debt 5 per cent of GDP,
exports growing, imports growing more rapidly because of the purchase of
investment goods and an influx of foreign investment. Wonderful.'
Why on earth should a prime minister go after all of that? Because he was
seen to conceal vital matters from parliament, a grave matter in a
plain-speaking state. Soon after his accession to office in October 1992, he
and Mr Siim Kallas, chairman of the Estonian central bank, sold nearly
Rbs2bn which had been dumped in the bank just before the country adopted its
own kroon currency - to Chechnya, the rebel Russian republic. It was done
secretly, by intermediaries who were close to the prime minister, and it
came to light only this year; it was underscored by the revelation of
another secret Laar deal: to buy small arms from Israel for Estonia's new
armed forces.
The case against is that Mr Laar concealed the deal, and may have allowed
intermediaries to benefit (there has been no public charge that he benefited
himself) and thus damaged a still fragile democratic system. His defence,
vigorously put in an interview, is that 'there was no time for discussion;
Kallas and I were the monetary committee charged with all matters affecting
the introduction of the new currency; and frankly, the money helped us
enormously in making the budget.'
The three-to-one vote against him in the parliament last week he interprets
as a signal that the parties in coalition with his Pro Patria group, unable
to sustain the hard pounding attendant on severe observance of a tight money
programme, were seeking ways out. The social democrats, whose defection
sealed his fate, left because they could not get a rise in the low
unemployment benefit. For the neo-liberal Mr Laar, issues like these are
fundamental. 'We have been pressing hard on the people out of work to get
other jobs. We won't increase the benefit except to those who take training
for new jobs. And you see the result: low unemployment.'
The two institutions which have done most to ingrain the market culture into
Estonia - the Laar cabinet and the central bank - remain very largely
confident that they have shorn up capitalism against any future ruin.
Nowhere else in the post- Soviet mosaic has such a self-confident cadre of
reformers emerged. Mr Enn Teimann, the deputy chairman of the bank, says
that 'the legislation of the country (which forbids the central bank to lend
money to the budget) will not allow irresponsibility. It is possible that
politicians can change this but I don't fear it.'
The prime minister, who had in parliament warned that Estonia was still a
fragile country vulnerable to populism, appeared to largely discount that:
'It would be very hard. There has been such a change of character in the
people. The old communist nomenclatura has no base.'
Mr Laar's optimism is bolstered by the fact that his partner in the
concealed rouble deal, central bank chairman Kallas, has emerged as the
candidate of the right for prime minister, and is supported by some of those
who passed the vote of censure on the prime minister.
The opposition parties are very much divided: the only candidate talked of
is Mr Tiit Vahi, briefly prime minister before Mr Laar, who, says the
latter, left him a legacy of high inflation and an untackled structural
crisis. 'For the first months I had an appointment book which was full from
morning to night with meetings with directors, who wanted the cheap credit
they had always got. I told each of them 'you cannot get it'.'
Choosing a new prime minister is the task of Mr Lennart Meri, the president
 -a role with limited powers which, Mr Laar (no ally) says he constantly
tried to exceed. Mr Meri, consumed last week with the dolorous task of
giving public representation to his country's loss, will this week resume
the talks with faction leaders from which a candidate should come. His own
preference is for a centrist figure: Mr Kallas is not that. Estonia may be
in for a change of course: but it will not be fundamental.
