FT  11 MAY 94 / Markets Report: Firmer tone to dollar
Continued speculation of a tightening in US interest rates and positive
developments on the US-Japan trade dispute helped the dollar finish firmer
yesterday, writes Philip Gawith.
The US currency was also bought on the back of a rumour that the Federal
Reserve and the Bundesbank would move in concert today by respectively
raising and lowering rates.
The Fed did not move, as some had expected, to tighten policy ahead of the
Dollars 29bn quarterly Treasury refunding auction which started yesterday
and finishes today.
Against a background of fairly quiet trade, the dollar closed in London at
DM1.6705 from DM1.6579 and at Y103.900 from Y102.875. Analysts said the
dollar's recovery had not yet gone far enough to be convincing. In New York
it ended at DM1.6725 and Y104.415.
Elsewhere, the Bundesbank cut the repo rate to 5.35 from 5.41 per cent, in
line with market expectations. There is speculation in the market that the
Bundesbank council may lower the discount rate when it meets today.
Sterling was slightly firmer against the D-Mark on the back of a firmer
dollar, closing at DM2.4907 from DM2.4801. It lost  1/2 cent against the
dollar, finishing at Dollars 1.491.
In his first policy speech to the Lower House of parliament, after taking
office on April 25, Mr Tsutomu Hata, the Japanese prime minister, commented:
'Given persistent foreign criticism over the closed nature of Japan's
markets, it is important to change the economic structure . . . in order to
seek gradual shrinkage of the current account surplus.'
He said Japan would also try to restart the deadlocked trade talks with the
US. Mr Hata said Japan must pursue 'drastic' economic reforms for its own
benefit, opening its markets through deregulation and managing its economy
to achieve domestic demand-led growth.
He also said that Japan should implement the economic package adopted in
February and implement the market opening measures, set out in March, by
June.
The inability of Japan to reduce the size of the current account surplus is
widely seen as a reason for recent yen strength.
Earlier Mr Kantor had counselled patience in the stalled US trade talks,
saying: 'With some more discussion, we believe we could re-engage (the trade
talks) on an informal basis.'
Another explanation offered for the firmer dollar was rumoured dollar
buying, later denied, by the Swiss National Bank in the Far East.
Mr Paul Chertkow, head of global currency research at UBS, said if the
dollar broke above Dollars 1.69 and Y104.50 a sustained appreciation could
be expected. In the short term, a successful refunding auction might improve
the tone of the dollar.
There was talk yesterday of Japanese participation in the auction as a
possible quid pro quo for the US administration toning down its critical
rhetoric.
Mr Neil MacKinnon, chief economist at Citibank, said the dollar was being
undermined by the rerating of the D-Mark, based upon the upward revision of
German growth forecasts, and money markets now discounting the bottom of
German interest rates in September 1994.
Also lending support to the dollar was some anticipation of a possible 25
basis-point cut in the German discount rate today, from the current 5 per
cent. The rate was last reduced on April 14.
Arguments for and against are fairly evenly split. Although analysts believe
a cut is possible, few believe the Bundesbank is in a position where it must
move.
The repo rate cut to 5.35 per cent means that the Bundesbank has now, over
11 consecutive weeks, lowered the rate by 65 basis points to 5.35 per cent.
German call money was quoted at 5.50/60 per cent after the repo allocation,
from 5.35/50 per cent on Monday. Dealers cited weak bank reserve holdings as
being the reason for firmer rates.
Trade in the futures market was fairly weak, with the June Euromark contract
closing at 95.02 from 95.03. The December contract ended four basis points
firmer at 95.19.
In Europe the Belgian Franc ended unchanged at BFr20.58 per D-Mark after the
Belgian National bank trimmed its central rate to 5.45 per cent from 5.50
per cent.
Mr MacKinnon said the fact that the bank had felt constrained to cut by only
5, instead of the normal 10, basis points 'suggests the pace of easing is
being compelled to slow down (by the rate of decline in German rates)'.
The Italian lira finished firmer at L954.2 against the D-Mark from L958.9.
Mr Silvio Berlusconi was expected to present a new government to President
Scalfaro yesterday evening.
The Bank of England injected Pounds 420m liquidity into the UK money market
after forecasting a Pounds 400m shortage. Overnight money moved in the 3 3/4
to 4 7/8 per cent range. In the futures market the June short sterling
contract closed at 94.60 from 94.56.
