FT  13 JUL 94 / Tobacco spurs Philip Morris: Marlboro volumes rise 18 per
cent to 99bn cigarettes in three months
Philip Morris, the US food and tobacco group that makes Marlboro, the
world's best-selling cigarette, shrugged off strong anti-smoking sentiment
in the US and reported a 17.6 per cent surge in after-tax profits to Dollars
1.23bn (Pounds 783m) in its second quarter.
It was the first profits increase reported by Philip Morris since Marlboro
Friday in April last year, when the company slashed the price of Marlboro
and other premium brands in the US to win back market share from cheaper
products.
Worldwide, Philip Morris sold 18 per cent more cigarettes in the three
months to June than a year earlier. Marlboro volumes rose 18 per cent to
99bn cigarettes and volumes of all Philip Morris brands rose 17.9 per cent
to 187bn cigarettes.
Philip Morris cited strong volume gains in Germany, Italy, France, Spain,
central and eastern Europe, the Middle East, Japan, Korea, Argentina and
Brazil. Growth was particularly strong in the domestic market, where Philip
Morris increased sales by 21.9 per cent to 57.9bn cigarettes.
Philip Morris acknowledged that US gains were inflated by an increase in
stocks as wholesalers accelerated purchases in expectation of a rise in
federal excise tax. Last year's second quarter, by contrast, had seen stock
levels cut; so the industry as a whole had experienced 11 per cent growth in
US volumes.
However, the price cuts enabled Philip Morris to increase its market share
by 5 percentage points to 46.6 per cent. Marlboro's share rose by 6.5
percentage points to a record 28.5 per cent.
Although Philip Morris was selling its cigarettes at lower prices in the US,
the increased volumes helped lift operating income in the domestic tobacco
division by 25.1 per cent to Dollars 858m - seemingly vindicating the
strategy of Mr Michael Miles, the chairman and chief executive ousted three
weeks ago, who instigated Marlboro Friday.
Mr Miles fell out with the board over his support for a plan to lift Philip
Morris's share price by hiving off cigarette-making operations into a
separate entity. His successors - Mr William Murray, chairman, and Mr
Geoffrey Bible, chief executive - have ruled out a split for the forsee-able
future.
Paradoxically, the food side of the business performed relatively poorly in
the second quarter: worldwide operating income rose only 2.4 per cent to
Dollars 949m, while operating income on the tobacco side rose 22.4 per cent
to Dollars 1.5bn. Philip Morris blamed investment costs in emerging markets
and adverse exchange rates.
Group turnover rose from Dollars 15.8bn to Dollars 16.4bn. Earnings per
share increased 19.3 per cent to Dollars 1.42, helped by share repurchases.
Net income for the first six months rose 6.2 per cent to Dollars 2.4bn.
