FT  19 MAY 94 / One member, 0.0001% of the vote: Democracy it isn't, in the
first of a series on Labour's electoral college - Leadership contest
Do not be misled by the terminology. They may call it one-member-one-vote;
the numbers involved may make it the biggest consultation exercise ever
carried out by a British political party; but democratic it is not.
Officially, Labour's leadership campaign is not yet under way. Formal
campaigning is being held up until after the funeral of John Smith in
Edinburgh tomorrow, and a meeting of the ruling national executive committee
next week.
But it is already clear that the complex electoral system, adopted last year
with the intention of reducing the role of union leaders, has had the
largely unintended effect of increasing the influence of Labour MPs.
The system uses an electoral college split into three equal parts: the
party's MPs and MEPs; its individual members; and members of unions which
pay the political levy.
Labour officials have been pointing out this week that ordinary party
members will have a much greater say in the election of their next leader
than their Tory counterparts. The claim is true, but the system is
considerably less democratic than that used by the Liberal Democrats, which
gives all party members a single vote of equal value.
In fact, the Labour process is highly inequitable because of the deliberate
distortions in voting power. Each of the 275 MPs and 45 MEPs accounts for
0.1040 per cent of the votes; each of the 250,000 party members accounts for
0.0001 per cent; and each of the 4.5m levy payers for just 0.000007 per
cent. Put another way, each MPs' vote is worth 800 times that of a party
member, and 14,500 times that of a levy-payer.
To the regret of some - notably Lord Healey, the former deputy leader - MPs
are unlikely ever to recover the sole power to elect the leader that they
enjoyed before 1981. But they wield far more influence in this election than
they did between 1981 and 1993, when union leaders controlled 40 per cent of
the electoral college votes.
The crucial rule is that the leader must be be nominated by 12.5 per cent of
the parliamentary party (20 per cent if the party is in government). In
practice, this means that the MPs conduct a primary contest which weeds out
candidates with little parliamentary support, even if they can mobilise
substantial backing among activists and union members.
The system works strongly in favour of MPs with strong backing at
Westminster, such as Mr Tony Blair, the shadow home secretary, Mr Robin
Cook, shadow trade and industry secretary, and Mr Gordon Brown, shadow
chancellor. But candidates whose support is largely in the constituencies
and the unions, such as Mr John Prescott, shadow employment secretary, and
possibly Mrs Margaret Beckett, deputy leader, risk being squeezed out of the
race before it starts.
The procedure also gives substantial influence to special interest groups
among MPs, who can get a candidate on to the ballot by collecting a mere 34
nomination signatures. Once in the race, the support of a special interest
group is worth its weight in gold: the Scottish group of 49 MPs, for
example, will dispose of 15 per cent of the MPs and MEPs' votes, and 5.2 per
cent of the total electoral college votes.
Unfortunately for the candidates, it may not be that simple because even
special interest groups can rarely be relied on to act as a bloc. Many of
the Scottish group, for example, will back Mr Brown, MP for Dunfermline
East, but a number of rightwing Scots will plump for Mr Blair, and
leftwingers may support either Mr Cook or Mr Prescott.
There are other potentially important groupings, many of which overlap. Many
women MPs will vote for Mrs Beckett, and there is support among the large
group of north-east MPs for Mr Jack Cunningham, shadow foreign secretary,
who sits for Copeland.
More formal groupings have less power than they did. Tribune, for example,
has been infiltrated by so many centre and rightwing MPs that it now
contains supporters of several different candidates.
There are other complications, too. The NEC has yet to decide whether the
ballot will be secret, as it was before 1981, or open, as it has since been.
The difference is important: a secret ballot makes promises of support
unreliable, but an open ballot would subject some MPs to pressure from
constituency activists.
The timing could also influence the prospects of some candidates. The NEC
will probably decide on Wednesday whether the ballot should be held
immediately after the European elections on June 9, or delayed until the
party conference in the autumn. A delay would ensure that both the
leadership and deputy leadership could be contested, increasing the options
for Mr Cook, Mr Prescott and Mrs Beckett. The shape of the battle will
remain unclear, however, until the NEC fires the starting gun.
