FT  20 MAY 94 / Survey of Greek Banking and Finance (7): System suits the
self-employed - Kerin Hope finds franchising and leasing arrangements both
flourishing
With the highest percentage of self-employed businessmen and professionals
of any European Union member-state, Greece is a place where both franchising
and leasing arrangements can flourish.
Moreover, because interest rates on lending to small businesses are still
depressingly high (averaging more than 24 per cent), there is considerable
demand for alternative forms of financing.
Liberalisation of the Greek banking system enabled both franchising and
leasing to take off at the end of the 1980s. Franchising has grown by leaps
and bounds as deregulation of the banking system reduced the obstacles to
repatriating earnings in foreign currency.
At the same time, the appeal of foreign brand names in Greece helps to
attract well qualified applicants for franchises, especially for master
franchises covering the whole country, which are seen as the fast track to
wealth.
Restaurant chains such as Kentucky Fried Chicken, Wendy's and Pizza Hut lead
the franchise market, but other sectors are expanding fast.
Imported clothing labels are sold through different franchise systems.
Storehouse, the UK retailer, sells through a Greek store, Klaoudatos, in
Athens and Thessaloniki. Benetton outlets, on the other hand, can be found
in every provincial Greek city.
'Whether it's food or retailing, franchising is seen as a way of acquiring
expertise from abroad that gives a competitive advantage in the local
market. At the same time, the franchise arrangement provides a sense of
security,' says Mr Aris Ikkos of Metrotech Development Consultants.
While Greek franchising is dominated by food businesses, from ice-cream and
hamburger chains to patisserie and sandwich, accounting for some 25 per cent
of franchises, the system operates successfully in other sectors.
Neoset, a furniture producer with 50 franchise outlets which posted sales of
Dr6.5bn (Dollars 26m) last year, has expanded abroad, with half a dozen
franchisees in Poland and the Czech republic. Germanos, a battery producer,
sells through a network of 19 franchise outlets which claims to provide
batteries for anything 'from a watch to a helicopter.'
For manufacturers, a franchising arrangement helps to develop an effective
distribution network without the need for heavy capital investment .
'It's a system that suits the Greek business scene, where a high proportion
of people prefer to work for themselves, often in small businesses where
there's flexibility in operating methods,' Mr Ikkos says.
The average initial investment for a franchise in Greece is around Dr36m,
with an additional Dr16m required for working capital. Royalty payments
range between 5 and 10 per cent of turnover, in some cases including an
advertising levy.
The most innovative franchise in Greece is held by Southeastern European
Airlines, an Athens-based private operator, which flies the Athens-London
route for Virgin Airlines. SEEA's aircraft are painted in Virgin livery and
offer in-flight service to Virgin standards in what is billed as the
airline's industry first franchise arrangement.
'Virgin provided training and keeps a sharp eye on maintaining standards,'
says Mr Tassos Pantazopoulos, SEEA's managing director. 'We've kept prices
competitive, especially over the winter, and managed a load factor of more
than 70 per cent in the year since the flight started.'
Greece's 20 largest franchise networks averaged sales of around Dr2.5 bn
last year, against Dr1.5bn in 1992, according to a study by Alexander Young
Horwath, the business consultants. The country's biggest franchiser,
Goody's, a restaurant and cafe chain, made pre-tax profits of Dr1.2bn on
turnover of Dr10 bn.
For foreign franchisers, however, repatriating royalties can still be a
battle. Last year, commercial banks took over responsibility from the
central bank for processing payments, but procedures are still slow.
'The banks don't have personnel to handle royalty payments and after years
of just waiting for central bank approval, they're afraid to take on the
responsibility. Franchisors have to be very patient, ' says Mr Yanos
Gramatidis, an Athens lawyer who specialises in franchising.
Other problems affecting franchise operations include Greece's unpredictable
tax system and, in legal disputes, the Greek judiciary's tendency to favour
the franchisee, Mr Gramatidis adds.
If franchising has become established in Greece, leasing remains in its
infancy, with only 7 per cent of total investment financed through leasing
contracts, against a European average of 25 per cent.
The sector remains strictly regulated: all 10 Greek leasing companies
operations are subsidiaries of banks, mainly because individuals setting up
leasing operations are required to put up Dr4bn in capital, equivalent to
acquiring a banking licence.
Finance leasing, with contracts where the lessee has paid most of the value
of the equipment or machinery by the expiry date, is still the only form of
leasing available.
Leasing contracts are used to finance medical equipment for private clinics
and practitioners, machinery for smaller manufacturers, office, hotel and
restaurant equipment, computers and cars.
Most Greek lessees are responsible for finding the equipment themselves
before coming to the leasing company to arrange financing.
The services sector accounts for over 40 per cent of leasing contracts, with
another 35 per cent going to manufacturing. Despite continuing recession,
leasing activity is increasing at a rate of more than 30 per cent yearly,
helped by tax incentives for lessees. At the end of 1993, the total value of
leases reached more than Dr250bn.
'Though medical equipment is still the second-largest single item, the
biggest growth is in industrial machinery and car leasing,' says Mr
Vassilios Sarris, manager of Alpha Leasing, Greece's biggest leasing
company.
Machinery covered Dr16bn out of Alpha Leasing's total contracts of Dr46bn
last year, against Dr11.3bn for medical equipment.
Most leasing contracts run for four to five years and are paid through
monthly instalments. Bad debts are rarely a problem, Mr Sarris says, because
most lessees arrange contracts with the leasing subsidiary of their bank.
Although growth in both manufacturing and services is now faster in
provincial centres than in Athens, leasing is still largely confined to the
capital and its surroundings, where more than two-thirds of contracts are
arranged.
'The market potential for leasing is huge, considering that businessmen in
the provinces have been slow to realise its potential,' Mr Sarris says.
