FT  14 DEC 94 / International Company News: Mercedes-Benz finds French site
for Swatchmobile plant
Mercedes-Benz, the German carmaker, is to build its first car assembly plant
in France.
The company is expected to announce next week that it has chosen a site in
Lorraine, northern France, for the production of its pioneering micro city
car  - the so-called Swatchmobile  - which it is developing in a joint
venture with SMH, the Swiss watchmaker.
The decision was disclosed yesterday by Mr Karl Feuerstein, the chairman of
the Mercedes-Benz employees' council and a member of the supervisory boards
of both Mercedes-Benz and Daimler-Benz, the parent company.
Mr Feuerstein, who has been fighting to bring the project to Germany, said
the plant would be built at Hambach, near Sarreguemine in Lorraine.
Mercedes-Benz refused to confirm the site, and insisted that negotiations
were continuing with several local authorities. An official announcement is
expected on December 20, following a meeting of the Daimler-Benz board.
Mr Feuerstein claimed that some 8,900 jobs would be created by the micro-car
project, including 800 to 1,000 jobs at the car plant itself. The bulk of
the jobs, however, would be created at suppliers to the project, including
3,900 at components producers in Germany. Some 1,300 jobs will be created at
Mercedes-Benz plants in Germany.
Mr Feuerstein said the French car plant would have capacity to produce up to
200,000 cars a year, with production beginning in 1997. Mercedes-Benz
planned to build additional micro-car plants elsewhere in Europe, if the car
was a success.
He attacked the choice of a French site, saying the Mercedes-Benz workforce
was 'angry and indignant' at the decision to locate the plant outside
Germany.
With the Swatchmobile, the company is aiming to open up a new segment at the
bottom of the European car market for a two-seater urban micro-car. At only
2.5 metres long, much shorter than the Mini, they can be parked in congested
cities head-on to the pavement.
