FT  27 JUL 94 / Deutsche Bank inches ahead 1%
Deutsche Bank managed a 1 per cent rise in first-half operating profit to
DM2.66bn (Pounds 1.1bn), despite a sharp fall in earnings from own account
trading.
The results were bolstered by a 46 per cent reduction in new provisions for
bad and doubtful debts to DM885m from the DM1.64bn set aside in the same
period of 1993.
Mr Hilmar Kopper, chairman, said that full-year operating earnings would be
above average. Last year's DM5.27bn had been an exceptional result. He made
no dividend predictions but he pointed out that the bank had already earned
the DM780m needed to cover an unchanged payout.
Deutsche, the first of the main German banks to report half-year figures,
made just DM332m on its own account trading, down from DM998m last time.
According to Mr Kopper, profits from own account trading in equities and
securities exceeded expectations but the bonds business fell short of
target.
Provisions for bad debts were reduced after some DM200m of country risk
provisions had been written back because of debt reschedulings.
Mr Kopper said the economic recovery in Germany and improved prospects for
Deutsche's core customers in medium and small-scale businesses had also
helped provisions.
The improved outlook for domestic risks was reflected in a provisions fall
at the German parent, Deutsche Bank AG, from DM1.6bn last time to DM512m.
The amount set aside to cover potential losses from the collapse of Mr
Jurgen Schneider's property business has been set at DM473m - less than the
DM500m announced earlier.
The group's net commission income rose almost 6 per cent to DM3bn, with
positive contributions from most financial service divisions.
Equity sales were the main factor behind rising receipts in the securities
operation, while income from sales of investment certificates and syndicated
business 'roughly matched the good result of last year'.
Net interest earnings of DM5.8bn were virtually unchanged despite a
contraction of 0.12 percentage points in the overall interest margin to 2.09
per cent.
Lex, Page 18
