FT  19 JUL 94 / Survey of Monaco (1): An anachronism - but it works well -
Prince Rainier's achievements have recently been put to the test by the
economic recession, and so far he has passed with flying colours
One photograph hanging in the Monaco government offices shows the
principality in 1865 as a clutter of houses perched on the rock around the
palace. The picture beside it was taken in 1949 after the casino had ushered
in a new era of affluence, and a final photograph depicts the modern Monaco
where every scrap of land is crammed with high-rise apartments, hotels and
offices.
The three photographs tell the story of Monaco's metamorphosis from the
dusty old Mediterranean town of the mid-19th century to the leisure resort
and fledgling financial centre of today. They also illustrate how Prince
Rainier, who took the throne in 1946 as Europe's sole surviving absolute
monarch, has clung on to his country against the odds and turned what was
once a playboy's playground into a more broadly-based, if idiosyncratic
economy.
His achievements have recently been put to the test by the economic
recession and so far he has passed with flying colours. Monaco, like every
other European country, has been affected by the downturn, but it has fared
far better than most places, notably the nearby towns of Nice and Cannes.
The level of employment in the principality fell by less than 3 per cent in
1993 and, at the end of March, only 700 people from a population of 30,000
were out of work.
'We have felt the effects of the recession, but it has been much milder in
Monaco than in France or Italy,' says Jean Pastorelli, government counsellor
on finance. 'The recession has also been shorter here. The level of activity
has already picked up since the start of this year and many local companies,
having laid people off last year, are now hiring again.'
The key themes of Prince Rainier's reign have been to develop the local
economy thereby providing long-term employment for the 5,000 or so surviving
Monegasques and to nurture good relations with France, his powerful
neighbour. When he took the throne Monaco's only assets were its climate,
its picturesque position and its liberal fiscal system.
His principality had become, in the words of Somerset Maugham, a 'sunny
place for shady people' that risked falling victim to the sleazy side of the
Cote d'Azur underworld.
Rainier, helped by Grace Kelly, the Hollywood movie star whom he married in
1956, spruced up Monaco's image and restored its lost lustre. He created a
country which was scrupulously clean and virtually crime-free thanks to a
large, well-trained police force. He also kitted out Monaco with every
conceivable convenience including street signs, escalators, pedestrian
subways and even doggy shelters where pampered pooches can shade themselves
from the sun. The principality soon regained its old status as an upmarket
holiday resort and became a popular haven for wealthy tax exiles.
Monaco still fulfils those roles today. There might not be quite as many
rich tourists who are able, and willing, to check into its luxury hotels as
there were in the 1950s. But Monaco has recognised reality by building up a
business conference business and creating new facilities for the thousands
of day-trippers flooding in from France and Italy. The local tourist
industry was affected by the recession last year but not as badly as other
parts of the Cote d'Azur. The number of visitors fell by 15 per cent to
208,206 from 245,592 in 1992 and has been increasing so far this year.
The principality has also taken on a new lease of life as a tax haven. Only
a few years ago it was in danger of being seen as a retirement home for
elderly ex-pats of Prince Rainier's own vintage. It has since attracted a
new generation of ex-pats in the globe-trotting supermodels Claudia Schiffer
and Helena Christensen, who have joined long-time residents, such as Karl
Lagerfeld, the fashion designer, and Helmut Newton, the photographer. The
supermodels have also provided a new source of publicity after the
apparently endless paparazzi pictures of Rainier's children: Caroline,
Albert and the wayward Stephanie.
The influx of new residents, coupled with the expansion of the tourist
trade, has stimulated the property market.
The property business is no longer as frenzied as it was in the late 1980s,
but it is still relatively robust thanks to the scarcity of land and the
supportive presence of long-term investors such as Societe des Bains de Mer,
the state-controlled leisure company, and Pastor property group.
The price of residential property is only 10 per cent or 20 per cent beneath
its peak. Prices in Monte Carlo's prestigious Place du Casino are still
comparable with the most expensive parts of Paris.
Meanwhile, the local banking industry has flourished since the 1987
abolition of French exchange controls which enabled foreign investors to
move money in and out of Monaco more easily - and discreetly. The number of
banks in the principality has since doubled to just under 40 and the value
of private client deposits has almost quadrupled to FFr80bn. The banks have
recently experienced a slowdown in growth, but still expect an increase in
deposits and assets for 1994. At the same time the introduction last year of
tough new banking laws has been welcomed by bankers as evidence of Prince
Rainier's determination to prevent Monaco from becoming a money laundering
centre for French drug dealers and refugees from Italy's corruption
crackdown.
The banking laws are also illustrative of Prince Rainier's diplomatic
skills. He realises that his absolute monarchy and the continued existence
of a country with a population of 30,000 (only 5,000 of whom were actually
born there) is an anachronism. He also knows that France could take away
Monaco at any time as General de Gaulle demonstrated in 1962 when he sealed
off the border with troops in protest at the number of Frenchmen using it as
a tax haven.
Prince Rainier, nothing if not a realist, immediately agreed to exclude the
French from Monaco's tax privileges. He has since stuck to the same
conciliatory approach on the assumption that France will tolerate Monaco's
independence only for as long as it does not pose any problems. Hence his
government's zeal at cracking down on money launderers.
Yet the success of Prince Rainier's economic policy has given him another
defence in the political game against the French. The expansion of the local
economy has not only enabled him to protect the indigenous Monegasques by
giving them cheap housing (in the Fontvieille area that has been reclaimed
from the sea) and preferential employment rights, but also to generate jobs
for French workers.
The principality now employs just over 30,000 people only 7,000 of whom are
Monegasques, either living in Monaco itself or in cheaper places across the
French border. Some 3,000 Italians and 17,000 French also work there. The
French government would be loath to see those jobs disappear at a time of
high unemployment if Monaco lost its independence and its special tax
status.
Prince Rainier continues to finance new economic development projects such
as the FFr1.2bn new conference and cultural centre due to open in 1998 and
his FFr1.4bn scheme to liberate more land by submerging the railway station.
The government is also working on turn-of-the-century land creation projects
such as the construction of a new jetty beside the present harbour and the
creation of Fontvieille II on another sea reclamation site.
'The impression one gets is that Rainier is a very clever businessman in the
tradition of grands patrons, the great French bosses,' says one foreign
banker. 'He may be an absolute monarch, but he is far too astute to use his
power bluntly. There are never any surprises but you always know that a firm
hand is in control. Monaco might be an anachronism - but it works.'
