FT  29 JAN 94 / Arts: Raiders of the lost tombs - Antiquities collections
rob us of our history
Burglary is often the simple, squalid truth behind collecting antiquities.
Antiquities' robbers are ransacking the countries of the Mediterranean and
Middle East. Why? Because they have a market, the collectors. Most objects
in collections have no provenance. Many of these are stolen goods from
illegal excavations. It is bizarre in the 1990s that the Royal Academy
should appear to condone the practice by hosting an exhibition of the Ortiz
collection, including goods without a provenance. Of course Ortiz, who
purchased many of his pieces in England and Switzerland, has broken no laws.
Provenance, however, remains a sensitive issue.
Times have changed, but not the Academy. The British Museum, the Getty and
other great museums refuse to buy unprovenanced objects nowadays, unless
they have a pedigree to show that they have been in private hands for a very
long time - say, in an English country house or Italian palazzo. The
Metropolitan Museum has handed back to Turkey fabulous silver and
silver-gilt treasures of around 400 BC which the Turkish government has
pressed hard for.
A New York commercial gallery has bowed to a campaign by American and Greek
archaeologists and the Greek government and is donating a collection of
Mycenaean gold that 'surfaced' recently, and probably comes from tombs in
southern Greece, to a charity - The Society for the Preservation of the
Greek Heritage - to pass on to Greece. Many countries have ratified the
Unesco Convention Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property. But the UK, which is a major
clearing house for antiquities, has not subscribed.
In three ways we lose from antiquities theft. First, landowners lose. Ask
John Browning, the Suffolk farmer from whose fields the Roman 'Icklingham
Bronzes' were stolen. He had an almighty battle, ending with a law suit in
New York, to retrieve them. They will eventually come to the BM. In many
Mediterranean and Middle East countries the law is different. The state owns
all antiquities, but it does compensate landowners for finds that are
reported.
Secondly, countries lose their birthright when the pieces disappear abroad.
And finally, all of us, and particularly the home-country, are losing
because the finds are robbed of their historical value. They become a
tantalising travesty of what might have been discovered.
People often ask me what has been my best find, expecting to hear about
gold. I wish I could find some. But archaeology is not primarily about
precious objects. It is about finding out how people lived and developed
through looking at every possible scrap of evidence. The vital concept is
context.
Archaeologists are always trying to see everything in its setting, from the
layers of earth in digging a tomb that show that these jewels go with this
body, to the large issues of how the ancients used the landscape. The
thrills come from new connections that let one rewrite a line or two of
history.
Illicit digs destroy the context in the frantic rush to get the valuable
objects out before dawn. Anger when the objects overtake the history is not
merely priggish or politically correct. We have precious little history left
in the ground. Like coal and oil, it is a finite resource. Any bit we dig up
we must dig properly. Moonlight digging is vandalism. Through a chain of
middle men, the collectors create the demand. If we stop the demand, the
incentive to rob will wither.
And it will cut faking. Robbing breeds faking. When robbed goods are short,
fakes fill the gap. They are not expected to have a provenance either. It
may even be cheaper to pay one man to fake than to send a gang to rob with
picks and shovels - and with a bribe to the village policeman. Take the
third millennium BC marble figurines from the Cyclades. Twentieth century
collectors love them. They influenced Brancusi and Modigliani. It is
surprising how many exist, looted from the islands or, if not looted, faked.
There are some arguable benefits to exhibitions of antiquities collections -
they could, for example, bring the objects to the attention of possible
legitimate claimants. But I am unconvinced. As a long-time Friend of the
Royal Academy, I trust that this is the last time Burlington House holds
such a display.
