FT  18 JUL 94 / The Monday Interview: Private view of a public motivator -
Lewis Preston, World Bank president
Visiting the World Bank at its 19th Street headquarters in Washington DC,
you would never guess that questions are being raised about its long-term
future. You have to negotiate a building site strewn with cranes and
earth-moving equipment. With both the bank and the IMF, its sister
institution across the street, racing to complete lavish extensions to their
already- extensive offices, the area resembles a development zone in
southern China.
The World Bank has been expanding rapidly for years. There are now about
11,000 people on its payroll, compared with 8,000 in 1989 and 7,000 in 1984.
The number of 'higher level' professional staff is now 6,039 (including
1,291 'consultants') - an increase of a third in five years, and more than
50 per cent in a decade. Since 1991, when Mr Lewis Preston took over as
president, the bank's administrative budget has risen 44 per cent to Dollars
1.4bn; staff costs (excluding consultants) have risen 43 per cent to Dollars
876m.
To his credit, Mr Preston has no apparent interest in empire building. He
welcomes the Group of Seven's call in Naples for a review of the role of
international institutions. 'If there is any duplication, overlap or waste,
let's get it out,' he says.
Questioned about the bank's future, he states repeatedly that it must
intervene more selectively and become more cost efficient. It would be
'absolutely wrong' to continue lending to countries that could easily obtain
capital from private sources. 'We shouldn't interfere where the private
sector is prepared to invest,' he says.
Having spent 40 years at JP Morgan, the premier New York bank, Mr Preston
seems untroubled by the notion of transferring bank functions to the private
sector. 'Over time the shift that is called for will occur, should occur and
must occur,' he says. He has an admiration for private enterprise that is
perhaps not entirely shared by senior colleagues who have never experienced
life outside the public sector womb.
Yet although he seems personally convinced that the bank should contract,
this theme does not come across clearly in the bank's 'vision statement', to
be released tomorrow in a 50th anniversary attempt to redefine its goals and
defuse growing criticism. And it is unclear whether he has the stomach for
serious 'downsizing'. At times he gives the impression he is fighting a
losing battle against the bank's permanent bureaucrats.
What is the main difference between running the World Bank and running JP
Morgan? At Morgan, he says, strategic change was readily accomplished. He
simply discussed a plan with four or five colleagues and then implemented
it. He was able to 'incentivise people' and make things happen.
The situation is entirely different in a large public-sector bureaucracy.
'Here it is a matter of building a consensus.'
But surely, since you are president, you can just order the changes you
want? He indicates that life is far more complex. People at the bank, he
says, 'have seen presidents come and go'. They can 'wait you out', he adds.
Since 1989, private flows to developing countries have quadrupled to about
Dollars 120bn, dwarfing the bank's total commitments of about Dollars 20bn.
Didn't this vast increase in private development capital mean the bank had
to contract?
'Absolutely,' he says. He notes that the bank's loans have fallen off
sharply in recent years, partly because countries such as India are awash
with private inflows and no longer need its adjustment loans. He hopes there
will be 'a significant number of graduations in Latin America' - in other
words, countries that become too rich to qualify for World Bank support.
But the bank has to move carefully, he warns, because the recent jump in
private flows might not be sustainable. It was spurred by interest rates in
developed countries that are 'at their lowest level since the second world
war'. And most of the capital is being absorbed by about 20 countries with
the best prospects.
He says there are two reasons why the bank's staff and headquarters'
expenses have risen so rapidly, despite the reduced demand for loans. The
first is the need to meet the historic challenge posed by the transition to
capitalism in eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. He cannot cut back
elsewhere, because 'members were very insistent that we didn't dilute
services to the existing customer base'.
He has also needed to fill gaps in the bank's skills mix. He has created new
vice-presidencies covering areas in which the bank expects to play a larger
role in the future: the environment, private-sector development, and human
resources such as health-care and education.
The bank now employs 200 environmental experts, compared with a handful when
it embarked on the much-criticised Namada dam project in India in the
mid-1980s. Lending for human resource development now accounts for 17 per
cent of all loans, against 5 per cent in the early 1980s.
While favouring a larger role for the private sector in development, he says
some ideas for expanding the International Fi-nance Corporation, the bank's
private-sector arm, are facile. The bank proper cannot transfer resources
directly to the IFC, because they have different owners. In any case, the
IFC has sufficient capital to expand its investments at 12 per cent a year
until 2005; faster growth might be imprudent.
The biggest change facing the bank is a likely increase in its advisory role
in developing countries and a corresponding reduction in its importance as a
financier. With private capital more readily available, the challenge is to
help clients restructure their public sectors, so as to create a climate in
which private business can flourish.
But if the bank becomes an adviser rather than a lender, shouldn't it charge
directly for consultancy services?
Mr Preston likes the idea. 'I think selectively we should try it.' If the
bank charged fees, he muses, it would be able to test the strength of demand
for its services. And it could see how it measured up to private-sector
competitors. 'If Lazard and Warburgs can give it cheaper, and it's better,
there will be an even more rapid diminution in staff,' he says.
But then he frowns, remembering that he is at the World Bank, not JP Morgan:
'But the idea of charging for advice is totally alien around here. They
don't like it,' he admits.
He says his greatest achievement at the bank is 'changing the emphasis from
initiation to implementation'. He is referring to recent attempts to alter
bank culture by judging staff not by the volume of loans they initiate, but
by the performance of the projects they help finance. The emphasis on loan
volume rather than project success is said to reflect the 'production line'
mentality of Robert McNamara, the influential World Bank president in the
1970s - and a former head of the Ford car company.
Mr Preston is also proud of introducing the bank to the mysteries of cost
accounting. Incredible though it may seem, he says, the bank did not have a
means of measuring the costs of different activities. 'How can you be
selective if you don't know what your costs are?' he asks.
Looking back, he admits he may have adopted too low a profile as bank
president. 'It's important now that I respond to our critics,' he says.
Although some parts of Asia are developing enormously quickly, he is
concerned by the 'desperate' plight of sub-Saharan Africa. 'So I don't think
50 years is enough,' he says firmly, referring to strident demands from
leftwing environmentalists for the World Bank's closure.
