FT  21 MAY 94 / Lucas faces Pentagon probe over quality control
Lucas Industries has confirmed it is under investigation by the Pentagon for
allegedly supplying gearboxes that fell below specified standards for the US
Navy's F/A-18 fighter aircraft.
Shares in the UK aerospace and automotive components manufacturer fell
sharply by 15p to 175p yesterday on reports that it might be fined and
barred from new contracts with the US Department of Defence.
Lucas has shipped 3,000 sets of the gearbox equipment for the US Navy over
15 years.
Management at the company's Utah and Los Angeles plants is alleged to have
passed equipment which was below specification. The Defence Department then
launched an investigation.
In Washington, US Navy officials refused to comment.
Mr John Grant, Lucas finance director, acknowledged that quality controls at
the plants which made the gearboxes had been poor for a number of years.
He also said senior management in the subsidiary, Lucas Western, had been
replaced and that the company was co-operating with the US Navy and the
Pentagon to resolve the issue.
This is the second time Lucas has encountered difficulties in the US. It
recently agreed to pay Dollars 12m (Pounds 8m) to settle a dispute over the
supply of unsatisfactory components for the Maverick air-to-ground missile.
Lucas denied a report yesterday in the Wall Street Journal which said its
gearboxes had caused 167 emergency landings of F/A-18s in the past year and
a half. 'We have had no indication from the US Navy or the Department of
Defence that there have been any operational problems,' said Mr Grant.
Lucas has annual business with the US Defence Department worth some Pounds
170m, but analysts say it would be unusual for any ban on new orders to
extend across the whole of a company's business. The military turnover of
the US gearbox operations is about Pounds 15m a year.
Even a ban on supplies from Lucas Western may not materialise since Lucas is
the sole supplier of such equipment. It has also been awarded the contract
to supply gearboxes for the advanced F-22 stealth fighter, which is under
development.
If Lucas is found guilty of shipping shoddy equipment, it could face a
substantial fine, possibly in the region of Dollars 25m.
Defence analysts on both sides of the Atlantic played down the risks to
Lucas's business and long-term reputation.
'It is run of the mill for US companies to have tremendous quality problems.
It usually ends up with slaps on the wrist,' said Mr Marcus Corbin, an
analyst with the Centre for Defence Information, a Washington defence policy
organisation.
Defence procurement officials have had a long-running battle over quality
control and overbilling with many of their largest suppliers. One
investigation, Operation Ill Wind, has already resulted in criminal
convictions of more than 65 companies and individuals, and is expected to
reap more than Dollars 250m in penalties for the Pentagon.
London stocks, Page 17
Lex, Page 26
