FT  08 JUN 94 / The FT Interview: Sceptic with a hint of enthusiasm -
Antonio Martino, Italy's foreign minister
It is a curious irony that the first European government to be headed by a
media magnate should have an image problem.
But the month-old Italian government of Silvio Berlusconi is struggling to
shrug off the negative international impact of containing five ministers
from the neo-fascist MSI/National Alliance.
Much of the flak falls on the shoulders of Antonio Martino, the free-market
economist and political novice who has taken over as foreign minister.
'We made a mistake in not paying sufficient attention to the foreign press
(during the election campaign),' Mr Martino concedes.
Having just spent much of Monday fielding queries on hostile comments made
against the MSI by Mr Jacques Delors, president of the EU Commission, and an
Israeli junior minister, Mr Martino is remarkably sanguine.
He attributes the attacks on the neo-fascists to attempts by European
socialists to score points in the run-up to this weekend's European
elections. 'We are in a pre-electoral atmosphere,' he says. 'After Monday,
things should begin to quieten down.'
Though feeling his way and distracted by having to convince Italy's
international partners of the government's democratic credentials, Mr
Martino clearly relishes the opportunity to put his ideas into practice. He
is an economist trained in Chicago under Milton Friedman, who caught Mr
Berlusconi's eye writing opinionated free market articles some 18 months
ago. Right until the end of the campaign for the March general elections, he
was Mr Berlusconi's economic adviser and looked set to be the next treasury
minister.
Nevertheless, diplomacy runs in the blood. His father, Gaetano, was the
Christian Democrat foreign minister who signed the articles of the Treaty of
Rome, while his cousin, Ferdinando Salleo, is a career diplomat.
Mr Martino is the first Italian foreign minister since the Treaty of Rome to
question the European ideal. It would be surprising if his forthright views
do not shape new Italian policies towards the Union.
'In Italy I'm considered a Euro-sceptic; but in Britain I would probably be
considered a Euro-enthusiast,' he says of his membership of the
Thatcher-inspired Bruges Group. A convinced Anglophile, married to an
American, he champions a more pragmatic approach to the consolidation of the
EU. 'The Maastricht treaty is not a bible.'
Mr Martino is also critical of the Euro-socialist thinking behind the social
chapter. 'It may be motivated by lofty ideals but it produces some perverse
results.' He attributes Italy's high unemployment directly to unnecessary
rigidities in the labour market, although the hire and fire laws were
intended to protect the workers.
Yet he is by no means anti-EU: rather he is deeply critical of the
unquestioning pro-Europeanism of previous Italian governments. 'Italy said
yes to everything but then was not necessarily able to implement,' he says,
citing Italy's inability to comply with milk quotas.
He dislikes the dirigiste aspect of Brussels. Governments, he says, should
be free to determine their own regulations to avoid the kind of bruising
national arguments over the 'Euro-sausage' or 'convergent size of condoms'.
'In the EU we have created institutions without strategies (for their use) .
. . It's like buying a computer without knowing how to use it. First you
must choose the software, then the hardware . . . If we believe in Europe we
have to ask why.'
Europe, he insists, must be demonstrably for the public good. He sees five
elements of common benefit - the single market, a common currency, a common
foreign policy, a common defence policy, and the need for a genuine court of
appeal/ombudsman to which citizens can resort.
He supports the single market but warns it must be able to make guarantees
against protectionism among individual members. On the advantages of a
common currency he is more sceptical.
'If - and it is a big if - I can have guarantees that the common currency
will not be mismanaged, then I'm in favour.' The common currency would be
beneficial, he claims, because it would reduce the cost of transactions,
help stabilise international currency markets and be an alternative to the
dollar, while also acting as a symbol of European unity.
'A common currency is desirable although it is not absolutely essential for
the single market . . . It requires an indivisible solution - ie: it cannot
be done step by step.'
On a common European foreign policy, Mr Martino is wary of forming axes
within Europe such as that between France and Germany. An axis means a
return to 'conventional diplomacy with favoured partners'. To counter the
latest moves by France and Germany towards tightening their co-operation, he
is aware Italy might be tempted to make common cause with the UK and Spain.
The first test of Italy's Euro-diplomacy will be the forthcoming choice of a
successor for Mr Delors. Instinctively Mr Martino would prefer Sir Leon
Brittan, the trade commissioner, or Mr Peter Sutherland, the Irish candidate
and Gatt head. Such figures, or a compromise candidate, are needed to embody
a new post-Maastricht approach to union. But the Italian government has yet
to make up its mind.
Italy, Mr Martino says, should be more prepared to be more opinionated on a
range of issues. 'One should say exactly what one feels about policy. In
this I admire Mrs Thatcher, even if she may have overdone it on occasions.'
This underscores the desire of Mr Martino - and that of Mr Berlusconi - to
raise Italy's international profile. One problem here is that Italy, despite
its size and membership of Nato, has poorly equipped armed forces.
Successive governments when looking for spending cuts always turned to the
defence budget, he laments.
'The defence ministry now spends less than the regional government of
Sicily,' he observes. If Italy is to play a bigger international role, it
must have the military means - 'but I don't want to sound militaristic'.
He is bitter at the way Italy has been left to play second fiddle over
events in the neighbouring states of former Yugoslavia. Italy has been
excluded from the contact group formed between the US, Russia and the EU.
'We cannot be answerable for decisions to which we are not a party,' he
says.
Behind this treatment of Italy lies a complex debate over whether troops
should be sent to ex-Yugoslavia. Mr Martino lays down four conditions for
this to happen: a peace plan must be accepted by all interested parties;
this peace plan must be backed by the United Nations; the UN must request
Italian troops; and the troops should then be under Nato command.
In all his answers, Mr Martino behaves as if he is master in his own house.
'I think Berlusconi shares some of my Euro-scepticism. He trusts me and
expects me to take care of this area of policy. As a businessman he is
accustomed to the idea of delegating responsibility.'
