FT  29 SEP 94 / Accountancy Column: 'True and fair view' in need of
refurbishment - Why a guiding principle is more relevant than ever in
today's business climate
To give a 'true and fair view' is the statutory objective of UK financial
reporting and, via the Fourth European Directive of 1978, the leading
accountancy principle in the European Union. Like most guiding concepts,
however, it defies agreed definition.
Unofficial attempts to pin it down swing wildly between the 13 paragraphs
once hammered out by the technical partners of the UK's Big Six accountancy
firms to more informal attempts to sum up its flexible nature as a
'make-believe compass'.
Standard setters, accountants and academics from nine countries met in
Oxford last week to consider 'The true and fair view: a European
retrospective'. Like most useful conferences it transcended its title and
discovered, oddly, that the real value of the true and fair view may lie in
its future use by regulators of financial reporting.
There was also some agreement that the real value of this principle to
accountancy within the EU could lie in its ability to rise above legal
definition and provide a principle which can be used in any country at any
time.
The need to revitalise the principle is obvious to anyone who takes a glance
at the many companies which have collapsed with no warning signs from
auditors who examined their health barely a few months before. The papers
retrospectively show that the auditor was very often aware of many of the
signs of impending doom - but said nothing publicly.
Before looking at some of the views expressed at Christ Church at the
conference, which was organised by the Chartered Association of Certified
Accountants, two questions need to be answered. Why true AND fair? And how
is true and fair incorporated into the Fourth Directive?
To answer the first question, there are various illustrations. Consider the
captain of a ship who records in the log that the first mate was drunk on
Monday. In revenge the first mate records in the log on Tuesday that the
captain was sober. This is true but hardly fair.
The answer to the second question is more complicated. The European Fourth
Directive's second article says that accounts should be drawn up according
to generally accepted accounting practices. If this fails to give a true and
fair view then notes must be added. In exceptional circumstances where these
disclosures are still insufficient, the true and fair view can be used to
'over-ride' other rules.
Again an illustration helps. The accounts should be a signpost to a true and
fair view. If the signpost points in the right direction but fails to give
you enough information to get to the destination then additional information
is needed. If it points in the wrong direction to start with, then the
'over-ride' comes into play.
The conference's principal speaker was Mrs Justice Arden, the co-author of
an influential legal opinion on the true and fair view. She saw the
principle as useful in the last resort to resolve disputes in 'penumbral'
areas of the law: 'When you have rules there are always going to be problems
at the edges and you need something like the true and fair view to resolve
them.'
She said that the definition of true and fair would be tested in the courts
and that the final decision of the judge would rest on expert evidence. The
opinion of the Accounting Standards Board would carry particular weight.
Karel van Hulle, head of accounting at the European Commission, revealed
that the inclusion of the true and fair view in the directive had been
initiated by the Dutch during the drafting process. He said that its main
role in the European context was as a safeguard to over regulation: a
principle to stand against a system of prescriptive rules  - the so-called
'cookbook'.
Van Hulle said that he was aware of about a dozen examples within the EU
where the true and fair over-ride had been used, but hoped the
FourthDirective would provide a flexible regime: 'We must allow companies to
be creative within limits.'
Graham Stacey, with 15 years practical experience of the true and fair view
as an auditor, was one of the technical partners who originally tried to
define the true and fair principle. He said the concept rested on providing
information to shareholders which was sufficient in quantity and quality to
meet their reasonable needs and expectations. He now saw a case for meeting
the needs of other users of accounts.
At the heart of this definition lies reasonable expectations - a concept
which changes over time and is often moulded by the standards set by
regulators. The content of the accounts may alter but the principle remains.
Stacey doubted that true and fair was a useful tool for practitioners at
all: 'The dominance of rules brings us towards being a cookbook country.'
However, the principle would be relevant if the regulators, such as the
Accounting Standards Board, altered public expectations of what accounts
should tell them.
Allan Cook, of the ASB, said that true and fair had many definitions, all of
which had a use. For him, its most important was to give direction and
authority to development in reporting requirements. He also saw it as a
signpost to commercial reality, a reporting obligation on preparers, and a
brake on the proliferation of rules. Within Europe he felt that the
principle could be a 'subtle instrument of change'.
Looking ahead, Doreen McBarnet, from the Oxford Centre for Socio-Legal
Studies, said that historically the more detailed rules became, the easier
it was to avoid them. Some terms were best left undefined.
A culture of rules gives rise to 'creative compliance', she said, and could
stimulate the need for regulators to develop a system of 'creative control'.
But the use of 'open textured' principles allowed the use of discretion on
the part of professionals.
Christopher Whelan, of Warwick University Law School, analysed the potential
role of the Financial Reporting Review Panel, the ASB's sister body, which
has the power to reprimand companies or take them to court if they breach
standards. He saw the true and fair view as a 'tool for the enforcers'.
The panel's problem, said Whelan, was that if it took companies to court
then a body of law would build up which would define the principle and
reduce its effectiveness. If it was bounded by law it would fail.
Professor Anthony Hopwood, from the London School of Economics, and
conference organiser with Dr Peter Walton, said the tone had been
'conciliatory' but illustrated the profound ignorance which still existed
about different accounting cultures.
He felt that the true and fair view was part of the 'archaeology of
accountancy', laid down in the past as part of a laissez-faire economic
culture. It was now capable of being excavated and providing a modern link
between accounting standards and the law.
Finally he asked: 'Are we asking too much of accountancy?'. He questioned
the role of accounts as the only source of information in the market and
wondered if alternatives, like newspapers less inhibited by libel or
ownership, might not play a bigger role.
