FT  15 APR 94 / Pergau fears of trade minister 'overruled by PM'
The prime minister and senior members of the government endorsed an offer of
overseas aid to Malaysia to build the Pergau dam in 1991, in spite of
objections by the trade minister at the time, it was revealed yesterday.
According to evidence given to the Commons' Foreign Affairs Committee, Mr
Tim Sainsbury, who was trade minister before the last general election,
called for the offer of Pounds 234m of aid for the dam project to be
scrapped at a ministerial meeting in February of that year.
Mr Richard Needham, the current trade minister, told the committee that Mr
Sainsbury had argued that Britain should not use its aid-and-trade provision
to build a hydro-electric power station in Malaysia, but should use the
funds for alternative gas projects.
Mr Needham did not specify why his predecessor had taken this view.
However, Mr Sainsbury's objections coincided with concerns expressed in
Whitehall that the hydro-electric project would result in Malaysian
consumers paying over Pounds 100m more for electricity during the 35-year
life of the project than if the money was invested elsewhere.
According to Mr Needham, the objections to the Pergau project were overruled
by ministers in other departments. He said Mr Sainsbury's position 'was not
the view of the Foreign Office, certainly not the view of the Malaysian high
commissioner, foreign secretary or the prime minister'.
Instead, Mr Needham argued that it would have been impossible to scrap the
aid offer without damaging the broad canvas of Anglo-Malaysian relations.
'The real question,' he said, 'is whether in February 1991 it was realistic
to go back to the Malaysians and say: 'Sorry, two years after all of this we
now have to tell you we think you don't know what you are talking about . .
. and we will give you a gas-fired power station instead.' The Malaysians
would have said: 'Thank you very much, goodbye', and phoned up the
Japanese.'
Nevertheless, the revelation about Mr Sainsbury's views shows that concern
about the project was not confined to officials at the Overseas Development
Administration.
Sir Timothy Lankester, then permanent secretary at the ODA, raised strong
objections to the project on economic grounds.
In the summer of 1991, he requested Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary,
to supply him with a 'ministerial direction' to incur expenditure on the
Pergau dam, thereby absolving him of any blame for approving funds.
