FT  05 JUL 94 / International Company News: Fyffes edges ahead to IPounds
14.2m - IPounds 16m acquisition announced / Some IPounds 40m earmarked for
further expansion
A sharp drop in interest income held back profits growth at Fyffes, the
European fruit and vegetable distributor, which reported pre-tax profits
ahead by just Pounds 57,000 to IPounds 14.2m (Pounds 14m) on turnover up 38
per cent to IPounds 368m for the six months to April 30.
Interest income fell from IPounds 6.62m to IPounds 3.36m because of lower
interest rates, but operating profits from trading were lifted 44 per cent
to IPounds 10.8m, largely due to the group's two acquisitions in Denmark and
Spain last year.
Mr Carl McCann, deputy chairman, said that some 50 per cent of the group's
net cash of IPounds 80m will be spent on capital investment and acquisitions
this year.
The first of these, announced yesterday, is a 50 per cent stake in Velleman
&amp; Tas, a leading banana and fresh produce distributor in the Netherlands for
a total consideration of IPounds 15.9m.
The move has been welcomed by market analysts in Dublin, who said that it
would lift group turnover to about IPounds 1bn on an annual basis, making
Fyffes the second biggest fruit distributor in Europe, and providing a
further outlet for new banana supplies coming on stream from Guatemala.
Mr McCann said that on the basis of Velleman's past performance, the
acquisition should boost Fyffes' operating profits by IPounds 3.5m over a
full year.
He said that although the net worth of Velleman at IPounds 8.6m 'is a bit on
the light side, we have bought it on a good (earnings) multiple of 4.5'.
The acquisition represents 'an important step for Fyffes in the development
of its continental European business,' the company said.
Earnings per share were 2.68p (2.75p) and the interim dividend is raised by
10 per cent to 0.4294p.
COMMENT
The cash hoard which Fyffes has been sitting on for the past three years was
good for the bottom line while interest rates were high, but has predictably
hit profits now that rates are close to historic lows. It is encouraging,
therefore, that the group is delivering on its promise to spend its treasure
chest on earnings-enhancing acquisitions and is steadily building its market
presence in Europe. If it can break into the French, German and Italian
markets with subsequent acquisitions - and it has the wherewithal to do so -
Fyffes will then have significant market power on the Continent to take on
the likes of Chiquita and Dole. Pre-tax profits of IPounds 34m for the
full-year look achievable. Given the encouraging profit outlook this year
and next, the shares are on a modest prospective p/e of 13.4.
