FT  03 FEB 94 / VW poaching of GM staff did not break rules, court declares
A Frankfurt civil court yesterday rejected claims that Volkswagen broke
competition rules in poaching seven managers from the General Motors group
and trying to lure away a further 22 last spring.
VW greeted the judgment as a crucial victory in its long-running dispute
with GM over the recruitment of Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, the US
group's former global purchasing chief, and his associates who followed him
to VW.
Criminal investigations in Germany and the US relating to suspected
industrial espionage, theft, perjury and wire fraud are still in progress.
However, the court said in a written statement that it was a matter for
debate whether allegations of the theft of GM secrets were justifiable.
Mr Jurgen Kicker, the lawyer representing Volkswagen, said the ruling
exonerated Mr Lopez and the German group from all suspicions against them.
'It confirms what we have always said: that no one has stolen any trade
secrets and no one has used any.' He said he did not think the current
criminal investigations would come to any other conclusion than that reached
yesterday.
Mr Otto Ferdinand Wachs, VW group spokesman, said: 'It was a very clear
victory. The state prosecutors will have to think twice now before bringing
any charges.'
But a spokesman for Mr Klaus Liesen, chairman of VW's supervisory board, who
is responsible for the board's conduct, stressed that the ruling resolved
only the issue of anti-competitive staff poaching. Unlike Mr Ferdinand
Piech, VW chairman, Mr Liesen has consistently refused to give Mr Lopez or
his followers unconditional support.
Officials at Adam Opel, GM's German subsidiary, stressed that the evidence
available to the Frankfurt court was more limited than that gathered by
public prosecutors - it included only information from GM's files.
Evidence and statements gathered by the prosecutors since then were not
examined by the Frankfurt civil court, they said.
VW has admitted that some of Mr Lopez's team were involved in shredding
'possibly sensitive' material last March in the group's Wolfsburg guest
house. Prosecutors, who have also investigated at least two further
instances in which material has been destroyed, are examining a computerised
data seized during a raid on VW headquarters and employees' homes last
August.
A court statement said it had not ignored the 'unusual' circumstances in
which all seven suddenly left and were almost immediately installed in new
jobs at VW, but its decision was based on the former GM employees' evidence
that they had approached Mr Lopez voluntarily.
Opel officials said yesterday's judgment was a sideshow to the main event.
The company regretted the decision, and would examine the ruling before it
decided whether to appeal.
