FT  02 JUL 94 / Nationwide reports 0.7% fall in house prices
House prices dipped again last month, figures from Nationwide building
society show, providing further evidence of a sharp slowdown in the pace of
the housing market recovery.
Nationwide said the average price of a home fell 0.7 per cent to Pounds
54,221 in June compared with the previous month. The society had reported
price rises in every month since February.
In sharp contrast Halifax, the country's biggest mortgage lender, had
reported price falls in April and May, including a 1.6 per cent fall in May
 -the biggest monthly fall announced by the society since the corresponding
month last year.
The latest decline reported by Nationwide reduces the annual rate of price
increases recorded by the society to 1 per cent, compared with 3.3 per cent
in May.
Halifax is expected to show a similar annual increase of 1 per cent when it
publishes its house price index on Monday. It is likely to show a small
month-on-month increase in June, of less than 1 per cent.
Both societies have reduced their forecasts for price increases this year
from about 5 per cent to about 2 per cent or 3 per cent, reflecting recent
concern that the pace of recovery has slowed. The slide has been blamed in
part on tax rises and increases in the cost of fixed-rate mortgages.
Mr Brian Davis, Nationwide's operations manager, said yesterday: 'Market
confidence remains fragile, reflecting the moderate pace of economic
recovery and persisting concerns about employment. The initial impact of
recent tax increases and a rise in fixed mortgage rates may also have been
factors temporarily slowing the market's recovery.'
Figures published this week by the British Bankers Association showed that
banks approved 10 per cent fewer mortgages in May than in the corresponding
month last year.
Net new lending by building societies in May was also lower, at Pounds 806m
 -17 per cent down from the Pounds 974m lent in April and 10 per cent lower
than in the corresponding month last year.
Nationwide said yesterday that the picture remained mixed and 'reports from
our estate agents show that whilst activity levels during the spring have
been disappointing in some areas, other localities are seeing more buoyant
demand'.
More than half of the 143 estate agents questioned in a recent survey by the
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors said that sales in the three months
to the end of May had 'either flattened out or declined' compared with the
previous three months.
Housebuilders have also reported lower sales activity since the spring.
Builders say weekly sales are little higher than in the corresponding period
last year. Earlier this year industry sales were 10 per cent to 15 per cent
higher than at the same stage last year.
Experiences differ between sectors of the market and between regions.
According to estate agents, purchases at the top and bottom of the market
appear to be holding up best.
