FT  21 DEC 94 / Electricity from renewable sources to double
The government yesterday gave the go-ahead to the doubling of the amount of
electricity generated from renewable sources of energy such as wind and
waste.
More than 500 candidates bid for funding in the third and biggest round of
subsidies for renewable energy projects.
The subsidies - the Non Fossil Fuel Obligation - in the form of a levy on
electricity bills, are designed to encourage the development of renewable
energy sources which are still more expensive than conventionally generated
electricity.
However, average prices in the latest round were lower than in the past,
reflecting technological advances and growing experience.
The average price for a unit of electricity from large wind farms dropped by
more than half to 4.32p per kWh. Power is sold into the wholesale
electricity 'pool' by PowerGen and National Power at the average price of
about 2.5p per kWh.
More than 140 bids to generate almost 630MW of electricity in England and
Wales received final approval. In Scotland, 30 proposals to generate 76MW
were approved - about double the government's original estimate. However,
the proposals still require local planning consent.
Assuming that not all bids succeed, the government estimated that the third
round should increase the total amount of electricity generated by renewable
sources in England and Wales by 300MW-400MW from 340MW.
The government said it would announce a fourth round of subsidies next year
as a further step to reach its aim of generating 1,500MW of electricity from
renewables by 2000.
The policy of encouraging renewable sources forms part of the UK's plan to
meet its 1992 Rio Earth Summit commitment to cut carbon dioxide emissions to
1990 levels by 2000. It is also designed to stimulate renewable energy
industries.
The government's announcement was welcomed by wind power generators, which
had feared a backlash after recent adverse publicity about the damage to the
landscape from wind installations. Similar anxieties had been voiced by
waste power supporters after recent allegations that incinerators emitted
toxic gases.
In the event, bids from both technologies were highly successful, with
approval for 31 wind projects and 20 waste schemes in England and Wales.
Triodosbank, a Netherlands-based bank, announced it would next month launch
a wind fund through Mercury Provident, its UK partner, to invest in the wind
power industry. The fund, which is similar to a scheme already in existence
in the Netherlands, hopes to raise Pounds 10m from investors.
