FT  03 OCT 94 / Media Futures: A monsoon that must not be missed - The
regrouping of Olivetti's multimedia side
Preparing for the multimedia revolution sometimes seems like putting a
bucket outside and waiting for a rainstorm to fill it: you can vary the size
and shape of the bucket, but you can't do much to encourage the rain.
The bucket which has just been put out by Olivetti, the Italian computer
group, is called Olivetti Telemedia, and the parent company is frank about
its early prospects.
'We have an idea of the supply (of products and services), but we don't yet
know what the demand will be like,' admitted Elserino Piol, Olivetti's
deputy chairman, at Telemedia's launch two weeks ago, although he ventured a
figure of Dollars 3,000bn as the potential size of the worldwide information
market.
In fact, Telemedia is a grouping of the Italian company's existing
receptacles for multimedia and telecommunications - including a number of
small international joint ventures but excluding the mobile telephone
venture, Omnitel-Pronto Italia, in which Olivetti has a large stake.
Those ventures include some which have been quietly working on multimedia
innovations for the last few years, and others formed only in the last few
months.
Thus the June alliance between Olivetti and Hughes Network Systems, a
subsidiary of General Motors of the US, to exploit the market for business
satellite communications in Europe now comes under the Telemedia umbrella.
So does the joint venture with Redgate Communications of the US, announced
in March, to produce electronic catalogues. But Telemedia will also include
Seva, the data services company set up in 1985, and the company's
well-established R&amp;D operations in Pisa and Cambridge, among others.
New operations are being added bit by bit. Last week, for instance, the
Italian company formally launched Italia Online, in collaboration with
Italy's business daily Il Sole 24 Ore, to provide personal computer users
with access to databanks worldwide.
Aware of the risks of developing a high technology system while neglecting
the software, Olivetti has also taken on Grant Perry, a presenter with CNN,
the cable television network, as head of new media initiatives to scout out
innovative programming for Telemedia.
At present, Olivetti describes Telemedia as 'a virtual company' - a network
of autonomous ventures with a common aim, which can be easily adapted to the
challenges ahead - and for the moment Telemedia will make only a small
virtual profit for Olivetti.
In 1994, Telemedia's components expect to turn over only L325bn (Pounds
132m), 40 per cent overseas, which compares with the group's turnover last
year of L8,612bn. Piol talks in terms of an initial investment of Dollars
50m (Pounds 32m) in Telemedia, compared with the Dollars 2bn which Omnitel's
shareholders will pump into the cellular telephone venture over the next
four years.
This does not mean that Olivetti's commitment to the multimedia sector is
half-hearted, but the company is still hamstrung, according to the company,
by regulatory obstacles. Carlo De Benedetti, Olivetti's chairman and chief
executive, rarely misses an opportunity to press publicly for further
liberalisation of the telecoms sector and development of Europe's IT
infrastructure, and Piol takes up the same theme.
'At the moment there is not much scope to invest because of the regulatory
environment,' he said. Deregulation means breaking up monopolies and
creating a 'pluralistic, competitive market for networks and innovative
services,' according to Olivetti, and focusing regulatory efforts on the
distribution of scarce frequencies and the protection of free competition.
From the point of view of income, Telemedia and Omnitel-Pronto Italia are
still two empty boxes in a group structure still dominated by computer
products, systems and services.
But after two to three years of drought in the international computer
market, the Italian group knows that it cannot afford to miss the forecast
Dollars 3,000bn multimedia and telecoms monsoon.
As De Benedetti said in his report to shareholders earlier this year:
'Converging information technology and telecommunications is the new,
immense fast lane where Olivetti intends to operate.'
