FT  14 APR 94 / Book Review: Green grow the accusations
Mortgaging The Earth - The World Bank, environmental impoverishment
and the crisis of development
By Bruce Rich
Earthscan Publications, Pounds 14.95. Beacon, Dollars 29. 376 pages
Fifty years after its creation, the World Bank faces a chorus of complaints
that the Dollars 24bn worth of loans it makes a year is failing to bring
about the kind of economic development it intends. One of the most frequent
accusations is that the bank's projects are also destroying the environment.
That charge was partly acknowledged by the bank last year, when it withdrew
a proposal to lend India money to build the Narmada dam in Gujarat state,
west India. Critics of the Dollars 3bn project to provide electricity and
irrigation said it would destroy wildlife habitats and force thousands of
people to resettle.
According to Bruce Rich, the Narmada episode is just one example in a long
list of World Bank projects which have brought 'ecological devastation'.
Rich, a campaigner at US lobby group the Environmental Defence Fund, is
right in his criticism of the bank's lending practices on many counts.
Several World Bank-funded schemes have become notorious for their ecological
impact. Road building through the rainforest of north-western Brazil
accelerated logging of hardwood trees; the bank then felt obliged to back
further projects intended to counteract that damage. Indonesian
transmigration - the relocation of people from the western Indonesian
islands into the untouched forests of Irian Jaya - caused extensive
disruption of the island's native communities and of the plants and animals
that supported them. The scheme did not alleviate poverty, but simply
redistributed it, Rich argues.
He is right, too, in his analysis of some of the causes of these
misjudgments. He points to the bank's preference for projects such as dams,
road building and irrigation schemes, which have environmental and social
consequences that are often hard to anticipate.
But he seems misguided in ascribing the bank's failings to a thirst for
power and to its 'official culture of secretiveness'. A sprawling chapter,
'From Descartes to Chico Mendes' (who campaigned against Brazil's timber
policies), declares that the bank represents a centuries-old western
tradition of dominating other societies and the natural world.
A better explanation might be that the bank favours large schemes because of
the difficulty and expense of gathering information on smaller projects, and
because of the need to control overheads.
Rich's taste for grandiose pronouncements on cultural trends makes many of
his descriptions frustratingly abstract. 'To see Singrauli today is to
witness a nihilistic negation of nature and humankind', he says of one
Indian industrial region - which hardly conveys what it feels like to be
there.
Even where he introduces particular cases of ecological destruction, his
attacks on the World Bank are frequently imprecise. For example, when
talking about the environmental impact of commercial shrimp farming in Thai
mangrove swamps, he does not say how much tree felling would have happened
regardless of the bank's involvement.
However, the book's main weakness is that it judges the bank only by an
ecological yardstick. Rich makes no attempt to assess how the bank rates
against its own goals of fostering economic development and reducing
poverty. He quotes people who object to projects, but does not examine
whether other groups - or the countries overall - have benefited from the
World Bank's presence.
Rich does not give sufficient credit to recent soul-searching at the bank -
including a conference last year on proposals for reforming its lending
practices and environmental standards. After Narmada, the bank produced a
series of scathing internal reports, which concluded 'neither the board nor
the president wants more surprises about problems with ongoing projects'.
It becomes clear, as Rich rails against 'the seemingly unstoppable,
inevitable face of development', that he is at heart uncomfortable with the
pursuit of economic growth. As helping countries to grow is one of the
bank's central aims, it is perhaps inevitable that no World Bank project
meets with his approval.
Tellingly, he concludes that 'nature itself appears in revolt against this
empire of man over things'. Readers may feel at many points that Rich does
not much like people, unless they belong to indigenous tribes.
These weaknesses are unfortunate, because Rich poses timely questions about
the World Bank's role. Anxieties about whether resources are applied to the
most deserving projects, and about how success should be measured, now
confront many of the international institutions set up after the second
world war - notably the International Monetary Fund, the World Health
Organisation and the International Atomic Energy Agency, the nuclear
watchdog.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, set up in 1991 to help
rebuild eastern Europe and modelled partly on the World Bank, has grappled
with similar issues.
If the World Bank now faces more searching questions about its role than in
the past, that is not entirely the fault of its lending record. It also
reflects the growing debate about the proper economic and environmental
relationship between the developed and developing world.
For instance, how much financial help should industrialised countries give
to the third world, and what strings should be attached? Are western
campaigners wrong to try to impose their 'green' standards on other
countries?
Rich does not solve such conundrums. He is right, though, to argue that the
bank needs to find answers, because the questions will not go away.
