FT  15 FEB 94 / Radicals set upin opposition
Russia's leading radical reformers yesterday warned of an economic and
political crisis by spring - and made it clear they were now in complete
opposition to the policies of the present government, led by Mr Viktor
Chernomyrdin.
The largest of the radical parties, the Russia's Choice group led by Mr
Yegor Gaidar, former first deputy prime minister, intends to constitute
itself as a fully-fledged political party next Saturday. A draft programme,
produced last weekend, claims Communist and fascist forces linked to a
criminal bureaucracy are planning a 'political reaction', while 'the
executive, in order to withstand reaction, moves further and further from
the course of reform.'
At the same time Mr Boris Fyodorov, former finance minister, warned
yesterday that, on present government policies, hyperinflation and financial
collapse were inevitable by the spring. The budget deficit could grow to as
much as Rbs100,000bn.
'There are some elementary things that have to be done: bring down
inflation, bring down the budget deficit, keep interest rates higher than
inflation,' he said.
'These are elementary things - but the government has done nothing. As long
as these trends continue there will be no investment, and thus there will be
no growth in production, and people will live worse.'
These similar estimates, coming the week before President Boris Yeltsin is
expected to focus on the economy in Friday's state of the nation address,
have underscored the radicals' determination not to support the government.
However, they sharply distinguish government from president. Russia's
Choice's draft says it will 'mobilise social, political and parliamentary
support for the reforms brought in by President Yeltsin since 1991. We
support the president who put such a strategy in place.'
Russia's Choice, which has been riven with dissension since the election and
from which a number of members - including Mr Fyodorov - have defected, is
now seeking to claim the prime place in reform and to claim that, while in
opposition to government policies, it is still the natural presidential
party.
