FT  07 NOV 94 / Tory right threatens EU revolt after retreat on postal
sell-off
Rightwing Conservatives are threatening to block a crucial bill to increase
British contributions to the European Union in retaliation for the cabinet
climbdown over Post Office privatisation.
Amid growing rightwing anger at Mr John Major's decision to give way to a
handful of mainly leftwing Post Office rebels, cabinet loyalists sought to
defuse the row by pledging that privatisation was still on the government's
agenda.
In a robust defence of the prime minister, Mr Jeremy Hanley, the party
chairman, told BBC radio that Mr Major retained the support of 'the vast
majority' of MPs.
He said ministers 'do not believe this policy is wrong, but maybe we do need
to sell it better'. Sir Norman Fowler, his predecessor as party chairman,
told BBC television: 'Anybody who thinks this is the end of the matter
should think again.'
However, rightwingers queued up to blame the retreat on weak leadership by
Mr Major. Mr Norman Lamont, the former chancellor, said it was 'absurd that
the government should be held to ransom by a taxi-full of flotsam and
bobtail'.
Mr Lamont said the rebels would have backed down if the prime minister had
made the bill an issue of confidence, as he had done when faced with a
rightwing rebellion against the bill implementing the Maastricht treaty on
European integration.
Mr Lamont said he would vote for the bill increasing contributions to the
EU, which implements an agreement setting a higher ceiling for payments
along lines he negotiated as chancellor.
But, in a clear warning to the government's business managers, Mr Lamont
said the Post Office debacle would increase opposition to the bill by
rightwing critics of the EU, who would demand 'a very thorough examination
of it'.
The bill, which will be included in the Queen's speech to parliament on
November 16, is vulnerable because the number of committed Euro-sceptics far
exceeds the government's Commons majority of 13.
It is broadly supported by the main opposition parties, but Labour is
working on parliamentary manoeuvres intended to embarrass the government
into relying on a vote of confidence to force the bill through.
In a development which could
be significant if the government's fortunes fail to recover, rightwingers
praised Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade and industry secretary, for seeking
to press ahead with Post Office privatisation.
Mr Edward Leigh, a former minister, said Mr Heseltine had 'covered himself
in glory', and hinted that the right might back him in a leadership
challenge against Mr Major if the government fails to rebuild its popularity
over the next year.
Cold shoulder from Norway's north, Page 2; Cabinet set to endorse spending
cuts, Page 7
