FT  19 OCT 94 / Survey of North American Business Locations (3): Foreigners
welcomed with open arms - Mexico / Damian Fraser assesses the prospects
With its access to the US and Canadian markets guaranteed by membership of
the North American Free Trade Agreement, Mexico expects to become a haven
for foreign companies in search of a cheap labour force and a stable
investor-friendly country with more than 85m people.
In the first seven months since the treaty came into effect, there are
already signs that Mexico's ambitions are being fulfilled. Despite the
tremendous political uncertainly before the August presidential election,
direct foreign investment rose by 32 per cent to reach Dollars 8.035bn
compared with the same period last year.
The largest share of the foreign investment - 62 per cent - came from the US
as in previous years. But the passage of Nafta has not increased the US
proportion of investment. High-profile non-US companies such as BMW, Honda,
and Labbat, the Canadian brewery, have recently announced plans to invest in
Mexico, raising slightly the share of non-US investment in the country this
year.
Under Nafta, Mexico, the US and Canada have agreed to remove almost all
trade and non-trade barriers over 15 years. With Mexican wages roughly one
fifth of those in the US, economists expect many US and Canadian companies
to move their labour intensive operations south of the border  - continuing
a trend towards economic integration that began well before Nafta was
proposed.
Mexico further agreed to liberalise its foreign investment law in the Nafta
negotiations. Under the new laws, Mexico's financial sector is open to US
and Canadian investment, red tape on obtaining approval in other sectors is
significantly reduced, and many restrictions on investing in border and
coastal zones are lifted. Most of the concessions offered to the US and
Canada have subsequently been granted to other countries.
The big three US car companies were among the first to spot the advantages
of investing in Mexico and exporting parts or finished vehicles to the US
and Latin America, and have plans to increase their investment in Mexico in
coming years. They have now been joined by many German and Japanese auto
manufacturers, who have recently announced their intention to make large new
investments in the country, in part so as to be able to meet higher local
content rules prescribed under Nafta.
A study commissioned by the Mexican Investment Board - the
government-sponsored investment agency that is the first port of call for
foreign companies moving to Mexico - reckons electronic, building materials,
apparel and mining are the other sectors of most probable interest to
international companies seeking to locate south of the border. The study
concluded that Mexico's pro-business climate, quality of government, access
to the US and its cheap work force, were among the main factors attracting
companies to the country.
Mexico's other principal attraction was the growing domestic market of 85m
consumers. So far most companies seeking to sell to Mexicans, such as
Labbat, the Canadian brewery, Bell Atlantic, the telephone company,
Wal-Mart, the US retail chain, have entered the market with Mexican
partners. But some, such as the 20 foreign banks which have applied to open
subsidiaries, are going it alone.
After subdued economic growth for the past couple of years, the foreign
investors looking at the internal economy are hoping for a recovery next
year. The government has forecast an expansion of about 4 per cent, regarded
as well within reach by most independent economists. Inflation, meanwhile,
is expected by the government to fall to less than 7 per cent this year, and
to 4 per cent next year.
But despite the evident attractions of investing in Mexico, many foreign
companies have found out that doing business there is more expensive than
might appear. Workers on average are considerably less productive than in
the US, infrastructure is poor (especially in railways and ports), the cost
of capital is high, regulations governing ownership are unclear and law
enforcement unpredictable. While the federal government is considered
helpful to foreigners, state governments, with some notable exceptions, are
often bureaucratic, and prone to corruption.
Nor does Mexico enter into bidding wars for companies seeking to receive
benefits for locating in the country. Companies (foreign and domestic alike)
receive modest federal tax breaks for new investments, and for buying
anti-pollution equipments. State governments can give land away or help
train workers. But, generally, the government opposes giving discretionary
benefits to foreign companies planning to invest in Mexico.
Some of the obstacles to foreign location in Mexico will be addressed by the
incoming government of Ernesto Zedillo. His administration has pledged to
boost spending on vocational training for workers, to commit to a
significant expansion of the country's infrastructure, to lower interest
rates by reducing inflation still further, and to enforce the law with
respect to property rights and application of regulations.
There is little doubting the importance Mexico's government now attaches to
foreign investment, and the open arms with which it welcomes any who are
willing to set up operations in the country.
