FT  23 SEP 94 / Welfare dilemma for Nordic social democrats: Can the
Scandinavian countries sustain high state benefits and reinvigorate the
private sector?
Scandinavia, the heart of western European welfare politics, is set once
again for a period of social democratic domination following elections this
week in Sweden and Denmark.
The return to power in Sweden of Mr Ingvar Carlsson's Social Democratic
Party ended three years in which the welfare state, built up during the
party's years in power since the war, was under challenge by conservative
prime minister Mr Carl Bildt.
In Denmark, Wednesday's election confirmed the Social Democrats of prime
minister Mr Poul Nyrup Rasmussen as the country's biggest single party and
the leading force in the new government. Although he lost ground to the
right-wing Liberal party, Mr Nyrup Rasmussen will be able to stay in power
with the support of centre and left-wing parties.
The Swedish and Danish elections followed the victory last September of Mrs
Gro Harlem Brundtland's Labour party in Norway which, like its sister social
democratic parties to the east and south, has a profound commitment to
egalitarianism achieved through the universal provision of welfare.
To complete the picture, opinion polls in Finland suggest that the Social
Democratic party there, led by Mr Paavo Lipponen, will unseat the present
centre-right coalition of prime minister Mr Esko Aho in the general election
next March.
But this swing to the left is hardly a vote for state socialism.
In all four countries, private industry has been unchallenged for most of
the past 40 years as the engine of economic growth.
What the social democratic trend does seem to reflect is a deep-seated
determination to maintain the welfare state even at the cost of tax rates
which would be unsustainable in other western countries.
Over the years, Nordic citizens have grown accustomed to the state provision
of 'womb to tomb' welfare services covering health, education, social
services and generous safety nets such as high unemployment benefits.
In all four countries, for example, not only do mothers have
state-subsidised maternity leave rights much greater than those in most
European countries, but fathers have the right to paternity leave.
The big question, however, is whether the Nordic countries can sustain their
welfare states at current levels.
Norway, with the benefit of North Sea oil and gas revenues, has least cause
for concern, at least in the short to medium term.
But in Sweden, even the Social Democrats recognise that there is now a
damaging imbalance between the public and the private sector.
Last year, government spending as a proportion of gross domestic product
exceeded 70 per cent, well above the European average of around 50 per cent.
This imbalance, caused in large part by the huge cost of financing 14 per
cent unemployment, has left the country with the most serious crisis it has
experienced in its public finances.
The budget deficit is expected to be around 11 per cent of GDP this year and
government debt will shortly exceed 100 per cent of GDP.
Mr Carlsson is now preparing the country for a period of tough fiscal
medicine in which he has made no secret of the need for some severe cuts in
welfare benefits.
He may well have in mind the Danish example.
Denmark experienced a similar crisis in the early 1980s, but now has a
relatively strong economy after a decade of budget stringency.
The public finances were brought under control and, despite a long
recession, the budget deficit is now around 5 per cent of GDP.
Meanwhile, the welfare system continues to flourish. Indeed, Mr Nyrup
Rasmussen has this year introduced a popular new welfare programme.
As many as 100,000 Danes will take advantage of a 'leave from work' scheme
under which parents of young children and people undergoing job-related
training can take six months off work while receiving generous compensation.
But the Danish experience may not be as reassuring to Mr Carlsson as it
appears at first sight.
Denmark still ranks second to Sweden among industrialised countries in the
proportion of GDP accounted for by state spending (more than 60 per cent),
while unemployment continues to run at 12.5 per cent of the workforce.
But both Mr Nyrup Rasmussen and Mr Carlsson recognise that to tackle
unemployment, they must not only keep the public finances in order, but also
reverse a 40-year trend in the Nordic area of net job creation coming from
the public sector.
They are committed (as are Mrs Brundtland in Norway and Mr Lipponen in
Finland) to promoting private sector growth.
But many Nordic economists fear that the high unemployment benefits
encouraged by the welfare states have led also to high minimum wages that
hamper the private sector job creation needed to underpin the welfare
structure.
This is the awkward dilemma which Nordic social democrats must come to grips
with as they lead the region towards the end of the century.
