FT  30 MAR 94 / Tighter curbs on electricity prices urged
Electricity consumer representatives yesterday dismissed recent price cuts
in the industry as insufficient and pressed Professor Stephen Littlechild,
the regulator, to tighten price controls on power distribution companies.
The chairmen of the 12 electricity consumers' committees in England and
Wales said that while profits and dividends had increased since
privatisation, 'the ordinary non-investing customer has enjoyed little
financial benefit'.
They said there was no evidence that recent announcements of 'small' price
reductions and price standstills were prompted 'other than by a need for the
companies to remain within the current price formula'.
Of the 12 regional companies the highest cut was 6 per cent - by Norweb.
Five companies implemented freezes.
The committee chairmen said price reductions of at least 5 per cent would
have been appropriate.
They said they would lobby Prof Littlechild to take advantage of the
distribution price-control review, now under way, to tighten the price
formula.
Separately, Prof Littlechild yesterday announced standards that require the
12 regional electricity companies and two in Scotland to carry out Pounds
100m of expenditure on energy-efficiency measures in the next four years.
Under a review of prices of the companies' supply businesses conducted last
year, the regulator provided each company with an allowance of Pounds 1 per
customer per year for expenditure on energy-efficiency projects. These
include subsidising the fitting of insulation in customers' homes and
reducing the prices of energy-efficient appliances.
The key requirement of the standards is to ensure that the money raised by
the companies is spent on 'worthwhile projects which will benefit the
customer'.
The savings will be calculated in accordance with a formula proposed by the
Energy Savings Trust.
Companies will be encouraged to target special-needs customers, such as the
elderly, disabled and low-income families.
Prof Littlechild said the companies would produce annual reports which would
'allow for an informed public debate about the value to customers of the
energy-efficiency measures'.
