FT  07 JAN 94 / Aspirin 'may save 100,000 lives'
The humble aspirin could prevent 100,000 premature deaths a year around the
world, says research published today in the British Medical Journal.
The cost of each death avoided would be 'about Pounds 250', and if all those
at risk took aspirin the National Health Service alone would save at least
Pounds 70m a year, the research authors say.
The study is the largest in a series that suggests one of the world's
cheapest drugs can be effective against two of the world's biggest killers:
heart attacks and strokes.
Regular small doses of aspirin could prevent 100,000 deaths a year of people
aged less than 70 and avoid twice as many non-fatal heart attacks and
strokes, says the report. The document is a compilation of results of 300
different trials involving 140,000 patients.
Such reports have already boosted global sales of aspirin. In the US 10 per
cent to 20 per cent of all aspirin sales are for patients with
cardiovascular problems, according to industry estimates.
In the UK the figure is 'under 10 per cent, but sales are growing by 17 per
cent a year', said UK manufacturer Reckitt and Colman. Reckitt said that the
BMJ report should increase sales further.
Although aspirin lost its patents decades ago, global sales are still worth
Pounds 600m a year. The biggest supplier is French company Rhone-Poulenc,
which makes more than a quarter of world output of 40,000 tonnes.
Its low cost may have inhibited its wider use, according to Professor
Richard Peto of Oxford University and one of the authors of the BMJ report.
He said: 'Aspirin is so familiar that many doctors and patients still don't
fully recognise its importance. Perhaps if aspirin were 100 times as
expensive it would be used more widely.'
'The cost of half an aspirin each day is low, so that even at UK aspirin
prices, each death avoided costs only about Pounds 250 and there are further
benefits from preventing non-fatal heart attacks and strokes.'
Today's report says aspirin is effective for women as well as men. For more
than a decade US guidelines on aspirin after stroke recommended it only for
men. It also says aspirin is effective in a wide range of conditions other
than heart attack and stroke.
The research says the best dose is about half a tablet a day but warns that
people with low risk of heart or blood vessel disease should not take
aspirin regularly. The chances of internal bleeding as a result of taking
aspirin regularly are low, but may be higher than that of cardiovascular
disease in healthy people.
Editorial Comment, Page 13
