FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (19): Airports of the world - Charmless,
but it has every facility / Frankfurt
If you have the legs and the patience to seach them out, Frankfurt Airport
has every conceivable facility for the business traveller within its
charmless vastness.
The tricky part is finding a helpful and knowledgeable ear to offer
directions. Don't even try on a national or regional holiday, but be sure to
arrive with plenty of time to spare if you are flying out. On peak days the
outward-bound total approaches 70,000 happy travellers.
Those en route to the US should leave an even greater safety margin in the
light of the continuing withdrawal of swathes of US military and ancillary
personnel, their dogs and bicycles.
Formerly bottle-necked security checks are showing signs of improvement with
the arrival of extra staff and an increase of almost a third in the number
of X-ray machines in the past few months. A newly-expanded supply of baggage
trolleys (apparently modelled on the Mercedes S-class car) also appears to
have put an end to regular wrestling matches, especially in the departures
area.
Mechanistic processes requiring minimum personal contact with airport staff,
such as baggage handling, tend to be flawless.
Passport control for new arrivals is erratic. Do not bother to smile at the
uniformed checkers, but make sure you toe the yellow lines as you approach
them unless you enjoy being harangued.
Public transport services are adequate. For preference take the train or a
20-minute taxi ride if the prospect of the gruesome drug-addict population
lurching around Frankfurt's railway station concourse deters you.
Car-hirers may be rattled by the tangle of roadworks associated with the
construction of the new Dollars 1bn terminal, scheduled to open a new era of
comfort and efficiency in October. Road signs near the airport are
confusing, to say the least.
Incoming drivers looking for a parking space are often best advised to avoid
the signposted car parks 1, 2 and 3, and nip along past the set-down area to
car park 4 which generally provides quickest access to arrival and departure
areas.
