FT  21 MAY 94 / Arts: The Count of Monte Cristo - Malcolm Rutherford admires
a new staged adaptation
This is the 150th anniversary of one of the most prolific literary
achievements of all time. In 1844 Alexandre Dumas produced both The Three
Musketeers and The Count of Monte Cristo. They were first written in
instalments for magazines; the books came later, then the plays and
ultimately the movies. Dumas himself wrote a popular stage version of The
Count which required four evenings to perform.
The enthralling new adaptation at the Manchester Royal Exchange Theatre is
slightly more modest. The first night began just after 6 pm and, with a few
intervals, was over shortly after midnight. The adapters, James Maxwell and
Jonathan Hackett, have divided the novel into two parts: Treasure and
Revenge. Although for most of the season they will be shown separately,
there is much to be said for taking in the full sweep at one sitting.
'Sweep' is what it is. There is no wholly satisfactory term to describe the
Dumas style. 'Romantic epic' perhaps comes closest. There is not much
feeling, but the action comes in bucket-loads. Wild and improbable though
the story may seem (it was partly based on a police record), somehow it
never breaks into parody. The secret, I think, is that there is a realistic
social background: beyond the ball-room glitter and the talk of millions of
francs, poverty, prison and fear are never far away. It is the role of the
Count to provide the mystery and the magic.
In the Manchester production, directed by Braham Murray, there are two
outstanding accomplishments. One is the use of the Royal Exchange stage; the
other is the performance of David Threlfall as the Count.
This is theatre in the round, but not of the conventional kind. There are
galleries all round the stage as well. Simon Higlett's settings use the
space and the height to the full. Characters come down on ropes, there are
firework displays and strange sprite-like creatures dressed in red flit
about all over the place. It is never quite clear, though never distracting,
which entrance will be used next. Indeed it all adds to the impression that
the Count can appear from anywhere.
Threlfall's energy and stamina are prodigious. He is a tall actor - or
perhaps the height of the roof and the smallness of the others make him seem
taller than he is. He appears in several guises: young sailor, priest,
eccentric English lord as well as the Count. At his most unforgettable, he
is standing erect in evening clothes with long black flowing hair: a
Mephistopheles figure who can do good as well as evil.
Like Hamlet, the Count can also fence and there is a certain melancholy
about him. When challenged to a duel, he suggests - apart from the
conventional choice of weapons - drawing lots on who should commit suicide.
None of the other characters quite come up to him, though that is not to
disparage: they are not meant to. Some of them impress, like Clive
Llewellyn's mute slave, merely by being there and giving presence. This is a
team performance where no-one falls short.
The scenes change swiftly and frequently: note, for instance, when the Count
appears at the opera. Even after nearly six hours we are off to new
territory when one of the characters is kidnapped by bandits and kept in a
cage. The Count could go on for ever. Nothing ever flags: neither the
imagination, nor the playing.
Until August 6. (061) 833 9833
