FT  27 MAY 94 / Survey of Relocation in the UK (18): Shift in help to south
 -The North
The full impact of last year's redrawing of the Assisted Areas map has yet
to become apparent in northern England, where the provision of state aid to
reinvigorate the local economy dates from the 1930s.
In one sense, the region did not see any great change in the review; while
Darlington in County Durham was taken off the map, the Morpeth and Ashington
area of Northumberland was added, and in Cumbria Workington's demotion from
development to intermediate area was compensated by the granting of IA
status to Whitehaven and Barrow-in-Furness.
However, the government's decision to give help for the first time to parts
of London and the south and east coast means the 'traditional' assisted
areas may have to fight even harder for inward investment, with fewer
financial resources.
The Northern Development Company, the economic regeneration body for
north-east England and Cumbria, with overall responsibility for the region's
inward investment drive, learnt recently it had suffered a 2 per cent cut -
Pounds 32,000 - in its 1994-95 funding from central government.
The NDC had sought a zero increase - a cut in real terms. 'The recovery of
this region in terms of economic regeneration is a very slow process,'
complains Dr John Bridge, NDC chief executive.
The issue is certain to be raised next month at the annual meeting between
Mr Tim Sainsbury, the industry minister, and the NDC and its counterparts
from other regions. The minister faces some tough questioning.
Already, the new competition is asserting itself; on a recent visit to Dubai
with the Cumbria Marketing Initiative Mr Harry Knowles, chief executive of
Furness Enterprise, the Barrow-based agency, came across the rival East Kent
Initiative. 'There's only so much inward investment to go round; we're all
competing like crazy for it,' he says.
The East Kent team emphasised its area's proximity to the Channel tunnel.
North-east and Cumbrian agencies do not believe the tunnel will lose them
significant inward investment; indeed, Mr Chris Fraser, the NDC's director
of international investment, says the new link between Britain and France
should be generally beneficial in marketing terms.
In the north, the need for further improvement to the A66 between Cumbria
and the east coast ports is more of a live infrastructure issue.
The region's inward investment agencies are reporting a recent rise in
inquiries.
Dr Bridge has noted growing interest from Germany, because of the UK's
improving comparative productivity and relatively low labour rates and the
strength of the D-Mark.
In recent years, the NDC has aimed to secure about 5,000 projected jobs
annually, including new and safeguarded jobs, through inward investment.
This year, says Dr Bridge, 'we'll be lucky to get 4,000.'
Even so, the past year has seen some big breakthroughs. West Cumbria has won
its first Asian investment. Sammi (UK), a subsidiary of Korean audio speaker
manufacturer Sammi Sound Technology, has taken over a former shoe factory
near Workington. It is now starting production, employing 30 people, rising
to 60 by the end of 1994. The target is 100 within two years.
This month Taiwan's CMC Magnetics Corporation opened its Pounds 26m floppy
disk production plant in Cramlington, Northumberland, expected to create 550
jobs over three years.
The project, receiving Pounds 8.25m in government regional assistance, is
the UK's seventh investment from Taiwan, and Northumberland's third. 'Taiwan
is one of our markets with the most potential at the moment,' says Mr
Fraser.
