FT  19 OCT 94 / Balladur tries to restore cabinet calm
Mr Edouard Balladur, the French prime minister, yesterday sought to defuse
factional disputes within his government which threaten the chances of the
right in next spring's presidential elections.
The divisions in the centre-right coalition have been fuelled by the
undeclared contest between Mr Balladur and Mr Jacques Chirac, leader of the
Gaullist RPR party, for the conservative candidacy in the presidential
polls.
Mr Balladur met Mr Alain Juppe, foreign minister, and Mr Charles Pasqua,
interior minister, yesterday to urge the maintenance of government unity.
Last week, the two ministers clashed when Mr Juppe, a strong supporter of Mr
Chirac, rejected Mr Pasqua's proposal for primary elections to select a
single conservative candidate for the presidential elections.
Mr Pasqua responded by suggesting that Mr Juppe should leave the government,
claiming that the foreign minister's membership of a support committee for
Mr Chirac was incompatible with his position in the cabinet. Mr Francois
Leotard, defence minister and a Balladur supporter, has also been at odds
with Mr Juppe following the defence minister's remarks that US policy
towards Iraq was motivated by domestic political considerations.
After meeting the prime minister, Mr Juppe said he was 'staggered by the
deterioration of the political climate', but denied having breached cabinet
solidarity.
Mr Balladur is seeking to delay campaigning for next year's presidential
poll until January, partly because of his own interest in silencing Chirac
supporters. He has also written to Mr Chirac and Mr Valery Giscard
d'Estaing, leader of the UDF, junior partner in the RPR-UDF coalition,
calling for a meeting to discuss a political ceasefire.
The increasingly public disputes between cabinet members has further
unsettled a government shaken by two resignations in the past three months.
Mr Alain Carignon, communications minister, and Mr Gerard Longuet, industry
minister, stepped down following corruption allegations.
The various setbacks have highlighted the potential threat to the right from
Mr Jacques Delors, the European Commission president and a possible
Socialist presidential candidate. Mr Delors has said he will not make a
decision on his candidacy until the beginning of next year, but he has
closed the gap with Mr Balladur in recent opinion polls.
An IFOP poll published yesterday showed that Mr Delors had gained five
percentage points to close within four points of Mr Balladur in a survey of
voting intentions for the second and decisive round of the presidential
elections.
