FT  16 JUL 94 / Markets: A month is a long time in soccer - Wall Street
Call it the World Cup Effect. Since the week the tournament kicked off on US
turf (real, not artificial) US shares have been on the slide. Now, with the
end finally in sight, stock prices have clawed their back to almost exactly
their level of four weeks ago. For stock market watchers, as for soccer
fans, a month can seem like a very long time.
The Soccer Cycle, to be fair, has coincided neatly with recent swings in
sentiment in the US over the outlook for interest rates. The fortunes of
their football teams may have influenced some Latin American countries'
financial markets, but the sport has not yet put down real market-moving
roots in the US.
A month ago, the dollar's plunge sparked a bond market retreat amid concern
that the Federal Reserve would raise interest rates to defend the currency.
The dollar may not have bounced back - it touched a new low against the
Japanese yen at the start of this week - but the relative stability in
currency markets of recent days and some promising economic data have set
the stage for a modest rally for both stocks and bonds.
The good news for the financial markets trickled out during the week. On
Tuesday, June's producer price index turned out to be better than expected:
the index remained flat during the month, compared with a general belief
that it would rise modestly (higher producer prices feed through eventually
into higher consumer prices, which leads to inflation and higher interest
rates).
On Wednesday, the producer price index for June matched expectations with a
small rise, while June's retail sales and the latest week's jobless figures,
released on Thursday, were generally seen as positive.
With this data out of the way, there is little on the immediate horizon to
trouble the markets (the Federal Reserve's interest rate policy-making
committee next meets in mid-August, but nothing seen in recent days is
likely to force it to shift its stance). And that has allowed US traders and
investors to focus instead on how the US corporate sector is faring, rather
the bigger macro-economic picture.
Two corporate events have set the tone. First, something to set Wall
Street's pulse racing: the promise of multi-billion dollar takeover battle
(or perhaps even two.) When CBS, the television network, agreed a takeover
of home shopping cable TV group QVC 10 days ago, both companies' shares
jumped. Last week, a rival bidder cable television bidder - Comcast -
stepped in to claim QVC.
The result: both QVC and CBS shares jumped again. There could be other
bidders for QVC. Also, CBS's attempt at a deal had revealed its own
weaknesses (both in its lack of cable TV interests and in management,)
exposing it as another potential takeover candidate. CBS shares were trading
at Dollars 312 at midday yesterday, up from Dollars 300 earlier in the week,
while QVC stood at Dollars 44.
Meanwhile, the reshaping of the healthcare industry continued apace. Eli
Lilly, the drugs company, agreed to pay Dollars 4bn for distribution company
PCS, while Kendall International, a medical supplies company, is to be
acquired by manufacturing group Tyco International for Dollars 1.4bn.
The second big moment of the week was the release of second-quarter earnings
from Chrysler. Coming at the very beginning of the latest US earnings
season, the car company's record post-tax profits of nearly Dollars 1bn (40
per cent up on a year before) appeared to confirm analysts' confident
predictions for across-the-board earnings advances. Chrysler's shares jumped
Dollars 1 3/8 on the news, to Dollars 51 1/4 , though by yesterday they had
retreated to Dollars 49 1/8 on profit-taking. Further strong earnings
reports in the coming days could do much to calm Wall Street's frayed nerves
of recent weeks.
Will it set the stage, finally, for the summer rally of which US investors
have been dreaming? A jump in share prices during the summer is a
traditional part of the US investment scene. Perhaps not surprisingly, talk
of a summer rally, which began in May, has resurfaced. The Dow Jones
industrial average yesterday lunchtime had retraced lost ground to 3736.98 -
just five points shy of where it was when the World Cup got into full swing,
and more than 100 points above its low of a fortnight ago.
All the same conditions are in place for shares to stage some impressive
gains as a month ago: no immediate fears over interest rates, a rebound in
corporate earnings, and the prospect of more big takeovers in the telecoms,
media, finance and healthcare sectors. Only, as the Soccer Cycle has proved,
it does not always work out that way.
 --------------------------
Monday     3702.99 - 06.15
Tuesday    3702.66 - 00.33
Wednesday  3704.28 + 01.62
Thursday   3739.25 + 34.97
Friday     3753.81 + 14.56
 --------------------------
