FT  23 AUG 94 / Pension funds may face extra tax
The Inland Revenue is considering taxing the sub-underwriting commissions
earned by pension funds in a move that could have widespread ramifications
for the industry.
The Revenue's office in Sheffield is believed to have approached a large
pension fund suggesting that its commissions may be subject to assessment.
This may lead to a test case before the Revenue special commissioners or in
the courts which could lead to the principle being applied more generally
across pension funds.
The move undermines the long-held assumption that such earnings are
tax-exempt, and comes five years after the Revenue last considered the
matter, which has been kept under review.
Sub-underwriting commissions are the fees charged when a lead underwriter on
a share issue passes on some of the risk to other investment institutions.
The rate has long been fixed at 1.25 per cent.
Section 592 of the 1988 Income and Corporation Taxes Act specifically
exempts underwriting commissions from income tax as long as they relate to
'casual' or 'occasional' profits.
The Revenue's case would hinge on showing that the commissions had become
part of regular trading activity for the pension fund in question.
A report commissioned by the Office of Fair Trading in July suggested the
risks taken by underwriters did not justify the 'excessive' profits made.
Mr Geoff Lindey, chairman of the investment committee of the National
Association of Pension Funds and head of UK institutional investment at J P
Morgan Investment Management, said: 'We have always believed these
commissions not to be taxable. We would not complain if they become taxable
prospectively but we would be very unhappy if the rules are changed
retrospectively.'
He said profit on commissions was too small to be worth the Revenue's effort
and a tax would encourage pension funds to withdraw from sub-underwriting in
a way which would decrease the number of institutions willing to spread the
risk on an equity issue.
The Inland Revenue said yesterday: 'There is no case with the special
commissioners at the moment. It is possible that there might be a case in
the future but we really cannot say any more at the moment.'
Lex, Page 16
