FT  12 FEB 94 / Power deal disappoints suppliers
Several electricity distributors were disappointed with Professor Stephen
Littlechild's settlement with National Power and PowerGen - but the Major
Energy Users' Association was full of praise for it.
The council said the agreement reached by the electricity industry regulator
delivered 'exactly' what they needed and was welcome news for heavy industry
as it struggled to recover from recession. It said power-plant sales by the
two generators would speed the transition to a proper competitive market and
the regulator had been right to insist on a price cap.
The regulator has agreed not to refer the generators to the Monopolies and
Mergers Commission but complainants, including consumers' associations,
pointed out that the settlement would be of limited benefit to householders.
Losers include Nuclear Electric, the third big generator in England and
Wales, and, in the short term, other independent power companies.
Prof Littlechild's oft-stated intention is to bring as much competition to
the market as possible. It is ironic that the loudest complainants about
yesterday's settlement were from the very companies that he is trying to
encourage to improve the market.
'We do not understand why he thinks that artificially depressing prices will
encourage competition,' said Mr David Porter, representing the Association
of Independent Electricity Producers. The association argues that the lower
the rewards that generators can make from electricity the less likely they
are to want to build new plants.
Some of the regional electricity companies also felt aggrieved. They say
they were not consulted or warned about the changes in prospective pool
prices. The changes will have a considerable impact on contracts they have
been negotiating with users of 100kWh and above who from April will be able
to choose who supplies them with power.
Yorkshire Electricity was one of several companies inundated with calls from
100kWh customers who wanted to know the implications. Several regionals fear
pressure to renegotiate contracts.
Yesterday's settlement will have only a marginal effect on regional power
companies' profitability since most of the power they buy from the
generators is on long-term contracts backed by hedging agreements.
Some may even benefit because prices of electricity not covered by hedging
contracts will fall. All of the regional companies were relieved that Prof
Littlechild avoided a reference to the commission which would have disrupted
the whole market.
But perhaps the biggest sighs of relief yesterday were from the electricity
generators, the companies whose price-bidding behaviour sparked the inquiry,
the results of which were published yesterday. They had the most to lose.
Prof Littlechild's investigation found no evidence of abuse by either
company of their market position. More importantly, the settlement will be
less punitive than some analysts had feared and will leave both companies
with considerable market clout and profits at the end of the two years that
the deal lasts.
The two main elements of the agreement are a cap on prices that the
generators charge, and therefore the price in the electricity pool, and an
agreement that the generators 'use all reasonable endeavours' to sell up to
6,000MW of their generating plant.
The impact of the cap could be to reduce potential prices in the pool by
about 7 per cent but some analysts were suggesting yesterday that this
assumes that prices had continued at the high levels of the first half of
this financial year. Prices have fallen since then.
The companies were stressing that the cap was on prices rather than on
profits; National Power talked about a 'modest adverse impact' on its future
profitability.
Analysts were downgrading their profits forecast for the next two years,
when the cap will be in force, but not by amounts that would upset their
expectations on dividend growth, one of the main criteria by which
electricity companies are judged by the market.
SG Warburg Securities thought the settlement would cost National Power
Pounds 40m a year in profits over the next two years and PowerGen Pounds
20m. It expects National Power to make pre-tax profits next year of Pounds
650m, down on this year's expected Pounds 670m, and PowerGen to make Pounds
470m, about level with this year's forecast.
But the cap is temporary, a makeshift arrangement while competition develops
more fully. The success of the settlement will depend on how the generators
dispose of their plants in the future.
The regulator was yesterday putting a different gloss on the plant disposals
agreement than the generators. While he warned that he may renew his threat
to refer the generators at the end of next year if they had not made
satisfactory progress on the sales, PowerGen was warning that it was not
going to be rushed into a fire sale.
There could yet be significant arguments over the sale price of the plant.
The likelihood is that the generators will make at least some of the
disposals. But even if they do there is no guarantee that this will lead to
lower prices. This is because prices in the wholesale electricity pool are
determined by the most expensive plant needed to run the system. The most
expensive plants may still be in the hands of National Power and PowerGen
because anything they sell is likely to be offered at low prices by the new
owner to make the purchase economically viable.
If that were the case the generators would find it easier to lift their
prices again when the cap ends. Prof Littlechild's work is far from from
over.
