FT  05 APR 94 / Business Travel: Inspiration rises from the rubble -
Although much of east Berlin looks like a building site, visitors to the
city should choose to stay there
Anyone doing business in the German capital should insist on staying in east
Berlin.
Certainly, the east is a vast building site, where the bright lights of the
tall cranes seem like high street lights for the Mitte, the heart of the
city before it was divided in 1961. But at least the change seems positive,
unlike in the western part of the city, where the inhabitants complain that
unification has raised taxes and increased traffic, and has upset the
privileged status they had before the wall came down on the night of
November 8, 1989.
Don't be put off by such complaints, or by the dust, noise, rubble and
unprepossessing housing in the east. After all, most first-time business
visitors to Berlin hope to take advantage of the opportunities for
construction and services created by unification.
When you land at Tegel, the main airport north-west of the city, or the
small, rather quaint Templehof, a former military airport near the centre,
the benefits of unification may not be immediately apparent. Taxi drivers,
who charge about DM30 (Pounds 11.60) for the journey from Tegel to the
centre, will mutter that they cannot find the exact location of the street
if your hotel is in the east. They admit that they are still not used to
driving in that part of the city - four years after unification.
Most good hotels in east Berlin are in the Mitte. Say 'Mitte' clearly to
your taxi driver, and try to avoid being dropped off at the corner of
Checkpoint Charlie, the main crossing between west and east. A helpful taxi
driver deserves a tip of about 10 per cent. You should receive a receipt as
a matter of course. If not, just say: 'Quittung. Bitte.'
If you want a change from taxis, have little luggage and are not in a rush,
you can buy a weekly (DM33) or 24-hour (DM13) travel card for the city's
excellent public transport network. The cards, available from machines at
the airport bus terminal and at all underground stations, give unlimited
travel on the underground, S-bahn - or city trains - trams and buses.
You can also use them on the airport bus, which stops at
Karl-Schumacher-Platz, near Tegel. From there, you can take the fast,
efficient underground to Franzosische Strasse or Stadtmitte, which are near
the Maritim Grand and Hilton hotels, respectively. These hotels are a short
walk from the Treuhand privatisation agency on Leipziger Strasse - it is not
worth going by car to the agency, because traffic congestion around this
part of the Mitte is acute, especially around 8am, midday and 5.30pm.
Another advantage of using the U-bahn - or underground - is that this avoids
the Umleitungen, or diversions, on the roads, which are steadily growing in
number and can delay the taxis. As most of the city's bankers, engineers,
lawyers and Treuhand officials always seem pressed for time, it is polite to
arrive with a few minutes in hand.
Berlin is a deceptively big city, and its streets are very long. If you
don't want to be late, ask which end of the street the office you are
visiting is located.
Doing deals
Before appointments, find out whether an interpreter is needed, or whether
one will be provided. Most of the west Berlin business community - but not,
as a rule, most officials from the senate or government - speak English.
Many, however, prefer to speak German. And if you meet with local managers
in the eastern part of the city, they are more likely to speak Russian than
English. Another point to remember: always shake hands when meeting and
leaving.
If your contacts need extra copies of architectural or construction plans
that are too big for the hotel to cope with, there are outlets called
Copyhaus. One is in Georgenstrasse 3, close to the wonderful Pergamon
Museum, and is open from 9am to midnight on Monday to Friday, and from 10am
to 18.30 on Saturday. Another is in Grunewaldstrasse 18, south of the city,
which is open until midnight on Saturday.
Most visitors to Berlin end up doing some walking. This exercise is welcome
in a city where the inhabitants, particularly the middle to older
generation, are fond of large, heavy meals, three times a day.
Where to eat
Pace yourself. If you are meeting clients over breakfast, most hotels will
provide the full buffet, from fresh yoghurt, salami, fish and a selection of
meats, to a variety of excellent rolls, fruit and cereals. If you prefer to
eat breakfast outside the hotel, try Cafe Berio in Nollendorf-platz, or any
of the cafes in Savigny-platz, both in the west. Savigny-platz has better
surroundings, is very trendy and is a short walk from Ku'damm, or
Kurfursten-damm, the main shopping area of west Berlin.
The east is not particularly good for eating out, although it is slowly
improving. For lunch, you can wander up to Oranienberger Strasse and try
Cafe Oren, or Cafe Silberstein, or dine under the arches at Zum Nolle at
Friedrichstrasse railway station.
For dinner, go west, where there is an ever increasing number of good
restaurants, including Cafe Einstein, a grand old Berlin coffee house which
refuses to indulge in heavy German food, except for the Schnitzel. If the
weather is fine, ask for a table in the wonderful garden. Otherwise try Il
Calici, just off Adenauerplatz, and Paris-Moskau, behind the Reichstag, the
future seat of government. Increasingly, restaurants and shops take credit
cards, but this is still a cash-oriented society.
Leisure time
If, after all of your appointments and meals, you have time to spare, your
decision to stay in the east will be vindicated. The hotels are a stone's
throw from the Staatoper on Under den Linden, the Schauspielhaus, home of
Berlin's symphony orchestra, and a short walk from the Berlin Philharmonic.
There is also a good English-language bookshop on Mauerstrasse, which stocks
daily newspapers - east Berlin has been slow to set up kiosks selling
non-German papers. The few that do stock them sell out quickly. Otherwise,
the hotel should oblige.
In the centre, the shops close at about 6pm, except on Thursdays when they
stay open until 8pm. They remain open until 4pm, other than on the first
Saturday of each month. Banks generally open at 8.30am and close at 2pm,
except for Tuesdays and Thursdays when they stay open until 6pm, but it
depends on their location.
As for the overpriced duty free goods at the airports, forget them. It would
be better to buy a fine art history of Berlin or Potsdam at the bookstores
and ponder whether this strange, unhappy, united city will ever recapture
its former glory and confidence.
