FT  13 JUL 94 / Survey of Argentina (4): Nafta option shelved - Plans for
Mercosur are well advanced
The government of President Carlos Menem has carefully cultivated its image
as a responsible member of the new world order, ostentatiously rejecting its
former radical non-aligned foreign policy.
However, Mr Menem cannot always be guaranteed not to put his foot in it. His
personal endorsement of Mexican president Carlos Salinas to head the nascent
World Trade Organisation at the Cartagena summit of Latin American leaders
in June had to be retracted by embarrassed Argentine diplomats. Argentina
had previously pledged support to a Brazilian candidate.
Neither was Mr Menem's suggestion that former British prime minister
Margaret Thatcher should be extradited for war crimes likely to speed the
visit he says he wants to London.
Mr Menem often repeats his prediction that the Falkland Islands - over which
the UK and Argentina fought a brief war in 1982 - will be Argentine by the
year 2000. And his foreign minister, Guido di Tella says: 'I think he may be
wrong; the islands will be Argentine in 1997.'
At present, both countries agree to disagree over the islands' sovereignty.
Meanwhile, talks move ahead over fishing - a longer-term agreement is being
discussed to replace the current one-year accord - and oil in the Falklands
waters. 'If they want to explore for oil, we think we can block them,' said
Mr di Tella.
He said the region should become a 'special area with a special (oil)
regime', a subject that would be discussed, he said, in talks on oil this
month.
Twelve years after the Falklands war, relations with London are on a
reasonable footing. More importantly, Argentina's new foreign policy -
reflected, for example, in its ratification of nuclear non-proliferation
treaties and its participation in United Nations forces in Cyprus, Bosnia
and the Gulf - has been enthusiastically welcomed in Washington.
Mr di Tella, gets annoyed with those who sneer at the country's close
relations with the US. He argues that foreign policy, with a 59 per cent
approval rating is - along with economic policy - among the highest approved
of government policies. Disapproval of the so-called 'carnal relationship'
with Washington is the preserve of a discredited intelligentsia, he says.
Good relations with the US have yielded benefits. They aided the government
in its negotiations over a bank debt restructuring and encouraged flows of
investment from the US.
Yet, there appears no longer to be an expectation of a rapid move towards
free trade with the US. The idea that Argentina could gain quick accession
to the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta) always seemed unlikely
given the US political calendar.
Now, says Jorge Campbell, secretary for international economic relations at
the foreign ministry, the emphasis is on cementing and deepening the
southern cone free trade zone with Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay, known as
Mercosur.
'We put out some feelers about Nafta - whether we would qualify, whether it
would be expanded or not - and after a few months concluded that we'd rather
stick to Mercosur with the semi-incorporation of Chile and Bolivia,' says Mr
di Tella.
'Our evaluation was that Nafta was like a seal of quality for investors to
invest in Argentina. Trade-wise it was never very important, even
detrimental.'
Furthermore, standards required for Argentina to qualify would not be easy,
and would to some extent conflict with Mercosur. 'Maybe we will try in
two-to-three years. 1997 would be a good date,' he said. Then Brazil's
economic trajectory would be clearer and the attitude of the new president
taking office in January towards economic reform would be known.
While Argentina would have had little trouble meeting labour standards
associated with Nafta, the US would require a patents law to a standard
higher than that envisaged by the Uruguay Round.
Argentina's 10 per cent statistics tax on imports and the protectionist car
industry regime would also be obstacles - though these are scheduled for
elimination in due course.
The threat of US sanctions over the country's archaic patents law appeared
to be averted earlier this month when the Buenos Aires government promised
special efforts to get a new law through Congress. US trade sanctions were
anyway not likely, given the Dollars 3bn US trade surplus with Argentina and
the estimated Dollars 5m-Dollars 6m in extra royalties implied by a new
patents law.
Argentine officials insist that the patents law is essential. 'Our patent
laws are 120 years old. They are obsolete and insufficient, (unless) you
adopt the view that we are geniuses and generate ideas all the time that are
being robbed by the imperialists. If you want to be innovative, you need a
patent law,' says Mr di Tella.
Mercosur is not without its political difficulties, and - given the
uncertainty about the next administration in Brazil - its future is unclear.
But the four governments have moved a long way towards forming a customs
union - a common external tariff has been agreed for 85 per cent of goods.
Bolivia and Chile are also possible associate members, suggesting the accord
could be a stepping stone to a broader South American common market. Still,
whatever governments do - unless they take a sharp return towards
protectionism - a de facto economic integration is moving ahead at a
corporate level.
Quinsa - the largest Argentine brewer - is one of hundreds of companies
pursuing a regional strategy. It has plants in Paraguay and Uruguay. Its new
brewery in Chile, it says, achieved an 18 per cent market share by the end
of last year. It is also looking at possible acquisitions in Brazil, as the
Brazilian beer giant, Brahma, starts to attack its own home market in
Argentina.
Carlos Sant'Anna of the Argentine subsidiary of the big Brazilian food
company Sadia says his company has embarked on a regional expansion strategy
that will lead at least, to its building a plant in Argentina. It aims, he
said, to develop the market that runs in an arc from Rio de Janeiro through
Sao Paulo, Montevideo, Buenos Aires and Santiago, which contains 65 per cent
of South American GDP.
