FT  26 SEP 94 / Survey of Using Computers in Business (22): Obstacles along
the ISO route - Case study
Even large users run into difficulties in trying to follow what they are
told are international standards. An example is Trafalgar House Engineering
Division, which includes John Brown Engineering.
It has won a clutch of awards for technological excellence and has been
committed to an open systems strategy for several years, yet it was
perplexed by a string of obstacles along the route prescribed by the ISO.
It set up an international network connecting all the company's 37 offices
in 12 countries, as well as a number of its suppliers and contractors. The
network supports a global database, which can be accessed by its engineers
and designers wherever they may be.
It disposed of 12 Unisys mainframes and substituted some 200 UNIX
workstations. To procure these machines it issued to UNIX vendors a list of
criteria for openness. From the replies it discovered that it could not be
sure of interoperability even though all the vendors claimed to offer open
systems. In the end it standardised on machines from Hewlett Packard and Sun
Microsystems.
To make such a complex network possible it stuck to what it considered to be
industry standards, among them TCP/IP, X400, the SQL database standard and
Microsoft's DOS operating system.
It preferred OSI standards where they existed but was willing to adopt de
facto ones where they did not, or make up its own where neither existed.
'OSI standards are necessary but not sufficient,' concludes Mr Jim Noble,
the division's information technology director.
'We adopted the official standards for ISDN (Integrated Service Digital
Network), X4OO and X21 but we still found that A did not talk to B because
the suppliers had interpreted the standards differently. So we had to knock
heads together.'
In some cases this proved possible  - Trafalgar House succeeded in
persuading BT and its Dutch counterpart to interpret standards in the same
way  - but now it is struggling to do the same in countries where achieving
compatibility is much harder, such as Vietnam, Puerto Rico and Kasakhstan.
Mr Noble says his company, like others, is getting to interoperability by
pragmatic steps. 'OSI was seen as the holy grail but it no longer is. TCP/IP
will do for us for the foreseeable future. We're prepared to set aside
principles in order to get effective solutions. We will look at X/Open
specifications for guidance, but we are not concerned to buy products that
have the X/Open brand.'
The X/Open interoperability brand will therefore be an important milestone,
but is not expected by users to resolve all their problems at once.
Interoperability is likely to preoccupy the industry for at least another
decade.
