FT  19 MAY 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Pulp and paper makers urged to
collaborate
The global pulp and paper industry was yesterday urged to put aside its
rivalries and join forces to deal with long-term challenges and provide
shareholders with decent returns.
Mr Ronald Oberlander, president and chief executive officer of Toronto-based
Abitibi-Price, the world's biggest newsprint producer, told a Financial
Times conference in London: 'Taking a collaborative approach may be an
unusual step for this industry. But, while the outlook for the next few
years is buoyant, we face common challenges over the long term and the time
has come for uncommon approaches'.
Offering to spearhead the initiative, Mr Oberlander told the conference on
world pulp and paper that he was motivated by concern at the industry's
'inability to create shareholder value over any reasonable period of time'.
A recent 10-year study of 17 Canadian forest products companies found an
average return on capital employed of just 2.6 per cent, he said. Another
study of European pulp and paper companies from 1983 to 1991 showed only one
of the 10 biggest groups had a positive return on capital.
The industry had been criticised because of its failure to spend money
wisely during periods of prosperity, he said. 'I am concerned, on the eve of
an upswing, that unless we change our behaviour we too will invite the
criticism of future generations.'
Mr Oberlander called for collaboration between companies in tackling the
competition from multi-media technologies, developing new manufacturing
methods, fighting trade barriers, promoting the industry and meeting growing
environmental demands.
'All of us, to varying degrees, face increasingly rigorous environmental
legislation,' he said. 'While it is possible to meet these standards through
current technologies, the cost is enormous, making it even tougher to
achieve a decent return on capital.
'Surely there are more innovative and cost-effective technologies that could
be developed, and we are more likely to arrive at such solutions by
collectively pooling our substantial R&amp;D funds and expertise for the task.'
The environmental pressure on the pulp and paper industry was highlighted by
Mr Jean-Paul Jeanrenaud, forest conservation officer for the Worldwide Fund
for Nature (WWF), who urged companies to accept independent verification
that their wood products came from well-managed forests.
Credible certification schemes would give producers and manufacturers who
participated in them 'a clear market advantage', he said.
