FT  28 APR 94 / Row over saving energy intensifies: Funding shortfall could
reach Pounds 300m a year
The growing row over the lack of funding for the government's Energy Saving
Trust was further inflamed yesterday when government officials told the
Commons energy committee that the shortfall might reach Pounds 300m a year
by the end of the decade.
Senior civil servants said Ms Clare Spottiswoode, director-general of Ofgas,
the gas regulator, had acted within her powers by refusing to allow the
costs of the trust's projects to be passed on to gas customers.
The trust, a Conservative pledge in the 1992 general election, was set up to
help gas and electricity companies identify ways for their customers to save
money. The government intended that the trust be financed by customers
through their bills.
Ms Spottiswoode has upset the government's plans by saying a regulator
should not impose levies on customers which are 'tantamount to regressive
taxes' because they fall proportionately more on less well-off families.
Ms Spottiswoode's concern is that the trust, which invested some Pounds 4m
in pilot schemes last year, will need to spend about Pounds 400m a year by
the end of the decade to reach government energy conservation targets. This
could add a significant sum to household fuel bills, on top of the value
added tax imposed from this year. Of the total, Pounds 300m is expected to
be spent on gas projects and Pounds 100m on electricity projects.
The trust, headed by Lord Moore, the former cabinet minister, is one of the
main planks of the government's plans for tackling the threat of global
warming. At the 1992 Rio Earth Summit, the UK committed itself to
stabilising carbon emissions - produced largely by energy generation - at
1990 levels by 2000.
Mr John Michell, head of the oil and gas division of the Department of Trade
and Industry, told the committee that Ofgas's director-general was allowed
to pass costs on to customers which did not cause a significant rise in gas
prices. The definition of 'significant' was 'a matter for her (Ms
Spottiswoode's) discretion'.
He said Ms Spottiswoode was acting within her rights in deciding that, in
the case of the schemes presented to her so far by the trust - notably a
scheme to encourage fuel-efficient boilers - she would not allow any costs
to be passed on.
Ms Spottiswoode's stance has caused consternation in government departments
because it marks an abrupt change from the views of her predecessor, Sir
James McKinnon.
Mr Michell added that Ms Spottiswoode's views on the trust were not explored
at her interview for the five-year post. The utility regulators were
independent of the government, and the DTI had no powers to make her change
her position or to dismiss her over a difference of opinion, he said.
Mr John Hobson, director-general of the energy efficiency office within the
Department of the Environment, told the committee that the government was
considering introducing legislation to overcome the hurdle. It could form
part of the legislation expected next year, which is intended to introduce
more domestic gas competition by spring 1996.
Departments are looking at other funding sources for the trust, including
the utilities' profits. 'One possibility would be public expenditure
although it would be hard to find a mechanism,' said Mr Hobson.
He also suggested that estimates of how much emissions needed to be curbed
might be reduced if they were reviewed in the light of recession and the
switch from coal to gas in energy generation.
