FT  14 JUN 94 / Technoogy: Gene genie - A look at one scientist's
potentially revolutionary effect on genetic-related business
Craig Venter, one of America's leading gene researchers, does not appear
stung by having been likened to a monkey operating a machine or by the fact
that the insult came from a pioneer of modern molecular biology, James
Watson.
More than two years after Watson criticised Venter's plans to find the
chemical sequence of human genetic DNA, Venter is busy in his new, non
profit-making Institute for Genomic Research in Gaithersburg, Maryland, a
few miles from the government's National Institutes of Health, where he
pioneered the rapid identification of human genes.
Venter, finding that he could not expand his gene sequencing work at NIH,
now works for private industry. He is confident that his team will identify
virtually all human genes within a few years and is seeking patents to turn
this knowledge into a revolutionary range of diagnostic tests and therapies.
Since Venter raised the possibility of identifying and patenting large
amounts of human genetic material in 1991, he has been criticised by other
scientists. For many years, university and government researchers have made
the DNA and protein sequences they discover publicly available in data
banks.
But Venter's innovations changed the terms of gene science. In 1989 at NIH,
Venter discovered how to use automated sequencing machines on a large scale
to identify short strands of complementary DNA, or cDNA, which is produced
when genes hidden in the chromosome become active. Venter harnessed powerful
computers to match his DNA strands with known ones and with DNA from other
organisms. In this way he could work out the structure of the longer gene
which his bit of cDNA came from. This made the hitherto painstaking work of
gene hunting possible on a vast scale.
At NIH, Venter applied his technique to his own neurological research but
his proposals to expand the work were rejected twice by Watson's Human
Genome Centre, also at NIH.
Gene hunters usually proceed by identifying a function or disease, locating
a likely chromosome and region where the gene might be found, and working
along the chromosomal DNA, which is millions of base pairs (chemical units)
long. While this identifies each pair of 'beads' along the chromosomal
'necklace' and extends knowledge of function, it is time-consuming and
costly. Venter's method shortcuts to the gene itself  - not necessarily
knowing anything about function or region - and accumulates masses of base
pair data.
Other scientists criticised Venter's technique as 'fast food' science. In
December 1991 at a public meeting with members of Congress and the press
Venter mentioned that NIH had filed for patents on 315 of his sequences.
Watson rose to say that automatic sequence machines 'could be run by
monkeys'.
If patents were sought on genes or parts of genes whose function was
unknown, gene research would be tied in knots for years by patent
litigation, he said. Watson was the chief of NIH's part of the quest to
define the whole genome - all human genetic material - on which the US
government expects to spend Dollars 3bn (Pounds 2bn) by 2005. NIH director
Bernadine Healy defended the patent filings. Watson resigned in April 1992
over this and other issues.
Venter also left NIH in 1992 when Wallace Steinberg, chief of Healthcare
Investment Corporation, offered him Dollars 70m over 10 years for a new
non-profit institute, if Venter would give worldwide exclusive rights to his
research to a companion profit-making biotech company. Venter's institute,
known as TIGR, is funded by Steinberg's money (raised to Dollars 85m)
flowing through the new company, Human Genome Sciences.
The scale of TIGR and HGS's growing genetic library is awesome. Venter's
institute runs 30 automatic sequence machines and HGS has another 50. In
TIGR's lab, analysers and sequencers are arrayed in rows like an assembly
line. Upstairs are the main computers: a Sun SparcCenter 2000 which keeps
track of the DNA library, and a Maspar 2204 supercomputer which searches for
similar sequences in public databases and analyses the DNA.
TIGR and HGS sequence 750,000 nucleotides per day. The NIH Genome Project,
in contrast, expects to complete 1.5m nucleotides of finished sequence in
the whole of 1995.
Using the classic approach, scientists around the world took 10 years to
identify 3,000 human genes. Since January 1993, the Venter-HGS operation may
have found as many as 30,000 genes; for it has more than 60,000 unique
sequences, of which 4,500 were previously known in public databanks. Since
there are an estimated 100,000 genes, HGS chairman William Haseltine says
they will have a 'virtually complete' set of human genes in 'one to two
years'. The fact that the largest gene library will be in private hands will
be equally revolutionary.
The company has arranged for SmithKline Beecham to have first call to
develop the results, in exchange for access to Dollars 125m. SB's support
was the source of HGS's 1993 profit of Dollars 1.8m on Dollars 22m revenues.
HGS and TIGR are not the only private gene-hunting operations in the private
sector but they are the largest.
However, the US Patent Office rejected all the applications NIH filed on
Venter's gene sequences. Rejection of all 25 filings that HGS has made would
spell disaster for the venture. But Haseltine says HGS has applied on more
complete sequences and whole genes and in all cases their utility is
claimed. 'We believe we will meet all the criteria for patentability,' he
says.
Meanwhile, he and Venter are arranging to make their research available
publicly in ways that do not conflict with their ownership.
Venter is pleased with the turn of events. 'I feel a major social and
scientific responsibility to patent,' he says. 'I left NIH to change the
starting point in science.'
The outcome of what Venter calls his 'giant business and social experiment'
will be anything but dull. Other biotech start-up companies have seen their
promise fade.
Following HGS's successful stock offering last December, Venter's shares in
the company became worth about Dollars 12m. But he could become even richer
if the award of patents forces others to pay licence fees to bring about the
expected gene-based revolution in medicine.
