FT  16 MAR 94 / Arts: Stars in their own right - Music in London
The great composers of the romantic era are fair game these days for
conductors from the period-instrument movement. Twenty years ago Bach and
Handel were still being played by symphony orchestras; 10 years ago people
argued that 'authentic' Haydn and Mozart would never catch on.
Each decade the authentic brigade moves on to its next hunting ground.
Norrington and Gardiner have already tackled Berlioz and Brahms, both making
a particularly good job of the latter's German Requiem. Now Nikolaus
Harnoncourt, known in his earlier days for his Monteverdi operas and Bach
cantatas, has caught up with them. The enormous success of his Beethoven
symphony cycle made further progress into the 19th century inevitable.
There is one big difference with Harnoncourt. When he conducts classical or
romantic music he prefers to work with conventional orchestras - although he
does his level best to turn them into honorary period musicians. The
admirable young players of the Chamber Orchestra of Europe look wholehearted
converts: the double-bass players play standing up, the timpanist sits on a
low chair and the violins renounce their usual vibrato.
In Harnoncourt's hands they become a lithe, red-blooded orchestral animal,
with lean strings and snarling brass, ready to pounce at their conductor's
next command. There is a high quota of aggression in Harnoncourt's
conducting and it made itself felt from the beginning of Friday's Barbican
concert with a trenchant performance of Beethoven's Coriolan Overture.
There was no soloist, which may account for a disappointing audience (though
a noisily appreciative one). The central work was Schumann's Fourth
Symphony, so different in style from Leppard's recent Schumann cycle that
regular Barbican concert-goers might have wondered if they were listening to
the same composer. Where Leppard was fluent and graceful, Harnoncourt dug
into the music with zealous determination.
This is a conductor who always likes to spring a surprise. In Brahms's First
Symphony he did not drive relentlessly along, as one might have expected,
but found time for relaxation as well. If the music still sounded stark, one
suspects that for Harnoncourt overturning a century's tradition of glowing
romantic performances is half the delight. As he raced triumphantly through
the final brass chorale, the adrenalin count hit danger level. Other Brahms
conductors, beware.
Education work in the community has become a prime responsibility of
Britain's orchestras, but it costs money. On Monday the London Symphony
Orchestra held a gala concert in aid of the LSO Endowment Fund to raise
support for its education programme and invited Jessye Norman as the star
attraction - a useful insurance policy if the ticket prices are going to be
that high.
A solo recital on the South Bank earlier this year proved that Jessye Norman
can fill a hall alone at prices most orchestras in this country would long
to charge for large-scale symphony concerts. As that occasion showed, she
has been adventurous in learning new music, while the spontaneity has been
going out of the old. Perhaps a singer needs constant renewal as an artist
to keep up the momentum.
For this concert she was joined by Colin Davis, LSO principal
conductor-elect and a long-time colleague (they share a record company).
They had put together a programme equally shared between two composers,
tempting speculation that each of them would excel in one half: Britten for
him, Strauss for her. Of course, it never works out that simply.
Britten's late cantata Phaedra was written for a mezzo (Janet Baker) and has
usually been sung by mezzos, but it falls very comfortably for Jessye
Norman's low-ish soprano. Alone of the singers I have heard in it, she
experienced no strain at the top. The very fullness of the voice adds
another side to the character. In some of her singing of late, the extrovert
outward signs of involvement have concealed a deadness at the core, but not
here: Phaedra's inner torment and shame were fully alive, the beating heart
of a rounded portrayal.
There was no lack of heart in her Strauss, the closing scene from Capriccio.
In fact, the sheer generosity of the voice and the personality was too much
of a good thing. There is a cool, elegant poise written into the music of
Strauss's Countess, which is smothered if the vocal line bulges with heated
emotion and verbal emphasis. True Strauss stylists like Janowitz take a more
refined line. Nevertheless, Jessye Norman was in lustrous voice. The star
appeal still shines brightly.
In between came two orchestral items which were definitely not fillers. It
is a luxury to hear the Four Sea Interludes from Britten's Peter Grimes
played by a top orchestra and the LSO showed what a difference it makes. The
partnership with Davis is promising a splendid future, his mature wisdom and
their panache combining in a fine performance of Strauss's Don Juan. If the
LSO continues to play as well as this, it can be the star in its own gala
concert next time.
LSO concert sponsored by American Airlines; it is repeated on March 17
