FT  03 MAY 94 / Steely dedication as new leader struts his stuff
The world's sprightliest septuagenarian strutted his stuff across the stage
and into history last night.
Mr Nelson Mandela, glowing with the energy that comes from victory, led the
joyous high-stepping celebration of black South Africa's emancipation from
apartheid.
It began in the ballroom of a Johannesburg city hotel bedecked with bunting
and balloons in the black, green and gold of the African National Congress.
By mid-evening it had spread through the exuberant black townships.
'Free at last, free at last, thank God free at last,' declared South
Africa's next president, in the immortal words of Martin Luther King.
The famous phrase rang across South Africa and around the world as the
75-year-old Mr Mandela reached the final, triumphal summit of a journey that
began when he was a young advocate, and has taken him via Robben Island's
cells to leadership of his country.
Mr Mandela's declaration of victory included graceful acceptance of
departing President F. W. de Klerk's declaration of defeat but had a steely
undertone of single-minded dedication to his goal.
'I stand before you humbled by your courage, with a heart full of love for
all of you,' he said.
'Tomorrow the entire ANC leadership and I will be back at our desks, rolling
up our sleeves to begin tackling the problems our country faces . . . let's
get South Africa working. This means creating jobs, building houses,
providing education and bringing peace and security for all.'
Behind Mr Mandela the ranks of the ANC choir broke into song, the packed
audience joined in and the dancing began. Mr Mandela's elbows sawed the air.
The former boxer, moving like a cross between Mohammed Ali and Michael
Jackson, led the dancing of a night to remember.
From the stage came the resonant baritone of ex-president Kenneth Kaunda of
Zambia, whose country paid such a high price for its role as ANC
headquarters and who was an honoured guest.
On the dance floor the audience contained almost as many whites, coloureds
and Indians as blacks.
Groups in the hall began the toyi-toyi, the universal dance of black South
Africa - knees raised high, a sort of dancing on the spot, once performed at
the barricades of Soweto and black townships around the land but last night
an exuberant celebration of the new South Africa.
