FT  01 DEC 94 / Donors pledge budget aid for Palestinians
Donors, under pressure to give credibility to the Middle East peace process,
yesterday agreed to plug a Dollars 125m (Pounds 76.2m) budget deficit and
boost employment for Palestinians, Reuter reports from Brussels.
Mr Jan Egeland, Norway's deputy foreign minister, said after chairing a
two-day meeting of donors in Brussels that Dollars 102m had been pledged so
far to cover the Palestinian budget gap until the end of March 1995. The
remainder would be found soon.
'All three sides (Israelis, Palestinians and donors) pledged to work towards
one common goal - to fill the Dollars 125m gap,' Mr Egeland told a news
conference.
The donor conference, which included delegates from the European Union, the
World Bank, Israel, the Palestinian Authority, Russia and the US, committed
an additional Dollars 23m to create thousands of new jobs in the area. The
employment programme would be defined within two weeks.
The three sides earlier signed an accord detailing Palestinian budget needs,
anticipated revenue from taxes and Israeli refunds.
The new funds come at a critical time because of rising discontent among
Palestinians who say peace has not brought any financial rewards.
'There was a feeling that unless we provided economic dividends for peace,
the situation would become more serious,' said Mr Nabeel Shaath, minister of
internal co-operation for the Palestinian authority.
'Stability has two legs - one economic and one political,' Mr Shaath told
reporters.
The donor conference also agreed to form a co-ordination committee to assess
how aid was being channeled.
In October last year, donors pledged more than Dollars 2bn over five years
for projects to support Palestinian self-rule, with Dollars 700 million
earmarked for this year.
A senior World Bank official said on Tuesday that only Dollars 200 to
Dollars 240m would be disbursed by this year and delays in implementing the
peace process had set back economic projects.
The EU pledged Dollars 48m of the total needed to plug the deficit.
