FT  10 JAN 94 / Industrialists subpoenaed in UBS case
Mr Terry Smith, one of the City of London's best known investment analysts,
is serving subpoenas on three leading industrialists as part of his case for
unfair dismissal against UBS Securities, the investment bank subsidiary of
Switzerland's biggest bank.
He has filed subpoenas in the high court for the attendance at his case of
Sir Colin Marshall, chairman of British Airways, Sir Allen Sheppard,
chairman of Grand Metropolitan, and Mr Robert Montague, chairman of Tiphook.
Mr Smith was sacked by UBS in October 1992 after he refused to cancel
publication of a book, Accounting for Growth, which is critical of the
accounting techniques used by many of the UK's biggest companies, including
the drinks group Grand Metropolitan. He believes he was dismissed in part
because of complaints about the book from GrandMet and other companies,
though UBS has denied this. It said he was dismissed because he breached
internal procedures for vetting the contents of the book.
The trial, which begins later this year, is likely to be a focus for the
long-running City debate on whether analysts are free to write impartial
reports on companies which are the customers of their firms.
GrandMet's then finance director, Mr David Nash, complained about publicity
the book was receiving a few weeks before Mr Smith was suspended by UBS on
August 12 1992. The company was an important foreign exchange customer of
UBS, carrying out deals generating monthly income for UBS of around Pounds
100,000.
Sir Colin Marshall, a non-executive director of GrandMet, is thought to have
reiterated GrandMet's concerns to UBS. At the time, Sir Colin was also chief
executive of BA - he is now chairman - which was one of UBS's most important
corporate broking clients.
The subpoenas ask Sir Colin and Sir Allen to produce documentation
concerning telephone conversations they had with Mr Rudi Mueller, chairman
of UBS's London operations, in summer 1992, and with each other. Sir Colin
is also asked for documentation concerning a telephone conversation he had
with Mr Miles Emley, then a corporate finance director at UBS, on August 6
1992. Mr Emley is now chairman of printing group St Ives.
Mr Montague's subpoena asks him to produce documents relating to a telephone
conversation he had with Mr Mueller on the book in the summer of 1992.
Tiphook, which ran into financial difficulties last year because of its debt
in excess of Pounds 1bn, was not at the time a corporate broking client of
UBS but it became one later.
UBS is suing Mr Smith for breach of copyright in relation to the book. Mr
Smith is suing UBS for breach of contract and unfair dismissal. He is
claiming around Pounds 600,000 in lost remuneration and legal costs.
