FT  07 SEP 94 / Shephard call for review of GCSE grades
Mrs Gillian Shephard, the education secretary, yesterday called for an
investigation into 'apparent discrepancies' between the grades awarded by
different boards in this year's GCSE exams.
Her announcement followed a proposal by the School Curriculum and Assessment
Authority, chaired by Sir Ron Dearing. The authority's external assessors
observed the GCSE examination procedures for the first time this year, after
a new code of practice was introduced by Mrs Shephard's predecessor, Mr John
Patten, to combat fears that standards were eroding.
Pass rates have improved swiftly since 1988, when the GCSE qualification
replaced the O-level for 16-year-olds in England and Wales. The proportion
of entrants gaining at least a grade C - equivalent to an O-level pass - has
increased by 33 per cent since that time, while the numbers gaining a grade
A have increased by 94 per cent.
The authority will interview all the boards' examiners about the reasons for
their decisions, and analyse different scripts to see if they have been
consistently marked.
The authority attempted to play down the significance of the investigation,
saying that it had expected to do work of this kind in the first year of a
new system.
Sir Ron said: 'I don't start with any presumption that anything has gone
wrong.'
If the authority cannot find a good explanation for the discrepancy,
however, it has the power to put new procedures in place.
Mrs Shephard said: 'The examining groups are independent and responsible for
marking and grading. But they are publicly accountable. It is essential that
GCSE grades are consistent and fair across the country.'
The government has promised that future editions of the Parent's Charter
will confirm a parent's right to educate their child at home. The move came
after the charter, distributed three months ago, told parents they had a
duty to make sure their child went to school.
The pressure group Education Otherwise welcomed the pledge, but regretted
that ministers had not said they had made a mistake.
