FT  07 DEC 94 / International Company News: Iscor and state link in R3.6bn
steel mill venture
Iscor, the South African iron and steel manufacturer, has announced plans to
develop a R3.6bn (Dollars 1bn) steel mini-mill at Saldanha Bay on the
country's west coast in partnership with the state-run Industrial
Development Corporation.
The project has been under investigation for several months, with both Iscor
and the IDC undertaking comprehensive feasibility studies. The decision to
go ahead is regarded by local analysts as a positive move that should
substantially help Iscor's long-term profitability.
The proposed mill will comprise a 650,000-tonne-a-year Corex plant, an
800,000-tonne-a-year shaft furnace to manufacture sponge iron, a DC arc
furnace, a continuous thin slab caster, a soaking furnace and a hot strip
mill. It will produce 1.25m tonnes of hot-rolled coil aimed primarily at the
export market.
Mr Hans Smith, Iscor managing director, said the project should generate
substantial foreign exchange earnings.
He said it signalled the commitment of both Iscor and the government to
promoting the treatment of raw materials before export.
'This is one of the biggest industrial projects of recent years and is
directed at beneficiating local raw materials for export,' Mr Smith said.
'It also has significant potential for future expansion and for development
of new, steel-related industries in the Saldanha area.'
The new mill, which will be constructed under what the company describes as
'stringent environmental standards', will support about 600 permanent jobs
and 4,000 temporary places during the construction phase. Production is
expected to begin within 36 months of the start of construction.
The announcement follows shortly after Iscor's decision last week to convert
its carbon steel-producing Pretoria Works into a stainless steel plant, at a
cost of R100m. That project is also expected to boost foreign exchange
earnings through the sale of new rolled products. Mr Smith estimates sales
of some R2bn a year by the end of the decade.
He said the combination of the Pretoria conversion with the Saldanha Bay
project would not alter the company's total volume of carbon steel
production.
