FT  28 MAY 94 / Kohl stokes up EMU dispute: Foreign Office minister breaks
ranks to criticise threat to sovereignty
An unexpected intervention by Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany yesterday
threatened to reopen the divisions in the Conservative party over British
participation in a single European currency.
At the end of the first week's campaigning for the June 9 European
elections, Mr Kohl flatly contradicted the judgment of Mr John Major that
economic and monetary union is now a remote prospect.
That in turn prompted Mr David Heathcoat-Amory, the Foreign Office minister
responsible for Europe, to break with the government's formal neutrality on
the issue. He warned that a single currency would undermine British
sovereignty.
Echoing controversial remarks made this month by Mr Michael Portillo, the
Euro-sceptic chief secretary to the Treasury, Mr Heathcoat-Amory said the
replacement of sterling would 'dilute' Britain's national identity.
Making little effort to disguise his own distaste for the idea, he added:
'The Foreign Office view is that the timescale laid down in the Maastricht
treaty - the two trigger dates of 1997 and 1999 - is unrealistic.'
His comments contrasted with the studied neutrality on the issue in the
Conservative manifesto, which leaves a decision on a single currency to a
future parliament, and with the view of Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor.
Mr Clarke, a supporter of monetary union, said this week he expected the
issue to return to the European agenda.
Mr Kohl said on BBC television that he remained firmly in favour of a single
currency. The target dates set out in Maastricht were not sacrosanct but:
'It will come, I have no doubt at all.' He said many of those who focused on
particular dates wanted to wreck the project.
By contrast, Mr Major indicated that he thought a single currency was
unlikely in his lifetime.
Mr William Cash, a prominent Euro-sceptic on the Tory backbenches, accused
the German leader of meddling in Britain's domestic affairs. 'This is also
an unwarranted interference in the British European elections and is in
support of Liberal Democrat and Labour policy on a single currency.'
But the opposition parties accused the government of trying to disguise its
internal divisions by keeping Mr Portillo and other cabinet Euro-sceptics on
the sidelines during the European election campaign.
A MORI poll in The Times today says the Conservatives could lose at least
half and possibly up to 80 per cent of their European seats. Of 1,929 people
asked how they would vote, 47 per cent said Labour, 27 per cent Conservative
and 22 per cent Liberal Democrat.
