FT  22 MAR 94 / International Company News: Hongkong Land posts flat profits
of USDollars 306m
Hongkong Land, the property development and management arm of the Jardine
group, yesterday reported unchanged net earnings, with 1993 profits before
extraordinary items of USDollars 306.5m, compared with USDollars 305m in
1992.
Last year's earnings at the operating level were ahead by only 1.6 per cent,
and growth was further undermined by Hongkong Land's share, totalling
Dollars 20.6m, of losses at Trafalgar House, the UK property, engineering
and construction conglomerate.
Mr Alasdair Morrison, managing director, said he hoped Trafalgar House's
problems were behind it and that losses would not recur.
Profits after an extraordinary gain of Dollars 213.2m on the sale of a Hong
Kong property were Dollars 519.7m. The dividend is going up 5.3 per cent, to
10 cents a share. The company ended last year with net borrowings of just
Dollars 82m.
Hongkong Land owns the most highly-prized office and retail properties in
the central district of Hong Kong island. Mr Morrison, who is stepping down
at Hongkong Land to take over as head of the Jardine group, said the company
expected improved earnings this year on the back of higher rents. About a
third of the company's property leases come up for renewal this year.
He said the average rent during 1983 was HKDollars 45 per square foot for
office accommodation and HKDollars 105 for retail space. In recent rent
reversions, the company had achieved around HKDollars 100 per sq ft for
small offices in Exchange Square - its prime office development on the Hong
Kong waterfront - and expected to rent larger spaces for more than HKDollars
90 per sq ft.
'We see rents increasing for some time; most of the space in core central is
fully let,' Mr Morrison said. In real terms, current rents were still below
those of 1989, he said.
Mr Morrison said that Hongkong Land was interested in property development
in China. It was conducting a market survey of Shanghai and hoped to
identify opportunities there.
Sun Hung Kai Properties, a leading Hong Kong property developer, has entered
into a joint venture agreement to develop an integrated commercial complex
in Shanghai. The project, Central Plaza, will require an investment of
HKDollars 800m (USDollars 103.5m), the company said.
