FT  04 OCT 94 / Survey of World Car Industry (15): Sharpening reflexes -
Profile: Ford
Ford Motor, in many respects the most successful US car company over the
past decade, is in the early stages of an ambitious plan to create a global
car company, which it hopes will cut its costs, quicken its reflexes and
give it a sharp competitive edge.
The second largest US vehicle manufacturer, in its most sweeping
reorganisation for 25 years, plans at the end of this year to merge two huge
units - North American Operations and Ford of Europe - into a single
operating unit, Ford Automotive Operations.
Until now, Ford has had a tradition of independent regional fiefdoms, with
American and European operations developing cars of essentially the same
size, but with different characteristics aimed at their local markets.
The shift is no small gamble by Alex Trotman, the British-born executive who
took over as chairman of Ford at the start of this year. He says the
upheaval is designed to 'combine the resources of a large and very
successful company with the speed and responsiveness of a small company.'
The shake-up involves Ford reorganising into five vehicle programme centres
(VPCs), four in North America and one in Europe. The European VPC, with
research and engineering centres split between the UK and Germany, will be
responsible for developing small and medium front-wheel drive cars for sale
in Europe, America and Asia.
The other four VPCs, based in Detroit, will develop large, front-wheel drive
cars, such as the Ford Taurus; rear-wheel drive cars, such as the Ford Crown
Victoria; personal trucks, such as the Explorer sports utility vehicle, and
commercial trucks.
While elements of the Ford plan have some parallels with initiatives at its
US rivals, GM and Chrysler, no car company anywhere has such an ambitious
global integration scheme under way.
But Ford, which in many respects has set the pace for the US motor industry
over the past decade, needs a sustained burst of innovation to maintain its
competitiveness against rivals such as Chrysler, which has emerged over the
past two years as particularly lean and aggressive.
Forced by financial crisis to cut costs in the early 1980s, Ford improved
productivity in its plants long before GM and Chrysler and still boasts the
most productive North American factories among the Big Three.
It has also scored some huge hits with consumers, notably with the Ford
Taurus in the mid-1980s, which revolutionised US family car design and is
currently the top-selling US car (though Honda's Accord is again challenging
for that title). Other successes include the Explorer sports utility vehicle
and the revamped sporty Mustang car.
These models helped Ford increase its share of the US car and light truck
market from about 23 per cent in 1987 to some 25.4 per cent last year,
though in the first six months of 1994 there was slippage to 24.9 per cent.
However, this success has yet to translate into adequate profits. In the
first half of this year the group's net profits were Dollars 2.62bn,
compared to Dollars 1.35bn in the same period of 1993, while its worldwide
automotive profits quadrupled from Dollars 571m to Dollars 2.14bn.
David McCammon, the group's treasurer, has says 'our return on sales isn't
to the level we believe it needs to be'. He adds that Ford made only 69 per
cent of Chrysler's profits on each vehicle it sold in the second quarter and
needed to lower development and purchasing costs, and continue to shift
production from cars to more profitable light truck lines.
External critics have also long complained that Ford is particularly slow in
the time it takes to develop models.
The global reorganisation is designed to address some of these problems. Mr
Trotman reckons it should save the company Dollars 2bn to Dollars 3bn by the
end of the decade.
Ford has some experience with global integration, thanks to its development
over the past six years of the Mondeo, the first 'world car' designed to be
sold around the world. It has been a big hit in Europe and is being
introduced to the US this year.
Analysts sceptical about the global integration drive point to the long
gestation and high costs (Dollars 6bn) of the Mondeo programme. But Mr
Trotman says: 'Our investment is in much more than hardware. We've been
buying a new way of doing business for the long term.'
