FT  18 JAN 94 / Central banker puts case for foreign control
Israel's central bank governor has urged foreign investors to take a
controlling stake in some of the commercial banks which will be sold by the
government this year.
In an interview, Mr Jacob Frenkel trumpeted last year's breakthrough in
Israel's banking sector as the government took measures to restructure the
industry, encourage more competition, reduce concentration of ownership and
begin selling off the country's leading banks taken over in 1983 after a
share manipulation scandal.
'I would like to see a controlling interest in at least some of our banks by
foreign investors because international competition is the best recipe to
increase competition in the market,' Mr Frenkel said.
Mr Avraham Shochat, minister of finance, is expected to announce today the
government's go-ahead for the sale this year of ownership in Bank Hapoalim
and Bank Leumi, the country's two largest banking groups.
The government has defined a controlling stake as at least 20 per cent of
the shares and is expected to sell Bank Leumi first, allowing investors who
fail to buy Leumi to bid for Hapoalim later.
Last year the government sold blocks of shares in both banks through the Tel
Aviv stock exchange.
'The development of the Middle East in the peace era depends on the capacity
to develop efficient and effective intermediation mechanisms that will
channel finance and investment,' said Mr Frenkel.
'Any foreign investor looking at the Middle East will see Israel favourably
because we have established property rights, a legal system, a market
system, macro-economic stability and a strategy that is built on a
multi-year process of economic reform.'
The governor said 1993 had also been a watershed year in macro-economics as
the impact of the government's policy shift away from growth led by public
sector housing had been felt. Despite the 'drastic cut in public housing'
the economy had grown 3.5 per cent with industrial exports up 18 per cent
and unemployment down from 11.2 per cent to 10.4 per cent.
Mr Frenkel predicted the economy would grow at higher levels this year. The
Bank of Israel, he said, was determined to achieve its inflation target of 8
per cent for 1994. He strongly defended the recent hike in interest rates to
11.5 per cent, criticised by the Finance Ministry, saying it was essential
to curb inflation which rose last year by 11.2 per cent.
He said the reason for high inflation in 1993 was housing prices which grew
last year by 23.7 per cent as a result of the cut in public housing
construction, economic expansion and continued immigration. Inflation,
excluding housing, was 7.6 per cent last year.
The governor said privatisation would be speeded up this year. The
government has pledged to sell shares in companies such as El Al, the state
airline, and Israel Chemicals and plans to raise Dollars 1.5bn (Pounds
1.01bn) from the divestiture programme. 'I am convinced that the political
will, especially on the part of the prime minister, to see privatisation
move forward is absolute and not hesitating,' he said.
Mr Frenkel, however, warned that the budget deficit target for 1994 of less
than 3 per cent of gross domestic product might be difficult to achieve as
the government had to pay the unbudgeted costs of the peace process such as
the redeployment of Israeli troops in the occupied Gaza Strip and West Bank.
The first official Israeli economic delegation to visit Morocco returned
yesterday after a five-day tour of Rabat, Casablanca and Marrakech, marking
a breakthrough in Israeli-Moroccan relations.
The delegation, including senior businessmen in banking, industry and
tourism, met the Moroccan prime minister, six economic ministers, the heads
of the employers' and manufacturers' associations and leading Moroccan
companies.
