FT  20 OCT 94 / Berlusconi offers unions pension reform changes
The Italian government last night held out an olive branch to the country's
powerful union movement by offering to reconsider injustices in pension
cuts.
Proposals to alter the costly state-run pay-as-you-go pensions system
provoked a four-hour general strike last Friday. More than 3m took to the
streets and union leaders have called for a huge follow-up next month in
Rome.
The attempt to re-establish a dialogue with the unions followed an all-day
meeting of leading figures in the right-wing coalition government to
consider how to eliminate hardship cases caused by the budget proposals
regarding pensions. A government spokesman said broad agreement was reached
that the changes could be amended providing any extra cost was compensated
for elsewhere. It is not clear how much the amendments might cost, but as
much as L1,000bn (Pounds 405m) could be at stake.
If the cost of mollifying the unions appears too high, the government could
be forced to raise taxes, a move always resisted by Mr Silvio Berlusconi,
the prime minister.
The prospect of changes in the budget comes only a day after Mr Antonio
Fazio, the central bank governor, warned that the government projections for
the cost of debt service in the 1995 budget were too optimistic.
The main area of hardship as far as pensions are concerned is the temporary
freeze on people being taken on to the scheme. Many people applied for early
retirement, fearing cuts in benefits by the Berlusconi government. Now they
find themselves with no prospect of a pension payment until February.
Mr Berlusconi telephoned union leaders last night to explain the thrust of
the amendments, inviting them to return to the negotiating table.
The coalition meeting is also believed to have discussed the decision by the
Bank of Italy to nominate an insider, Mr Vincenzo Desario, as
director-general - the number two job. There were reports of government
moves to censure the appointment, as a signal of displeasure at the way the
Bank of Italy asserted autonomy in choosing the candidate.
Mr Alfredo Biondi, the justice minister, meanwhile has ordered an inquiry
into complaints about the behaviour of Milan's anti-corruption magistrates.
The move comes at a moment when the higher magistrates council, the
judiciary's governing body, looks set to shelve a complaint lodged by the
government about a newspaper interview given by Mr Francesco Saverio
Borrelli on October 9 saying the investigative net was closing round Mr
Berlusconi.
The complaints are understood to cover seven separate aspects of the Milan
magistrates activities during the course of the year but mostly since the
Berlusconi government took office in May.
