FT  21 NOV 94 / Bank raid or revolution: Martin Ebner's challenge to the UBS
board has unsettled Switzerland's cosy corporate culture
Switzerland's cosy business community has never seen anything like the
bitter proxy battle at the Union Bank of Switzerland, where a determined
outsider has taken on a powerful establishment for control of the company.
Six weeks of hectic trading have wiped more than SFr1bn (Pounds 489m) from
the bank's market capitalisation. And it remains unclear whether the UBS
board will attract enough votes at tomorrow's extraordinary general meeting
of shareholders to see off a challenge to their governance from Mr Martin
Ebner, a little-known Zurich broker-fund manager.
But the case is about more than UBS; it also marks the beginning of the end
for continental Europe's discreet and private approach to corporate
governance. Capital market liberalisation and privatisation have created a
new shareholder culture bent on accountability. And Mr Ebner, a former share
analyst, has confronted the bank with it.
In 1984, Mr Ebner left the Zurich private bank J. Vontobel to set up BZ
Bank, specialising in block trades for institutions. Feared by established
rivals, the bank is one of the most pushy players in the Zurich market. Mr
Ebner diversified into fund management in 1991, taking control of an
investment company, Pharma Vision 2000, specialising in pharmaceutical
shares, and starting another, BK Vision, for financial shares. He declared
the Visions would be activist shareholders, and BK Vision began to needle
the mighty UBS.
As one of only three international banks with triple-A status from all the
big credit-rating agencies, UBS would not seem a propitious target for a
dissident shareholders' movement. But Mr Ebner says the bank's real return
to shareholders - averaging 5.9 per cent in the past 15 years - is far too
low. He argues that, as Switzerland's largest and most prestigious bank, UBS
must break lazy habits acquired from dominating formerly cartelised domestic
financial markets.
'The only banks that will survive are those which concentrate on their most
efficient and profitable activities,' he said in a speech to the UBS AGM
last April. At that meeting, BK Vision put a motion to reduce the UBS board
from 23 members to nine. The motion was defeated, but BK Vision, to
everyone's surprise, attracted some 40 per cent of the votes.
Mr Ebner interpreted this support as a wider mandate to challenge the bank's
overall governance, and foresaw a unique opportunity next spring when the
terms of 10 UBS directors expire.
A couple of months ago, he informed UBS directors that he was trying to
attract a majority of shareholders' votes with a view to making substantial
board and strategy changes at the next AGM.
As UBS has a market capitalisation of over SFr30bn, it would normally be
prohibitively expensive to accumulate enough votes for such a cause. But,
like many European companies, the bank has two classes of shares, bearer and
registered. They are issued in roughly equal numbers and each carries one
vote per share. But the registered shares have a par value only one-fifth of
that of the bearer shares, making them a cheap way to buy votes.
Theoretically, at today's market prices, an investor could buy all of the
22.25m registered shares, carrying 51 per cent of the votes, for some
SFr6bn. By contrast, the 21.3m bearer shares, which carry the other 49 per
cent of the votes, would cost more than SFr25bn.
Until recently, registered shares traded at an effective discount, in that
it cost less to buy five registered shares than it did to buy one bearer
share. This was because of rules prohibiting foreigners from voting with
them and preventing anyone from voting with more than 5 per cent of them.
These restrictions were intended to prevent UBS from a foreign takeover.
But this year the registered shares have traded at a growing premium,
trading at a price 40 per cent above one-fifth of the price of a bearer
share by late September. UBS directors suddenly realised they faced a
serious threat.
They called tomorrow's extraordinary general meeting to propose converting
all the registered shares into bearers on terms that would slash their
voting power to a level in line with the 17.3 per cent of capital they
contribute to the company. They offered no compensation for the collapse in
the premium on registered shares that would follow conversion. And they
declared that a two-thirds majority of all shares present at the meeting,
provided they represented more than 50 per cent of the capital, would be
sufficient to approve the motion.
Mr Ebner and other registered shareholders cried foul, arguing they should
be compensated for the loss of voting power and be able to vote separately
on a proposal to remove their rights.
UBS said that compensation could only come from money that belongs to all
shareholders, and so would invite legal action from aggrieved bearer
shareholders.
UBS would appear to have the more virtuous position to defend. Mr Robert
Studer, the chief executive, points out that the single share structure
would improve market liquidity and remove the danger that Mr Ebner and his
allies could take over control through a relatively small investment. 'He is
a raider. He wants to walk away with money. He is not interested in what
will happen to UBS in 10 years,' Mr Studer charged last week.
Mr Ebner says registered shares provide the only effective way for
shareholders to press the bank's board and management to perform better.
This is because a very large proportion of the shares can only be voted in
favour of the board.
A large proportion of UBS shares - over 40 per cent of those voted at the
last AGM - are held by Swiss banks for their clients. Swiss law provides
that, if the banks have a general power of attorney from their clients, as
most do, and receive no specific instructions to the contrary, they can only
vote these shares in favour of the board's resolutions.
Both sides have been clumsy and amateurish in their campaigns. Mr Studer
declared at one point that Mr Ebner's demand that the bank achieve a return
on equity of 15 per cent was 'ridiculous', only to be reminded that two
years ago he had given it as a target for the longer term. For his part, Mr
Ebner claimed UBS could fall into the hands of international drug dealers if
the protection against foreign takeovers provided by the registered shares
were lost.
Only later did he explain why he would not set out an alternative strategy
for UBS: strategy was a board decision; shareholders' responsibilities were
only to set the target return on equity, set incentives for top management,
and appoint directors to get on with it.
Most Swiss bankers and institutional shareholders are expected to support
UBS tomorrow because they do not want to offend the country's most powerful
bank or because they dislike Mr Ebner.
But the extraordinarily high volume of registered share trading - 11.6m last
month - reflects how many fund managers would rather sell than decide what
voting stance to take.
Both UBS and Mr Ebner accuse each other of buying big volumes of registered
shares, and both deny it. The truth is made more difficult to discern by the
potential for buying votes through futures contracts or borrowing shares
from custodians.
Mr Ebner says that, if he loses, he will immediately seek a court injunction
preventing conversion of the registered shares. Registered shareholders
would then retain their extra power for votes at the AGM in April, and the
UBS's decision to precipitate the current fight would have been in vain.
Mr Studer shrugs. 'Maybe we will have mobilised a few minds, sensitised a
few shareholders.'
Whatever the immediate outcome, shareholders in UBS and many big continental
companies are likely to be the ultimate winners. UBS directors have
belatedly realised Mr Ebner's demands for more rigorous management have a
lot of support among their widening shareholder base. Directors of other big
quoted Swiss and European companies would be unwise to ignore the message.
