FT  19 MAR 94 / UK Company News: Shandwick in Pounds 18.9m rights issue to
cut borrowings
Shandwick, the public relations company, is to raise Pounds 18.9m from a
rights issue to reduce bank borrowings.
The cash call had been long-expected, and the share price reacted favourably
to the news, rising 3 1/2 p to close at 59 1/2 p.
Mr Dermot McNulty, chief operating officer, said that 'people will now be
able to focus on our business, and not our financials'.
The company is proposing the issue on a 1-for-2 basis, pitched at 45p, which
is a 20 per cent discount to Thursday's closing share price. Shandwick will
use Pounds 16.9m of the proceeds to reduce its Pounds 71m bank debt,
directors stated.
Lending margins on Shandwick's debt were cut when it renegotiated banking
facilities in January, and the banks have agreed a further reduction, upon
repayment of Pounds 15m.
These lending margins will have been reduced by about 0.75 percentage points
in three months, and brokers estimate that debt servicing will be reduced by
about Pounds 1.5m per annum, following the rights issue. Net debt will
remain at about Pounds 48m following the rights issue.
Shandwick is not considering acquisitions, according to Mr McNulty, but he
added: 'We are now beginning to see encouraging signs, in terms of trading
in the US and UK, and we would like to be in a position to look at business
opportunities.'
Shandwick is paying a 0.43p interim dividend in September and a final of
0.87p, the first pay-out since 1991.
COMMENT
It was only a question of time before Shandwick came back to the market, and
while the rights issue will dilute earnings per share over the next two
years, it puts the company back on a firm financial footing. Given the
pricing of the rights shares, a high take-up is certain. Brokers expect
pre-tax profits of Pounds 7.75m in 1993-94, putting the shares on a p/e of
13.6, allowing for the rights. Given the company's operational gearing and
improving business environment, there should be longer-term upside in the
share price.
