FT  25 NOV 94 / Resignation triggers Mexico shockwaves
The resignation of Mexico's deputy attorney-general over claims that senior
ruling party officials have obstructed investigations into the assassination
of his brother has delivered another shock to the country's political
system.
Mr Mario Ruiz Massieu resigned as deputy attorney-general, member of the
ruling Institutional Revolutionary party (PRI), and lead investigator into
the killing of his brother, Francisco, which he claims was ordered by a
powerful group of PRI politicians. Francisco was, at the time of his death,
secretary-general of the PRI.
One week before Mr Ernesto Zedillo takes over the presidency, the
accusations have generated much noise, heat and smoke in the febrile
atmosphere of Mexico's political system. But it is not clear yet whether Mr
Ruiz has tossed a bomb or a firecracker at the ruling party.
The weeks before the six-yearly handover of power in Mexico are, in any
case, usually highly charged. In the relative political vacuum that exists
before power is handed over, stunning accusations are often levelled at
powerful figures, and the cracks quickly covered up once the new president
takes power.
That may be more difficult on this occasion, given the intensity of the
year's events. The September killing of Francisco came as the country's
political system was calming down following August's presidential election,
the April assassination of the PRI's original presidential candidate, Mr
Luis Donaldo Colosio, and the peasant uprising in the southern state of
Chiapas.
The greater freedom now enjoyed by parts of the Mexican media will also make
the political fallout harder to control. Mr Ruiz's accusations and
resignations were delivered on live television and witnessed by a packed
room of applauding family members, politicians and journalists.
Mr Ruiz is one of a handful of figures who have achieved celebrity status in
Mexico this year after delivering devastating critiques of the country's
tight-knit political system. The others include Mr Manuel Camacho, the
former mayor of Mexico City and Chiapas peace negotiator, and Mr Eduardo
Valle, a former special investigator in the attorney-general's office who
from self-exile in the US has alleged close links between senior Mexican
politicians and drug traffickers.
Political analysts say Mr Ruiz's moves make more likely a high-profile
political gesture from Mr Zedillo as soon as he takes office. This would be
reminiscent of President Carlos Salinas's decision to arrest the head of the
oil workers' union, Mr Joaquin Hernandez Galicia, when he took office, and
would stamp his authority on a feuding ruling party.
The moves also increase the pressure on the president-elect to pursue the
reform he has promised of the judiciary. Apart from tackling a corrupt and
unpopular institution, it would also head off minor scandals before they
became significant political incidents.
In Washington on Wednesday Mr Zedillo said he would give the assassination
investigation priority in his new administration and said he was anxious to
receive any and all information about the case from Mr Ruiz.
Mr Ruiz said he would hand his 'proof' that senior officials obstructed
justice - which has yet to be seen - over to a notary public, who would hold
it for Mr Zedillo.
Yesterday the attorney-general, Mr Humberto Benitez, and the president of
the PRI, Mr Ignacio Pichardo, renewed their demands that Mr Ruiz publicly
present proof that they conspired to obstruct the investigation of the
assassination.
Mr Ruiz said the alleged obstruction meant 'now is the time for political
decisions instead of police investigations'. He said that 'those who
obstructed the investigation will surely receive jobs in the next
administration' and that they 'were more powerful than the truth and justice
the president sought'.
