FT  08 OCT 94 / UK Company News: Facing the reality of price pressures - The
squeeze is on for the UK's specialist chemicals companies
When it comes to setting prices, some of Britain's leading speciality
chemicals companies pay scant regard to the government's inflation target
range of 1 to 4 per cent.
The companies, which rely on bulk petrochemicals to manufacture products
ranging from latex and foam to paint, are under mounting pressure to pass on
sharp increases in raw materials prices, which for some commodities have
more than doubled.
Their freedom to charge more has been restricted, however, because many
industrial customers are reluctant to pay higher prices in a competitive low
 -inflation environment.
'Demand has been relatively slack, so many companies will have to absorb the
higher raw material prices through internal cost savings,' warns Mr Keith
Wey, senior economist at the Chemical Industries Association.
That prospect has prompted a series of cautious trading statements in recent
weeks from speciality chemicals companies, including British Vita, Hickson
International, Holliday Chemicals and, most recently, Yule Catto.
Reporting a 42 per cent increase in half-year profits last week, the
Harlow-based chemicals and building products group warned that rising raw
materials prices could hamper future growth.
Although it has reduced costs to offset the impact of price rises, Mr Alex
Walker, chief executive, said margins could be squeezed in the second half.
Many of these companies cut costs aggressively during the recession and now
have little room for manoeuvre, especially those relying on commodities such
as ethylene, styrene, orthoxylene and methanol.
European spot prices for ethylene, the building block for many chemical
products, have risen by 120 per cent from Dollars 250 (Pounds 158) per tonne
in April to Dollars 550 last month; methanol, by comparison, rose 125 per
cent from Dollars 187 per tonne to Dollars 422.
Contract prices have also risen steadily although they still remain below
the 1989 peak, when ethylene sold at Dollars 700 per tonne against Dollars
400 per tonne this month.
While warning that the increases would hit margins, City analysts said the
speciality chemicals companies had enjoyed substantial gains while commodity
prices languished at historic lows in the past two years.
'The bulk chemicals producers such as ICI are exacting revenge for the price
cuts they suffered during the recession,' says Mr Martin Evans at Hoare
Govett. 'It will take several months for the intermediates to push up
selling prices. If we had runaway inflation they could recoup costs, but
that's not happening.'
For their part, the bulk suppliers claim prices have increased because there
are insufficient stocks available to meet new orders coming through from the
speciality companies.
'Any price increases to our customers are being driven by supply and demand
rather than raw material costs, and are taking place after a period of
unsustainable low levels during the recession,' says Mr Peter Corners,
business manager at ICI Olefines.
Prices for ethylene, for example, rose sharply following shortages in the US
where supplies were hit after an explosion in August at Exxon Chemical's
Baton Rouge plant in Louisiana, where production was interrupted for several
weeks.
Stocks normally available to UK intermediates have also been diverted to
east Asia following the closure of some chemicals plants in Japan, where a
prolonged drought led to water restrictions for industrial users.
But warnings of widespread shortages are viewed with some scepticism at
British Vita, the foam and fibre group.
'I'm not sure how many shortages there really are. I think the bulk
suppliers are playing that card a bit too strongly,' said Mr Rod Sellers,
chief executive.
He blamed pricing pressures and flat demand among customers for sluggish
half year operating profits, adding that the group's main markets were
static or improving only slowly.
British Vita has reduced its workforce by 5 per cent to 12,800 and tried to
cut costs, but Mr Sellers warned: 'Either we have to pass on price increases
or we will have to make fundamental changes in product specifications.'
Raw material price increases have also hit those companies which have
enjoyed increased demand. Supplies bought at contract prices are proving
insufficient, and extra orders are set at much higher spot prices.
'In some cases we can pass it on, but it's proved difficult because stocks
were run down last year,' says Mr Jim Ratcliffe, managing director of
Inspec, the speciality chemicals company which came to the market earlier
this year.
City analysts are sympathetic, but remind the manufacturers that they've
never had it so good.
'It will be hard to pass on meaningful increases, but they've had a very
comfortable time during the past two years,' says Mr Philip Morrish of Smith
New Court.
The worst affected companies are now enduring a time lag before cost
increases can be recovered, and although the industry has been through
similar cycles in the past, this time the prospects are grimmer for passing
on higher prices.
'Last time this happened the economy was growing faster,' says Martin Evans
at Hoare Govett. 'But now it's a different story - the squeeze is on.'
