FT  01 NOV 94 / Meciar agrees to form a cabinet
The former Slovak prime minister, Mr Vladimir Meciar, formally agreed
yesterday to try to form a coalition government, a full month after the
electoral victory of his Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS), Reuter
reports from Bratislava.
Mr Meciar made the announcement in a letter to President Michal Kovac, who
played a key role in his downfall in a parliamentary no-confidence vote last
March.
The letter is the latest twist in Slovakia's personality-dominated politics
since the elections of September 30 and October 1, when the HZDS took 35 per
cent of the vote and 61 seats in the 150-member parliament.
Shortly after the vote, Mr Kovac appointed the HZDS to lead coalition talks,
but pointedly ignored its leader, Mr Meciar, whose suitability as prime
minister he questioned during campaigning. Mr Meciar rarely appeared as
talks dragged on with little success, preferring to send representatives
instead. At one point a senior HZDS member said Mr Kovac should resign for
the sake of Slovak political stability.
However, last Friday the president finally requested that Mr Meciar provide
him with a list of new cabinet members, although he set no deadline.
Mr Kovac's aides said they had received the letter yesterday by express
delivery, but that no HZDS representatives had yet visited the president.
So far the HZDS has clinched support in forming a coalition only from its
traditional ally, the extreme nationalist Slovak National party, which won
nine seats.
Mr Meciar's chances of forming a stable coalition depend largely on whether
he can strike a pact with the four-party grouping, Common Choice, led by
reformed communists of Party of the Democratic Left (SDL).
Talks between the two have so far been inconclusive, leaving Mr Meciar in
limbo and forecasting tough political times ahead.
'To get a majority in parliament we need six more votes. . . to seize the
challenge to solve the crisis situation coming in 1995,' Mr Meciar said in
an interview published yesterday in the daily newspaper, Republika.
