FT  04 AUG 94 / House price rise of 15% needed to end negative equity, says
study
Average house prices in England would need to rise by 15 per cent to
eliminate negative equity, says a report published today by the Joseph
Rowntree Foundation, the social research organisation.
The report, based on interviews with home owners in Bristol, Luton and
Glasgow, found a quarter of those with negative equity owed more than Pounds
10,000 above the value of their homes.
Most of those with mortgages greater than the value of their homes were
under 40, and many of them were in professional or managerial occupations.
More than a third were buying their second or subsequent homes. Previous
studies have suggested that it is first-time buyers who are largely
afflicted.
The report says that 'mortgage equity withdrawal' - raising cash from the
capital invested in housing - was a significant factor in creating negative
equity. Many homeowners increased their mortgages during the 1980s to buy
furniture, cars or holidays.
A separate report published today by the foundation says that equity
withdrawal will add billions of pounds to consumer spending by the end of
the decade. It predicts that it will boost consumer spending by around 3 per
cent.
Most of the additional spending will come from homeowners taking out
mortgages for more than they need to buy their homes. In some cases this
will be when buying ('over-mortgaging'); in others through secured lending
on second mortgages backed by the security of their home.
However, large injections will also come from the sale of inherited homes,
and from older home owners 'trading down' into smaller homes.
The foundation predicts that the number of houses to be inherited will rise
50 per cent to just over 180,000 a year by the beginning of the next
century. Much of the equity withdrawal from inheritance will not end up as
consumer spending, according to the forecasts. Only a fifth of capital
released goes to boost spending, with the rest re-invested.
The forecasts, prepared by the National Institute of Economic and Social
Research, predict that equity withdrawal will return to levels similar to
those of the 1980s as house prices recover during the rest of the decade.
Home Owners in Negative Equity. Mortgage Equity withdrawal: causes and
consequences. Joseph Rowntree Foundation, 40 Water End, York YO3 6LP. Both
free.
Mortgage loan data cast doubt on upturn, Page 6 Editorial Comment, Page 15
