FT  12 NOV 94 / Mayhew hopeful on talks despite shooting
Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, said he still hoped talks
between the UK government and republican leaders would start before
Christmas despite Thursday's murder of a post office worker.
Amid continuing uncertainty over whether the two men arrested after the
armed raid in Newry were active IRA members, Sir Patrick said: 'The peace
process is on course and I hope it stays on course.' Talks would happen,
though, only if IRA violence was 'shown to be permanently at an end'.
He said: 'If this miserable and wicked episode . . . shows anything at all,
it shows the evil use to which illegally held arms are put, and that has got
to be dealt with straight away.'
Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing, insisted yesterday that the 10-week-old
Ulster ceasefire remained intact. Mr Pat Doherty, Sinn Fein vice-president,
said the shooting of Mr Frank Kerr, 53, was wrong. But he did not know
whether the IRA had been involved.
He added: 'Any military operation of any nature should not be carried out
during this ceasefire. That is the commitment that the IRA has given - and I
am convinced that is the commitment they are prepared to stand over.'
As the Royal Ulster Constabulary appealed for information on another man
believed to have taken part in the attack, Mr Ken Maginnis, Ulster Unionist
security spokesman, said he thought four people were involved.
He said three had served prison sentences for terrorist offences. 'It will
be interesting to see what, if any, action the IRA intends to take against
the third and fourth members of the gang who escaped.'
As the Irish government joined London in emphasising the importance of
keeping the peace process on course, it emerged that Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn
Fein president, will fly to London next week. It will be his first to
mainland Britain since a ban on him was lifted last month.
The Irish government is likely to seek further meetings with Sinn Fein over
the next couple of days.
With the need to dismantle paramilitary arsenals now firmly at the top of
the two governments' agenda, the issue is expected to feature prominently
when Sir Patrick Mayhew meets Mr Dick Spring, the Irish foreign minister, in
Dublin on Monday.
Mr Spring denied that the Irish government had acted too quickly in drawing
up plans to release nine IRA prisoners.
Coalition rift, Page 3; Newry shooting heard in Dublin, Page 5
