FT  13 SEP 94 / UVF admits bombing Dublin railway station: Britain fears
loyalist violence could threaten ceasefire
The prospect of an early end to Irish political violence receded yesterday
as the outlawed Ulster Volunteer Force admitted bombing a Dublin railway
station.
The bombing was condemned as 'revolting' by Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern
Ireland secretary, reflecting British concern that loyalist violence could
threaten the open-ended IRA ceasefire announced last month.
Mr Pat Doherty, a senior official of Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing,
accused the UVF of trying to force the Dublin government to abandon direct
contacts with republicans. 'The loyalist hope is that fear of the conflict
being brought 'down here' will scupper the peace process,' he said.
Mr John Hume, leader of the moderate nationalist Social Democratic and
Labour party, said he was confident the IRA would not retaliate because Sinn
Fein's leadership was 'totally committed' to the peace process.
Mrs Maire Geoghegan-Quinn, the Irish justice minister, said the attack would
not deflect the Dublin government from its strategy of consolidating the
republican ceasefire by talking directly to Sinn Fein.
British officials believe the US is likely to grant a visa to Mr Gerry
Adams, Sinn Fein president, at the Irish government's request, as part of
the Irish strategy of drawing Sinn Fein into mainstream politics.
However, Downing Street believes President Clinton and administration
officials will avoid a direct meeting with Mr Adams for fear of weakening
unionist support for the peace process.
The Dublin bomb exploded as an express train from Belfast was pulling into
Connolly station in the city centre. Two women were slightly hurt. Irish
police said the explosion was caused by a detonator which failed to ignite a
2kg explosive charge, suggesting that casualties could have been higher.
The UVF, which bombed a Dublin pub three months ago, said it had planted
bombs in seven other locations in the city. None was found.
The bombing reflects loyalist suspicion of a deal between Britain and the
IRA, and confirms that Protestant terrorists are prepared to take their
campaign to the Irish Republic.
The Combined Loyalist Military Command, representing the UVF and the Ulster
Freedom Fighters said last week a loyalist ceasefire would depend on
assurances that no deal had been done. Loyalists are also concerned about
the implications of a 'framework' document for Northern Ireland's future
being drawn up by the British and Irish governments as part of the peace
process.
Peace dividend, Page 14
