FT  29 JAN 94 / Motoring: Modern cars out of their depth
The floods have gone - for now - but many motorists are still counting the
cost of trying to drive through them. They are faced with bills for
re-building engines wrecked by water sucked through air intakes. The result
can be dramatic.
Water cannot be compressed. If even an eggcup full gets through the air
intake into the combustion chamber - the space between the cylinder head and
piston top - there will be a very expensive noise. It will be the sound of
one or more of the connecting rods bending or breaking, leading to a damaged
cylinder head and, quite possibly, to a hole being smashed in the cylinder
block.
Unfortunate motorists who have had to pay up to Pounds 5,000 for complete
engine re-builds, have complained to the car-makers, dealers and motoring
organisations. They have had little satisfaction.
Many drivers with comprehensive policies have found insurance companies do
not automatically regard engines wrecked by flood water as having been
damaged accidentally. Cars, they are told, are designed to be driven on
roads, not through shallow lakes.
Years ago, cars with lots of space under the bonnet and air intakes high
above their engines could manage a foot (30cm) of flood water if driven
slowly. Not so modern cars, which are shaped by fashion, the need for good
forward vision and minimum aerodynamic drag. Together, this means that
bonnets - and engine air pick-up points - have to be low.
The Automobile Association has been contacted by many aggrieved members,
including one who destroyed the engine of a two-week old car driving through
floods. But Roy Staunton, of AA Technical Services, has simple advice for
any driver of a modern car confronted by water. If it is more than 10in
(25cm) deep at the very maximum, do not even think of driving through.
If, however, you must proceed, drive very slowly indeed so that it does not
splash up under the bonnet or make a bow wave. Says Staunton: 'I don't mean
reducing your speed from 40mph (64kph) to 20mph (32kph) but, literally, to a
walking pace.'
