FT  20 MAY 94 / GM and VW resume skirmishing
The legal struggle between Volkswagen and General Motors blew up yesterday
into a head-on confrontation involving senior executives, politicians and
legal officials.
Mr David Herman, head of GM's local operations, accused Mr Gerhard Schroder,
prime minister of Lower Saxony and a member of the VW supervisory board, of
trying to use his political weight to influence the investigations by state
prosecutors in Hesse into claims of industrial espionage against GM. The
case is based on suspicions that Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua and
close associates collected secret data while working for the US group,
taking it with them when they moved to VW last March.
Mr Herman said GM's Adam Opel subsidiary would resist all 'insinuations,
slander, cover-up attempts and other defamatory plans.'
Mr Schroder later repeated his suggestions - which sparked Mr Herman's
attack - that the probe should be stopped.
Mr Ferdinand Piech, VW chairman, said he wanted an independent assessor to
examine the conduct of the case.
Yesterday's outbursts were sparked by a sequence of related events,
culminating in a television programme on Wednesday night, which suggested
that evidence might have been planted, and that private detectives used by
Opel's lawyers had used subterfuge in the hunt for evidence. Lawyers
representing Mr Lopez, now VW's production chief, and his colleagues had
earlier implied that the official investigation might be biased and impaired
by evidence possibly obtained by subterfuge. However, Mr Hans-Christoph
Schaefer, attorney for the state of Hesse, said there was 'not the slightest
reason to doubt' the objectivity or neutrality of his investigators.
Contrary to suggestions from VW lawyers, he said the official investigators
knew private detectives had been appointed. Their findings were in the
files, clearly marked as coming from outside sources, and accessible to VW
legal representatives.
Such information would obviously undergo a critical examination, Mr Schaefer
added. If it turned out that illegal methods had been used to gather the
information, that would bring its value into question, and possible criminal
offences would be investigated.
Tom Burns adds from Madrid: Volkswagen was told yesterday that the Spanish
government would not inject funds into Seat, the group's ailing Spanish
subsidiary, but that it was prepared to help the restructuring programme
initiated by the Barcelona-based auto producer through complementary
measures.
The firm stance against any bail-out for Seat was delivered to VW chairman
Mr Ferdinand Piech during talks with the Spanish prime minister, Mr Felipe
Gonzalez. Specific help to Seat could involve credits to help finance a
Pta50bn (Pounds 241m) early retirement scheme.
VW first quarter figures, page 23
