FT  13 APR 94 / People: Soar - consequences of demotion
Philip Soar has resigned as a director of Blenheim Group, the exhibitions
organiser whose share price has almost halved over the past year, five
months after he was demoted from chief executive.
Soar has been widely blamed for the collapse of Blenheim's reputation in the
City and many observers believed his final exit was only a matter of time.
'He has been in the departure lounge since last year,' said one City
analyst. It is understood that several of Blenheim's senior managers pressed
for him to go. One close observer of the company says Soar was keen to stay
on and is bitter at the way he has been treated: 'He feels that he has been
blamed for something that was not his fault.'
In November, Soar was replaced as managing director by Staffan Svenby and
demoted to the new post of director of planning and strategy.
The company's statement yesterday thanked Soar for his 'major contribution'
and wished him 'every success in the future'.
Soar was brought into Blenheim in 1990 by Neville Buch, the company's
chairman and co-founder, who was a personal friend. After a glittering
career at publishers Marshall Cavendish  - he was managing director by the
age of 25 and also found time to write books on football  - Soar had set up
his own publishing venture but was then looking for 'a new challenge'.
'It soon became clear it was a mistake,' says one observer. 'Phil turned out
to be much more at home with his computer models than as a hands-on
manager.'
These models proved Soar's undoing when they failed to predict the impact of
recession on Blenheim's important American and French operations. Analysts,
who based their forecasts on Soar's optimism, blamed him when they were
forced to slash their predictions last year.
It is thought that Soar, 46, will get Pounds 300,000 to cover the rest of
his one-year contract but will receive no further compensation.
Blenheim announced a number of other moves including the promotion of Steve
Monnington, company secretary, to director with responsibility for
developing the group's new markets in Italy and East Asia. Peter Begg, legal
director, takes over as company secretary and David Pegler becomes managing
director of Blenheim's UK business, replacing Michael Fletcher, who is
returning to the financial services industry.
