FT  09 MAR 94 / Oftel imposes tighter regime on BT charges
British Telecommunications faces a sharp increase in regulation as Oftel,
the telecommunications watchdog, tries to open the UK market to greater
competition.
A new supervisory regime announced yesterday by Oftel will provide for the
regulator to set and publish the price of more than 70 charges levied by BT
on competitors needing to use its network to carry their calls.
It will also force BT to publish separate accounts for its network and
retail businesses to reduce the advantage the company gains as a retailer
from owning the country's largest telecoms network.
Payments to BT, which controls about 90 per cent of the UK telecoms market,
represent about half of the total costs of rival operators.
The largest rival is Mercury, but dozens of new operators have gained
licences in the past two years, including cable companies build-ing combined
television and telephone networks in urban areas.
Mr Don Cruickshank, Oftel director-general, said the changes were essential
to promote a transparent, competitive telecoms market. He said: 'I hope BT
will increasingly see other operators as customers as well as competitors.'
BT views new operators solely as a threat, however, and is anxious to avoid
becoming little more than a wholesaler of network capacity to other service
providers.
At present it sets charges for competitors using its network by negotiation,
with a right of appeal to Oftel - exercised twice by Mercury. The prices
have been confidential and vary between operators.
In future, competitors will pay for key interconnection services at
standard, published tariffs set by Oftel.
BT condemned Oftel's 'costly increase in regulation'. But Mr Michael Hepher,
BT managing director, has assured Oftel of co-operation in the introduction
of accounting separation, which will apply from this financial year.
Mr Cruickshank said the level of detailed regulation proposed was
'absolutely essential' to develop competition. He added: 'BT is presently
not offering the same price for the same thing to competitors and it is not
demonstrating to operators how prices are reached.'
Oftel's standard interconnection charges will initially be based on its
determination last year of the long-running dispute between BT and Mercury
over network payments.
Mercury is contesting the determination in the High Court in an attempt to
secure a more favourable settlement. Mr Cruickshank made no further
concessions to Mercury yesterday but repeated his intention to examine its
proposals as a medium-term option.
Mr Richard Woollam, director-general of the Cable Television Association,
said Oftel's plans were 'roughly in line with what we have been looking
for'.
