FT  05 APR 94 / European Press Review
ITALY
Italians like winners. Even if they do not back them, they are quick to
recognise them.
With few exceptions, the Italian media did not expect Mr Silvio Berlusconi
and his Forza Italia movement to come out on top in last week's elections.
But as results came in they moved with considerable speed to correct this
error - not least at the state-run RAI broadcasting network where many now
fear for their jobs as a result of the sceptical tone reserved for Mr
Berlusconi throughout the election campaign.
Mr Berlusconi's position as the man most likely to head the next government
has seen the media magnate and three-month-old politician treated with a new
respect.
Not once in the wake of the elections has he been referred to by the once
oft-used nickname 'Il biscione' - the colloquial name of a viper. Instead he
has been regaled as 'Il Cavaliere' - the knight.
Leading the shift away from scepticism to respect has been Corriere della
Serra, which has always regarded itself as the weather-vane of sensible
opinion. Mr Paolo Mieli, the editor, took the view that Mr Berlusconi and
his friends in the right-wing Freedom Alliance were obliged by the sheer
scale of their victory to form the next government.
'It is now up to Berlusconi to maintain his campaign promises,' wrote Mr
Mieli. 'We read on his lips: 'less taxes and one million jobs without cost
to the state'. So now we would either like to be able to thank him or pass
him the bill if he fails to keep his promises.'
Mr Berlusconi's arch enemies, the daily Repubblica and its weekly
stable-mate, L'Espresso, have also begun to lower their aggression a few
notches. The old venom remains, but there is an element of wait and see from
veteran Repubblica editor Eugenio Scalfari, who spectacularly misread the
mood of the nation.
L'Espresso's cover contented itself with the ironic title 'Goal]' - likening
the Berlusconi victory to that of his AC Milan football team. Inside, the
magazine reserved some space for the shape of things to come by alleging
links between Mr Marcello Dell'Utri, one of Mr Berlusconi's closest
associates, and the Sicilian mafia.
In contrast, the other main weekly, Panorama, now controlled by Mr
Berlusconi's younger brother, Paolo, came up with an adulatory front page:
'How Berlusconi wants to change Italy.' It showed a confident Mr Berlusconi
staring into the future with a rising sun shining on his face.
Already one paper, Sardinia's Unione Sarda, has witnessed serious ructions
between pro- and anti-Berlusconi camps. The editor and his two deputies
resigned last week over what they claimed was victimisation and attempts to
censor them after the newspaper's proprietor, Mr Nicola Grauso, took
exception to reports about his and Mr Berlusconi's masonic links.
But the sub-text of post-electoral reporting has been perplexity over the
Berlusconi phenomenon and the incongruity of his potential allies in
government. Readers have been treated to a bewildering change of headlines
regarding the attitude of Mr Umberto Bossi, the populist leader of the
Northern League. Last Thursday Mr Bossi and Mr Berlusconi had sealed the
outlines of a deal for government - 'Peace with Bossi'; by Saturday it was
'Bossi snubs Berlusconi' when the former refused to attend a negotiating
session. Then by Sunday it was 'Bossi: No to Berlusconi as Premier.'
Meanwhile, commentators have had a field day digesting an interview given
last Thursday to La Stampa by Mr Gianfranco Fini, the astute leader of the
neo-fascist MSI/National Alliance and the third likely partner in a
Berlusconi government. Mr Fini declared Mussolini to be 'the greatest
statesman this century'. Did this mean, asked L'Unita, the daily newspaper
backed by the former communist Party of the Democrat Left (PDS), that the
right was irredeemably fascist?
Others left their conclusions to the cartoonists. Corriere della Serra
showed Mr Fini sitting atop the open tomb of Mussolini with the (seasonal)
caption 'Resurrexit', while La Repubblica pictured Il Duce in a wheelchair
with a bubble caption: 'Now I can die in peace'.
Compiled by Robert Graham
