FT  15 AUG 94 / European recovery 'set to strengthen export growth'
Britain's exports are set for strong growth as the rest of Europe moves into
economic recovery, according to two reports published today.
The Lloyds Bank Quarterly Economic Bulletin says falling relative labour
costs mean UK companies are well placed to take advantage of stronger
European Union markets.
Mr Trevor Williams, Lloyds' senior economist, says: 'Prospects for UK export
growth seem to be the best for a decade.
'Relative unit labour costs improved by about 15 per cent in 1993, a much
better gain than for the 1980s. After jumping 10 per cent last year, export
price growth is expected to be barely positive in the next two years, helped
by low domestic inflation.'
This optimism, ahead of Friday's trade figures, is shared by Professor
Douglas McWilliams in the quarterly economic report of the Chartered
Institute of Marketing.
He says: 'Surveys show a powerful growth in export orders and it would be
reasonable to expect continued sales growth as the world's economic revival
spreads.'
The report forecasts the UK current account falling from a deficit of more
than Pounds 11bn this year to Pounds 5.6bn in three years.
Prof McWilliams is more cautious on interest rates and investment.
He forecasts a 'substantial' rise in world short-term interest rates next
year to 8 per cent or 9 per cent in the US. Prospects for UK investment are
'mixed'.
Mr Roderick Wilkes, the institute's chairman, says in the same report that
the longer hours worked in Asia mean companies there are more profitable and
therefore invest more.
Both reports say that domestic growth will remain relatively weak.
Prof McWilliams says inflationary pressures as a result of rising commodity
prices are 'relatively modest'.
Mr Williams says that industries with the lowest wage inflation, such as
aerospace, pharmaceuticals, drink and tobacco, are those with the highest
trade surpluses.
Motor vehicle manufacturing, wood, paper, printing and publishing have the
potential 'to perform better than at any time since the early 1980s,' he
argues.
