FT  22 FEB 94 / Cairo bankers play down extremist threat
Bankers in Cairo yesterday sought to play down any possible threat from
Islamic extremists who have warned that Arab and foreign banks were a target
in their anti-government campaign. The extremists had set today as a
deadline for people to withdraw money from what they called 'usurious
monuments'.
A handful of bankers said they had reinforced security, though most said
they were content with measures in place for more than a year, since the
Gama'a al-Islamiyya, the militant Islamic group, first warned that Arab and
foreign businesses might become targets in their campaign.
'There's not much more we can do, and anyway we'd rather not play into the
hands of the militants' propaganda,' one foreign banker said.
A straw poll of bankers in Cairo found few concerned by the militants'
threat and none suggesting they might avoid going in to work.
The Gama'a al-Islamiyya issued their deadline earlier this month after
planting explosive devices outside three banks in Cairo. A fourth explosive
was planted on February 15. Only two of the devices detonated, causing
superficial damage and injuring no-one.
The banks have been made targets because they charge interest, which is
forbidden according to the Islamic Sharia law the militants would like to
see strictly installed in Egypt. All but a minority of specialised Islamic
institutions charge interest, however, and banks yesterday reported no
unusual withdrawals.
The militants' warning appears to be an attempt to prove they retain the
ability to wage a continued and co-ordinated campaign against the government
despite a frequently violent crackdown by security forces.
The Gama'a al-Islamiyya's follow-up to its deadline may therefore prove some
guide to its present strength, and a test of the government's confident
claims to have broken the organisation.
Nevertheless, Gama'a claimed responsibility for an attack on Saturday in
which four people, including two foreign visitors, were injured, when gunmen
opened fire on the Cairo-Luxor train as it passed through a militant
stronghold in Upper Egypt.
In a statement faxed to news agencies, the Gama'a's standard means of public
communication, the group claimed the attack to have been in retribution for
three death sentences passed by a military court on three men charged with
an attempt late last year on the life of Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak.
The three, according to Gama'a, were an army officer and two conscripts
charged with mining an airstrip close to the Libyan border at Sidi Barrani
shortly before a visit by Mr Mubarak.
More than 300 people have fallen victim to the violent campaign between
Islamic militants and security forces over the past two years.
The militant groups have specifically targeted members of the security
forces, high-ranking government officials and the tourism industry, the
latter in what has been a largely successful campaign to damage a vital
component of Egypt's economy.
Last month, Gama'a issued specific warnings to foreigners to leave the
country or risk becoming embroiled in what it called its 'ferocious' battle
with the government.
