FT  23 JUL 94 / Latvia relents over curbs on citizenship
Latvia, the Baltic republic, yesterday bowed to international pressure to
give up controversial quotas making it impossible for many of its
non-Latvian residents to gain citizenship of the newly-independent country.
Latvia's Russian-speaking population increased sharply after the republic
was annexed by Stalin in 1940. Last month, the government introduced
draconian quotas for the naturalisation of non-Latvians born outside Latvia,
in a long-delayed citizenship law.
The aim was to stop Latvians being outnumbered or threatened by
non-Latvians, who today make up just under half of the population, as
opposed to a quarter before the annexation.
But international organisations such as the Council of Europe, which Latvia
wants to join as soon as possible, said Latvia had more democratic means at
its disposal to protect its national identity and security.
Following the Latvian president's request that parliament re-examine the
citizenship law, a new version passed yesterday is now likely to satisfy
Latvia's critics in the west.
The law still requires that citizens know Latvian (a language which many
Soviet-era immigrants never learned). But instead of imposing quotas on a
whole category of the population, the law seeks to prevent 'disloyal'
individuals becoming citizens by banning the naturalisation of any residents
previously involved with specific organisations hostile to Latvia's drive
for independence. These include such organisations as the Union of Veterans
of the Armed Forces of the USSR, as well as Communist groups or repressive
bodies such as the KGB.
It also for the first time introduces a one-year deadline for Latvian
officials, who have often been accused of arbitrariness and foot-dragging in
the past, to process naturalisation applications. The new law is likely not
only to speed Latvia's reintegration with the west, but to improve relations
with Russia, which is due to complete a withdrawal of its troops from Latvia
by the end of August. Possibly in response to domestic accusations that it
was too 'soft' on Latvia, Russia has suspended troop withdrawal from Estonia
until the rights of the Russian-speaking minority there are assured.
