FT  26 APR 94 / Venezuela accord on lower rates
The Venezuelan government and the heads of the country's leading commercial
banks have reached an agreement aimed at progressively lowering interest
rates charged for commercial loans.
Mr Gustavo Roosen, presidential commissioner for reform of the financial
system, unveiled the deal late on Sunday, after marathon meetings of cabinet
members, the central bank president and the heads of several of Venezuela's
largest commercial banks.
The agreement, some details of which have still to be worked out, calls for
banks to lower interest rates on loans for 'the productive sector' every two
weeks.
The spread between rates paid by commercial banks on deposits and charged
for loans to business is high, sometimes 20 per cent, and the government is
seeking to push down rates for loans as part of its economic stabilisation
programme. For example, typical rates for a 90-day deposit at mid-month was
an annualised 41 per cent in the commercial banking system, while the rate
for a commercial loan was close to 60 per cent.
Inflation in Venezuela last year was 46 per cent, and projections for 1994
range from the government's optimistic estimate of 30 per cent to as high as
60 per cent.
The government of President Rafael Caldera, which began a five-year term on
February 2, believes that the move to push down interest rates is logical
now that it has announced a series of measures, such as budget cuts and new
taxes, aimed at reducing its fiscal deficit and lowering inflationary
expectations.
Mr Roosen, who was appointed as special commissioner last week by President
Caldera, also said that he would soon announce a plan to reform and
rehabilitate Venezuela's financial sector, which was thrown into crisis
after the failure in January of Banco Latino, the country's second-largest
bank.
He added that the executive branch was holding talks with the central bank
in an effort to lower interest rates in Venezuela's money market, perhaps by
replacing with other instruments the high-yielding zero-coupon bonds now
issued by the bank to absorb excess liquidity.
The government would also reorganise the Superintendency of Banks and the
Bank Deposit Guarantee Fund (Fogade), Mr Roosen said.
