FT  18 FEB 94 / UK Company News: Confidence borne of a successful year -
John Gapper asks whether the upbeat mood at Kleinwort Benson can be
sustained
Of the 200 years of Kleinwort Benson's history, few can have been more
eventful than 1993. The investment bank suffered uncertainty while it looked
for a new chief executive to help rebuild its past pre-eminence, yet doubled
profits to record levels because of buoyant financial markets.
Not only was it a tumultuous year - culminating in the decision not to hire
a chief executive from outside - but yesterday's results told the story more
clearly than in the past. They included previously-hidden details of income
and the balance sheet to comply with an EU directive.
Lord Rockley, Kleinwort's executive chairman, decided in December to appoint
two heads of investment banking under him and Mr Simon Robertson, deputy
chairman, rather than hiring a chief executive to follow Mr Jonathan Agnew.
He said he had confirmed his view that it had 'a lot of good people'.
Quite a few of them earned a lot of money, with the bulk of a Pounds 72m
rise in expenses coming from bonuses. The question is whether they will earn
as much this year. That would require Kleinwort truly to have improved the
quality of earnings rather than just gaining windfall profits last year.
The new management has a substantial task. It has to put an end to the
historic tension between its corporate finance and securities operations
which dogged it in the late 1980s. It also has to show that Kleinwort can
compete internationally with global investment banks, notably US ones.
Some have argued that Kleinwort sits uncomfortably in the middle range of
merchant banks, neither being a small niche player nor of sufficient size to
compete with SG Warburg. The bank has also been vulnerable to the charge
that its earnings are too vulnerable to market volatility.
Mr Robertson emphasised yesterday that the bank's work on more than 200
international equity issues and placings last year had required co-operation
between its primary and secondary sides. 'Our success in bought deals was
proof positive that the two sides work together well,' he said.
The bank carved out a niche in privatisation - such as those of electricity
utilities - working on 45 such initiatives in 16 countries. Lord Rockley
said that showed there was 'a place for a European merchant bank as opposed
to the world being dominated by international investment banks'.
Yet the bank believes its capacity to place securities in all markets needs
to grow. Lord Rockley pointed to successes such as placing Carrefour's FFr
2.04bn stake in Castorama in 17 countries last March, but said that one
priority was to 'increase our international distribution capability'.
Apart from reinforcing its international presence, the main task is to
ensure earnings are sustained. One difficulty is that it benefited heavily
from a rise in dealing profits from Pounds 61.9m to Pounds 120.8m, which are
unlikely to be repeated in more subdued treasury and capital markets this
year.
Kleinwort has tried to build up earnings from investment management to
stabilise income. But although funds managed by its asset management arm
rose from Pounds 8.9bn to Pounds 11.1bn, profits from investment management
rose 3 per cent to Pounds 26.4m, compared with a 290 per cent rise in
investment banking profits.
This was one reason for a fall in its shares yesterday despite large
profits. 'I am slightly left with the impression that the quality of
earnings is not good enough, although it is fair enough that they took
advantage of strong markets,' said Mr Philip Gibbs, an analyst at Barclays
de Zoete Wedd.
In response, the bank points to a number of aspects of its figures to
illustrate their strength. One is that it claims to be less aggressive than
US banks, and even UK ones such as Warburg in boosting profits by using its
own capital to trade. This would make it less susceptible to a downturn.
'Some banks get big profits, but there are big risks as well,' said Mr Rob
Jeens, finance director. He also emphasised the 67 per cent rise in fee and
commission income to Pounds 239m, against a 12 per cent fall in net interest
income. Kleinwort argues that such income is more sustainable.
The bank has also tried to make its cost base more flexible by shifting away
from basic salaries to bonuses. 'The greatest mistake in a cyclical business
is to have a high fixed cost base,' said Lord Rockley.
The atmosphere at Kleinwort was cheerful yesterday. 'There is a lot more
confidence around here that I do not think was there two or three years
ago,' said Mr Robertson. The test will be whether such confidence can be
sustained in a year that is likely to be less kind, and less exciting.
