FT  22 SEP 94 / World Trade News: Jail threat to Indian 'shoddy goods'
exporters
Indian exporters were yesterday warned that they face jail if they
deliberately shipped shoddy goods or otherwise 'created the impression that
Indian exporters are not trustworthy'.
Mr Tejinder Khanna, the commerce secretary, said the government planned
changes in the law covering foreign trade to penalise exporters who wilfully
damaged India's commercial reputation. Such businessmen would face losing
their import and export licences or going to jail 'because they tarnished
the Indian flag'.
Speaking at a conference of economic journalists, Mr Khanna urged industry
to treat foreign trade seriously. He was commenting on recent trade
statistics, which showed that export growth in the first four months of the
1994-95 financial year, starting in April, slowed markedly to 8.3 per cent,
from 20 per cent for the 1993-94 year.
An important reason for the slow-down has been a revival in domestic demand
which has persuaded some companies to divert goods from exports to local
markets.
The Commerce Ministry has received reports of companies cancelling or
unilaterally amending export contracts in order to supply goods to domestic
buyers.
Mr Khanna said long-term export growth required a commitment to export, not
a tendency to turn to the domestic market for short-term benefits. A change
in approach was needed, he said. 'I believe the whole country depends on
this change.'
Mr Khanna said he was beginning to see change among younger businessmen who
were establishing new ventures and planning to export 35-40 per cent of
output.
But the transformation had to go much further, he said.
Gone were the days of 'suitcase exporting', when a businessmen would take a
few saris and some handicrafts overseas, sell them from his hotel bedroom
and then buy a few foreign goods for importing into India, said Mr Khanna.
India had to develop the image of a high-technology modern exporting nation.
Mr Khanna also warned executives travelling on trade delegations against
mixing business and tourism. He indicated that it was unacceptable for
delegations to pull out of meetings or receptions at the last minute, as, he
said, had recently happened with an Indian delegation in Kenya.
Reviewing the recent performance of exports, Mr Khanna said that in
textiles, the biggest contributor to India's exports, sales had suffered
from competition from China and from quota restrictions. Compared with an
original target of 25 per cent export growth in 1994-95, officials now
expected only about 10 per cent.
In engineering goods, including car parts, which saw exports grow 36 per
cent last year, the rate of growth is expected to fall to 14 per cent,
because of the diversion of goods to the domestic market. Exports of
diamonds are also expected to slow because of weakness in the world diamond
market.
However, in agriculture, where the government has recently lifted important
export controls, Mr Khanna expected rapid growth of about 20 per cent. 'This
sector holds the key and may bail us out,' he said.
