FT  15 DEC 94 / Survey of Arab Banking (13): Women find their role - A
transformation in Tunisia's business scene
Many Tunisians regard a group of laws which, in 1956, abolished polygamy and
gave their womenfolk rights not enjoyed elsewhere in the Arab world, as one
of their country's proudest achievements.
The 'Personal Status Code' is arguably former President Habib Bourguiba's
greatest single achievement. The rights granted to Tunisian women have been
further consolidated since Mr Zine El Abidine Ben Ali became president in
1987.
The efforts to promote education, health and family planning have produced
clearly visible results - population growth is down to 1.9 per cent a year
and two-thirds of all Tunisian women are now literate. Furthermore, women
are increasingly visible in a wide variety of professions - in teaching,
medicine, architecture and in factories as workers, engineers and managers.
Today, women have 25 per cent of all jobs in Tunisia, 35 per cent of jobs in
industry and 40 per cent in agriculture.
Increasingly, they own and manage new businesses. A minor revolution is
afoot as the number of new companies founded by women in Tunisia has risen
from 7 per cent of the total in 1985 to 13 per cent this year.
Most of these companies are small, with less than 10 employees, but others
are much larger and often engage in international trade in a manner which
was quite unthinkable only a decade ago.
It does not come as a surprise that 73 per cent of all companies owned by
women are found in the textile sector. That is true in other developing
countries but the quality of some of what is produced in this sector and the
sheer size of some investments points to change.
Leila Boufaid, whose husband is a senior magistrate, started a small luxury
braid business 20 years ago. Today, she employs 200 workers, has a turnover
of Dollars 1.8m. Around 90 per cent of its output is exported to Europe and
the US.
Maille Fil which opened in 1989 is a Dollars 20m investment by Hedi
Bouchamaoui for his four daughters, two of whom manage Tunisia's largest
combed cotton and yarn production plant. The company imports cotton from the
US and produces 3,000 tons of high quality fabric a year, 75 per cent of
which is exported. While two daughters oversee the factory, the others are
completing their studies at university in Michigan.
Meanwhile, women in Tunisia are now branching out into other spheres of
business. Saida Mechri worked in a security company after gaining a degree
in economics in Belgium. In 1988 she started her own company, Securitap,
which employs 800 people, 700 of whom are security agents hired out to
embassies and companies across the country and boasting an annual turnover
of Dollars 1.7m. More recently she started a haute couture business which
employs 10 designers and sells styles to Italy. She readily confesses that
the company, called Tosca, is her 'true love.'
There are other diverse examples of successful women in business. Hayet
Laouani, for instance, started as secretary in a shipping company, 20 years
ago. Now she owns and runs Stumar, a company with a turnover of Dollars 3m
and is active in stevadoring, conveyancing and forwarding.
Rashida Rouissi is a leading exporter of citrus products and is doing battle
with the Marseilles suppliers who have a tight grip on the bulk of Tunisian
exports, especially citrus fruit, 89 per cent of which was, until recently,
shipped through the French port. Ms Rouissi has, however, succeeded in
exporting ever-larger quantities of citrus fruit through Toulon, thus
cutting freight and other costs. Her battle is not merely with Marseilles
shippers but with well-established Tunisians who have lived comfortably off
their links with the French port.
Alya Heda runs Opalia, a joint venture with an Italian businessman which
makes pharmaceutical products under licence from Alfa Wasserman and Amuchina
of Italy. Among the hundred doctors and pharmacists who work for her, eighty
are women. Pharmaceutical exports to African countries are flourishing and
she hopes soon to break into the European market.
Selma Rekik is the financial controller of the Chebika Group, owned by her
father and brothers. Among the group's key activities is the manufacture of
electrical items for cars - Peugeot, Renault, Mercedes and Opel are clients.
She has recently acquired a 40-year lease on a former state farm, the Stifen
domaine, north-east of Tunis and is busy developing rich farmland where
earlier lack of investment over a generation all but ended production. All
the fruit and vegetables produced will be exported to Europe. Like other
women entrepreneurs, she started in business after marrying and raising
children; her husband is one of Tunisia's leading ophthalmists.
A study conducted last year by Aziza Dargouth, who runs the CPS consulting
agency, suggests that 48 per cent of women who start their own business find
little difficulty in reconciling their professional and family obligations,
that 43 per cent ventured into such activities for the sake of the challenge
it offered, that only one husband in five is opposed to his wife's
activities. Such findings do not conform to a widespread European stereotype
of Arab women.
This new breed of innovative women owner-managers work hard, often more
diligently than menfolk and is prepared to do battle with the civil service
which, despite the efforts to liberalise the management of the economy
launched in 1986, remains a worthy successor of its Turkish and French
forebears. A Tunisian businesswoman jokes that edicts of the central bank
are 'as difficult to interpret as the Holy Koran itself . . . and spawn
quite as many hadiths (the body of comments on the Koran).'
Such rules, in her view, should be clearly written and implemented with
speed and honesty.
Though some women run large companies, the bulk of such businesses employ 10
people or less and are often run from home.
