FT  30 JUN 94 / Survey of Executive Cars (10): Leasing catches on in Britain
 -Private contract purchase schemes
A two-year-old scheme to get private buyers into new cars has met with such
success that many in the industry expect it to account for half of all
private transactions in the future.
The format, which works on the basis that most buyers are far more
interested in the size of the monthly repayment than the total cost, was
imported from the US, where it is known simply as leasing.
In Britain, leasing attracts VAT, a tax which is already included in a new
car's retail price, and this has prompted the Finance and Leasing
Association (FLA) to come up with the generic term, private contract
purchase (PCP).
The first such scheme in the UK, Ford's Options was introduced in 1992 in
the run-up to the August sales boom.
Ford's big rivals were quick to follow - Vauxhall with Choices, Rover with
Select, Peugeot with Passport and so on. Now, practically every car
manufacturer has a PCP. Early problems, caused largely by a lack of dealer
training, seem to have been ironed out.
The attraction of a PCP is that a driver can get behind the wheel of a new
car for relatively low monthly payments. 'As it is aimed at private
purchasers, we find Select is skewed towards our smaller cars, the Metro and
200,' says Mr John Lowndes, marketing operations director at Rover.
Mr Andy Green, sales director of Nissan, which was one of the last into the
arena with its Preferences scheme, adds: 'PCPs are particularly attractive
to younger drivers.'
The schemes differ in detail, though the principles are similar. A driver is
required to make a deposit of 30 to 40 per cent. When the contract is drawn
up, the dealer estimates the car's value after the end of the agreed period
(either two or three years) based on the driver's projected annual mileage
(6,000, 12,000 or 18,000). The driver then pays a monthly fee based on the
difference between the new and secondhand prices, plus interest charges.
At the end of the fixed term, the customer can decide to keep the car by
making the final 'balloon' (or lump sum) payment, swap to another new model,
or simply walk away. Thus, a Pounds 6,500 model such as a Citroen AX can be
driven for three years for under Pounds 100 a month. A Pounds 13,000 car
such as a Ford Mondeo costs under Pounds 220 a month over a two-year period.
A PCP does not make a car any cheaper; the difference between the final cost
of a hire purchase agreement and a PCP (including the balloon payment) is
small. But it does make it more affordable in the short term.
It presents the customer with a fundamental alternative to car ownership: it
offers the opportunity of paying just for the use of the vehicle, rather
like a long-term rental agreement.
The schemes arrived at a fortunate time for the motor trade. New car demand
was still depressed after several years of expanding demand. Even the recent
quickening of pace in sales has come mainly from fleet purchasers where
orders are counted in terms of 25 or more cars. The private, or retail, side
has lagged behind.
PCPs have stimulated interest among private buyers at a time of considerable
economic uncertainty. The schemes, with their fixed, low cost monthly
outlays, give consumers peace of mind when so much else is uncertain.
Repair costs are covered by the manufacturer's warranty and some purchases
carry roadside assistance programmes. The only additional outlay is common
to all cars: insurance, tax and servicing.
Some of the more recent PCPs are going further. Toyota's Terms plan can be
extended to include regular servicing. Citroen's new Elect scheme can be
expanded to include items that wear out such as tyres.
'If you look at PCPs within the finance-funded sector, they moved from
nothing to about 25 per cent within 18 months, Rover's Mr Lowndes says. Mr
David Nash, public relations manager of Ford Credit, reports a similar
performance. 'Ford is doing between a quarter and a third of its retail
business through Options,' he says.
Ford, Rover and other companies expect PCPs will eventually account for one
in every two private car transactions.
Ford, which tested Options regionally for two years before the national
launch, reports that 68 per cent of early customers are renewing their
original plans and seven out of 10 are choosing a newer model under the
terms of the PCP. The remainder are either buying the original car or
switching to other manufacturers.
'Our long-term goal is to retain an Options customer for life,' declares Mr
David Flanigan, managing director of Ford Credit - one of the reasons his
competitors decided to join the PCP bandwagon so rapidly.
In the US, leasing now accounts for one in six new cars, and Ford recently
began testing similar schemes in the Netherlands and Spain. However, PCPs
are not a feature of the motor trade in most other European countries
because of VAT and personal tax regulations.
