FT  09 FEB 94 / Chiapas's gentle military strategist: Damian Fraser profiles
the self-styled guerrilla 'sub-comandante' who has transfixed Mexico
A month after the guerrilla uprising in the southern state of Chiapas,
Mexico is transfixed by the figure of 'sub-comandante' Marcos, as he calls
himself, the spokesman and chief strategist of the self-styled Zapatista
rebels.
The sub-comandante formally reports to six Indian leaders who are the
supreme authorities of the Zapatista army. But they themselves describe
Marcos as the Zapatista military strategist, and have appointed him as
interpreter to the outside, non-Indian world.
He has only been seen in public wearing a black balaclava that reveals
nothing more than pale skin, a large nose and chestnut brown-green eyes. He
seems to have a moustache and beard, and to be in his 30s. Other than that,
his identity is hidden from the public.
But since peasant guerrillas first seized several towns in the impoverished
state, Marcos has gripped the country with a series of ironic, sometimes
poetic and always compelling communiques that have arrived at Mexico's main
independent newspapers from his base deep in the Chiapas jungle.
When President Carlos Salinas decided to offer the guerrillas amnesty for
taking up arms, Mr Marcos asked whether they should be pardoned for dying of
hunger, for not staying silent in their misery, for not accepting a gigantic
history of contempt and abandonment, for dying of dysentery, cholera and
typhoid, in a string of more than 150 rhetorical questions.
'Who should ask for a pardon and who should give it?' he asks in the letter,
which along with others has turned Marcos into a cult hero for much of the
country's urban middle class.
On Monday, Multivision, a subscriber-only television station, broadcast the
first full-length television interview with Marcos. He was soft spoken,
humorous and self-deprecating, even admitting to errors in the uprising on
New Year's Day.
He said the lack of land and Mr Salinas's decision to end land reform was
the detonator of the rebellion. He described a movement made up almost
entirely of Indians from Chiapas, who received no help from the church,
foreigners or other social groups.
In the clearest terms yet, he described the Zapatista battle as political
rather than military, as one of mobilising public opinion against what the
rebels see as the government's iniquitous economic programme and the
country's authoritarian political system.
Asked why the Zapatista uprising did not spread, Marcos replied: 'We did not
expect that, we did not expect that the people of Mexico would say 'Oh look,
here are the Zapatistas, now it is our turn' and pick up their kitchen
knives and attack the first policeman that they found. We thought the people
would say what they have said - something is wrong in this country,
something has to change.'
Despite the brutal nature of the uprising, in which policemen were killed by
rebels in cold blood, Marcos has been proved right. The uprising has
unleashed a wave of criticism of government policy and forced it to accept
on paper a broad political reform. According to an opinion poll in Este
Pais, an independent magazine, 61 per cent of Mexicans sympathise with the
Zapatistas.
The sympathy for the sub-comandante in part stems from disillusionment with
existing political leaders. While Marcos has been able to engage the public
in a dialogue, the speeches of Mexican politicians are generally tedious and
earnest.
In spite of his balaclava and guerrilla outfit, Marcos sounds remarkably
moderate and avoids leftist dogma. He thus almost immediately dropped the
original guerrilla demands for the resignation of the government and
replaced them with calls for democracy and justice, especially for the
country's indigenous peoples.
'Marcos is articulating very elegantly the aspiration of many Mexicans,'
says Mr Sergio Aguayo, a political scientist at the Colegio de Mexico. 'His
success is a testimony to the poor state of the political parties.'
Marcos has instead painted the government as the extremists, especially when
the army was accused of human rights abuses in the first part of the
conflict. 'We will not take the country a hostage. We do not want to, nor
can we, impose on Mexican society our idea through force of arms, as the
current government imposes its project for the country through force of
arms,' he wrote in one of his earlier communiques.
Marcos is fond of evoking the heroes of Mexico's 1910 revolution, and much
of his support may be linked with the public's romantic view of that period
in Mexican history. Ironically, Emiliano Zapata, the revolutionary peasant
leader after whom the rebel army is named, is one of the heroes of Mr
Salinas, and his picture hangs on the wall in his office.
'The cultural values of Mexicans accept violence as a way to arrive at
power,' says Mr Federico Reyes Heroles, the editor of Este Pais.
The government, which has used revolutionary ideology to give it a
legitimacy that elections have not, is now finding that out to its cost.
