FT  06 SEP 94 / Technology: Hand in hand - The barriers between
biotechnology and pharmaceuticals are gradually disappearing
The technological distinction between biotechnology and pharmaceuticals has
become so nebulous that many people in the industry now differentiate simply
between large companies, mostly pharmaceuticals, and small companies, mostly
biotechnology groups.
Drug discovery methods in the two fields are merging to create a new
multi-faceted approach. 'Pharmaceuticals are starting to look at
biotechnology not as a different industry but as part of their industry,'
says Jeremy Levin, president of New York-based Cadus Pharmaceutical. 'And
biotechnology companies have realised that they have a lot to learn from
pharmaceutical companies in terms of drug discovery methods.'
The result is a hotch-potch of tools ranging from structure-based drug
design - crystallising and X-raying a molecule to come up with a computer
model - to robotic screening, using robots for high-speed random testing.
Pharmaceuticals are quickly adopting what were once considered biotechnology
methods. Bristol-Myers Squibb of New York, for instance, says it used
computer-based design, traditionally a biotechnology tool, to help it come
up with one of its best-sellers, the hypertension drug Capoten.
Biotechnology companies are becoming adept at traditional pharmaceutical
strengths such as chemistry. The boundaries between the two industries have
become so foggy that Chiron, a large Californian biotechnology company, is
now providing chemistry assistance in a joint venture with Syntex, a
neighbouring pharmaceutical group. 'We're doing the chemistry, Syntex the
biology,' says Walter Moos, vice-president of Chiron Technologies. 'That's
not the way it usually works, but it just shows you how weak the divisions
are these days.'
Until recently, many biotechnology companies scorned pharmaceuticals' old
method of random screening as nothing more than a game of chance.
Pharmaceutical companies test hundreds of thousands of compounds in a
laboratory until they achieve the desired chemical reaction.
Biotechnology companies believed they could find cures in a more direct
manner. Structure-based design - sometimes called rational drug design  -
allowed them to look at molecules in detail. The answer, many believed, was
to study the particular molecular site in the body where binding was
desired, and design a molecule to fit into it. Biotechnology companies hoped
to produce molecules like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle, creating an exact match
in the right place.
The last few years have revealed weaknesses in the computer-based approach,
however. Determining the structure of a site is difficult. It often depends
on being able to turn a floppy protein molecule into a crystal for analysis.
But the structure the computer software predicts will fit into the structure
simply may not. Scientists often discover the model's weaknesses as soon as
they begin testing in the laboratory.
Even if the new molecule fits into a site, it may not lead to a cure,
especially for complex diseases such as cancer, arthritis or Aids. 'The idea
was that by targeting a single molecule, you could stop a disease,' says
Levin, 'but most illnesses are a lot more complicated than that.'
While scientists were coming to grips with the weaknesses of computer-based
design over the last few years, pharmaceuticals' traditional screening
methods were undergoing a renaissance. Sophisticated robotics, for instance,
mean that companies can now screen compounds far faster than previously.
'It's like gambling,' says Prabha Fernandes, vice-president of bio-molecular
screening at Bristol-Myers Squibb. 'The more you play, the better the
chances of getting a hit.'
Drug companies are also starting to adopt screening methods which bundle
dozens, even thousands, of compounds in a single test tube. Those that get
no reaction are immediately discarded, rapidly narrowing the field.
Although the screening methods are becoming more sophisticated, they are
increasingly viewed as just one tool in the drug discovery process.
Computer-based design may not be perfect, but it can provide scientists with
key leads in their search for the right molecule.
'What we're seeing is an interplay between screening and rational drug
design,' says Marilyn Hartig, head of external science and technology at
Bristol-Myers. 'The methods get worked and re-worked in a cycle until you
get the molecule you want.'
The biotechnology firm Procept, for example, uses structure-based design to
come up with a 'lead' - a clue as to what the right molecule will look like
 -then follows up with extensive screening. 'We define shape, size and
grooves and compare that to our existing database,' says James Jenson, the
group's chief scientist. 'Then we screen only the molecules we think have a
good chance of working.'
Biotechnology methods can also be used to help build up a 'library' of
molecules for screening. Lib-raries - databases of natural and synthetic
compounds that can be tested for effectiveness in treating certain diseases
 -are becoming a priority as screening regains ground. Pharmaceutical
companies usually hold libraries of hundreds of thousands of molecules.
Biotechnology companies are starting to catch up. Chiron, for instance,
claims its library now compares in size with that of many of the large
pharmaceutical groups.
The question remains whether the new multi-faceted approach to drug
discovery is just an interim step as the industry waits for structure-based
design methods to mature. 'Rational drug design is getting stronger and will
one day be able to stand alone,' predicts Peter Johnson, president of
southern California's Agouron, which relies heavily on computer-based
design, but has, over the last few years, boosted its screening
capabilities.
Meanwhile, the increasingly complementary drug discovery methods used by the
biotechnology and pharmaceutical groups will probably help stimulate more
collaborations between the two industries.
Non-technological distinctions between biotechnology and pharmaceutical
groups remain clear. Pharmaceuticals have the capital many biotechnology
companies desperately need. Biotechnology groups have the agility and
entrepreneurial attitudes of smaller companies. Both need each other, and
with each side crossing increasingly into the technological hemisphere of
the other, collaboration should become even more fruitful.
