FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (12): US analysts
expect Dow to fluctuate around 3,600 - Equities / Regional reports
After a promising January, the rest of the first quarter was all downhill
for the US stock market, after the Federal Reserve twice raised interest
rates during the period.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average ended the quarter at 3,635.97, down 118
points, or 3 per cent, since the New Year. The Standard &amp; Poor's 500 was at
445.76, having fallen 21 points during the quarter, while the Nasdaq
composite index was at 743.46, down 33 points.
Yet 1994 had started so well. Prices rose steadily throughout January, with
the Dow breaking through 3,800 and then 3,900 for the first time, before
confidently marching toward the 4,000 mark. The market was helped by another
strong results season from Corporate America, which, thanks to a resurgent
economy, productivity improvements and tough cost-containment policies,
posted impressive quarterly earnings.
At this stage, the Dow was outperforming the rest of the market as investors
favoured cyclical stocks, which traditionally do well during periods of
economic recovery.
Then, suddenly, the market's mood changed. The catalyst was the Fed's
decision on February 4 to raise short-term interest rates from 3 per cent to
3.25 per cent in a pre-emptive move against inflation. It was the first
tightening of monetary policy in five years, and it marked a turning point
in the investment cycle.
As soon as rates were raised, investors knew that conditions for investing
in equities would not be so favourable again for a long time. Fearing
further interest-rate increases, and worried that the strengthening economy
would push inflation higher, bond market investors pushed long-term interest
rates up sharply from their historic lows.
Within weeks, bond yields had climbed from below 6 per cent to 6.5 per cent.
The sharp rise in interest rates unnerved the stock market, which began to
follow bond prices lower. By mid-March indications that the economy was
growing even faster than expected sent bonds into a tailspin and the 30-year
yield over 7 per cent, and stocks began suffering heavy losses.
A second Fed tightening - another quarter of a point on short-term rates -
followed on March 22, and with investors also worried by the Whitewater
affair in Washington DC and political unrest in Mexico and Korea, the
quarter ended with Wall Street contemplating the possibility that a bear
market phase had begun.
Opinions, however, were divided as to whether the sharp declines at the end
of the quarter marked the end of the long bull market in stocks. Some
analysts pointed out that the economic and earnings fundamentals of the
market remained strong, and predicted that the Fed's two rate increases
would soon slow the pace of economic growth, allowing for long-term interest
rates to come down and for share prices to resume their upward path.
The majority of analysts, however, were adopting a more cautious stance on
the outlook for the second quarter. Most believed long-term interest rates
would stabilise between 7 per cent and 7.5 per cent, and predicted a choppy
three months for stocks, with the Dow in a fairly broad trading range either
side of 3,600.
In Mexico, the first quarter of trading on the stock market was dominated by
the negative impact on share prices of the peasant uprising in Chiapas, and
later, the assassination of Mr Luis Donaldo Colosio, the ruling party's
candidate in the August elections.
Although analysts were quick to point out that the assassination did not
alter the positive economic factors underpinning the market, they predicted
uncertainties in the political scene would make for an unsettled second
quarter. The Prices and Quotations index ended the quarter at 2,410.38, down
192 points, or 7.3 per cent.
In Canada, the stock market held up remarkably well, in spite of the sharp
losses on Wall Street and concern about rising domestic interest rates and
the weakening Canadian dollar. The Toronto Stock Exchange composite index
ended at 4,329.62, up just 8.19 points on the quarter.
