FT  21 JAN 94 / Leading Article: Troops out, weapons in
Mr Douglas Hurd, the UK foreign secretary, visits Bosnia today to see for
himself the situation of British troops serving there with the UN protection
force (Unprofor). Although officials insist that no decision has yet been
taken, it is no secret that both Britain and France are seriously
considering a withdrawal of their contingents in the spring, if by then
there is still no political solution in sight.
The collapse of the three-party peace talks in Geneva on Wednesday night
makes it even less likely than before that any political solution will
emerge from the present military stalemate. The Bosnian government, now
resigned to the effective partition of the country, is determined to fight
on rather than accept a territorial settlement which it rightly regards as
not only unjust but unworkable, and which it has every reason to believe the
Serbs would not honour even if they signed it.
The Bosnian Serb leaders, for their part, are happy to fight on rather than
give back the territory the government is demanding, which consists of areas
where there was a Moslem majority before the war. And the Croats, knowing
that any Moslem territorial gains are likely to be at their expense, have
now effectively switched sides.
Unable to end the war and unwilling to fight it, Britain and France are
rightly reluctant to keep their soldiers sitting indefinitely in the middle
of it. Indeed, there can be no justification for prolonging the danger and
humiliations to which the UN troops are constantly exposed. Although they
have undoubtedly saved many individual lives, they are unable to carry out
the mandate given them by the Security Council, and as a result they have
incurred the anger of the victims as well as the aggressors.
Achieving little
The force was sent in to ensure the delivery of relief supplies to
beleaguered civilian populations. The logic of deploying armed men for this
purpose was that without the use of force the supplies would not get
through. Since in practice force is not being used, the troops are achieving
little that unarmed relief workers could not.
But if they are to leave, their departure must not mean that the world is
finally abandoning Bosnia to its fate. The message to the Bosnians must not
be, 'you are all equally impossible, and we are leaving you to fight it
out'. On the contrary, the reason for pulling Unprofor out should be that it
symbolises a neutrality which is at odds with all official pronouncements on
the conflict, and indeed with many other acts of the UN, including notably
the economic sanctions against Serbia.
Beyond recall
The presence of UN forces has frequently been used as an argument against
giving effective military assistance to the Bosnian government, since it has
been argued that to do so would endanger the lives of UN troops. Once the
troops are out, that argument will have to be dropped. Their removal should
be accompanied by a clear statement to the effect that the Serbs and Croats
are held responsible for the lack of a peace settlement, and that from now
on the western powers are determined to help the Bosnian government, not
alas to restore the integrity of prewar multiracial Bosnia, which is
shattered beyond recall, but to gain control of sufficient territory to
build a viable Moslem state, either by reconquest or by achieving a stronger
negotiating position.
Western powers are clearly unwilling to engage their own ground forces in
this combat. But they can, if they so choose, ensure that the Bosnian
government forces are far better equipped for it than they now are, and they
can provide them with devastating support from the air. If they showed
willingness to do so they would acquire much greater leverage over the
parties. The Bosnian government would have a strong incentive to avoid
atrocities which might alienate western public opinion, and to listen to
western advice in future negotiations. The Croats would have a strong
incentive to return to their alliance with the government, in order to avoid
being treated as enemies rather than as allies by the west. And the Serbs
would have much more compelling reasons than at present to seek an end to
the war through a genuine compromise.
