FT  03 AUG 94 / Hoverspeed protests to EU over immigration law
Hoverspeed, the cross-channel hovercraft operator, has lodged two complaints
with the European Commission over a UK law fining international transport
carriers for bringing illegal immigrants into the country.
The company, a subsidiary of Sea Containers, says that the implementation of
the act on cross-channel services between England and France is in breach of
the provisions of the Treaty of Rome guaranteeing free movement within the
European Union.
It also complains that the government is giving illegal state aid to Channel
tunnel rail services by exempting them from the fines.
Hoverspeed says that it has paid Pounds 484,000 in fines since the
introduction of the law in 1987 and spends about Pounds 100,000 a year on
checking passengers' passports to avoid liability. By exempting train
services through the tunnel, the UK government is giving it a 'hidden
subsidy', Hoverspeed says.
The accusation follows an application by Eurotunnel for a judicial review of
a Commission decision to retain duty-free sales on cross-border journeys
within the EU until 1999. Eurotunnel says that this is a hidden subsidy to
the ferries and airlines which can sell duty-free goods during journeys,
unlike train operators.
Hoverspeed's complaints will reopen the controversy over the Immigration
(Carriers' Liability) Act 1987, which imposes fines on airlines and shipping
companies which bring passengers into the UK without a valid passport or
visa.
Hoverspeed, like the airlines, opposed the act from its inception. Mr
Geoffrey Ede, managing director, said yesterday: 'To expect check-in
assistants to operate as immigration officials and to fine the operator when
they fall short is unreasonable. Their job is to welcome people on to our
SeaCats and hovercraft, not keep them off.'
He added that the government had refused to listen to Hoverspeed's
representations on the issue, leaving it no alternative but to resort to the
law.
The Home Office said last night that the exemption for Channel tunnel rail
services recognised their 'unique character'.
