FT  23 AUG 94 / Personal View: Peg is no panacea for hyper-inflation
There has been much discussion lately of how effective a pegged ex-change
rate can be in stabilising the value of a currency (Financial Times,
Economic Viewpoint: 'No going back to Bretton Woods', July 28).
Pegged rates can help with stabilisation and have been central components of
anti-inflation strategies in many instances, but they cannot do it alone;
the right supporting conditions are also necessary.
Such conditions cannot be assumed automatically to accompany the adoption of
a fixed-rate regime. This is why the record of such regimes, such as the
many stabilisation plans in Latin America and elsewhere, in the 1980s and
1990s includes failures as well as successes.
At the same time, successful stabilisation has been achieved without pegging
the exchange rate. It is important to review the lessons from such diverse
experiences, several of which are discussed in the May 1994 edition of the
IMF's World Economic Outlook.
Strict financial discipline is critical for successful stabilisation, with
or without a pegged exchange rate. Large fiscal and quasi-fiscal deficits
are a fundamental driving force behind the excessive monetary expansion that
sustains high inflation. In high-inflation countries, attempts to stabilise
prices without attacking the fiscal deficits have, at best, only temporarily
succeeded.
To be sure, pegging the exchange rate can encourage financial discipline,
but this effect should not be exaggerated.
The costs of failure under a pegged regime are high. Fiscally unsound
programmes that have relied on a fixed exchange rate - and, in many
instances, on incomes policies as well - have achieved only a temporary
reduction in inflation. When such programmes eventually fail, inflation
comes back with a vengeance.
During the second half of the 1980s, for example, Argentina and Brazil went
through a succession of failed exchange-rate-based programmes, with
inflation reaching a higher plateau after each failure. Failed programmes,
whether exchange-rate-based or not, erode the credibility of future
stabilisation efforts, increase the public debt, may have a high cost in
terms of international reserve losses, and increase the difficulty of
eventually attaining stabilisation.
Using the exchange rate as the nominal anchor has been most successful
against hyper-inflation - when rigidities in domestic prices and wages and
backward-looking indexation usually disappear. Most prices are quoted in
foreign currency. Hence, fixing the exchange rate can immediately stabilise
prices in domestic currency. This explains why in most successful
stabilisations inflation has come down virtually overnight.
An important problem, however, is fixing the exchange rate at the right
level, a particularly difficult task in economies in transition or others
with widespread price distortions. If the rate is fixed at too high a level,
competitiveness in foreign trade may be sacrificed and, with it, confidence
in the currency. If the rate is too low, far from reining in inflation it
may give it an additional boost.
Pegged exchange rates have also been successful in stabilising economies
with a history of high, but relatively stable, inflation. However, in these
cases widespread indexation in goods and financial markets imparts a high
degree of inertia to inflation.
Fixing either the level or the rate of change of the exchange rate does not
usually have an immediate effect on inflation, thus leading to real
appreciation and often unsustainable trade deficits. Therefore, incomes
policies have sometimes been used to break the wage-price spiral, as in the
successful Mexican and Israeli plans, and in Argentina structural reforms
such as the elimination of indexation were used.
Currency stabilisation may occur even without a sizeable cushion of reserves
or abundant official foreign financing. External financing may be important
as a signal of international support, not least in helping to make
stabilisation packages politically feasible.
In some cases, a sizeable reserve cushion has also been useful in
reinforcing the credibility of the peg. However, experience shows, most
recently in Argentina, that large amounts of official foreign financing are
not strictly essential to support an exchange rate peg when the domestic
financial situation is brought under control. Also, countries such as
Bolivia and Peru floated their currencies and were able to maintain currency
stability without major official external financing. The potential for
private capital inflows may in any case overshadow the need for official
financing.
What the past teaches us is that an exchange rate anchor is considerably
less than a panacea for stabilisation, though the IMF has appropriately
supported its use as part of a credible policy package in, for example, the
former Czechoslovakia, Estonia and Poland.
But if the other conditions for currency stabilisation, especially fiscal
consolidation, are not met, an exchange rate anchor will fail, and may make
the outcome worse than if it had never been introduced.
Its main use is in enhancing the credibility of an otherwise viable policy
package, especially in hyper-inflationary conditions, though even with such
a package it may be useful, but not necessary.
For this reason, the IMF takes a pragmatic view of pegged exchange rates,
considering their use as but one possible tool in recommending an
appropriate policy package to help members reduce inflation and restore the
value of, and confidence in, their currencies.
The author is the director of external relations, International Monetary
Fund
