FT  15 DEC 94 / Belfast Investment Conference: Happy in the shadow of De
Lorean - Jimmy Burns visits a components manufacturer whose managing
director has grown to like the city
When Montupet, a French car components manufacturer, announced plans to set
up a Pounds 90m operation near Belfast in December 1988 it promised to give
the local economy its most significant boost in recent years.
It was the biggest single project secured by Northern Ireland's Industrial
Development Board, and the biggest initial investment by an overseas company
in Northern Ireland.
Yesterday the manufacturer's Belfast subsidiary was among a select group of
companies shown off to delegates as an example of the benefits that peace
can bring.
The challenges and potential pitfalls that Montupet has had to meet typified
the problems faced by inward investors in the province.
What made the investment particularly significant was its location at the
Dunmurry site near Belfast where Mr John De Lorean, the flamboyant the US
entrepreneur, had planned to build a luxury sports car.
De Lorean's closure in 1982, with a net loss of Pounds 50m of taxpayers'
money, was one of the most spectacular failures in the British government's
long-running campaign to attract overseas investment to Northern Ireland.
Overcoming that legacy has not been easy for Montupet, as its managing
director, Mr Georges Senninger, admits. 'Ever since we started up in
Dunmurry, people have been asking the same question: how long are you going
to last? Are you going to pack up like De Lorean?' he says.
Far from it. Mr Senninger has grown to like Belfast, a city he admits he
once found 'depressing'. And he is not merely wedded to the place - a few
months ago he married a local woman.
Like other foreign companies, Montupet was lured to Northern Ireland by a
generous package of incentives offered by the IDB. This covered 30 per cent
of capital investment, 50 per cent of training costs, and wage subsidies
amounting to a one-off bonus of Pounds 6,000 per employee.
Mr Senninger insists the package - less than the 70 per cent to 80 per cent
of costs which can in theory be made available by the IDB - was not the most
important factor behind the investment decision.
The main short-term attraction was the availability of a cheap factory site
capable of integrating Montupet's European operations, and the low cost of
industrial land - Pounds 60,000 per acre compared with Pounds 185,000 in the
East Midlands.
Longer-term considerations included the availability of a skilled workforce
which would work for lower rates than on the UK mainland or in France.
Since starting up in March 1990, Montupet - like a number of other companies
given generous grants by the IDB - has failed to meet promised production
and employment targets. Output is now at the level it should have been at
the start of 1992, while the workforce is 500, rather than the 900 expected.
Mr Senninger rejects the suggestion that generous grants contributed to lax
management attitudes and poor investment strategies. He blames the crisis
that affected the world car industry in the early 1990s: 'The market shrank
and that was it.'
But the company has weathered the crisis and still projects itself as an
example of how businesses can survive in Northern Ireland in spite of
adverse circumstances.
The Dunmurry site now produces cylinder heads for Ford's Bridgend and
Cologne plants, and wheels for Peugeot and Renault. It has secured further
orders to supply engine blocks to Volkswagen. Production lines are running
nearly at capacity and recruitment has started again.
Located between staunchly Protestant and Catholic areas, Montupet has
recruited equally from both communities.
Only occasionally in the past four years has Mr Senninger, a French-born
Catholic, been reminded that Northern Ireland is not quite the tolerant
haven that the IDB's image makers try to portray to first-time visitors.
Soon after the plant started up, it was attacked by youths throwing stones
from the nearby Catholic Twinbrook estate. The security forces blamed the
IRA.
Mr Senninger thinks the authorities overreacted and regrets that he was
obliged to spend more on private security than he would have liked.
'The kids had got used to using the disused De Lorean testing track for joy
riding. They didn't like us taking away their playground,' he says with a
shrug.
On a personal level he was more affected by a row with the Royal Ulster
Constabulary which led to a court appearance. 'They arrested me just because
I had a foreign accent. It was absolutely unbelievable.'
More disturbing on a personal level is the fact that his wife - a local
Catholic - is afraid to use her Christian name in some Protestant areas of
Belfast.
Such experiences leave Mr Senninger cautious about the future. 'The
paramilitary ceasefires are a good start, but only a start. The province
needs a total cultural change and that's going to take time. I think the
government has some hard selling to do.'
