FT  12 APR 94 / Two states exchange broadsides in navy row
Russia and Ukraine yesterday traded accusations over the storming of a
Russian-controlled naval base in Odessa. Moscow alleged Ukraine had used
armed force and wounded servicemen in response to Ukraine's earlier
accusations that Russia had stolen naval equipment at the weekend.
Ukrainian military authorities denied using force in the incident, which
took place on Sunday night. They said that the troops had acted to detain
three officers who had ordered Russian sailors to defy Ukrainian orders and
sail a research ship out of Odessa.
According to the Russian reports, 120 Ukrainian soldiers stormed a Russian
naval base in Odessa on Sunday night, opened fire and injured several
servicemen and their families. Reports from Moscow also said that a second
Russian-controlled base near Odessa was blockaded by 40 Ukrainian soldiers
yesterday.
Ukraine's Defence Ministry called the Russian allegations over the use of
force 'a lie' designed to provoke 'an armed conflict between Black Sea fleet
servicemen, Odessa port officials, border guards and Ukraine's navy'.
Ukraine said it had only detained Russian officers who defied Ukrainian
orders on Friday night, when the two navies narrowly avoided an armed clash
near Odessa. Ukraine also strenuously denied surrounding the second Russian
base.
The Russian government protested to Ukraine demanding the officers'
immediate release. Prime Minister Victor Chernomyrdin spoke to Ukraine's
President Leonid Kravchuk by telephone, but details of their discussion were
not released.
The heated confrontation was the latest and most serious in two years of
disputes when the fleet was put under Russian-Ukrainian joint command
following the break-up of the Soviet Union. The tensions have arisen over
property rights and allegiance between the Ukrainian military and the
largely Russian-controlled and financed fleet.
The conflict began on Friday night when a Russian ship, the Cheleken, loaded
Dollars 10m worth of naval navigational equipment at Odessa and sailed away
toward its headquarters in Sevastopol, Crimea, despite objections by
Ukrainian naval officials.
The Russian ship, part of the 300-vessel Black Sea fleet awkwardly shared
between Russia and Ukraine, defied Ukrainian orders to remain in the port of
Odessa. After Ukrainian border guards tried to block the ship, Russian
sailors took a senior Ukrainian military officer hostage and cut tow ropes
in the middle of the night to take to sea, a Ukrainian Defence Ministry
spokesman said.
Ukraine is calling the seizure of equipment 'an act of piracy' and is
condemning the Russian officers for creating 'a precedent of a sharp
escalation of tensions which might have led to grave consequences'. Russia
says Ukraine's failure to pay its debts for the equipment, which needed
maintenance, justified the move.
On Sunday night, Ukrainian special forces reportedly attacked an Odessa
reserve naval yard of the Black Sea fleet and took control of its armoury.
During the attack, bystanders were injured by flying glass and some Russian
soldiers may have been beaten. Tensions had eased by yesterday afternoon
although the rhetoric was stepped up.
