FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of International Fund Management (5): Signs of a
growing acceptance - Derivatives / A younger generation is proving less
conservative
Incredulity can sometimes be the reaction when life insurance executives or
pension fund managers are asked about their use of derivatives - instruments
such as swaps, futures and options whose value is 'derived' from more
conventional financial assets.
'They are not real assets are they?' is how the chief executive of one of
the UK's leading life insurance companies puts it. Institutional fund
managers have been slower to accept the potential uses of derivative
instruments than the treasurers of large international companies, most of
whom actively use swaps and options to manage their exposure.
Fund managers have been inhibited in their use of derivatives for a number
of reasons:
Pension fund trustees can sometimes restrict the use of derivatives,
limiting managers in their use of options.
'They tend to take the view that they are happy to use futures for asset
allocation and options for hedging purposes - often they are keener to buy
rather than sell options,' says Trevor Robinson, former director of
derivatives at Fidelity International.
Fund managers can be put off the illiquidity in certain derivative
instruments. The majority prefer to build up their portfolios through
picking the shares of companies which they know rather than buying
index-based instruments which reflect the market as a whole.
In addition, most tend to measure their performance in relative rather than
absolute terms, being more worried about their performance relative to that
of rivals rather than the achievement of any absolute return. This adherence
to benchmarks has sometimes discouraged innovation.
Bad publicity linked to the corporate losses through the use of derivatives
this year has been one of the factors leading to a low take-up by retail
customers of derivative-linked funds. Fidelity International decided in
September to withdraw its futures and options funds from the market, for
example. Although a number of building societies and life companies have
successfully launched guaranteed funds, which use options as a principal
plank of their portfolio, fewer fund managers have launched pure derivatives
products.
Despite these factors there are signs that UK fund managers are gradually
overcoming instinctive caution and traditional conservatism about the use of
derivatives. Partially this reflects cultural factors, as a younger
generation of fund managers comes to prominence.
At the same time the industry's regulatory framework has been modified in a
number of ways, easing restrictions on the use of derivatives. The European
Union's third life directive was implemented in the UK earlier this summer,
radically redrawing the regulatory framework under which life insurance
companies operate.
Under the earlier regime rules governing valuation and measuring solvency
were highly restrictive and fund managers were virtually prohibited from
holding derivatives in unit-linked funds. The change has followed an
overhaul of rulers in the unit trust area in 1991 - which paved the way for
both futures and options and geared futures and options funds, as well as
allowing some limited use of derivatives (mainly for hedging purposes) in
standard securities funds. At the same time, the Inland Revenue clarified
its treatment of derivatives transactions by pension fund managers in 1992.
Two surveys published earlier this year indicated the scope for increased
activity. Buchanan Partners, the London-based quantitative investment
management firm, conducted a survey of 166 pension funds in January.
Buchanan found 57 per cent of the overall survey used some form of
derivatives, with funds in the range between Dollars 251m and Dollars 500m
more likely to use derivatives than any other smaller or larger group. One
third of derivatives users used performance as a reason or their use. A
similar portion used derivatives to reduce risk or volatility. About half
used derivatives to protect their investment portfolios, while four fifths
of users deployed derivatives to tactically allocate assets.
Many in the industry expect this use to grow, partially because derivatives
allow managers to allocate assets very cheaply. A fund manager wanting to
switch a part of his investment from UK to US equities would typically sell
UK equities and then over a period of time buy US stocks. Using derivatives
to conduct the same strategy fund managers would sell the futures contract
in the UK and buy the futures contract in the US, saving on transaction
costs.
KPMG Peat Marwick, the accountancy firm, in a survey published in May this
year, discovered that half of a sample of 50 UK life companies used
derivatives for either portfolio management or product design. The larger
life offices, in particular, have long used derivatives for hedging and
asset allocation purposes and, more recently, to match FT-SE-linked
products.
Life companies also made some use of equity options and futures, with 40 per
cent of the companies in the survey - mainly with-profits offices and
mutuals - currently using equity options. 'This probably reflects the use of
call options to pre-invest cash flows and the need for such offices to
protect their equity portfolios against sharp falls in value,' said the
report.
Rupert Yardley, the author of a report, expects life companies to increase
their use of derivatives. Following regulatory changes in the summer four
out of every five companies said they intend to use the instruments in the
future.
A large majority of the companies believed there was a significant
opportunity to design new products and derivatives could be the key to
offering products with guarantees.
Competitive pressures within the life industry, including the wider
development of unit-linked products, could also act as a spur to push fund
managers to use derivatives.
Mr Robinson also expects the use of derivatives to increase, in spite of
Fidelity's recent decision. Fund managers are also likely to make more use
of options, either to hedge their exposures or to develop specific products.
He says fund managers should build up their positions slowly and advises
them to 'remember that they do not need to commit the entire fund to using
derivatives.'
