FT  24 JUN 94 / Spirits await a summons to action: The fluctuating fortunes
of the dollar are testing the criteria for concerted intervention
Glendower: 'I can call spirits from the vasty deep.'
Hotspur: 'Why, so can I, or so can any man. But will they come when you do
call for them?'
Put Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the US Treasury secretary, in the role of Glendower in
Shakespeare's Henry IV, Part One, and transform the majority of the
industrial world's central banks into a collective Hotspur, and you have a
rough idea of where the US stands in its efforts to rally support for the
dollar.
On Wednesday, Mr Bentsen resorted to the first line of defence of any US
administration when faced with an unwelcome fall in the value of its
currency: he tried to talk the dollar up by emphasising the fundamental
strengths of America's low-inflation, investment-led recovery.
By referring in addition to the US's partners in the Group of Seven leading
industrialised countries, the Treasury secretary also tried to give the
impression that international support for the embattled US currency was
close at hand.
But his declaration that 'we continue to be in close communication with our
G7 partners, and we continue to be prepared to act as appropriate,' was more
a statement of hope than a sign that the G7 leading industrial countries
were ready to rally to the dollar's defence.
True, the Bank of Japan was again seen buying dollars in Tokyo after Mr
Bentsen's remarks. But as trading in Europe drew to a close yesterday there
was no sign of either the European monetary authorities or the US Federal
Reserve Board stepping in to support the dollar.
In the mid to late 1980s, when currency manipulation by governments was all
the rage, central banks seemed happy to defend each others' currencies at
the drop of a hat. Nowadays, however, concerted intervention is a rare event
and happens only on those occasions when there is a genuine identity of
interests among the big industrial countries.
Although this week saw the US currency fall briefly through the
psychologically-important Y100 level, it appears that no such identity of
interests exists over the dollar. The financial markets sense this lack of
consensus. And although Mr Bentsen's words, backed by upbeat assessments of
the US economy from President Bill Clinton and Mr Alan Greenspan, the US
Federal Reserve Board chairman, sufficed yesterday to keep the dollar above
Y100 in European trading, traders and analysts argue that it is only a
matter of time before the authorities are again put to the test.
'Round one is over. But round two is still to come,' says Mr Neil MacKinnon,
Citibank's chief currency strategist in London.
The indecision of the central banks reflects doubts over whether
intervention could substantially affect the dollar's value in present market
conditions and a wider uncertainty about whether the US currency's present
weakness against the yen in particular represents a global problem.
At the beginning of May, by contrast, when the dollar fell close to Y100, up
to 17 central banks stepped into the market to buy the currency. Notable
features of that intervention were the participation of the Bundesbank and
the purchase of dollars, not just for yen at Y101.2, but also for D-Marks at
DM1.6570. This week, although the dollar briefly dipped below the Y100
level, only the Bank of Japan has been supporting it.
Seven weeks ago, the air was thick with dire warnings that a fall of the
dollar through Y100 would precipitate a free fall to Y95, Y90 or even Y80.
In the trading session on Tuesday, when the greenback fell through Y100, it
managed to scramble back up above this 'big number' of its own accord.
The dollar's ability to keep its head above water may partly reflect a
strengthening of economic fundamentals. Since the beginning of May, German
interest rates have fallen while the key US discount and federal fund rates
have been raised by half a percentage point.
The effect of losses among the lightly regulated hedge funds and the
proprietary trading desks of investment banks may also be giving the dollar
a respite. According to one senior analyst in London, speculative investors
could have lost as much as Dollars 60bn of capital in this year's turbulent
financial markets, reducing their scope to speculate by an estimated Dollars
600bn.
The non-appearance of concerted intervention could also reflect changed
circumstances in Germany and a perception among market operators that
current market conditions are unsuited to such action.
The outlook for economic recovery in Germany has improved considerably since
the beginning of May, when the Bundesbank stepped in to prevent the dollar's
fall from undermining German exports. Although Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the
Bundesbank president, said yesterday that he favoured currency stability 'in
principle', a somewhat weaker dollar could even be to Germany's advantage at
present, because it would hold down the prices of imported goods and offset
recent price rises for commodities including oil. On the other hand,
intervention by the Bundesbank to support the dollar could increase
inflationary pressures by boosting Germany's already rapidly growing money
supply.
The technical state of the foreign exchange market is also thought to be
restricting the enthusiasm of European central banks for foreign exchange
market intervention.
Intervention to support a currency such as the dollar works best when
speculators have 'shorted' it by selling currency that they do not have in
the hope of buying it more cheaply when they have to settle orders at a
later time. Intervention in these circumstances can force speculators to buy
the currency to cover their positions, resulting in heavy losses.
According to foreign exchange market analysts, the market is not short of
dollars at present. As a result, intervention would have to be on a large
scale and concerted among many central banks, and would still run the risk
of being ineffective.
There is little doubt that European banks would act, despite the risks, if
they felt their interests threatened. But viewed from Europe, the sinking
dollar is more clearly a problem for the US and Japan - so far.
In Japan, a falling dollar threatens the country's exports. A drop in the
dollar could spell trouble for the US if translated into further weakness
and rising interest rates on the US bond market.
But whereas Japan, as shown by central bank intervention, is clearly taking
its predicament seriously, policymakers in America's G7 partners are
uncertain about the true depth of Washington's concern about the dollar.
Reflecting these doubts, Mr Hideaki Kumano, a vice minister at Japan's
Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Miti), yesterday said 'the US
itself should defend the dollar'.
The US Federal Reserve is thought to have bought dollars on behalf the Bank
of Japan in recent days. But there has been no sign of it supporting the
dollar on its own account.
Indeed to some observers, the involvement of President Clinton in talking up
the dollar and Treasury secretary Bentsen's statement of Wednesday smacked
of a short-term reaction to domestic US headlines about Tuesday's fall in
the dollar to a post-second world war low against the yen.
Scepticism about the US stance was not eased by suggestions that the US
Treasury had been irritated by President Clinton's announcement that it
would be making a statement on Wednesday. The idea that Mr Bentsen had been
bounced into premature comment was given some support by the low key
references to the G7 in his terse two-paragraph statement. His remarks were
widely interpreted as a sign that the US had at that point failed to win
over its partners to a policy of dollar support.
Such perceptions could bode ill for the stability of the dollar in the days
and weeks ahead. Speculation often builds up ahead of big set-piece
international events such as the economic summit of G7 leaders to be held in
Naples between July 8 and 10, while the unresolved trade dispute between the
US and Japan could easily foment another bout of market turmoil.
Although the central banks have so far been absent as a concerted force in
this week's dollar trading, it is a fair bet that the US will be trying to
secure an agreement on concerted intervention should this prove necessary.
But to win the support of its trading partners for such a move, the US
administration will have to demonstrate that it is prepared to act in
defence of its own currency.
