FT  10 MAY 94 / MPs' vote may kill off CrossRail
The Pounds 2bn CrossRail project for an east-west underground railway link
across London may be blocked today by a cross-party committee of MPs.
The MPs, chaired by Mr Tony Marlow, Conservative MP for Northampton North,
are deeply split over the project, which would link Paddington and Liverpool
Street stations.
After months of uncertainty, the committee is expected to take a final vote
at a private meeting this afternoon. Enough MPs are undecided to make the
outcome highly uncertain.
Under Commons rules, the committee has quasi-judicial powers over the
project because of its impact on private property along the proposed route.
In effect, a vote to block the project would kill the bill. It would also
hearten campaigners against the Channel tunnel high-speed line, which will
be considered under similar rules.
The CrossRail committee has taken an unexpectedly sceptical approach to the
project, which is regarded by British Rail as an essential element of
London's transport infrastructure.
A defeat of the bill would be deeply embarrassing for Mr John MacGregor,
transport secretary, and Mr John Major, the prime minister, who overruled
Treasury opposition to the project.
However, it would be a victory for Mr Michael Portillo, the Treasury chief
secretary, who warned Mr Major that the project would not justify proposed
public investment of Pounds 1bn.
CrossRail supporters suffered a setback last month when a report prepared
for the committee by the Sir Alexander Gibb engineering consultancy said the
project could not be justified until 2010.
The report said CrossRail was 'a visionary project which may be ahead of its
time'. It doubted whether the project would attract sufficient private
finance to make it viable.
The committee has also heard opposition to CrossRail from a large number of
objectors, including Tower Hamlets council in east London, which says the
project would cause more congestion than it would relieve.
The council argues that the link should be re-routed to join the proposed
high-speed rail line from London to the Channel tunnel at Stratford in east
London.
The Pounds 500m modernisation of British Rail's west-coast main line may
take until 2005 to complete, the government has disclosed in a Commons
written answer, David Owen writes.
Work on the 480-mile link between London and Glasgow was expected to start
next year and take between eight and 10 years.
The government said a competition would be held 'early next year' for the
contract to design, build and maintain the improvements to the line. This
would follow a feasibility study by a private-sector consortium working with
Railtrack, the organisation set up to run BR's track and signalling.
The consortium is considering how to improve the track, power supply and
signalling and how to raise private finance in a way which is acceptable to
the Treasury.
