FT  13 JAN 94 / Howe weighs in against Scott on side of the mandarins
Lord Howe's attack on the handling of the arms-to-Iraq inquiry was being
interpreted last night as part of a growing Whitehall whispering campaign
against the inquiry's chairman, Lord Justice Scott.
A leading administrative and constitutional lawyer said the former foreign
secretary was repeating views expressed recently by civil service mandarins
unhappy with the way they were treated by the judge and the inquiry's
counsel, Ms Presiley Baxendale QC.
There was some sympathy from lawyers for the view that the rights of
witnesses before such inquiries are not properly safeguarded.
They pointed out that if the government had chosen to set up a statutory
inquiry giving witnesses the right to be represented by counsel and to
cross-examine other witnesses, the process would have become much more like
a trial. 'The questioning would have been much more searching and the
procedure much more adversarial,' said one QC. 'There's no saying they
(civil servants) would have liked such an inquiry any better.'
The government had rejected the option of a statutory inquiry in favour of
the informal procedure used by Lord Justice Scott, so it was ironic that
civil servants and ex-ministers were now complaining about their treatment,
he added. Businessmen had been making similar complaints about Department of
Trade and Industry inquiries for many years.
The Fayed brothers have lodged a complaint against Britain at the European
Commission on Human Rights alleging they were effectively found guilty of
crimes by the DTI inspectors' report on the 1985 takeover of House of Fraser
stores group without having had the right to a fair trial.
'The fault lies with successive governments for failing to establish due
process for tribunals of inquiry,' the QC said. 'Ministers and ex-ministers
are now getting a taste of their own medicine.'
Given that the government specifically rejected a statutory inquiry, Lord
Howe's remarks were wide of the mark, other lawyers said. The procedure
under which the Scott inquiry was set up gives the judge wide discretion as
to the way he conducts proceedings.
'It's not a requirement of administrative law that witnesses should be
represented by lawyers.' said Mr David Pannick QC.
'The only obligation of natural justice placed on chairmen of such inquiries
was to act fairly,' he added.
