FT  02 NOV 94 / UK Company News: Diversifying out of lumpiness - Vosper
Thornycroft, the boat builder in the south
The battle between British Aerospace and GEC for control of VSEL, the
Cumbria-based submarine maker, is causing some irritation in the boardroom
of Vosper Thornycroft.
For the Southampton-based boat builder believes the takeover struggle has
overshadowed the fact that Britain still has a warship company on the south
coast - in addition to VSEL's Barrow yard and GEC's facilities at Yarrow on
the Clyde.
And just to underline the point, Mr Martin Jay, chief executive, last week
had marks drawn on the floor of the main construction shed at Portsmouth,
showing it could accommodate vessels up to 6,000 tonnes.
Vosper was being referred to solely as a builder of glass reinforced plastic
(GRP) minehunters, corvettes and patrol craft, said Mr Jay.
These do indeed comprise the bulk of the 180 vessels which the yard has sold
over the past 25 years to 30 navies around the world, but Vosper emphasises
that it can also make steel ships up to the size of a frigate.
With net cash of about Pounds 200m, Mr Jay said Vosper had the financial
strength to bond any of the projects in the current naval procurement
programme for surface ships. Despite having an order book worth Pounds 600m
and 14 vessels currently under construction, Vosper still has plenty of
capacity.
Mr Jay said Vosper would also bid for vessels such as the new Royal Navy
landing platform dock assault ship, which would be too big for the
Southampton yard. If successful, the group would become prime contractor,
but have the construction done elsewhere.
Although Vosper made no steel ships between 1988-92, it has recently
invested Pounds 10m in a new module hall for steelwork construction and
fitting. A laser cutting machine is linked by fibre optics to the yard's
computer-aided design system, which has helped push up productivity and
improve the quality and finish of individual components.
In spite of this investment and ambitious bidding plans, Vosper is also keen
to build up the non-warship aspects of the group. These account for about 20
per cent of sales, compared with only 5 per cent two years ago. The chief
executive said he would like to increase this proportion to between 30 and
40 per cent over the next two or three years.
Vosper's main priority is to win more business which is both small in scale
and reliable, to help offset the unpredictable swings of warship orders. Mr
Jay said: 'To talk of diversifying out of defence is to miss the point -
we're diversifying out of lumpiness.'
Many of Vosper's diversification opportunities flow directly from its link
to warships and the world's navies. As part of the training and support
service offered with its vessels, the group runs a maritime training centre
at Portchester, near Portsmouth, which can accommodate 300 people.
Some trainees come from HM Customs and the Royal Fleet Auxiliary, but most
serve in the Middle Eastern navies which are Vosper's main customers. This
has led the company to establish an adjacent Arabic school for their
children, which can accommodate 70 pupils.
The maritime centre has developed computer-based training for naval
personnel, which is much cheaper than simulators. Its expertise at writing
software has been utilised to devise a training scheme for British Rail
maintenance engineers, which will be used in BR depots throughout the
country. The centre will also soon take delivery of a new armoured vehicle
from GKN, the engineering group, to train personnel from a Middle Eastern
country.
Vosper's biggest opportunity to diversify is probably offered by the
government's market-testing initiative. Mr George Cameron, managing director
of Vosper's systems, said the group could be bidding for contracts worth up
to Pounds 1bn over the next 18 months. These include the Navy's maritime
services operation, which employs nearly 2,000 people and operates 200
support vessels - such as tugs and lighters.
Vosper recently won a three-year contract for the Ministry of Defence's
Record Data Centre, which records all the parts and plans for the Royal
Navy's surface ships on computer and fiche. It also has a five-year contract
to operate marine services craft in support of the RAF.
Back at the Southampton yard, Mr Mike Davidson, managing director of
engineering services, said: 'We are looking outside to see what we can do
with our existing facilities for industries other than shipbuilding.'
So far the group has identified the nuclear and transport industries as
potential customers. It has built a fuel-rod handling machine and fuel store
for BNFL at Thorp and is also making GRP bumpers, under licence, for trams
in Strasbourg.
Having acquired a few business for about Pounds 1m each, Vosper said
recently it was prepared to buy one or more companies at about the Pounds
20m level to increase the pace of its diversification.
The biggest deal to date was the Pounds 8.6m purchase in April of HSDE, a
maker of electronic control and monitoring systems.
Vosper was sold by British Shipbuilders to a management team in 1985 for
Pounds 18.5m and came back to the market in 1988, valued at Pounds 49m. Its
current market value of Pounds 236m reflects the uprating which the shares
have enjoyed in the last three years, due mainly to the group's strong
export position.
About 95 per cent of Vosper's warship orders are exported and the group's
focus on minehunters and patrol craft - selling to the Middle East and east
Asia - has insulated it to a large extent from the downturn in defence
spending by former cold warriors.
Such a strong export order book might well be attractive to BAe - or even
GEC - as the UK defence sector enters what could prove its final phase of
consolidation. However, Vosper shares trade on a comfortable premium to the
market and the company would prove an expensive proposition to predators.
Mr Jay said: 'We've done well in recent years as an independent company and
it's our strategy to remain so.'
