FT  17 MAY 94 / Channel 4 seeks to alter revenue rules
Channel 4 is likely to launch a formal campaign later this month to persuade
the government to alter the rules that govern its financial relationship
with the ITV companies. The channel could have to pay several hundred
million pounds over the next 10 years.
The rules were drawn up to provide a safety net against a serious drop in
income for the channel once it started selling its own advertising time. But
Channel 4's revenues have increased.
In October, Channel 4 told the Commons national heritage committee that it
could end up paying Pounds 200m to ITV over the 10 years of its licence.
Channel 4 executives now fear the amount could be very much more.
The safety net, which was spelt out in the Broadcasting Act 1990, means that
Channel 4 has to give to ITV 50 per cent of any advertising and sponsorship
revenues earned above 14 per cent of the total of its UK non-satellite
revenues. A further 25 per cent goes into a reserve fund and Channel 4 is
allowed to keep the rest. In return, if Channel 4 revenues fall below 14 per
cent of UK non-satellite revenues, the channel is compensated out of the
reserve fund and then by ITV. In February, after it handed over Pounds 38.2m
to the ITV companies for 1993, Channel 4 said it would seek to renegotiate
the terms of the safety net.
The channel, which is thought not to have asked the government for the
safety net, is concerned about the increasing amount of its money going to
the competing ITV companies. The total this year could reach Pounds 50m -
although the channel has recently had a dip in viewing figures.
A final decision on the exact aims and terms of the campaign will be taken
by the Channel 4 board on May 23 and announced along with the publication of
its annual report the next day.
Mr Michael Grade, chief executive of Channel 4, yesterday refused to discuss
the campaign ahead of the publication of the report.
BT yesterday launched a service for broadcasters and facilities houses which
enables them to transfer programme material and commercials in digital form.
BT said the service was the first of its kind and would protect picture
quality and prevent the delays associated with delivery by couriers.
