FT  06 JUL 94 / Keys, master of inspired commonsense
Mr Derek Keys taught South Africa to believe in itself. Yesterday he
jeopardised that new-found confidence by announcing he will resign as the
country's finance minister, from October.
Less than a month ago, Mr Keys stood before international investors at a
meeting of the World Economic Forum in Cape Town, displaying his 'good news
tie', a garish neckpiece whose multi-coloured stripes clashed painfully with
the bold striping of his shirt. He asked them to believe in South Africa, to
trust its intention to maintain strict fiscal and financial discipline.
To the extent they did so, it was because the presence of Mr Keys in
government gave them confidence and reassurance. Now this consummate
psychological manipulator is leaving government; it is hard to see another
man taking his place.
Mr Chris Liebenberg, last night named as Mr Keys' successor, certainly has
the technical skills to be finance minister, having served as chief
executive of the country's fourth largest bank. But he lacks Mr Keys
powerful personality, and his carefully nurtured relationship with top
figures in the African National Congress; he will not command the same
respect in the government of national unity, or outside it. Mr Keys' loss is
a serious blow to the new govern-ment's credibility, at home and abroad.
When he said, only a month ago, 'We've spent the past four years proving the
sceptics wrong and we are quite happy to go on doing so,' no one suspected
he would not be there to carry on that struggle. A man of strong faith and
devotion to his wife Silma, Mr Keys has often made clear she would prefer
him to leave politics, and that he likes to please her whenever possible.
But once he accepted the post of finance minister in Mr Nelson Mandela's
government after having served in that role under Mr FW de Klerk, no one
expected him to bow out so soon. He seemed to enjoy his new role, and his
relations with Mr Alec Erwin, his deputy, and Mr Jay Naidoo, reconstruction
and development minister, both socialists and former radicals from Mr
Mandela's African National Congress, were excellent.
The only consolation comes from the fact that Mr Keys' departure appears to
be genuinely motivated by personal reasons, rather than irreconcilable
policy differences with Mr Mandela.
Mr Keys's achievements of the past two years are substantial: reducing the
budget deficit, keeping to budget targets, constraining the rise in
government spending, restoring confidence. But most of all, he has ensured
that, as he put it last week, 'there is a real understanding that the pot is
only a certain size; that the RDP (reconstruction and development programme)
has got to come out of it, and that if the pot looks as though it's being
emptied too much, it's going to have repercussions'. The budget he presented
to parliament a fortnight ago marks the government's acceptance of those
realities.
Throughout the country's turbulent transition to democracy, he has been
relentless in his optimism, even in the most violent days leading up to the
April elections.
He has mastered the art of making everything he says sound simple and
obvious. He has used commonsense and the commercial acumen developed over 30
years as one of South Africa's top businessmen, to induce sanity among the
country's fractious politicians.
At a time in 1992 when they had sunk to new depths of squabbling, Mr Keys
told them a few choice economic truths: that unless they moved quickly,
South Africa would not be worth fighting over. The politicians listened, and
democracy talks began in earnest.
'I'm the minister of the obvious,' he once told the Financial Times. 'I see
myself as someone who jollies people to do what common sense dictates they
ought to do.' He saw what had to be done, and had the political skill to
persuade the ANC, the black trade unions, the business community and the
cabinet that they had seen it first themselves.
His force comes from the strength of a truly uncluttered brain: clear like
his 'desk', the round conference table which stands empty at one end of the
room; simple like his rhetoric. Perhaps this is genuine, perhaps a trick of
personality. Either way, it worked; Mr Keys' personality was an important
force driving economic recovery which should see growth hit 2.5 per cent
this year, after a four-year recession.
His campaign has been overwhelmingly psychological. Investors must believe
in investing, bureaucrats must believe in giving their best efforts by
cutting waste and inefficiency, the ANC must believe in the virtues of a
free market, the unions must believe they have a stake in growth, and all of
them must believe in Derek Keys.
'Government is in a typically feminine role,' he told the FT in a 1993
interview. It is 'trying to create a situation attractive enough to
stimulate some initiative from another party (the private investor). Once
you commit yourself to relying on the private sector because only it can
produce the investment directions with adequate yields, then you put
yourself in this situation. How can I be more attractive? That's the heart
of the problem.' Now the problem is somebody else's.
