FT  14 OCT 94 / The Conservatives in Bournemouth: Expansion of nursery
places planned
The government is set to introduce an extension of nursery education,
following sustained pressure on the issue from parents, educationalists and
teachers.
Mr John Major is expected to announce the provision of more nursery places
for children aged four in his keynote address to the conference today. Late
last year the prime minister called for nursery education to be provided for
all children, but acknowledged that there was a short-term funding barrier.
It is understood that in spite of the stringency of this year's public
spending round the Treasury has approved Department for Education plans to
introduce such a scheme in the next two to three years.
Yesterday Mrs Gillian Shephard, the education secretary, announced tougher
standards for teaching in primary and secondary schools in England and
Wales.
Mrs Shephard told Tory representatives at Bournemouth that a tougher
curriculum for English language teaching would be introduced next year, amid
widespread concern that standards of literacy have slipped sharply in recent
years.
She also launched an initiative to raise public consciousness about the need
for good communication skills, inviting leaders of business and industry to
tell the government about their experience in this area.
She said: 'I want to put together a national campaign, inviting politicians,
industry, the media and business to raise awareness about the need for clear
communication. It is very important that people in business understand the
importance of communicating clearly with the customer.'
Mrs Shephard assured representatives that the government would impose a
period of stability in primary and secondary education in the next few years
to allow its recent reforms to take root.
She made clear that the workload on teachers imposed by the national
curriculum would be sharply reduced following the implementation of a report
by Sir Ron Dearing.
Announcing that she would accept Sir Ron's report in full, Mrs Shephard told
journalists that 20 per cent of the timetable for primary school teachers
would be flexible and 40 per cent for secondary schools.
