FT  28 JUN 94 / International Company News: Hard road for Japan's bank
mergers - Rationalisation plans may be at turning point
When Mr Takao Nakamura, a leading client for Kita-Nippon Bank, handed in a
petition of 30,000 signatures to the bank earlier this month opposing a
merger with two regional counterparts, he was unsure if he was doing the
right thing.
In the event, the plan to put together Kita-Nippon Bank, Shokusan Bank and
Tokuyo City Bank - all based in Tohoku, northern Japan - was subsequently
abandoned in spite of pressure for the deal from the powerful ministry of
finance.
The ministry is attempting a radical consolidation of Japan's many regional
banks. 'We didn't want Kita-Nippon to turn into something else, but we
didn't want to jeopardise its position either,' says Mr Nakamura, who heads
the bank's client union.
However, rationalisation and the expansion of market share through mergers
has become an increasingly urgent fact of life for Japan's financial
institutions as the country heads towards full financial deregulation.
Japan's banking sector contains a number of imbalances: 45 per cent of the
private-sector domestic loan market is held by the top 21 banks, the city,
long-term and trust banks: the remaining 5,700 institutions fight over the
other 55 per cent.
Under these circumstances, rationalisation is inevitable, especially with
many of the smaller and weaker banks suffering from bad loans made during
the asset 'bubble' of the 1980s. Instead of letting small banks fail, the
ministry of finance has encouraged mergers between the weaker and stronger
banks with the aim of avoiding public bailouts and crises of confidence and
helping local institutions to achieve economies of scale.
Initially, the three-way merger, which would have created the fifth-largest
of the second-tier regional banks with deposits of Y2,190bn (Dollars
21.26bn) and 225 branches, was welcomed by financial officials, clients and
employees. But the euphoria within Kita-Nippon soon gave way to apprehension
over allegations that Tokuyo City had bad loans of more than Y100bn.
Tokuyo City, which made a pre-tax loss of Y1bn last year, down from a Y7.6bn
loss in 1992, refuses to confirm or deny its bad loan figure. Although the
bank has a reputation for heavy lending to real estate companies, it says
most of its loans were not 'bubble' related, but were made before the real
estate investment boom.
'Every bank has non-performing loans,' stresses Mr Yoichi Oyama of Tokuyo
City.
Unions at Shokusan and Kita-Nippon objected to the merger on the grounds
that job security would be threatened by merging with a bank with
potentially high levels of problem assets.
'We've had great doubts about the merits of the economies of scale of the
merger as well,' says Mr Akira Yukinoura, head of Kita-Nippon's employee
union. Since the three banks are based in different areas of northern Japan,
there would be no cost-cutting benefits through closing branches, he says.
In addition, the initial cost of setting up new computer networks would be
too large.
'The ministry of finance's plan ignores the feeling of us local clients, and
the importance of Kita-Nippon's strong relationship with us,' says Mr
Nakamura, who owns a food manufacturing company in Iwate prefecture, where
Kita-Nippon is based.
Clients were also concerned over rising speculation about the reason the
merger was to take place on January 1 next year, in spite of the business
year starting in April. 'It seemed like the financial authorities wanted to
avoid having to reveal Tokuyo's poor financial statement for the year ending
next March,' he says.
Banking analysts suggest the collapse of the three-way merger represents a
turning point for the ministry of finance's bank plans to rationalise the
banking industry. 'The ministry can still orchestrate these mergers but they
need to make incentives clearer for the banks involved,' says Ms Alicia
Ogawa, banking analyst at Salomon Brothers in Tokyo.
Clients and employees of Kita-Nippon, which had the courage to reject the
ministry's guiding hand, are aware that the bank may face more pressure from
the ministry and increasing competition from other local banks.
Mr Nakamura says that by forcing Kita-Nippon to drop its merger deal, the
client group has pushed the bank to choose a 'road full of thorns'.
He stresses, however, that customers of Kita-Nippon acknowledge that they
too must play their part in making sure the bank survives.
