FT  09 AUG 94 / Textile chiefs to step up onslaught on Hualon plant
A group of senior British industrialists is to step up its attack on the
government's backing for the Hualon textiles project in Northern Ireland,
amid growing fears that it will lead to substantial job losses elsewhere in
the UK.
In the latest indication of the concern which the project has aroused in the
British textile industry, a delegation of business leaders has said that it
will meet Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland secretary, on Thursday.
The delegation, led by Mr Nicholas Winterton, the Tory MP and chairman of
the Manufacturing and Construction Industries Alliance, will urge Sir
Patrick to suspend backing for the Pounds 157m Hualon project until the
government has canvassed the views of other business leaders.
It will also demand that the government should consult British industry
about the economic consequences of all future inward investment decisions
before they are taken.
Mr Christopher Whitehouse, chief executive of the alliance, said: 'We want
to ensure that what has happened over Hualon will never happen again.
Ministers and civil servants should not feel they have a right to put people
out of a job just for political considerations.'
The plant - to be built by a Malaysian division of Hualon, of Taiwan - will
represent the largest industrial investment in Northern Ireland since the
failure of the De Lorean car venture in the 1970s.
The project is expected to create about 1,000 jobs in the next 10 years. But
leading figures in the British textile industry believe it could lead to the
closure of factories amid signs of overcapacity in the European market for
fabrics.
Earlier this year Sir David Alliance, chairman of Coats Viyella, said that
'as many as 1,000 jobs in Lancashire' could be lost because of the project.
Mr Whitehouse said yesterday that he was concerned about the way in which
the government took decisions on inward investment in general. His
organisation was inviting British companies to inform it of times when
government decisions had adversely affected their industry.
He said: 'What we want is a change in the Department of Trade and Industry's
policies so that the interests of manufacturers are taken into account.'
