FT  14 JUL 94 / Well-oiled, but still creaking: Economic pressures are
building as Nigeria ponders its constitutional future
Nigeria's embattled military regime today faces its most serious test since
General Sani Abacha seized power last November.
In the high court in the capital of Abuja, Moshood Abiola, millionaire
businessman and victor in last June's annulled presidential poll, will mount
his latest and most public challenge to the soldiers' authority.
Last month Mr Abiola, comfortable winner in elections intended to return
Nigeria to civilian rule for the first time since the military took power in
1983, defied the government and claimed the presidency.
Arrested shortly after a spell in hiding on a charge of treason, Mr Abiola,
a southerner whose Moslem faith gave him some standing in the predominantly
Moslem north, will today seek bail.
Few observers think he will be successful. But from the public platform of
the court, Mr Abiola's lawyers may turn the occasion into what amounts to a
rallying call for opposition. His legal plea could strain the stability of
Africa's most populous nation, the world's sixth-largest oil exporter, and
Europe's largest trading partner in sub-Saharan Africa apart from South
Africa.
Already a sympathy strike by workers in the oil industry is gathering pace
and may spread to other unions next week, but the strains go wider and
deeper. The crisis is not just over a millionaire's ambition, or over
soldiers clinging to power. After 34 years of independence, three new
constitutions and half a dozen military coups, Nigeria has yet to develop a
stable system of government which adequately shares the power and wealth
derived from exports of 1.7m barrels of oil a day among more than 200 tribes
and 90m people.
The crisis is about Nigeria's capacity to govern itself, and manage its
recovery from an economic decline as steep as any on the continent. External
debt exceeds USDollars 34bn, and is rising at a rate of Dollars 6bn a year.
An economic reform programme launched with the backing of the International
Monetary Fund in 1986 had begun to falter by 1990. When the January 1994
budget introduced a fixed exchange rate, the main pillar of reform - a
market-driven exchange rate - was abandoned.
Meanwhile, the spectre has arisen of religious and ethnic rivalry between
the largely Christian, Yoruba-dominated south, and the predominantly Moslem,
Hausa-Fulani north.
Whether these economic and political strains can be resolved depends partly
on the outcome of proceedings under way not far from the high court in
Abuja.
Some 360 delegates have gathered nearby at a constitutional conference
initiated by the government and with a qualified mandate from Gen Abacha to
define a path to democracy by the end of October, subject to the military's
approval. About 270 of the delegates were elected in ill-prepared polls in
which few people voted, and the rest were nominated by the government to
debate the country's constitutional options.
Mr Abiola and his supporters say the answer is simple: hand over power to
the man who won the only presidential election since civilians were ousted
in 1983. For the past decade there has been a constitution, but governments
have ignored it, they argue.
They charge that the conference has no real power, is unrepresentative,
needs only a third of the delegates to make a quorum and will be manipulated
by the military to produce the result the regime wants. Much will depend on
the skill of Mr Sylvanus Karibi-Whyte, a judge who has been seconded from
the United Nations commission on war crimes in former Yugoslavia to chair
the conference.
According to government advisers, the military wants three issues resolved
at the gathering: last June's election; a formula for the distribution of
revenue among the states of the federation; and the role of the military in
Nigeria's future leadership.
The government hopes the conference will give legitimacy to the transition
to civilian rule it is due to announce next year, when the ban on political
parties is lifted. It also hopes to appease the US and the European Union,
which have imposed limited diplomatic and military measures against
continued military rule.
The conference could also be a way for the government to neutralise support
within the armed forces for the Lagos-based national democratic coalition
which championed the cause of Mr Abiola.
But no clear direction or leadership is likely to emerge from the wide range
of interest groups represented at the conference. Among the delegates are
sacked ministers, retired state governors, banned presidential candidates
and ex-senators from a national assembly dissolved twice in more than a
decade of military rule. Political leaders in the south-west, in support of
Mr Abiola, boycotted the conference, leaving the Yorubas represented only by
political lightweights.
The north sent some powerful politicians, including Mr Shehu Yar'Adua, a
previous presidential contender, who is expected to use the conference as a
dry run for the formation of his own party next year. One surprise delegate
nominated by the government was Mr Umaru Dikko, who until last month had
been in exile after a previous regime tried to kidnap him for trial on
corruption charges. Mr Dikko is seen as a counter-balance in the north to Mr
Yar'Adua.
Few delegates will stand up for Mr Abiola. 'The Abiola issue will come up
indirectly,' said one. 'It is too late to uphold his right to the
presidency. That should have been done a year ago. He is no longer
acceptable outside his own part of the country.' Mr Abiola's political
enemies say he is an opportunist who lacks the backing of a united party and
that when his victory was annulled his appeal was eventually reduced to his
fellow Yorubas. Others accuse him of only supporting democracy when it suits
him. The presidential candidates who were banned by former President Ibrahim
Babangida in 1992 are also hostile to Mr Abiola. They blame him for failing
to speak out against the ban in his Concord newspapers group, shortly before
he put himself forward as a presidential candidate.
Government sources say the regime is ready to concede a greater share of
revenue to the oil-producing states to pacify their angry citizens who
object to seeing most of the oil wealth go north or west. 'We do not see it
as just a north-south issue,' says a newspaper publisher from the east. 'The
benefits between east and west are lopsided. Senior government posts are
loaded in favour of the Yorubas and they do not want to change it.'
As strikes threaten within days to curtail production of crude oil, the life
blood of Nigeria's economy, the conference is starting to look irrelevant.
Even if there is relief from the strikes, now spreading to water,
electricity and other services, and the conference is a success, it can only
make recommendations to the government which appointed it. Previous military
regimes have shown no inclination to check the dominance of tribal over
national interest and the growing centralisation of power.
'Nigerians' conception of the state is that of a national cake, in which all
sections have to partake in the sharing, otherwise their area will be
neglected,' according to Mr Shehu Musa, a member of the civilian government
in the early 1980s and now a member of the commission which helped to set up
the constitutional conference. 'Political office has therefore produced a
set of emergency millionaires whose main preoccupation in office was to loot
the treasury and divert all development projects to their kinsmen,' he said
in a speech earlier this year.
This observation goes to the heart of Nigeria's predicament.
Its civil service is inefficient and demoralised, its educational
institutions neglected, its youth disillusioned and its civilian leadership
weakened and divided by regional, ethnic and personal rivalry.
In short, Nigeria will have to overcome its chronic institutional weaknesses
if it is to manage its recovery from a protracted decline. Nothing that will
happen in Abuja is likely to change this.
