FT  25 APR 94 / Leading Article: Government in slow motion
When governments are in difficulty, political survival becomes the order of
the day. The effects of this are showing all too clearly inside Mr John
Major's government.
As the FT's story today about the Department of Trade and Industry
demonstrates, a kind of decision paralysis sets in. Important measures
promised by political leaders in an earlier flush of success get bogged
down. Small considerations, which in normal times would be brushed aside,
are transformed into impassable obstacles. Departmental in-fighting betrays
the erosion of trust between ministers. Above all, the fear of embarrassment
and controversy begins to smother all initiative-taking, stalling measures
both bad and good. Almost any forthcoming event, like the local elections,
and then the European elections, becomes an excuse for delay.
Although our story focuses specifically on the DTI, the accusation of
inaction could be levelled against most departments. But it is especially
relevant to the DTI because of the measurable costs which can be incurred by
its hesitations and because it casts a somewhat ironic light upon Mr Michael
Heseltine, who as President of the Board of Trade, heads the department. Mr
Heseltine is a man who likes to present himself as someone who gets things
done, which is part of his renewed appeal on the Tory backbenches as a
potential successor to Mr Major.
Inaction at the DTI can have wide repercussions. Mr Heseltine's failure to
proceed with either the review of nuclear power or gas deregulation - both
of which he promised at the end of last year  - is creating considerable
uncertainty in both those industries, particularly in gas, where billions of
pounds worth of investment are at stake.
Public vacillation
Meanwhile, the head of the Post Office has repeatedly given vent to
frustration over the months of public vacillation about whether to privatise
his organisation, which as a result is planning in the dark. Likewise, those
whose businesses or livelihoods depend on agencies like Companies House and
the Patent Office, also sell-off candidates, must be resigning themselves to
a long wait. It is inevitable in such circumstances that a certain blight
falls upon organisations whose future is in such doubt.
The uncertainty might be less damaging if it were clear why decisions are
being postponed. In the case of the Post Office, some think that Mr
Heseltine's own statements in favour of privatisation should be seen not as
an attempt to woo reluctant backbenchers towards a risky line of policy, but
primarily as a further manifestation of unfamiliar right-of-centre
credentials ahead of a potential leadership struggle this autumn.
Hostile lobbies
To be fair to Mr Heseltine, he is also having to juggle with limited
parliamentary time, and some of his measures, notably the nuclear review,
need to be carefully weighed to meet the strong likelihood of legal
challenge by hostile lobbies. Nor will Mr Heseltine easily forget the
experience of piloting through changes to the coal industry, which he
thought he had clearly signalled, only to find himself at the centre of a
violent parliamentary rebellion.
In some areas of policy, Mr Heseltine also has the excuse that he is trying
to link decisions to give them greater strategic coherence; this, for
example, appears to be the reasoning behind the delay in auctioning the
franchise for a fifth television channel, which has become bound up with the
future of the BBC and a wider review of cross-media ownership. Such
strategic thinking, wholly absent from the 1990 Broadcasting Act, is to be
welcomed, so long as it does not merely become an excuse for avoiding
necessary decisions.
The fear is that a government caught between consolidators on one hand and
activists on the other will become tangled in the web of its own self-doubt.
A government which lacks the courage to deal with any but the most harmless
measures can easily lose perspective on what is important and what is not.
Mr Major should be aware of these wider risks of indecisiveness both for the
economy and for the government's own credibility.
