FT  28 APR 94 / Condoms replace corsets in cost index
Mutton, candles, tram fares, trolleybus fares and back-lacing corsets have
gone. Satellite dishes, camcorders and condoms have arrived.
These are just some of the changes since the retail prices index started
life as a cost-of-living index 80 years ago, a birthday to be celebrated by
the Central Statistical Office today.
In 1914 the index was an estimate of the effect of price rises on the
welfare of working-class people, so food, rent, clothing, fuel and light
made up the largest part of the basket of goods used.
Since then it has become more sophisticated as the way the British live and
spend their money has changed.
Eighty years ago clerks using pens and inkwells compiled the index of only
80 prices. Women could not vote, Asquith was prime minister, Lloyd George
his chancellor, and Blackburn Rovers won the English first division
championship.
Today about 400 civil servants using computers collect 150,000 prices each
month in 180 areas.
'The RPI is about real people and real spending habits,' said the CSO. 'It
can tell us a lot about what life and prices were like 80 years ago and how
society has changed.'
The index underwent its first facelift in 1947, becoming more a measure of
what the average family was actually buying rather than what the government
thought working-class people should spend their wages on - alcohol was not
included.
So in came radios, cycles, prams, iron bedsteads, galvanised buckets,
custard powder, cinema and football match tickets, a pint of beer and a nip
of whisky.
The update in 1956 saw brown bread, pet food, televisions and washing
machines join the index. But out went candles, rabbits and distemper.
In 1962 sherry and refrigerators were added, and roasting chicken replaced
boiling fowl.
After that the index was revised annually. The 1970s saw the addition of
continental quilts, MOT test fees, canteen meals, yoghurt and mortgage
interest payments. In the 1980s, frozen ready meals, video tapes, CDs and
low-alcohol lager were added.
The latest changes have seen lard, tinned rice pudding, kippers, the St
Christopher pendant, men's vests and the seven-inch single record dropped,
while in have come microwave ovens and videotapes.
In 1914, 60 per cent of people's spending was on food. Now it is 14 per
cent, rivalled in importance by motoring and leisure.
