FT  31 JAN 94 / Israel's health minister may quit
Israel's crisis-prone coalition government came under renewed threat last
night as Mr Haim Ramon, the health minister, said he was on the verge of
resigning in a row over health insurance and the power of the Histadrut, the
trade union federation.
Mr Ramon, a popular spokesman for the reform wing of the Labour party, said
he had little alternative but to resign after the Labour convention rejected
his health insurance bill to separate health insurance contributions from
the Histadrut and its healthcare system, the Kupat Holim Clalit.
Mr Ramon's bill also called for all insurance contributions to be collected
by the National Insurance Institute rather than the Kupat Holim Clalit. The
convention voted for a compromise, maintaining the link between the trade
union and the Kupat Holim, leaving the Kupat Holim with 50 per cent of the
insurance dues.
Mr Ramon said the public wanted to separate politics from health, and the
compromise bill would encourage people to leave the Labour health
institutions. The Histadrut, he charged, wanted to use health insurance
contributions for political purposes.
Mr Ramon's bill was clearly intended to divorce the Histadrut from health
and is generally considered to have majority support among the Israeli
public, the Knesset (parliament) and perhaps even the cabinet, which is
expected to meet in special session tomorrow. Mr Ramon said if the cabinet
endorsed the compromise bill he would definitely resign.
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, prime minister, who reluctantly backed the compromise,
warned the move was unpopular, might not have a majority in the Knesset and
could even bring down the government. He warned, however, that the vote of
the Labour convention was binding on all 44 Labour Knesset members.
The first reading of Mr Ramon's bill won approval in the Knesset by 54:1,
and Mr Ramon said last night that if the government allowed a free vote his
bill would win 110 of the 120 Knesset members.
Mr Binyamin Netanyahu, leader of the opposition Likud, said yesterday his
party would vote against the compromise and in favour of Mr Ramon's bill.
Inside the coalition government Mr Amnon Rubinstein, minister of education
and member of the 12-strong Meretz party, said he would vote against the
compromise bill in the cabinet, and said the majority of the Knesset would
back Mr Ramon.
