FT  10 MAR 94 / Security fears revived at vital strategic target
Like the City of London, which has been struck by two IRA attacks in the
past two years, Heathrow airport is an important target both economically
and symbolically.
It is the world's busiest international airport, handling more than 42m
passengers a year, and is one of the UK's most important assets.
It handles 40 per cent of all passenger traffic through UK airports, while
Heathrow's World Cargo Centre is second only to the port of Dover in terms
of the value of goods handled, with the equivalent of Pounds 34bn in visible
trade.
Heathrow is a significant employer - 50,000 people work at the airport,
including 1,400 security staff, and an estimated 20,000 local jobs exist as
a direct result of airport activity.
Eighty different airlines use the airport, serving more than 200
destinations, with more than 370,000 aircraft movements a year.
Closure of Heathrow for a whole day, for example as the result of terrorist
action, could ground about 1,000 flights leaving up to 100,000 passengers
stranded. Repeated closures that damaged its reputation for reliability
could cost the airport hundreds of millions of pounds in lost business.
Heathrow is also the centre of a thriving local hotel and conference
industry, with 20 hotels offering about 5,000 beds in the immediate
vicinity.
The incident last night was the first mortar attack on mainland Britain
since the IRA used home-made firing tubes to bomb a cabinet meeting in
Downing Street in February 1991.
Previous mortars have consisted of a 9in-diameter, 3ft-long steel tube. The
apparently improvised weapon used last night has an even longer firing tube
for greater accuracy and range. In the past the weapons have been used most
effectively at ranges of between 400m and 500m. While two bombs landed on
the runway without detonating, their firing point in the car park of the
Excelsior Hotel would have brought a number of sensitive targets within
range.
One potential target from this position is the traffic tunnel under the
runway that acts as the main thoroughfare into the terminal areas.
Security within the airport perimeter fence was stepped up during the 1970s
due to the IRA threat and again in 1986 when police began carrying machine
guns in the airport lounges after terrorist attacks at Vienna and Rome
airports. The Excelsior Hotel, sited on a public road north of the airport,
does not enjoy the protection afforded inside the fence.
