FT  18 NOV 94 / Government Bonds: Treasuries unable to shake off bearish
mood
US Treasuries fell across the maturity spectrum yesterday as the market
proved unable to shake its bearish mood, in spite of some positive economic
data.
By late in the session, the benchmark 30-year bond was down  13/32 at 92 7/8
, yielding 8.132. At the short end of the market, the two-year note fell
3/32 to 99 7/16 , to yield 7.169 per cent.
Labor Department figures showing a 5.2 per cent decrease in housing starts -
well below economists' expectations - briefly lifted the long-bond by nearly
 1/3 point early in the day.
While weather was a factor in some markets, analysts interpreted the data as
a sign that higher interest rates were beginning to affect house building.
Nevertheless, the market proved unable to rally as traders tried to use the
rise in prices as an opportunity to sell.
Mr Doug Burtnick, a senior fixed-income analyst with Thomson Financial
Services, attributed the market's failure to take heart from a report from
the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, indicating slowing business
activity for November, to bearishness and confusion in the market.
There is uncertainty in the wake of the Fed's increase in interest rates
Tuesday. The increase was greater than expected, but the Fed still left the
door open for a future increase later this year or early in 1995.
'It's a bear market scenario. The uptrades are laborious and the downtrades
are like throwing rocks out a window,' Mr Burtnick said. 'People really
don't know what's going on, they see the market tumble and it's
disconcerting without any news to trigger it.'
He added that investors are also worried about over-supply in advance of
next week's auction of two-year and five-year notes that will take place in
a week shortened by the Thanksgiving holiday.
European government bond prices fell further yesterday, although UK gilt
prices continued their recent out-performance compared with other markets,
slipping only slightly.
Mr Mark Cliffe, international economist at Midland Global Markets said:
'There is disappointment in the markets about the rather poor response in
the US towards the Fed's tightening.'
Gilts started the day well, lifted by retail sales figures which suggested
there was little chance of an increase in UK base rates this year - sales in
October rose by a seasonally adjusted 0.1 per cent, below market
expectations of a 0.2 per cent rise.
However, gilts were pulled back by falls in US Treasuries and bunds and by
late in the day the December long gilt future had moved down  11/32 to trade
around 101 25/32 . The yield spread over bunds tightened by 4 basis points
to around 128.
Mr Jeremy Stretch at NatWest Markets said today's revised figure for the
third quarter GDP might have an impact on gilt prices.
'An upward revision should not undermine the market unduly. If it is on the
back of increased investment and manufacturing production, it will not be
too worrying,' he said, adding that he believed there was unlikely to be a
change in UK base rates until the first quarter of next year.
Mr Stretch said political uncertainty arising from prime minister Mr John
Major's difficulties over the UK contribution to the EU budget were not yet
an influence on gilts, but added: 'There is no doubt that will come into
play in the weeks to come.'
German government bonds slipped and the December bund futures contract
traded around 89.83 late in the day, a fall of 0.32.
Ms Alison Cottrell at Kidder Peabody said the expected release of money
supply figures next week was likely to be the next influence on the market.
The yield on Italian government bonds rose by 9 basis points to 12.14 per
cent on increased political worries.
