FT  31 JAN 94 / Pact drives coalition into LDP's arms: Historic agreement
will weaken Hosokawa
In Japanese politics, great victories are usually achieved only after the
losing side has been mollified.
So it was on Saturday when Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, the prime minister,
succeeded in getting parliamentary agreement to reform the electoral system
and curb corruption, and in the process avert the collapse of his
government.
To achieve a deal, Mr Hosokawa had to bow to the will of the opposition
Liberal Democratic party and accept a less radical version of his own plans.
The original scheme, voted down in the upper house a week earlier, would
have bulldozed the old structure of money politics. Now the outlook is for
gradual change; the foundations will shift and crack.
In particular, Mr Hosokawa had to tone down his proposed curbs on political
funding and accept an electoral system more favourable to big parties.
Snatched at the last minute from a hopeless deadlock between the seven-party
coalition and the LDP, the accord is nevertheless remarkable.
It retains a central point of the original proposal; to scrap the present
system of multi-seat constituencies in which several candidates from the
same party compete for votes, the main feature in Japan's costly, corrupt
poll campaigns.
Failure to achieve that crucial change brought down two of Mr Hosokawa's
prime ministerial predecessors, since the plans were first mooted five years
ago following the Recruit shares-for-favours scandal. Helped by strong
public support, Mr Hosokawa has succeeded where far more experienced
operators have failed.
Yet the first consequence of the agreement on reform will be to weaken the
fragile coalition and drive it into the arms of the LDP. Mr Hosokawa
recognised this over the weekend when he announced he would seek LDP
co-operation to draw up an economic stimulus package.
Mr Hosokawa's compromise, as he freely admitted, has upset the left wing of
the Social Democratic party, the coalition's largest and shakiest partner,
which is committed to banning corporate donations.
Now that the government's main task of political reform is out of the way,
the socialists will have even less in common with their coalition partners,
beyond a taste for power. The socialists will also oppose moves to increase
consumption tax and seek a permanent seat on the United Nations Security
Council, both of which will probably be on the agenda in the coming year or
so.
So it is no surprise that the 17 socialists who voted against the four bills
threatened over the weekend to form the nucleus of an independent group. At
the same time, some coalition members are doing their utmost to encourage
LDP supporters of reform to join the government.
This means that Mr Hosokawa's vision of a two-party structure of the
coalition and LDP looks less plausible. Some political observers think the
trend is now shifting towards a large centre-right coalition - ironically
resembling the LDP in its heyday - excluding anti-reformists on left and
right. Others believe a fresh round of defections from the LDP and the
Socialist party will lead to a two- or three-party system. Either way, they
agree that Japan is set for a long period of coalition governments.
Another result of the agreement is that the change in political style
symbolised by the end of 38 unbroken years of LDP rule in last July's
elections is far from complete.
Last summer's political realignment brought a straight-talking prime
minister, a refreshing contrast to his elliptical predecessors, plus a
tendency for confrontation in parliament, instead of the tradition of
forming consensuses in smoke-filled rooms.
The change in style seemed reinforced over the past few weeks, with dramatic
parliamentary ballots on reform, first in favour in the lower house, and
then against in the upper chamber. Television viewers have observed members
of parliament emerging from angry committee meetings, red in the face and
baffled. All this has made it look as if Japan is 'shifting from a
predictable non-voting democracy towards an unpredictable voting democracy',
in the words of a senior Japanese securities company executive.
Yet in the end the deal was thrashed out in the traditional manner, in a
late-night private meeting with Mr Hosokawa and Mr Yohei Kono, the LDP
president. A week of bitter encounters between their subordinates in
parliamentary committees had led to such complete deadlock that Mrs Takako
Doi, the upper house speaker, had to call on the two leaders to negotiate
personally.
Mr Hosokawa was keen to meet Mr Kono from the start, but the LDP leader was
reluctant, unable to decide whether opponents or supporters of reform were
winning an internal battle in his own party. The risk of defection by 70 LDP
reformists finally persuaded Mr Kono that a deal was necessary.
When the two leaders' compromise was presented to the upper and lower houses
on Saturday evening, members of parliament stood meekly, in the old style,
to give their assent. Out of the 761 members of the upper and lower houses,
a mere 42 - all socialists or LDP members - broke ranks.
Just how much difference the new rules will make to the practical conduct
and outcome of general elections cannot be predicted, according to political
observers. The general aim is to encourage politicians to seek votes on the
quality of their policies, rather than their ability to fund local swimming
pools or roads.
But traditions change slowly in Japan. The politicians campaigning under the
new system, in a general election expected some time this year, will on the
whole be the same people wearing new labels.
 -------------------------------------------------------------
              MAIN POINTS OF AGREEMENT
 -------------------------------------------------------------
Main points of Japan's political reform agreement
(government's original proposal in brackets)
 -------------------------------------------------------------
Lower house seats: 500 (500)
Single-seat constituencies: 300 (274)
Proportional representation seats: 200 (226)
Proportional representation base: 11 regions (nation)
Minimum votes a party must get to qualify for a proportional
representation seat: 2 per cent (3 per cent )
Donations to individual politicians: allowed through one fund-raising
organisation per politician, up to Y500,000 per year per private sector
corporate donor, to be phased out after five years (donations to be
banned, except to parties)
State subsidies for parties to make up for restrictions on corporate
donations: Y30.9bn overall, subject to a ceiling of 40 per cent of
party's income in previous year (Y30.9bn, no individual party limits)
Door to door campaigning: Now prohibited (permitted from 8am to 8pm)
Independent body to draw up new electoral boundaries.
 -------------------------------------------------------------
