FT  07 DEC 94 / Management: Rewards for bright ideas - A look at the ways
big companies encourage innovative employees
Last month a group of experts on valve emissions controls, aluminium
sulphate elimination and vibration-aided furnace decoking held a celebration
in a Buckingham management centre.
These were the winners of a new award set up by BP Chemicals to encourage
innovation. It is one of a number of companies hoping that the recognition
of success will provide role models, encourage innovators and motivate
others.
Bryan Sanderson, chief executive of BP Chemicals, says he was startled by
the response to the awards, which attracted 155 entries. 'It seems there was
a lot of potential for innovation which we did not know about,' he says.
The awards were conceived at a time when BP Chemicals was concerned about a
staff survey that suggested many employees did not feel the company was
innovative.
That posed a problem for a company which believes that its drive for greater
efficiency of the last few years has to be replaced with a more creative
philosophy. 'Rapid cost reduction and focusing is a miserable management job
but conceptually it is easy,' says Sanderson. 'But getting the next phase of
profit improvement is difficult and increasingly it will have to come from
more innovative thinking which increases performance and productivity.'
When BP Chemicals decided to introduce an innovation award, it looked to
similar schemes set up by BOC, the UK gases company, 3M, the US
manufacturing group, Dow, the US chemical company, and Elf Acquitaine, the
French petrochemical company. Some of these awards are designed to recognise
technological achievement; others to recognise innovation in every function
of the organisation.
These innovation awards tend to reward winners with glory, rather than hard
cash. Like BP, which primarily gives its prize winners 'a big public
thank-you', BOC does not give cash awards for its main scheme. Instead,
winners receive a team trophy, individual plaques, some publicity and a trip
to London, Washington or New York for a meeting with BOC's top management
and a dinner dance.
Some companies have experimented with giving sabbaticals or grants to their
most creative employees. In 1991, an IBM research centre in California
introduced a scheme which rewarded the person who had the best idea with the
services of a research assistant for two years.
One reason why companies shy away from financial rewards for innovation is
that bringing an idea to market often involves complex teamwork in which it
is hard to assess individual achievements.
The importance of teamwork in bringing new ideas to the market was a factor
in BOC's setting up an award for technological innovation five years ago. It
felt its reward structure placed too much emphasis on individual
achievement. That was compounded by scientists' tendency to revere
individuals for past scientific achievements. 'We wanted to change our
recognition system to put more emphasis on teams,' says Deb Chatterji,
managing director, technology.
Awards can raise the profile of an innovation but they cannot work in
isolation. If an organisation is inimical to innovation, investing Pounds
25,000 a year on an award scheme is little more than window dressing.
Even companies with highly creative employees will not produce innovations
unless the resources are available to ensure that new ideas are
commercialised. Market-driven innovation also needs good communications
between the design, development and marketing arms of the company.
Moreover, many companies frustrate the creativity of their employees with
badly-designed incentive schemes linked to short-term goals, according to
Clive Fletcher, a psychologist at Goldsmith's College at the University of
London. 'Companies often operate systems which squeeze the innovation out of
people,' he says.
He believes that introducing awards for innovation can play a useful role.
'Set against all the things that organisations do which counter innovation,
it is a positive step,' he says.
The difficulty in measuring creativity makes it hard for companies to assess
the effectiveness of award schemes. However, top managers are enthusiastic.
'It is hard to measure but one gets a clear feeling that it has a
motivational impact,' says Chatterji.
