FT  23 AUG 94 / World Trade News: EU toughens stance on Turkish trade ties
The European Union is toughening its stance in negotiations with Turkey on a
customs union, indicating it may cancel the date for implementation if
progress on legislative reform is not made.
Turkey is due to enter the customs union - lowering its trade barriers to EU
goods to zero and adopting the Union's common external tariff - on January 1
1996.
However in a move strongly opposed by the Turks, Brussels has now thrown in
an additional review date - September 1995 - giving the EU an effective last
minute opt-out of the negotiations.
Commission officials insist the ball is in Turkey's court. The EU opened its
markets to Turkish industrial products in 1973. However, Turkey has still
got some way to go to cut tariffs and adopt legislation that will bring
trade and industrial policy into line with that of the EU.
A customs union is an important step to closer ties with Europe, first
envisaged in the Ankara agreement of 1963, and Mrs Tansu Ciller, the prime
minister, has made it one of her key policy targets. The next few weeks will
decide whether or not the two sides can narrow their differences.
Mrs Ciller sent a 'white paper' to all government departments in May
outlining the conditions and timetable to be met.
In early September, the EU Council is expected to give its endorsement to a
framework work programme to complete the customs union.
However, commission officials warn there is considerable work to be done
before foreign ministers of the Turkish-EU Association Council can meet in
December to give the final go-ahead.
Turkey is currently engaged in an economic structural adjustment effort,
under the auspices of the International Monetary Fund.
There is some concern that difficulties in fulfilling the IMF's standby
agreement could hinder the reforms needed to put a customs union in place.
The Fund is due to make its first review of progress in the second week in
November.
The main EU concern is that Turkey's parliament may have problems approving
legislation in critical areas such as intellectual property rights,
industrial and competition policy.
There are still a number of key points of disagreement:
During a visit in February, Sir Leon Brittan, EU trade commissioner, warned
that if a competition policy in line with the EU's was not in place and
operating, the EU's anti-dumping provisions, which Turkey wants lifted,
would be retained beyond the customs union implementation.
Turkey wants the quotas lifted on textiles, Turkey's largest export earner
with around Dollars 5.3bn of sales in 1993, 70 per cent of which went to EU
markets. However, the EU is under pressure from Spain and Portugal, who are
wary of increased Turkish textile shipments to the Union.
On technical standards, Turkey wants both sides to adopt the principle of
mutual recognition, while the EU calls for Turkey to adopt the EU code.
Perhaps the most contentious issue is that of financial co-operation, which
Turkey maintains the EU is obliged to provide as part of the original Ankara
accords.
The EU appears amenable to some form of financial support, but wants the
issue treated separately from the customs union negotiations.
