FT  12 MAR 94 / Private View: More Big Bang for our bucks - Christian Tyler
meets the man responsible for Europe's planned proton-smasher
What is it worth to you if they discover the Higgs boson? It is not an idle
question, for this summer ministers and their advisers from 19 European
countries are likely to tell the scientists of Cern, the particle physics
laboratory outside Geneva, that they can have Dollars 1.5bn (Pounds 1bn) of
taxpayers' money to build a big proton-smasher inside their 27km circular
tunnel.
Few of us taxpayers will get a chance to say what we think about this latest
stage in the hunt for particles that might illuminate the dawn of time. So,
calculating my own contribution at about Pounds 1 a year - say a fiver for
the family - I flew to Geneva to ask the head boson-hunter what the payback
was.
Professor Christopher Llewellyn Smith is a 51-year-old theoretical physicist
and cross-country Blue from Oxford who became director general of Cern in
January. He has a rapid, precise manner - not without humour - and the
faintly mid-Atlantic speech of the globe-trotting academic. He did not try
to blind me with science, choke me with muons, gluons and quarks of colour,
charm and spin, nor dazzle me with the infinitely large and infinitesimally
small quantities his profession trades in.
So, endeavouring to look my most alert, I asked: What will the Higgs boson
do for the taxpayer?
'It is one very, very major step in understanding the way the universe is
put together,' he replied. 'If you ask why anyone should be interested, I
think there are three parts to the answer.
'First, the subject is justified as the pursuit of pure knowledge. I mean,
it's part of our culture.' He quoted a remark of the first director of
Fermilab who, asked by a US congressional committee what the lab contributed
to the defence of the nation, replied: 'Nothing. But it makes it worth
defending.'
'It's part of mankind's history to be curious about how things work,' the
professor added. 'We're trying to find out at the deepest level what matter
is made of, why the universe is the way it is and not some other way.'
His second argument was, not surprisingly, about direct and indirect
spin-off. But he did not labour it. The discovery of new fundamental laws of
physics usually had important practical applications, such as the discovery
of the electron. However, that was getting harder to be sure of, the further
physics moved away from everyday experience. 'So I don't think you can
justify the expenditure on those grounds.'
Technical development was another kind of spin-off. For example, the
collision detectors pioneered by Georges Charpak of Cern (and for which he
won a Nobel prize in 1992) were used for medical imaging; accelerators were
employed for cancer therapy.
'That's not the reason you do it, but it gives some return and you should
subtract it from the price. I always say it's a bit like subsidising the
theatre in London: it brings in tourists, but that's not the reason you
subsidise theatre.'
His third justification was education. Flagship projects attracted
schoolchildren to science, even if they ended up in engineering rather than
cosmology, while graduate students acquired valuable, if expensive, training
at Cern.
But, I said, the search for knowledge is the real reason?
'It is the real reason, I absolutely agree with that.'
For some people the scale of the endeavour alone may be sufficient
justification for spending the money. The Large Hadron Collider will be
inserted into the biggest of Cern's tunnels, a racetrack several miles
longer than the Circle Line of the London Underground. Where it takes a man
six hours to walk round, the protons will whip round the circuit 11,000
times a second. Their path is so precisely aligned that even the daily
gravitational pull of the moon has to be adjusted for. To get them to fly in
a circular path requires six tonnes of magnetic force every metre. The
debris of the collisions - including perhaps the Higgs boson - will be
detected by machines three storeys high, in a microcosm of what was going on
a fraction of a billionth of a second after the Big Bang which began the
universe.
The Higgs particle was postulated years ago by Prof Peter Higgs of Edinburgh
University to explain why some particles are massive, some massless.
Llewellyn Smith said it would help us understand why some forces of nature
operate over vast distances, others over minute distances, and why matter is
clumped as it is. 'This research can tell us why the universe is arranged
with islands of stars called galaxies, why it has this architecture. I think
these are pretty interesting questions.'
And if you do not find it?
'There must be some mechanism. If it's not the Higgs, we don't know what it
is. But we're going to discover something else instead which we haven't been
clever enough to imagine.'
But what about the cost? I asked. Can you not see a point at which
politicians will stop being interested?
'I would say that convincing politicans is not so hard. To a certain extent
the hardest people to persuade are people in other fields of science because
they are - well, jealous is the right word, I guess.
'It's difficult for people doing biology who need only a few thousand
pounds, a tiny fraction of what is going into Cern. So you get the argument:
why not do biology? It's cheaper than physics. But by the same argument, why
not do theology? It's cheaper than biology. There's a rather nice quote from
a French boulevardiste, one of whose characters asks why he should pay 15
francs for an umbrella when he can have a beer for two sous.'
I thought of the US decision to cancel its Dollars 10bn Superconducting
Super Collider in Texas which would have been three times the length of
Cern's. Scientific advances were quite cheap in the past, I said. Can we
justify our thirst for knowledge indefinitely?
'Well, that's our job in particle physics. We have kept the cost down. The
budget of Cern in real terms is less than it was 20 years ago, despite the
fact that the number of physicists who work here is five times bigger.'
The SFr2.23bn material cost of the Large Hadron Collider will not involve
more than about SFr500m of new money: the bulk will come out of Cern's
existing budget, currently SFr900m a year, as its other experiments wind
down. The two new detectors, costing SFr350m each, may be financed out of
university research budgets.
'People sometimes say it's like the opera and should be subsidised at the
same level. I think it's more than that, because scientific knowledge is
cumulative, it's more like the composition of an opera than the performance,
if you like. The discoveries made in the 19th century are still driving
today's electrical industry, for example. And those in the 30s are driving
semiconductors.'
You may be able to appeal to politicians or to national or European pride, I
said. But won't taxpayers protest if they can't understand what you're up
to?
'That's why I think we have a big obligation to explain what we're doing -
for a grand reason and a pragmatic reason. The grand reason is that we'd
like other people to share in the pleasure we get in the things we're doing:
and if it is a contribution to culture then presumably we can all share it.
'The pragmatic reason, obviously, is if we can't explain then obviously
we're going to lose the support.'
Of course, I said, I'm impressed you can look at the state of the universe
some fraction of a billionth of a second after the Big Bang. But I'd pay a
lot more to know what happened a fraction before.
'In a sense the Big Bang is infinitely far away in terms of its energy
density. In time it's a finite way away. But we never will really get there.
The energy at which one could directly test the theories that put all the
forces together is still a factor of about a million, billion away in terms
of energy.
'It's an interesting question what is in science and what isn't. I think to
paraphrase St Augustine, the most profound question that human beings can
ask is: 'why is there something rather than nothing?'
'Now, that question, it seems to me, is beyond the scope of science and
probably will always be - though there are scientists who think not. On the
other hand, the question we're asking in particle physics is: given that
there is something rather than nothing, why is it what it is, rather than
something else? And that question I think we may be able to answer.'
Would it be better for you if the results are a shock - better than getting
the predicted answer?
'Yes. It's paradoxes that show there's a real question there.'
So when you find the Higgs boson, it's going to be both a triumph and an
anti-climax?
'In a sense to find something different would be more interesting, yes.
That's true.'
If they find the boson, do you get a Nobel prize? The professor laughed.
'Certainly not. Probably Mr Higgs gets a Nobel prize.'
Well, for my fiver, I hope he does.
