FT  12 MAR 94 / Westwood's barefaced chic: Brenda Polan says the
controversial designer has been wilfully misunderstood
The fashion collection which has inspired such a sanctimonious brouhaha in
the British press (and earned nothing but praise elsewhere) was dedicated by
Vivienne Westwood to John Stuart Mill's essay, On Liberty.
Since this is the great liberal-utilitarian argument for free speech,
Westwood cannot object to all that wordy outrage; she is just, as ever, a
little disappointed at being so wilfully misunderstood.
At the nub of the dispute is the question: what are Paris catwalk shows for?
Certain mature British fashion journalists believe they are to show nice
outfits that they personally can buy and wear next season. Some designers
agree. Other designers, however, think of the runway show both as spectacle
and as a forum for ideas.
Ideas? Isn't that, you might well mutter, a little pretentious? We're
talking frocks here. But the truth about Vivienne Westwood and the
homosexual male designers indicted for misogyny last week is that their
medium is not only bits of cloth; it is woman's identity, particularly her
sexual identity. And it is inevitable that, just as in an art gallery or a
theatre, the more exploratory and experimental the designer's ideas, the
more they will shock us, amuse us, make us think a little.
The fashion designer's vocabulary is composed of the many images of
femaleness which women have worn through the centuries of human
civilisation. As with a living language, new words must be coined to
describe new concepts but their roots will be in words which already exist.
Twenty-five years after the start of the second phase of women's
mobilisation for equality, we are still seeking new definitions of
femininity. Arguably, this is an endless search.
Any new definition must come partly out of the old. Predominant are those
essentially male fantasies which we now categorise as pornographic but in
whose creation (and Westwood for one is quite clear on this) women colluded.
They are female identities modern woman needs to confront and explore.
On the runways of Paris and of London, Milan and New York designers, male
and female, homo- and heterosexual, use the vocabulary at their disposal to
do that. Westwood just does it more self-consciously and with more humour,
playing with archetypes and goading us to deconstruct them. Breasts have had
a lot of her attention. She has explored their erotic potential from maximum
artificiality to complete naturalness. And so, on her heels, have the other
designers. Indeed, nowadays a nipple or a thousand nipples pass unnoticed on
the catwalks.
Nevertheless, on the morning after her show, Westwood was once again called
upon to deny that she really expected women to bare their nipples on the
Tube or to employ a bustle to quell the competition for the last seat.
Aware of the history, and aware that, while the bustle was being lampooned
in the press, Mill's essay was being debated in the drawing rooms of Europe
and the Americas, Westwood set out to make connections and to amuse.
Mill, of course, also wrote On the Subjection of Women, the tract which
inspired the suffragettes. He was more concerned with lack of property
rights and domestic slavery than with corsets, but fashion historians and
feminist theorists have taken the corset and the crinoline as symbols for
woman, the non-citizen, the non-person.
It was Westwood who deconstructed that concept, perhaps not totally
satisfactorily but, at least, illuminatingly. Mill may be her hero but
Westwood says she's no feminist. That does not deter feminist semioticians
from admiring her. They, she may be mortified to know, do understand her.
