FT  12 FEB 94 / 'Customers set to benefit by up to Pounds 500m'
Extract from statement by Professor Littlechild on agreement with the
generators.
I have considered what a reasonable path of prices might be until a fully
competitive market can be achieved.
I have done this by assessing what average price would be necessary to cover
projections of the two generators' avoidable operating costs, other costs
including a programme of capital expenditure on low nitrogen oxides (NOx)
burners, flue gas desulphurisation (FGD) retro-fitting and new combined
cycle gas turbines (CCGTs) to meet environmental standards, plus an
allowance for interest and returns to shareholders.
The results are sensitive to the precise assumptions about each of the
components. However, the broad conclusion is that for the next few years the
two generators could achieve sufficient revenues at pool prices somewhat
below the average levels obtaining so far in this financial year.
The two companies argued that pool purchase price to date has not been
sufficient to cover the avoidable costs of much mid-merit and peaking plant.
My calculations suggest that the avoidable costs of mid-merit plant could be
met by higher peak prices more than offset by lower off-peak prices. There
does not need to be an increase in average pool price to cover these
avoidable costs.
The differential between peak and off-peak prices may well need to be
greater . . . to sustain mid-merit and peaking plant in a competitive
market. Such a greater differential would encourage new entry in this part
of the market and test whether peak demand could be met by cheaper plant.
There has been an increase in competition in generation, and more is in
prospect. However, experience suggests that the extent of competition is not
sufficient to restrain National Power and PowerGen if they wish to increase
prices. Nor is it certain that the additional baseload capacity under
construction will provide an adequate check. This capacity will in any case
not be fully available on the system much before the end of 1995. I
therefore proposed that National Power and PowerGen should undertake to use
all reasonable endeavours to negotiate the sale or disposal of about 4,000MW
and 2,000MW respectively of coal-fired or oil-fired generation plant for
operation in the England and Wales market within two years.
Such an increase in competition in generation would help to prevent prices
being held above a competitive level, provide greater choice and protection
for customers, and promote greater competition in supply.
I proposed that National Power and PowerGen should each undertake to bid
into the pool in such a way that, under reasonable assumptions of other
generators' bids and taking seasonal fluctuations into account, average
annual pool purchase price would in normal circumstances reasonably be
expected not to exceed 2.4p/kWh time-weighted and 2.55p/kWh demand-weighted
(both in October 1993 prices).
They should also undertake to agree prices in new electricity
supply-and-purchase contracts consistent with this, plus where applicable a
reasonable hedge against pool purchase price and a reasonable allowance for
uplift and their supply business costs.
These undertakings would represent reductions in pool purchase price of up
to 7 per cent from the levels obtaining so far this financial year.
Moreover, these reduced prices would be held for two full years. On this
basis, the reductions in average pool prices associated with these
undertakings would yield benefits to customers of up to Pounds 500m over the
next two years.
These benefits derive from a general reduction in pool prices rather than
from the revenues of National Power and PowerGen alone.
I have satisfied myself that such reductions in pool and short-term contract
prices would not reduce the revenues of National Power and PowerGen below
such a level. As to other generators, I am satisfied that these prices would
be above avoidable cost and not predatory or otherwise anti-competitive.
