FT  18 OCT 94 / Campaign fails to dent disillusionment
Ten days of hard election campaigning since the US congressional recess
began has failed to reverse the disillusioned and anti-incumbent mood among
US voters, according to an Associated Press poll.
The poll, released yesterday, found only 35 per cent of the electorate in
favour of re-electing their own congressional representatives. However, only
26 per cent thought much would change if the Republicans took control of the
Congress.
There was good and bad news for both parties engaged in a campaign so far
permeated by rancour and sleaze. Republicans were slightly more likely to
vote for newcomers than Democrats, who risk losing control of the Senate
and, conceivably, the House as well in the November 8 poll.
However, Democrats had a slight edge with 38 per cent of the voters against
37 per cent in favour of Republicans.
Democratic party strategists fear the apathy and anger in the electorate is
more likely to keep Democrats at home and drive Republicans to the polls.
President Bill Clinton and the national Democratic party recognise the
threat and have sought to turn the anger towards the 'obstructionist'
Republicans in Congress.
Recent missteps by Congressman Newt Gingrich, the Republican leader in the
House, have given the Democrats the opportunity to campaign with a national
theme. His 'Contract With America', unveiled last month and signed by 300
Republican incumbents and challengers, promises a balanced budget, tax cuts
and strengthening of defence - a prescription Mr Clinton is deriding as
warmed-over Reaganism.
Mr Gingrich has also warned that Democrats will be portrayed as 'the enemies
of ordinary Americans'.
This has given ammunition to Mr Clinton, whose approval rating on foreign
policy has been rising in the wake of US action in Haiti and towards Iraq.
However, he remains deeply unpopular in large sections of the country.
'They are going to give us the trickle-down economics of the 1980s. They are
going to give us their 'politics of the enemies list' of the 1970s,' Mr
Clinton said at the weekend, referring to the late President Richard Nixon's
obsession with his opponents.
Key to the Democrats' chances of stemming a Republican tide will be
delivering the message of Mr Clinton's accomplishments to voters, still
anxious about job security and profoundly ignorant of the nation's business.
Mr Richard Morin, polling director for the Washington Post, noted at the
weekend that few Americans knew the names of congressional leaders and four
out of 10 think Republicans control Congress.
Most could not name a single piece of legislation passed by Congress, and
half could not think of a single Clinton accomplishment. Those that could
named healthcare reform, which was never passed.
