FT  01 MAR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture (Farmer's Viewpoint): Argentine
farmers find stability hard to live with - Hyper-inflation had offered
opportunities for easy profits that have now disappeared
Eduardo Zavalia, a big man in his mid fifties, looks every inch a farmer.
Indeed he owns 1,200 hectares of land, which produces maize and barley as
well as providing the grazing for a herd of dairy cows with an annual yield
of about 2m litres and most of the feed for a herd of pigs.
But these days be spends much of his time 220km away from the farm in an
ornate office overlooking a pedestrianised shopping street in Buenos Aires.
For Mr Zavalia is the president of Sociedad Rural Argentina, the biggest of
the country's four farmers' trade unions, and in these troubled times for
his members this is a full time job.
One of his sons manages the farm and another, an economist, is his assistant
in Buenos Aires.
Ironically the problems being experienced by Argentine farmers result
directly from the success their government is having in tackling the
country's previous economic crisis. Only a few years ago Argentina had
hyper-inflation running at 500 to 600 per cent a year.
Several pampas farmers had told days before my meeting with Mr Zavalia that
they had learned to live, and even to prosper, in that economic environment.
All they had to do was to avoid selling any of the maize, soyabeans or beef
cattle from their fertile farms until they needed money and could maximise
the value on the day. By combining that with delaying paying their bills for
a month or too they could make a lot of money. Some also managed to pay
their bills in depreciating peso's while selling their produce for stable US
dollars, some of which they promptly placed off-shore.
But such volatility is not conducive to confidence in the long term future
of an industry and there was little investment in new technology during
those years. In consequence the machinery on most farms is old and
unreliable and even now, though the countrys' currency has been stable since
it was pegged to the US dollar on April 1, 1991 there is insufficient
capital available to replace worn out equipment.
In advance of the currency measures, President Menem's Peronist
administration had increased wages and provided modest pensions for all,
thereby increasing farm production costs. Meanwhile the value of farm
commodities on world markets had fallen, reducing income from exports; a
combination of factors that has left many farmers in real financial
difficulties.
Mr Zavalia points out that agriculture accounts for between two thirds and
three quarters of Argentina's export earnings and claims it should,
therefore escape some of the strict monetary policies imposed on the rest of
the economy. He does not accept that any economic policy should be imposed
indiscriminately across all industries and says he has asked the government
to give aid to farmers to enable them to bring-their technology up to dote;
to provide advice to help them adjust to the new circumstances; and to bring
down interest rates on their borrowings, at present between 16 and 24 per
cent.
Predictably, Mr Felipe Sola, Argentina's secretary of agriculture does not
agree. 'Dr Zavalia is not an economist, he is a trade unionist,' he says.
And although the agriculture secretary accepts that some sectors of
Argentina's agriculture are in trouble and that many thousands of small
farmers will go out of business, he argues: 'Now fixed exchange rates are a
certainty' most of the solutions are in the viable farmers' own hands.
The inertia bred by 25 years of subsidised agriculture has led farmers to
look to government to solve all their problems, he adds. What farmers need
to do is to look to their own shortcomings in production, presentation and
marketing. That way they can stop imports of commodities that are already
produced somewhere across the vast tracts of Argentina and also make it
easier and more profitable to export to other countries.
In any case, he explains, if the government aids one sector it will be
forced to aid all, and that could wreck a policy that has led to growth in
national output of almost 9 per cent in each of the past two years.
Behind Mr Zavalia's attempts to achieve special concessions for his members
there is clear acceptance that the changes brought about by the Menem
administration were vitally necessary. 'What we have to do,' he says, 'is to
learn to manage change.'
I cannot not help thinking that the problems of Argentine farmers are the
potential problems of British farmers, writ large. The UK may not be a third
world country struggling to join the first world; it may not have had such a
volatile recent history. But British agriculture will shortly have to suffer
a shock similar to that in Argentina when the European Union's guaranteed
price system all but disappears. It will be faced with even stiffer
competition for domestic and export food markets and it too will need to
cure its own shortcomings to survive.
As a British farmer I would be very wrong indeed to feel superior to my
Argentine competitors. I am just more fortunate, for the time being.
