FT  29 SEP 94 / The European Pensions Ruling: The six cases behind the
decisive ruling
All six cases involve issues of sex equality in pension schemes arising from
the European Court's May 1990 landmark decision in Barber v Guardian Royal
Exchange - that Community rules outlawing pay discrimination between men and
women applied to benefits under private occupational pension schemes and
that retirement ages should be equalised. In the Dutch Ten Oever case last
year, the court ruled the Barber judgment did not apply retrospectively. The
outstanding issues were settled by the court yesterday.
COLOROLL
Trustees of the pension schemes of Coloroll, the UK wallpaper and home
furnishings group which collapsed in 1990, have been unable to wind up the
schemes because of uncertainty as a result of Barber. The trustees asked the
European Court several questions:
Q: Are pension scheme trustees bound by the equal treatment principles set
out in Barber, or just employers?
A: Trustees are bound to apply the equal treatment rules.
Q: Where pensions are received as a lump sum funded by contributions from
employer and worker and are used to buy an annuity, is it OK for employers
to make equal contributions for men and women or must the employer ensure
equal benefits? Should trustees have regard to actuarial factors showing
women live longer than men when calculating contributions and benefits?
A: Equal treatment rules are satisfied provided employers pay equal
contributions. The use of actuarial factors varying according to sex is not
covered by the European equal treatment rules.
Q: In equalising pensions are trustees allowed to equalise down the benefits
of men and women? Do they have to improve benefits for men accruing between
May 1990 and whatever date the company took action to implement equal
pension rights?
A: Yes and Yes.
Q: In men-only schemes, can men claim improved benefits they might have
expected as a result of the Barber judgment if there had been women members?
A: No.
SMITH v AVDEL SYSTEMS.
A test case brought by five women, backed by the Equal Opportunities
Commission, who worked for Avdel Systems, an engineering company based in
Welwyn Garden City, Herts. They were among 78 who brought claims before the
industrial tribunal complaining they were financially worse off by the
raising in July 1991 of their retirement age from 60 to 65 following the
Barber ruling.
Q: The court was asked whether it was legitimate for employers to worsen
pension provision for women in equalising pensions?
A: For periods of service after implementation of equal pension rights,
employers may raise the retirement age of women to that of men worsening
their pension provision. This may not be softened by ancillary measures
designed to minimise the adverse consequences. For periods between May 1990
and implementation of equal pension rights, advantages enjoyed by women as a
result of lower retirement age may not be reduced.
VROEGE v NCIV
A Dutch case about rights of access to pension schemes by part-time workers.
Q: Do the European equal treatment rules apply to access to pension schemes
and, if so, is the right limited in time to the date of the Barber judgment?
A: Yes. The right is not time-limited by the Barber judgment and stretches
back to April 1976.
FISSCHER v VOORHUIS HENGELO
Another Dutch case on a similar point.
Q: Do the equal pay rules apply to access to a pension scheme which excluded
married women?
If a worker can join a scheme retroactively must she pay back-contributions
if the scheme is a contributory scheme?
A: Yes. That right is not limited in time to the date of the Barber
judgment. If a worker wishes to join a scheme retroactively she must pay
contributions covering that period.
VAN DEN AKKER v SHELL
In 1985 Shell equalised retirement ages at 65 but said it would protect
pension rights of existing women scheme members by allowing them to keep a
pensionable age of 60.
Q: After the date of the Barber judgment was it legal for women to continue
to enjoy better benefits than men, and can companies ring fence and protect
the rights of existing members of a pension scheme in this way?
A: No. For periods between the Barber judgment and equalisation, conditions
for male workers would have to be improved.
ABP v BEUNE
Q Is the Dutch civil service occupational pension scheme covered by the
equal treatment rules?
A: Yes. It is not permissible for such a scheme to discriminate against
married men.
