FT  09 FEB 94 / Whitehall admits aid for arms in dam deal
Precise amounts of British foreign aid were offered to the Malaysian
government in return for arms purchases as part of a preliminary agreement
between the two governments, the Foreign Office said yesterday.
The disclosure, that a protocol for a Pounds 1bn arms deal signed in March
1988 by the two governments contained 'figures relating amounts or
percentages of civil aid to amounts of arms purchases', is the most
compelling evidence to date that the government breached its own guidelines
that the provision of aid should not be linked to arms sales.
The admission was made last night in a parliamentary written answer by Mr
Alastair Goodlad, a Foreign Office minister, in response to a question from
Mr Alan Williams, the Labour MP for Swansea West. The allegation that the
protocol contained an aid-for-arms formula was first made last week in the
Economist magazine.
Last month, Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, had said that the
protocol included 'a reference to 'aid in support of non-military aspects
under this programme' ', but gave no hint that precise amounts of aid were
offered. In an interview last week, Lord Younger, who was defence secretary
at the time and signed the protocol, said he had 'no recollection' that it
contained an aid-for-arms formula.
Soon after the signing of the protocol, Lord Younger was advised by the
Foreign Office that aid could not be linked to arms sales, so in June 1988
he wrote to the Malaysian government to inform them of this.
Last night, the Foreign Office would not reveal the specific amounts of aid
offered in the protocol. However, the disclosure strengthened claims made by
Labour MPs that the donation of Pounds 234m of aid to the Malaysians to help
build a dam on the Pergau river was made in return for the arms deal.
Mr Williams, a member of a backbench committee that has investigated the
affair, said that yesterday's disclosure 'destroyed the government's
pretence'.
He said: 'For five years ministers have not just been economical with the
truth, they have been miserly with the truth.'
