FT  16 JUL 94 / Blair targets Lords in pledge on reforms
Mr Tony Blair, the runaway favourite to succeed the late John Smith as
Labour leader, committed the party yesterday to a sweeping constitutional
shake-up, including parliamentary reform, devolution and human rights
legislation.
In the last of six speeches aimed at the 4.5m voters in the leadership
election, Mr Blair promised 'a new constitutional settlement' in the first
term of a Labour government.
He also wanted to see the abolition of the right of hereditary peers to sit
in parliament.
He sought to exploit continuing concerns about the probity of the
Conservative government by pledging that he would insist on 'the highest
standards' of honesty and integrity from ministers and party officials.
Mr Blair's comments reflect confidence among his advisers that he will win
by a substantial margin when the results are announced at a special
conference in London on Thursday.
Friends say that Mr Blair has already begun to think about changes to the
opposition front bench team, although he has decided to delay a shake-up
until the autumn.
Mr John Prescott, the shadow employment secretary, is increasingly confident
of victory in the race for the deputy leadership, which is also being
contested by Mrs Margaret Beckett.
Mrs Beckett, who was Mr Smith's deputy from 1992 until his death in May,
told the Financial Times in an interview that it was 'perfectly possible'
she might fail to win either of the leadership posts.
'I am used to going into elections that I might not win, and having to make
my case and abide by the judgment of the electorate,' she said.
Mr Blair said in Cardiff that government under both parties had become
centralised, bureaucratic and indifferent to the fundamental rights of
citizens.
He also sought to raise public concern about the impact of quangos (quasi
autonomous non-governmental organisations) by linking constitutional issues
directly to economic prosperity.
'People care that vast amounts of their money are being swallowed up by
quangos, to be spent on projects they know nothing about, by Tories they
have never voted for,' he said.
Mr Blair wants a long list of constitutional changes, including devolution
for Scotland, Wales and the English regions; greater powers for local
government; incorporation into domestic law of the European Convention on
Human Rights; and a Freedom of Information Act.
Straight talker, Page 6
