FT  24 OCT 94 / FT Guide to the Week
MONDAY 24
Knesset to ratify deal
Israel's parliament meets to ratify the Israeli-Jordanian peace treaty.
Israel has invited 2,000 Jordanians, 2,000 Israelis and 1,000 Americans to
witness what is expected to be a near unanimous approval of Israel's second
peace treaty with an Arab neighbour since its accord with Egypt in 1979.
European Union Agriculture:
Agriculture ministers meet in Luxembourg to discuss, among other things,
measures to introduce maximum journey limits to protect animals from being
transported to slaughter (to Oct 25).
European Parliament begins a week-long session in Strasbourg.
South Africa's foreign minister, Alfred Nzo, kept busy by all the official
invitations his once isolated country now receives, arrives in Saudi Arabia
at the start of a week-long tour of the Middle East. He also visits Oman,
Kuwait, Bahrain and Iran, with which South Africa has had no official
contact since the Iranian revolution. He then visits the Czech Republic and
France.
Somalia: A seven-member United Nations security council mission leaves for
Mogadishu to prepare for the phased withdrawal of the 15,000-strong UN
operation by the end of March. The US-led intervention in December 1992
delivered food, but failed to bring about national reconciliation.
Kurdish rights: John Shattuck, US assistant secretary of state for human
rights, visits south-eastern Turkey, where security forces a month ago
launched one of their largest offensives against the separatist Kurdistan
Workers Party (PKK). International organisations accuse the army of
systematic human rights violations in a 10-year war against the PKK that has
claimed over 13,000 lives.
Ulster peace: British prime minister John Major is due to hold talks with
Ireland's premier Albert Reynolds at Chequers, Mr Major's country retreat
near London. They will review progress on peace in Northern Ireland, and
prepare for a summit when they are expected to release the long awaited
framework document for a settlement.
The meeting will confirm the leaders' joint approach, although Mr Major will
want to restate British concerns not to alienate the unionists, while Mr
Reynolds will repeat his view that Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing,
should be brought into talks as soon as possible to maintain momentum.
Eurostar tickets for Channel Tunnel passenger trains, due to start on
November 14, go on sale.
FT Survey: Zambia.
Holidays: Haiti (United Nations Day), New Zealand (Labour Day), Thailand,
Zambia (Independence Day).
TUESDAY 25
World Trade Organisation
The preparatory committee meets in Geneva to decide whether to go ahead with
an implementing conference in December to set a January 1 starting date for
the successor to Gatt. Only 30 out of the 125 participants in the world
trade talks have ratified the accords so far, but another 50, including the
US, EU and Japan, have pledged to ratify by the end of the year.
German government: Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union, its
Bavarian sister-party, the Christian Social Union, and the Free Democratic
party (FDP), begin what could be complicated coalition negotiations after
their victory in last week's federal elections. The FDP is under pressure to
give up some of the five ministries it controls in the 18-seat cabinet,
following its second worst election result since the second world war.
However, the three-party coalition has a majority in the Bundestag, the
lower house of parliament, of only 10 seats, a delicate situation which may
strengthen the FDP's negotiating hand.
Jacques Santer, European Union president-designate, meets Austrian
Chancellor Franz Vranitzky in Vienna to discuss the role of an Austrian
commissioner in the Commission to start work next year when Austria becomes
a member. The agriculture portfolio is said to be on offer. Mr Vranitzky
says he would appoint Franz Fischler, the (Conservative) agriculture
minister, for the post.
Germany's six economic institutes present their autumn survey, the most
comprehensive independent check-up on the state of the German economy.
UK economy: The Confederation of British Industry's industrial trends survey
should provide insight into developments in the UK manufacturing sector
ahead of next week's monetary meeting of the chancellor and the Bank of
England governor.
Tomorrow the globe:
The UK's first large-scale international Shakespeare festival, put on by the
Royal Shakespeare Company, starts at the Barbican Centre, London (to Nov
20). Among directors taking part will be the American Peter Sellars, with an
updated version of The Merchant of Venice; Karin Beler from Germany with
Romeo and Juliet; and the Japanese director Tadashi Suzuki, with King Lear.
There will also be companies from Georgia and Israel.
FT Survey: Italian Industry and Technology.
Holidays: Taiwan.
WEDNESDAY 26
Clinton attends signing
US president Bill Clinton arrives in Israel at the beginning of a three-day
Middle East trip to attend the signing of the Israeli-Jordanian peace treaty
at a newly established desert border crossing between the two former warring
neighbours.
Yitzhak Rabin, Israeli prime minister, and King Hussein of Jordan will sign
the treaty ending 46 years of enmity between the two countries and paving
the way to peace, development and economic co-operation.
Mr Clinton, the first serving US president to visit the heartland of the
Middle East since Jimmy Carter in 1979, is expected to spend the night in
Jordan. On Thursday he is due to address the Israeli parliament and visit
the Old City of Jerusalem. On Friday Mr Clinton will visit US troops in
Kuwait.
UK pollution: The Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution publishes a
study of transport and the environment. The report is expected to recommend
stiff tax increases on petrol among more than 100 measures to slow down the
growth in private car use.
UK gas market: The House of Commons Select Committee on Trade and Industry
holds hearings on the future of the UK gas market as the government dithers
over whether to include gas deregulation in the Queen's Speech outlining the
government's legislative programme. Witnesses include Tim Eggar, UK energy
minister, Clare Spottiswoode, gas industry regulator, and senior executives
from British Gas.
Saleroom: In New York from Wednesday through to Friday, Christie's is
disposing of the French furniture and works of art which occupied the New
York mansion of the late Miss Alice Tully, a Corning Glass heiress, until
her death in 1993. Among the highlights are a Louis XVI ormolu mounted
mahogany secretaire, attributed to Reisener, the great master of the period,
and estimated at up to Dollars 150,000.
The private collection of arms and armour assembled by the late A. R. Dufty,
former Master of the Royal Armouries, is offered by Christie's in London.
Among the highlights is a silver gilt presentation small-sword in original
scabbard and case. It was given to Captain Thomas Le Marchant in 1798 after
he successfully took a convoy to the Leeward Islands during the French Wars.
Mr Dufty paid Pounds 230 for it in 1961; it now carries an estimate of up to
Pounds 12,000.
FT Surveys: Aluminium and Technology in the Office.
Holidays: Austria (National Day).
THURSDAY 27
Aid for Ukraine
Ukrainian President Leonid Kuchma meets senior officials of the G7 nations,
IMF, World Bank and other finance officials in Winnipeg, Canada, to discuss
aid to Ukraine. He will press for up to Dollars 5.5bn to support the
country's nascent economic reforms. The US and Canada are due to raise
bilateral support to help cover a Dollars 600m balance of payments gap in
the fourth quarter. In return, they will urge Ukraine to accede to the
nuclear non-proliferation treaty and close the Chernobyl nuclear power
plant. Mr Kuchma should arrive in Winnipeg with a Dollars 360m credit from
the IMF, if initial macroeconomic reform steps satisfy the fund's board,
scheduled to vote on Wednesday.
Japan Tobacco, a privatisation issue rejected by nearly two-thirds of the
small investors who were offered shares, is to be listed on Tokyo, Nagoya
and Osaka stock exchanges. The first day's trading will prove whether small
investors were right to think the shares over-priced, at Y1.438m each.
Plaid Cymru, the Welsh nationalist party which has four MPs at Westminster,
starts its annual conference in Llandudno, north Wales (to Oct 30). In the
wake of the Labour Party's commitment to a Welsh assembly, delegates will be
pressing the case for a parliament with tax-raising powers.
FT Survey: Morocco.
Holidays: Turkmenistan, Zaire.
FRIDAY 28
Mozambique holds election
Two days of voting end in the country's first multi-party elections, amid
fears that it could go the way of Angola, which returned to civil war when
Jonas Savimbi refused to accept defeat in the 1992 election. President
Joaquim Chissano's ruling Frelimo party and Renamo, the former rebel
movement led by Afonso Dhlakama, are the main contenders for the presidency
and a 250-seat parliament. Some 2,000 UN and other observers will determine
whether the exercise is free and fair.
US economy: Analysts expect today's 'advance' US gross domestic product
figures to confirm a slow-down in the annualised rate of US growth to 2.8
per cent in the third quarter from the second quarter's robust 4.1 per cent.
The GDP deflator, the broadest measure of inflation, could be of greater
interest for financial markets if figures substantiate consensus forecasts
of a rise to 3 per cent from 2.9 per cent in the second quarter.
Malaysia's 1995 budget is presented today. A 2 per cent cut in corporation
tax to 30 per cent is expected as part of package to offer more incentives
to foreign and local investors. Restrictions on domestic credit are also
probable, to prevent the economy from overheating after seven years of above
8 per cent growth.
FT Survey: Portugal.
Holidays: Cyprus, Greece, Turkey.
WEEKEND 29-30
Scramble for EU portfolios
European Commission president- designate Jacques Santer holds an informal
meeting of commissioners- designate at Chateau Senningen in Luxembourg on
Saturday to discuss the allocation of portfolios. Failure to secure a deal
would be viewed as a blow to Santer's authority.
Macedonia holds a second round of elections for its 120-seat parliament on
Sunday. The Alliance for Macedonia coalition, led by ex-communists and
backed by President Kiro Gligorov, is expected to finish first after winning
some 30 per cent of the first-round vote, according to unofficial figures.
The Alliance is likely to resume governing with the Party for Democratic
Prosperity, representing Macedonia's sizeable ethnic Albanian minority.
Casablanca hosts the Middle East/North Africa Economic Summit on Sunday (to
Nov 1). Organised by the Council on Foreign Relations and the World Economic
Forum, it brings together 200 political leaders from 40 countries and 1,000
business people.
The conference aims to provide the economic foundations for a peaceful
Middle East after Israel's recent peace agreements with the Palestine
Liberation Organisation and with Jordan.
Clocks go back one hour in Canada, the US and Mexico on Sunday.
Compiled by Patrick Stiles and Angela Bleasdale. Fax: (+44) (0)171 873 3194.
