FT  30 JUN 94 / London Stock Exchange: Zeneca upbeat
Pharmaceuticals group Zeneca advanced 10 to 722p ahead of a significant
presentation of one of its new products and a broker recommendation.
Zeneca announced shortly before the market closed that it was holding a
presentation to leading psychiatrists on the results of clinical trials for
its new schizophrenia treatment Seroquel. In the announcement the company
said the drug was an important addition to treatment in an area of 'high
unmet medical needs'.
Stockbroker Greig Middleton also published a note recommending the stock.
Analyst Ms Julia Dickson said: 'There are good drugs for treating this
disease but they all have side effects. It looks as if this is efficacious
and does not have side effects.'
She added that last week's figures from chemicals group BTP had indicated
that recessionary conditions were over 'in every geographical area'.
Greig Middleton advises a switch out of Wellcome, which it sees as
overvalued by more than 100p. It believes suggestions that Wellcome has a
take-out price of around 900p a share are vastly optimistic. 'The recent
acquisition of Syntex by Roche was priced at 2.5 times historic sales; an
equivalent multiple would value Wellcome at only 589p,' said the
stockbroker. Wellcome ended 6 higher at 617p
Elsewhere, leading pharmaceuticals were driven higher by a strong
performance in the futures market. Glaxo added 10 at 553p and SmithKline
Beecham 'A' 9 at 409p.
Stocks with a heavy profile in the US market resisted the weakness in the US
dollar yesterday as they were supported by technical trading. Reuters
Holdings, the news and electronic information agency, shed just a penny to
438p.
The regional electricity stocks made further rapid progress as the market
continued to respond to the recent and more positive shift in expectations
about the forthcoming distribution review and the latest excellent dividend
announcements in the sector.
Eastern Electricity forged ahead 27 to 614p after the 19.8 per cent increase
in the dividend, which was well in excess of market forecasts, while
Northern, which lifted its dividend payment by 15.8 per cent, rose the same
amount to 670p. Other recs were also heavily supported, with South Western,
reporting this morning, up 17 at 601p.
Newspaper shares marked time as the selling prompted by the recent cuts in
cover prices dried up and marketmakers sat back to wait for the next set of
circulation figures.
June sales figures are expected at the end of next week and will give an
indication of whether newspapers, especially the mid-market tabloids which
have resisted the cuts, have held their ground.
However, the figures will represent only 10 days of the new regime and
analysts said the market would probably await the next set of figures in
early August before the price war is ratcheted up to a new intensity.
Telegraph shares dipped 6 to 379p, but Daily Mail and General Trust 'A' held
at 913p, United Newspapers, owner of the Daily Express, added 8 at 511p and
Mirror Group Newspapers firmed a penny to 127p.
Property shares powered ahead as the market latched on to the recent
upgrades in forecasts for commercial property values. With added support
from a strong gilts market, British Land was the sector's star performer as
the shares climbed 20 to 389p. Land Securities advanced 14 to 622p and
Brixton Estates 8 to 193p.
Positive sentiment for property stocks helped boost transport and property
group P&amp;O. The shares gained 18 to 640p.
Industrial group Charter was one of the day's best performing stocks. The
company announced it was paying Pounds 260m for Esab Group, the Swedish
welding equipment producer. The shares jumped 51 to 714p as the market
celebrated the purchase, which is to be partly funded by a one-for-four
convertible rights issue at 560p a unit. Mr Andrew Mitchell at Smith New
Court said the acquisition was 'made at the right time in the cycle and it
will be earnings enhancing'.
Insurance broker Lloyd Thompson fell 45 to 185p as the firm warned that
profits would be hit by lower interest rates and the fall in government
bonds over the past quarter.
Conglomerate Tomkins eased a penny to 214p on speculation that it might
launch a bid for food manufacturer Northern Foods, which appreciated 6 to
208p. Tomkins already owns baker RHM.
Broker recommendations in the US helped British Airways rise 9 to 376p.
Channel tunnel operator Eurotunnel underperformed the market, firming only a
penny to 272p, on reports that the Eurostar passenger train service which is
due to start at the end of this month will be delayed until the autumn.
Rolls-Royce gained 7 1/2 at 177p after Henderson Crosthwaite urged investors
to buy the stock, citing the prospect of a Saudi engine order in the near
term. TI eased 3 to 357p in volume of 2.8m. SG Warburg, the company's
broker, was said to have been a seller.
