FT  12 JAN 94 / Eurotunnel shares fall after high car fares announced
The shares of Eurotunnel, the company which will run trains through the
Channel tunnel, fell sharply yesterday after it announced higher than
expected fares for its passenger car shuttle service.
The fare for taking a car with driver and passengers through the tunnel
would range from a low of Pounds 125 for a special two day return to a high
of Pounds 310 for journeys at peak midsummer weekends. Cross channel fares
are considerably higher than most other short-sea routes worldwide.
The ferry companies, which had been fearing the outbreak of a price cutting
war on the Dover-Calais route, responded favourably to the fares
announcement. 'The size of the premium they are asking surprises even us,'
said Stena Sealink. 'If they are looking to building volumes they will have
to offer more attractive prices than this.'
The higher than expected fares prompted fears in the City that Eurotunnel
would not attract sufficient business to meet its traffic and revenue
projections. Its shares closed 17p lower at 608p while rival ferry company
P&amp;O closed 3p lower at 630p.
Sales of shuttle tickets, which start today, will be backed with a Pounds
25m pan-European marketing campaign advertising the simplicity of
Eurotunnel's fare structure. It has introduced four fare bands covering low,
high and mid-season with a peak rate for mid-summer weekends.
Travellers using the service will drive their cars into air-conditioned
wagons at Folkestone and remain with their vehicles for the 35 minute
journey through the tunnel to Calais. The total motorway to motorway time is
one hour, Eurotunnel said.
Shuttle journeys start on May 8 while through rail travel from London
Waterloo to Paris and Brussels for passengers without cars will begin in
June or July.
Announcing the fares, Mr Christopher Garnett, commercial director said the
Eurotunnel shuttle offered a unique service. Its benefits of speed,
frequency, reliability and ease of use, would be so compulsive that
customers would inevitably choose to travel by the shuttle.
Eurotunnel expects to carry 8m car passengers by 1996, about half of the
projected total cross channel market.
How cross-Channel fares line up Page 7
Editorial Comment Page 25
Lex Page 26
London stocks Page 44
