FT  02 JUL 94 / Lasmo wins battle against Enterprise bid
Lasmo won its hard-fought battle for independence when the Pounds 1.6bn
hostile bid from rival Enterprise Oil failed by an unexpectedly wide margin
yesterday.
Enterprise gained acceptances for only 23 per cent of the shares in addition
to the 9.8 per cent of Lasmo it bought in the market on Wednesday.
The Enterprise camp had been saying it expected a much closer finish. The
disappointing result drew some criticism of S. G. Warburg, the lead adviser
on the bid.
Mr Graham Hearne, chairman and chief executive of Enterprise, refused to
blame the advisers, saying: 'The responsibility rests with me. We are
naturally disappointed at the outcome of the bid. I still believe that the
assets fit together well, the terms were right and the price a fair one.'
However, the commercial arguments failed to convince most observers and the
lack of a cash element is thought to have swayed a number of institutions.
Instead, Enterprise was offering a mixture of new A shares and warrants
which Mr Rudolph Agnew, Lasmo chairman, successfully attacked as 'junk
paper'. Analysts criticised Warburg's handling of the bid and in particular
the apparent misreading of institutions' intentions. One analyst singled out
the actions of PDFM (formerly Phillips &amp; Drew Fund Management), Lasmo's
largest shareholder.
On Wednesday Enterprise bought nearly half of PDFM's stake at 169p a share,
suggesting it was worried that PDFM would not accept the paper offer. It
would have done better to buy from someone else as yesterday PDFM was one of
the few institutions to accept on behalf of its remaining stake. 'Tony Dye
(PDFM's investment director) deserves the biggest prize in this bid,' said a
member of the Enterprise camp. 'If he wants to, he will be able to buy the
shares back at much less on Monday.'
The announcement that the bid had lapsed came after the market closed,
leaving Enterprise up 9 1/2 p at 398 1/2 p and Lasmo 1 1/2 p higher at 136p.
Legal &amp; General also accepted the offer but Mercury Asset Management, the
fund manager owned by Warburg which Enterprise's advisers confidently
expected to accept for its 1.7 per cent stake, backed Lasmo. One institution
said: 'We genuinely did not decide which way to go until the last moment.'
The decision to extend the offer to US investors, who accounted for about a
fifth of the shares, was vindicated, with about half accepting the bid.
The Enterprise camp praised the defence campaign, pointing to the good
impression Mr Agnew and Mr Joe Darby, Lasmo's chief executive, made with
institutions.
Analysis, Page 10; London stocks, Page 15; Lex, Page 24
