FT  24 MAR 94 / Rover Maestro will live on in Bulgaria
Rover intends to start assembling Maestro cars and vans in Bulgaria by the
end of the year after production of the 11-year-old range has ceased in
Britain.
Maestro assembly line equipment will be shipped from Rover's plant at
Cowley, Oxford to a plant at Varna on the Black Sea. The company, a
subsidiary of BMW of Germany, said last night that the Maestro would be
assembled in Bulgaria from Cowley-supplied CKD - completely knocked down -
kits.
Rover said that it expected to set up a joint-venture company with Bulgarian
banks and other local partners within six months.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development has been approached to
participate in the project which has been under negotiation for several
years.
Rover plans to produce up to 10,000 Maestros a year in Bulgaria with a
significant share of the output being exported to other east European
markets.
Rover is expected to take a significant minority stake in the joint venture,
which would be secured through the provision of the car and the transfer of
technology. It would not make any financial contribution, the company said
last night.
Both car and van ranges would be equipped with the two-litre diesel engine
currently fitted in the UK Maestro and Montego ranges.
A 12-strong Rover team is in Bulgaria investigating the Varna plant - where
the Maestro will be assembled. 'We are going to strip out the plant and
re-fit it,' the company said last night.
The Bulgarian project is the most advanced of several foreign ventures that
have been under consideration by Rover.
The UK carmaker is also involved in negotiations which could lead eventually
to the Montego being assembled in India. The large family car was launched
in the UK in 1984 and is still assembled in small volumes at the Cowley
plant.
Last year Rover signed a memorandum of understanding with the Sipani group
in India which could lead to a joint venture for the local assembly of the
Montego and Rover's two-litre turbo-diesel engine.
The group also signed a memorandum of understanding with the Indonesian
government last year to lead the development of a national car project to
design, develop and manufacture a small car for production in Indonesia.
