FT  14 MAY 94 / Arafat struggles to name cabinet: The PLO leader has a hard
task balancing rival elements of the Palestinian community
Ten days after the Middle East peace deal was signed Mr Yassir Arafat is
still struggling to name the Palestinian national authority which will act
as a de facto cabinet for self-rule in the Gaza Strip and Jericho.
In choosing the 24-member authority the chairman of the Palestine Liberation
Organisation must carefully balance powerful families, different political
factions, Christians and Moslems, men and women, the old and the young.
Most difficult of all perhaps he has to bridge the deep gulf in attitudes
between the exiled PLO leadership and those Palestinians from the occupied
territories who have experienced 27 years of repressive Israeli occupation
and who are suspicious of the 'outsiders'.
Many Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza believe the outsiders have
become corrupt and distanced from the lives of ordinary Palestinians. They
also fear that the Tunis-based exiles have little enthusiasm for the
democratic ethos that has sprouted during the seven year intifada.
Palestinian experts say consensus building is a job Mr Arafat does best. For
a quarter of a century he has remained chairman of the PLO, surviving
military and political setbacks and often bloody internal challenges. But he
is clearly having great difficulty in naming the authority which should have
been in place last Wednesday.
PLO officials say several nominees like Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen) and Jamal
Sourani - all members of the 18-strong PLO executive committee - have flatly
refused to join the authority. It was unclear last night whether Farouk
Kaddoumi, head of the PLO's political department, would remain the PLO's
foreign minister. Mr Yassir Abed Rabbo, an important Arafat adviser and head
of a small Palestinian faction based in Jericho, has not yet made up his
mind. Many 'insiders' have also been cautious about joining or have placed
conditions on their acceptance.
The reluctance of many PLO leaders to sit on the authority reflects
widespread criticism inside and outside the West Bank and Gaza of the
concessions Mr Arafat made in negotiating the peace accord. Many prefer to
keep their hands clean of self-rule and position themselves for a possible
future leadership challenge should Mr Arafat fail to deliver on the high
expectations of Palestinians.
The difficulties were demonstrated yesterday after Mr Nabil Shaath, a senior
PLO official, announced an 'official' list of 15 appointees. Mr Samir
Ghoshe, a PLO executive committee member, and Mrs Hanan Ashrawi, former
Palestinian spokeswoman, were on the list but both denied they would accept
a post. Mrs Ashrawi said her plans to lead a watchdog on democracy, human
rights and corruption, remained.
A majority of the members will be 'insiders' from the West Bank and Gaza. At
least one woman and one Christian are on the authority. Several important
families are represented and Mr Arafat is carefully picking people from
different parts of the West Bank and Gaza to accommodate the strong feeling
of local community in the territories.
Mr Faisal Husseini, the head of the powerful Arab East Jerusalem Husseini
family, is on the list. Mr Husseini has said he wishes to have the portfolio
of Jerusalem - the issue which has been shelved in the peace accord but
which is the single most important issue to Palestinians.
To appeal to the marginalised Christian community Mr Arafat has named Mr
Elias Freij, the Mayor of Bethlehem who will be in charge of tourism  - the
sector Palestinians feel will develop quickly.
A particularly popular appointment is Mrs Intisar al-Wazir (Umm Jihad), the
wife of Abu Jihad, the PLO's former number two who was assassinated by
Israeli commandos in 1988. Abu Jihad, who was until his death in charge of
military operations, is perhaps the most popular figure in the territories.
Since his death Mrs al-Wazir has run the PLO's welfare fund for Palestinian
martyrs and their families and she will get the social welfare portfolio.
Among the outsiders named so far are Mr Ahmed Qurie (Abu Alaa), the PLO
official who negotiated the secret peace accord in Oslo and the Israeli-PLO
economic protocol and Mr Yasser Amr, a Jordan-based PLO Executive Committee
member. Mr Qurie is expected to be in charge of economics and relations with
donors and Mr Amr will probably have the education portfolio.
Those not yet named but expected to be on the authority include Mr Jawid-al
Ghossein, a London- based businessman who has been in charge of the
Palestine National Fund (PLO finance ministry), and Gen Nasser Yousef. Mr
Ghossein will have the finance and Gen Yousef the police portfolios.
Almost all those named to the authority are either from Mr Arafat's Fatah
faction of the PLO or are close to the Palestinian leader. Mr Arafat said
yesterday he hoped to go to Jericho next month.
