FT  14 FEB 94 / Pay falls 'below old minimum rates'
The abolition last summer of the wages councils, which set minimum pay rates
for about 2.5m people, has resulted in a substantial drop in pay rates, the
Low Pay Network says today.
In the first detailed survey of the consequences of abolition, the
independent lobby group found that 18.1 per cent of jobs were paying below
the last wages council rate.
The survey, covering 1,500 vacancies at 46 Jobcentres, found that 27.1 per
cent of jobs in the retail sector were paid below the last wages council
rate, followed by hairdressing with 20.8 per cent, the clothing industry
with 13.8 per cent, and hotel and catering with 12.2 per cent.
It found underpayment ranging from an average of 9.2 per cent in the
clothing sector to an average of 22.6 per cent in hairdressing, where the
last set rate was Pounds 2.88 an hour.
Before abolishing the wages councils, the government argued that removing
the statutory minimum wage would have little impact on wage levels or
employment.
This was based partly on research into the effects of taking away wages
council cover in 1986 from people under 21. This found that only a small
number of people were affected. The Low Pay Network, however, said that
about a third of young people were hit by the move.
Ms Gabrielle Cox, author of the report, said: 'It is clear that the
abolition of wages councils has caused a significant impact on pay levels.
It is alarming that so soon after abolition nearly a fifth of wages council
vacancies show an erosion of pay rates.'
One Whitehall official conceded that the survey looked thorough but pointed
out that the proportion of people being offered hourly rates below the
minimum might have been similar before abolition.
Campaigners estimate that at least 15 per cent of people in wages council
jobs were underpaid before abolition, and many such jobs were advertised in
Jobcentres.
What Price Abolition? Greater Manchester Low Pay Unit, 23 New Mount Street,
Manchester M4 4DE. Pounds 1.50.
