FT  21 FEB 94 / Lilley faces call to kill welfare state
The Adam Smith Institute, the think-tank that pioneered Thatcherite policies
in the 1980s, plans to put Mr Peter Lilley, the rightwing social security
secretary, on the spot next week by calling for the end of the welfare
state.
The Conservative party's leading free-market campaigners are planning an
assault on its welfare state policies, believing ministers have lost the
will to carry through their long-term review of public spending.
The institute will argue that a full range of benefits - such as
unemployment and invalidity allowances - should be privatised and handled by
insurance companies.
It also calls on the government to push ahead with plans to allow more
people to opt out of the State Earnings Related Pension Scheme (Serps). It
proposes that the government should borrow money on the international debt
market so that it can pay more people to quit the scheme as soon as
possible.
Department of Social Security officials yesterday sought to distance Mr
Lilley from some of the institute's 'unworkable proposals' which they fear
could embarrass the government before the local and European elections.
The institute's pamphlet, written by its president Mr Madsen Pirie, is
likely to give a new impetus to the hard core of Tory backbenchers who are
increasingly frustrated at what they see as the timidity with which the
government is pursuing Thatcherite reforms.
A leading member of the Thatcherite 92 Group said: 'Many Tory MPs will be
sympathetic to the institute's call for the end of the welfare state. We
would like Mr Lilley to speed up his review of social security spending.'
Another backbencher dismissed government concerns about the timing of a
controversial document before the local and European elections in May and
June. 'We should not stop thinking about the future just because there are
difficult elections ahead' he said.
Mr Lilley is understood to believe that borrowing money now to help people
contract out of Serps has an attraction because the government could repay
the loan in 20 or 30 years time with the larger sums that had been saved.
However, he is concerned about the problem of paying high interest rates on
short-term borrowings of capital that could only be paid back over decades.
Mr Norman Lamont, the former chancellor, recently said that the fundamental
review of public spending initiated last year by Mr Michael Portillo, the
chief secretary to the Treasury, had not had a strong enough impact on the
last Budget.
Another rightwing Tory MP claimed yesterday that Mr Portillo's review of
areas such as Home Office spending had not been pushed through strongly
enough. He said the chief secretary had called for a sweeping reassessment
only to find substantial funds had been granted for prison building.
