FT  20 JUL 94 / Bretton Woods 50 Years: Modern tasks for the money men -
Approval from the IMF and World Bank can be a trigger for private investment
Ten days ago in Naples, the summit of the Group of Seven industrial nations
called for a review of the key international institutions that have served
the world for the past 50 years. It is not just because 50 is a good age at
which to take stock. But the world economy and the world financial system
have changed beyond recognition over this period, and continue to evolve at
a staggering rate. In the last few years we have seen a sea change in the
world political environment. We need to make sure we have institutions well
adapted to our future needs.
Fifty years ago this week, the conference in Bretton Woods which gave birth
to the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank came to an end. It is
difficult today to conceive of the world that conditioned the visions of
John Maynard Keynes, Harry White, and their colleagues, who met at Bretton
Woods. It was a world still at war, only a month after the D-Day landings.
Memories of the collapse of world trade and the breakdown of international
monetary order before the war were still fresh.
Against this background, the conference aimed to ensure that the economic
beggar-my-neighbourism of the 1930s, which provided the backdrop to the rise
of fascism and the onset of war in Europe, would not rear its ugly head
again. That required the creation of a free, open and stable world trading
and financial system. In the following years, both institutions had to
respond to many changes, including the breakdown of the Bretton Woods
exchange rate system.
Today, the Bretton Woods institutions face new challenges just as great as
those of 50 years ago: the consequences of the end of communism; the massive
growth and integration of the world's capital markets; and the recognition
that economic success depends on a combination of market oriented structural
and macro economic policies, cutting across the traditional division of
labour between the Fund and the Bank.
In the post-cold war world, there is clearly still a need for World Bank and
IMF lending during difficult periods of adjustment for countries, while
macro-economic policies are stabilised and micro-economic distortions are
removed. And they have a continuing role in lending to the poorest countries
on concessional terms. But the Bretton Woods institutions can only provide a
proportion of countries' capital needs. Lending by the multilateral
institutions accounted for less than 20 per cent of total net capital flows
to developing countries in 1993.
In some cases, the signal provided by their lending is more important than
the lending itself. An IMF seal of approval often provides the trigger for
private, long-term investment. Indeed, while many developing countries,
including the poorest, need continuing assistance on concessional terms
through the World Bank's International Development Association, the
reduction in the Bank's lending to some developing countries this year is a
welcome sign of their success in attracting private capital inflows.
It is the private sector which is the engine for growth in this new phase of
global economic development. And the private sector in developing countries
now accounts for an increasing share of their overseas borrowing, growing
from just 13 per cent five years ago to around 40 per cent today.
The division of labour between the Fund and the Bank, and their efficiency
and governance as institutions, will also rightly come under continuing
scrutiny. While I believe the Fund should broadly continue to focus on the
macro economy, and the Bank on structural change, we need to recognise the
clear inter-connection between the two functions.
It is essential that the Fund and Bank co-operate closely with each other,
as well as with the regional development banks, the OECD, UN agencies, and
bilateral donors, so as to provide clear and coherent economic advice and
support to their members.
Both institutions face special challenges in helping to meet the needs of
the poorest countries, and the poorest groups within these countries . The
World Bank's main objective is poverty reduction and sustainable
development. The Fund has also helped these countries through policy advice,
and by offering lending on concessional terms.
The Fund must retain and enhance its pre-eminent role in providing frank
advice on the economies of all its members. This will become more important
as the international economic and financial system becomes more integrated.
The Fund has, and will have, a role in encouraging international discussion
of economic and financial issues, and convergence on low and stable
inflation. But I do not see any real prospect in present circumstances of
moving to a system of managed exchange rates administered by the Fund.
These are the general challenges that the Fund and Bank have to face up to
as we approach the next century. But I also have four more specific
suggestions.
First, the Fund should now give priority to removing the remaining
impediments to the free international movement of capital. Convertible
currencies for trading purposes encouraged the growth of trade, bringing
great benefit to the world economy. The free flow of investment brings
similar benefits. The Fund should now be working for worldwide abolition of
exchange controls on capital flows.
Second, the World Bank group, while continuing to improve its support for
institution building and social investment in the developing countries,
should also increase its emphasis on promoting private sector development -
a change supported by the report of Paul Volcker's Bretton Woods Commission.
This requires help for countries to create the conditions to attract private
capital, from home or overseas. It also requires increasing the volume and
quality of capital flowing to the private sectors of developing countries.
The International Finance Corporation, the World Bank group's channel for
investing in the private sector, has a key and expanding role to play.
Third, the evidence suggests that in many countries around the world,
including the former communist countries in transition, temporary financing
needs are greater than can be met by the Fund under current rules of access
to its resources. I believe that countries making strong efforts to reform
should be granted increased access to IMF resources.
Fourth, I believe that the Fund, and possibly the Bank as well, should
explore ways to produce an increase in resources available on a concessional
basis to the poorest and most indebted countries.
Helping to bring the former communist countries into the global economy is a
fitting end to the first 50 years of endeavour by the Bretton Woods
institutions. Fifty years ago, the immediate need was to reconstruct
economies devastated by war.
Now, a priority is to help in the reconstruction of economies in Europe,
Asia and elsewhere devastated by years of communist ideology. But that
challenge is only a particular example of the institutions' general mandate.
Their continuing task is to help to promote sound economic and financial
governance in member countries, and to create the conditions for harmonious
economic and financial relationships between their members. We are fortunate
that the institutions have risen to that task over the last 50 years. The
task and the challenge are even more important now, as the economies and
finances of member countries become more and more closely inter-connected in
a single world system.
The author is the UK chancellor of the exchequer.
Previous articles in the series appeared on June 21 and 28 and July 8 and 15
