FT  07 FEB 94 / Survey of Emerging Markets (4): Wide quest for pot of gold -
Profile of Mark Mobius
Mark Mobius, president of Templeton Emerging Markets Fund, gives two
addresses on his business card - one in Hong Kong and one in Singapore  -
but he might more correctly take a leaf out of the book of Truman Capote's
heroine Holly Golightly in Breakfast at Tiffany's and simply put
'travelling'.
For nearly 10 months of the year the 57-year-old bachelor is on the road in
far-flung parts of Asia, Africa and Latin America in pursuit of would-be
wealth for armchair investors back in the industrialised countries.
He now covers more than 20 countries, helped by a team of consultants in
situ, exploring mining operations, digging up agricultural investment
opportunities and inspecting production plants in search of the potential
pot of gold in some of the developing world's more unlikely spots.
Recently he returned from a tour of a pasta flour mill in Botswana. The
flour is used to make spaghetti and cookies, big business in that part of
the world in spite of the dearth of Italian mamas and big-eyed bambinos.
Botswana's proximity to South Africa - the two are neighbouring states  -
where there are government controls on the sale of flour, allows Botswana
traders to ship in higher quality flour at competitive prices. This is good
news for the South African bakers, who otherwise have to put up with batches
cut with poorer grades: quality is extremely difficult to maintain.
What is good for the bakers is also good for the factory, which has a ready
stream of business. And what is good for the factory must also be good for
any investors - the clinching factor for Dr Mobius, one of the leading
lights in emerging markets funds.
Templeton's Emerging Markets Fund, over which he presides and which stood at
USDollars 364m at the end of last year, has risen an annualised average of
61.6 per cent over the past three years. Last year it rose 97 per cent. The
fund has a portfolio which spans citrus fruit plantations in Swaziland and
tyre manufacturers in Indonesia, and is complemented by the Dollars 1.39bn
Templeton Developing Markets Trust.
In 1987, when Templeton launched the Templeton Emerging Market Fund it was
the world's first such fund listed on a stock exchange with investments in
emerging markets as its specific objective. Altogether, the group now has
some USDollars 4.6bn under management in 20 emerging markets' funds and
portfolios.
Of course, Dr Mobius has a wide horizon: the emerging nations cover 77 per
cent of the world's land area and represent 85 per cent of its population,
he says - although only 23 per cent of the world's gross domestic product.
In spite of this, when it comes to strategy, painstaking research and
attention to detail are paramount. Not for nothing does Dr Mobius quote Sir
Arthur Conan Doyle: 'It has long been an axiom of mine that the little
things are definitely the most important.' It is also for this reason that
he spends so much of his own time travelling extensively.
'Very often the kinds of information we need cannot be obtained readily. You
have to dig for it. We have about 24 analysts, but not all travel as much as
me. The idea is for us to understand what's happening on the ground,' he
says.
Dr Mobius - who has not married and has no children - has spent 25 years
working in Asia, Africa and Latin America, operating his regional economics
and research consulting firm based in Hong Kong throughout the 1970s.
In 1980 he moved to international securities firm Vickers da Costa (which
has subsequently merged with Citibank), again starting off in Hong Kong but
moving three years later to Taiwan to open the firm's office there and
direct operations in India, Indonesia, Thailand, the Philippines and Korea.
From 1983 to 1986, he was president of Taiwan's first and biggest investment
management firm, International Investment Trust Company, and joined
Templeton International in 1987.
Equally peripatetic as a student, Dr Mobius has augmented his bachelors and
masters degrees from Boston university with further studies in the US - at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he obtained his Ph. D. in
economics and political science, and at the University of Wisconsin - as
well as at the University of Mexico and Kyoto University of Japan.
Nowadays the stops are shorter and - contrary to most people's post-student
travelling experiences - possibly conducted in more rudimentary lodgings.
Speaking to him a week apart will often mean calling different countries.
While eschewing the black-and-white alternatives of picking countries or
companies first, Dr Mobius tends towards the bottom-up approach: 'We look at
stocks first then look at the country through the eyes of the company and
how it is being affected by the macropolitical economic social financial
situation in that environment: not just in that country but in that part of
the country.
'For example, Botswana is as big as France so you cannot make
generalisations. Then we look at the political suitability because it may be
favourable depending what side of the fence one is on.'
While emerging funds have proved to be voguish vehicles - on the back of
their often impressive returns - Dr Mobius is quick to stress these are
long-term investments and not without risk.
'There is a lot more interest in emerging market funds and for that reason
we have to make sure we warn people of the dangers, and don't mislead them
into thinking this is manna from heaven,' he says.
