FT  02 JUN 94 / Industrial price increases revive fears of inflation
A new survey from the National Association of Purchasing Managers yesterday
showed prices in the manufacturing sector continued to rise last month.
The NAPM said its composite index of activity in the manufacturing sector
remained steady last month at 57.7, the same as April and a level that
generally indicates an expanding economy.
But another sharp jump in the price component of the closely watched survey
helped to revive inflation fears in a nervous bond market. The NAPM price
index rose last month to 71.5, its highest level in four years and a marked
increase from 63.2 in April and 49.9 six months ago.
'Economic growth continued at the same strong rate in May as in April,
resulting in the broadest increase in manufacturing employment since late
1988 and the most widespread price increases paid by the manufacturing
sector since October 1990,' said Mr Ralph Kauffman, chairman of the NAPM's
business survey committee and manager of procurement at Oryx Energy.
Although the price index showed a sharp increase, economists cautioned that
that does not necessarily indicate sharply higher prices. Rather, the survey
assesses how widespread higher prices are across the economy by measuring
the percentage of purchasing managers questioned who reported that they were
paying higher prices for their raw materials.
Nevertheless, some analysts said the NAPM's supplier deliveries index rose
in May to 60.7, its highest level in six years, pointing to the difficulty
suppliers are experiencing in meeting their customers' orders. Although some
of this increase may be attributed to a road hauliers' strike, it could also
herald price pressures.
Many stock market economists had anticipated an increase in the broader
composite NAPM index, so yesterday's stable result provided less fuel for
fears of overheating in the economy.
Meanwhile, the Commerce Department reported that construction spending rose
in April by 0.6 per cent to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of Dollars
508.5bn. The department also revised upwards its estimate of March
construction spending to an annual rate of Dollars 505.4bn, a 1.9 per cent
jump from February.
