FT  22 SEP 94 / Markets Report: D-Mark stabilises
The D-Mark strengthened against the dollar and the pound yesterday as
Germany's M3 money supply figures came in lower than expected, writes Motoko
Rich.
Against the dollar, the D-Mark finished in London at DM1.5449 from DM1.5508.
Against the pound, it closed in London at DM2.438, up from DM2.4446.
The US currency came under some pressure as US treasury bond markets
interpreted a higher than expected rise in housing starts as an indication
that an interest rate hike is imminent. In recent months, the bond markets
have been leading the dollar.
The dollar fluctuated against the yen in the face of a raft of ambivalent
comments from US officials about trade talks with Japan in advance of the
September 30 deadline for sanctions.
In London the dollar closed against the yen at Y97.70 from Y97.75.
The D-Mark turned in a strong performance, due in part to market relief that
the M3 money supply showed a slowdown in annualised growth. Some investors
had spent the past few days preparing for a rise.
The M3 grew an annualised 8.2 per cent in August, below the consensus
forecast of 8.9 per cent and below a year-on-year growth rate of 9.8 per
cent in July.
Following the release of the data, Bundesbank deputy president Mr Johann
Wilhelm Gaddum said he was confident that the pace of money supply growth
would continue to slow down.
While some economists warned that the Bundesbank could use this news as an
opportunity to raise rates, Mr Gaddum further calmed the markets when he
said: 'We cannot be satisfied with the current inflation rate.'
The markets took these comments as reassurance that the Bundesbank would not
soon move to cut interest rates. 'The market feels that the bottom in the
German interest rate cycle has been established,' said Mr Neil MacKinnon,
economist at Citibank.
Another factor helping the D-Mark was a general opinion poll taken by the
Allensbach opinion research group, which showed the liberal Free Democratic
party, Chancellor Helmut Kohl's junior coalition partner, currently enjoying
8.5 per cent support for its bid to return to the national parliament in
general elections in October.
Worries that a poor performance by the FDP would force a coalition between
Chancellor Kohl's Christian Democrats and the Social Democratic party had
been rattling the markets. 'The markets have taken some comfort from the
poll and the D-Mark has regained its composure,' said Mr David Cocker,
economist at Chemical Bank.
The dollar traded within tight ranges, restrained by a 21.1 per cent rise in
US housing starts to 1.442m units, above the average forecast of 1.40m and
against revised July housing starts of 1.413m units.
Mr Cocker said: 'The strong housing starts seem to suggest that the amount
of Federal reserve tightening to date has not been sufficient and leads
markets to worry about inflation, which depresses bonds and leads to a
sell-off of dollars.'
The dollar bounced around against the yen after several US officials sounded
off about trade talks with Japan. US Commerce secretary Mr Ron Brown and Mr
Mickey Kantor, US trade representative, unsettled markets with vague
comments about the progress of talks.
But analysts were most impressed by Treasury Undersecretary Mr Lawrence
Summers, who warned that the dollar would not be a 'tool of trade policy'.
Mr Adrian Cunningham, senior currency economist at UBS said: 'If the trade
discussions were going badly, no US official would have gone as far as to
say that they are not talking the dollar lower.'
Sterling edged up against the dollar in response to better than forecast
non-European Union trade figures. The seasonally adjusted trade gap dropped
to Pounds 262m after a revised Pounds 384m in July. The consensus
expectation was for a rise to Pounds 500m.
In London, the pound closed against the dollar at Dollars 1.5781 from
Dollars 1.5764.
The UK currency was also helped by the minutes of the 28 July monthly
monetary meeting between Mr Kenneth Clarke, chancellor of the exchequer, and
Mr Eddie George, Bank of England governor, which suggested that interest
rates rises were being used as pre-emptive rather than reactive strikes
against inflation.
The Bank of England set a rate if 5 21/32 per cent on money market repos and
secured loan facilities commencing today, maturing on October 6 and October
20. After forecasting a shortage of Pounds 350m, the bank provided Pounds
350m in liquidity at 5 5/8 per cent. Overnight rates traded between 3 1/2
and 5 1/4 per cent.
The September short sterling contract, which expired yesterday, traded 9,150
lots to settle at 94.06 from 94.03. The December contract traded 66,670 lots
to finish at 93.07 from 93.03.
