FT  05 NOV 94 / Property: Sunny Cyprus, where the good life abounds - Gerald
Cadogan finds plenty to attract house and flat buyers
The choice is straightforward if you plan to buy a holiday or retirement
home in Cyprus: either a traditional village house, where you balance the
good points of an older property against the possible drawbacks of life in a
small community, or a house or apartment in an efficient new development.
Old houses are dearer and harder to find than a few years ago but still
attract do-it-yourself enthusiasts who are happy to spend years improving
the property - usually with help from local builders who speak English and
have probably worked in Britain.
The developments, with their swimming pools and newly-planted trees, are
plentiful and good value starting at around CPounds 27,000. (A Cypriot pound
is worth about Pounds 1.33 sterling).
People from the UK - including many British Cypriots - make up the majority
of foreign house-buyers. They find many familiar things. Social systems and
laws, even electric plugs, are much the same. Motorists drive on the left,
and the retired are entitled to buy a car duty-free.
Everybody speaks English and has a relative in the UK - usually north London
 -and much business is done in that language rather than Greek. Thanks to a
generous double taxation treaty, retired Britons can receive their pensions
free of any UK withholding tax and will pay Cypriot income tax at only 3 to
5 per cent, a tenth of the local rate, with the first CPounds 2,000 exempt.
Buying is surprisingly easy. Foreigners can purchase a flat or house with up
to two donums (2,675 sq metres) of land or a building plot not exceeding
that size. The island's Council of Ministers must give permission, but
normally this is a formality so long as you show an annual income of Pounds
8,000.
You must pay with funds brought into the country. If you decide to sell up
and leave, you can take the purchase price with you (plus any gain at a rate
of CPounds 10,000 a year).
You are liable to pay capital gains tax on any indexed profit above CPounds
10,000. The long-established land registry guarantees title.
The land registry's transfer fee (5 to 8 per cent of the declared value) is
unavoidable, as is 1.5 per cent stamp duty. Annual property taxes and
dustbin collection charges are low, however.
Possible water cuts to homes in the summer (which tourists in hotels do not
experience) are the only snag for buyers. Always inquire about the supply.
Paphos, in the south-west of the island, is good for new developments and
also has the advantage of its own airport. (The main one is at Larnaca, in
the south-east.) The beaches are sandy, the climate sunny and warm, and the
Roman mosaics stunning.
The Nicosia-Limassol motorway is advancing to Paphos. When it is finished in
two or three years, making it easy for Nicosia people to commute every
weekend, property prices are bound to rise, so now is a good time to buy.
Many have. 'There must be 5,000 Brits around Paphos,' says Michael
Cartwright of Leptos Estates, a Paphos-based developer which has built 6,000
units already.
Leptos bought 250 acres of hillside and planted them with trees to make
Kamares Village, where a two-bedroom detached villa may cost CPounds 56,000.
If you do it from scratch, plots start at CPounds 25,000 and building from
around CPounds 46,000. Owners have a clubhouse and pool. High and facing
west, Kamares is ideal for watching sunsets and is cooler than down by the
harbour.
Among other Paphos developments by Leptos is Tremythia Gardens. It is being
built around a clump of tremythia (pistachio) trees, which are a protected
species. Flat prices start at CPounds 27,000.
Another developer of repute is Cybarco, part of the Lanitis group of
companies, which has projects from Larnaca to Paphos. They include Asomatos
Villas (plots from CPounds 17,200 and villa construction from CPounds
58,000) in the orange plantations between Limassol and the British military
bases at Episkopi (army) and Akrotiri (RAF).
The smell is heavenly when the trees are in flower. In winter, flamingos
visit the Akrotiri salt lake.
Along the road to Paphos, the views from Cybarco's Pissouri Villas (CPounds
46,700 to CPounds 63,900), on the hill above Pissouri village, encompass
rich vine country, the sea and the Troodos massif where Cypriots escape to
be cool, eat trout and look at painted Byzantine churches.
In a traditional house, the basic unit is a long hall of stone or stone and
mud-brick. Roughly-shaped ceiling beams support a packing of clay and reeds
or straw. If there is an upper storey, it has a stone floor and a high
ceiling for coolness. The stairs are outside. Often, several of these
buildings, of different heights, are set around a courtyard.
If you can find one, a restored house can cost from CPounds 60,000 to
CPounds 80,000, says Paphos agent Renos Pitros. Unrestored, they are
cheaper, especially if inland. A CPounds 5,000 shell 20 miles from Paphos
could cost Pounds 25,000 near the town, with restoration costs of CPounds
20,000 to CPounds 30,000.
Further information: in Paphos - Cybarco (236 337), Leptos Estates (233 775)
and Renos Pitros (235 344). In London - Cybarco (071-436 3881) and Leptos
(081-340 8096).
The FT is organising a Special Invitation visit to Cyprus in April-May 1995.
See page XIII.
