FT  21 JUN 94 / Leading Article: Agency dangers
The creation of executive agencies has been one of the successes of the
Conservative reforms of the civil service. More than 60 per cent of civil
servants now work in more than 80 agencies, providing services such as the
payment of social security benefits, the management of prisons and the
testing of heavy goods vehicles. By allowing managers to focus on the
delivery of a particular service, the agency approach has improved the
efficiency and effectiveness of government services.
The success of agencies has also encouraged managers to adopt a more
entrepreneurial approach to the businesses they manage, seeking ways of
developing and expanding them. In some cases, the result has been to squeeze
the agency's assets - for example, by encouraging more foreign tourists to
visit historic royal palaces. In others, new business has come from
'value-added' services at premium prices, such as testing heavy goods
vehicles on operators' premises to improve fleet utilisation.
There are dangers, however, in this new entrepreneurialism if it brings
agencies into competition with the private sector. This is what appears to
be happening at HMSO, the agency that publishes government legislation such
as acts of parliament, statutory instruments and codes of practice. Legal
publishers have complained that HMSO is using its power to license the
reproduction of crown copyright texts to freeze them out of the market.
For example, HMSO will no longer license the reproduction of some
legislative source materials that are available under its own imprint. And
it is demanding royalties at full commercial rates for electronic
publishing, while itself entering the business through joint ventures. The
publishers say that the more restrictive approach dates from the conversion
of HMSO to an agency in 1988.
In any other line of business, such behaviour would soon fall foul of the
competition regulators. Yet as part of government, agencies are not covered
by the legislation on restrictive practices. While the Office of Fair
Trading would investigate a complaint, there is no legal remedy it could
take to stop anti-competitive behaviour against a crown organisation such as
an agency.
HMSO's new approach to licensing crown copyright materials indicates that
stronger supervision is needed to stop agencies using their privileged
position to damage potential competitors. If government bodies are
encouraged to trade and compete for business, they should be subject to the
same regulatory regime as the private sector. And if agencies are in a
position to compete with the private sector, they should be at the top of
the list for early privatisation.
