FT  03 SEP 94 / Arts: Stand-ups lose out - The Edinburgh Festival
The Edinburgh Fringe has sent an unequivocal signal to the funnybone of the
nation - the day of the stand-up comedian is over, writes Antony Thorncroft.
No more will audiences accept that rambling monologues about the contents of
a bathroom cabinet are necessarily hilarious. Resistance is mounting to
comedians who intrusively question the sexual habits of people whose only
crime is that they have paid to see a show.
Of course attractive personalities, competent entertainers and imaginative
jokers will survive. But the era of unsuccessful actors who embraced
stand-up because it enabled them to show off in public has passed.
The death knell came from the Perrier Award for the best comedy act on the
Fringe. Five stand-ups, including the surrealistically original Harry Hill,
were knocked down and the money went to a pair of Australians whose comic
roots streched down to music-hall and beyond.
Lano and Woodley have a little of Morecambe and Wise in their cosy
domesticity; more of Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis in John Cane's aggressive
good-looking dominance and Frank Wood's screwball innocent passiveness; and
whole lashings of the silent movies.
But Lano and Woodley won the Perrier because they were not stand-ups. Scott
Capurro was voted Most Promising Newcomer because there were just so many
gay American comedians on the Fringe this year. Cappuro describes himself
precisely as a cross between Karen Carpenter and Barry Manilow. He begins
perched on a stool, all camp confidence - 'Let's get the big question out of
the way - are you Barbara or Judy?'  - but soon wallows in homosexual angst
and gay initiation rites. To a nation that has taken Julian Clary to its
fireside bosom the only reaction to this sob stuff is: 'So what?'
Another American, Will Durst, is a graduate of the 'ain't life odd' school
of comedy, University of California Campus. His material is unashamedly
American, which means, as a good left wing stand-up, he has problems
knocking Bill Clinton. Still with a catchphrase 'Only in America', he is
scarcely bereft of targets.
Of Ross Perott: 'Elect a billionaire for president instead of a politician
and cut out the middle man.' Of politicians generally: 'Voting is like
swimming towards the least hungry shark.' It is depressing stuff: there are
no heroes here. His life view, and act, is summed up in his pay-off.
''Carter, Nixon and Kennedy are in a sinking ship. Women and children
first,' said Carter. 'Screw them', says Nixon. 'I thought we already had,'
said Kennedy. 'The last one to leave can turn out the light.''
It is a relief to turn to English eccentrics. Richard Herring is Fat, which
is the name of the show, but Herring is also funny. His scene is food - his
'chocolate raison d'etre' - and his imagination runs amok as he justifies
putting on a stone or two in research to reveal, almost plausibly, that God
is Mr Kipling: you never see him; and he turns rubbish into beautiful food.
His cleverness just about allows him to get away with a ramshackle format,
reminiscent of the Goons on a good day.
For well-turned wit, pointed social comment and verbal pyrotechnics you
still cannot beat Kit and the Widow. This is their 10th year on the Fringe
and they celebrate by dragging it up in kilt and trews and giving a potted
history of their Edinburgh nights. From 1984 when they shared a flat with
Hugh Grant - Huge Grunts in those days - through to 1987 when the Widow -
'the Holly Hunter of light entertainment' - first spoke, to now when their
annual update on the Royal Family, 'Postcards from the Edge' remains the
definitive history of the Windsors.
The new songs are strong. The Jackson-Presley union is celebrated in 'a
marriage made in Neverland - where little boys disappear without trace' and
Kit gets to camp his socks off as Marlene Dietrich unable to get her tongue
round 'Raspberry Ripple Rouser'. With their own tongues firmly up their
innuendos, Kit and the Widow get away with more bawdy than a busload of
stand-ups.
With almost 200 comedy shows straining for a laugh on the Fringe some smiles
are inevitable. Among the new faces who scored was Julian Dutton, with an
act that has been banished for more than a politically correct decade -
impersonations of famous actors. But his Albert Finney is auditioning for
Thunderbirds: His John Le Mesurier for the role of the Godfather; and Robert
de Niro for Noddy. Well, he got through to me.
