FT  13 JUN 94 / Letters to the Editor: Denmark more than just an 'ally' in
fight against EU fraud
Sir, I was pleased that the FT showed interest in the serious problem that
fraudulent use of Community funds constitutes with your article, 'A
labyrinth of loopholes' (May 19). As more and more resources are being
administered through the Community budget, the potential scale of the fraud
increases. The removal of internal frontiers with the creation of the Single
Market also poses new challenges in the fight against fraud.
However, the article needs some correction. It says concern about fraud is
most strongly felt in Germany, which has found allies in the Netherlands,
Denmark and the UK.
In my opinion Denmark has been more than just an ally. Denmark has played a
very active role in enhancing the focus on the war against EU fraud. The
protection of the financial interests of the Community was spelled out by
the Copenhagen European Council in June 1993 when it asked the Commission to
present a strategic programme for reinforcing the fight against fraud by
March 1994.
In addition, the Danish government published a note, 'The Community Budget
and Fraud', before the Ecofin council meeting in May this year. In this note
we suggest important additional elements to the Commission's anti-fraud
strategy. The note proposed speeding up member states' reaction to the
Commission's requests for control visits; the use of as precise and targeted
instruments as possible; and the development of systems to analyse the
results of various anti-fraud activities.
In addition, the note proposed more publicity to fight against fraud; and
use by member states of more common standards of control. The Commission's
control and auditing teams should to a larger extent be able to draw on
national audits in connection with EU control visits in member states. And
it is necessary also to focus on the problem that the country where the
fraud is committed is often not the same as the country of which the
swindler is a resident.
The Danish attitude is not only governed by economic interest. Misuse of
public funds runs counter to vital principles of openness and democratic
control. The fight against fraud is thus of utmost importance for the image
of the Community with our populations.
Marianne Jelved,
Minister of Economic Affairs,
Social LIberal Party,
DK-1216 Copenhagen K,
Denmark
