FT  09 JUL 94 / International Company News: Hoechst to spin off fibres
activities
Hoechst, the big German chemicals company, is to spin off its European
fibres activities into a separate legal entity. The move, which is designed
to take effect on October 1 this year, is Hoechst's reaction to what it
yesterday described as 'unprecedented crisis in the western European fibres,
textiles and clothing industries'.
The Frankfurt-based chemicals group explained yesterday that the transfer of
the fibres business would help the business segment react more flexibly and
swiftly to the poor market conditions in western Europe, where fibres
manufacturers were 'increasingly beset by pressure on prices and cheap
imports from Asia and eastern Europe'.
The aim of the spin-off is to restore the business to profitability after
four years in which there has been a continuous decline in sales coupled
with 'appreciable' losses.
The aim, Hoechst said, was to return to profitability via cost-reduction and
better utilisation of Hoechst's global fibres capacity. It gave no details
on the scale of potential cost-reductions or the nature of capacity
rationalisation, but said it would be entering talks next week with employee
representatives and Hoechst Celanese Corporation, Hoechst's US subsidiary.
Hoechst Celanese and the new entity, to be known as Hoechst Trevira, will
co-operate in certain business areas and target specific markets outside
Europe, Hoechst said. The new entity will, at first, employ about 5,000
people currently working at factories and independent subsidiary companies
in Germany, Portugal, Northern Ireland, Denmark and Austria.
There was no indication of the scale of turnover at the new subsidiary; last
year, Hoechst's worldwide fibres turnover amounted to DM6.84bn (Dollars
4.4bn).
Hoechst first indicated it was considering the spin-off in February this
year, when Bayer, its rival, transferred its fibres activities into Bayer
Faser, a new subsidiary, saying that the move would lead to significant cost
savings.
In April this year Hoechst and Courtaulds of the UK merged their viscose and
acrylic fibre operations to create the second largest European company in
these market segments.
