FT  24 JUN 94 / Technology: A bittersweet celebration - Clive Cookson
examines Russia's nuclear expansion programme, as it turns 40 today
Forty years ago today, the world's first nuclear power station - NP-1 -
started to generate electricity behind a splendidly Stalinist architectural
facade in Obninsk, a new science city built in the birch forests 100km south
of Moscow.
For Russia's sprawling nuclear industry, the 40th anniversary celebrations
have a bittersweet flavour. The older generation retains proud memories of
the Soviet triumph in the post-war race to use 'atoms for peace' but for the
younger scientists and engineers these are almost obliterated by today's
problems.
Like all the vast state enterprises inherited from the previous regime, the
nuclear industry is desperately short of funds. 'The nuclear power sector is
owed 500bn roubles (Dollars 250m) simply because consumers have not paid
their bills,' says Victor Murogov, director of the Institute of Physics and
Power Engineering (IPPE), the nuclear development centre in Obninsk.
On top of its specifically Russian problems, the industry suffers from the
worldwide perception of nuclear power as an energy source that is at best
stagnant and at worst dying. And Chernobyl - a direct descendant of
Obninsk's NP-1 - is an extra burden to bear.
It would be a mistake, however, to regard the Russian nuclear industry as
being in terminal decline. It continues to run on a vast scale and has
immense staying power - symbolised by NP-1, relegated from electricity
generation to a research reactor but still operating today at its original
1954 rating of 30 MW thermal power.
According to Rosenergoatom, the Russian nuclear utility, the country's 29
power-generating reactors produced 119bn kWh of electricity in 1993 - the
same as the three previous years - with a load factor that compares
creditably with western levels. It even managed to commission a new reactor,
a VVER-1000 pressurised water reactor at Balakovo.
The Russian atomic energy ministry has ambitious plans for nuclear growth
over the next 20 years. These involve building about 30 new reactors, both
to replace old plants and to expand the country's nuclear capacity.
The first steps will be to complete two reactors now in the final stages of
construction. Lev Kochetkov, a senior IPPE scientist, says another VVER-1000
unit is on course to start up at Kalinin next year, followed - more
controversially - by the last Chernobyl-style RBMK unit at Kursk in 1996.
At the same time, the final stages of design work are taking place for
reactors whose construction is due to start during the late 1990s.
IPPE is responsible for developing fast breeders - reactors intended
originally to 'breed' new nuclear fuel in the form of plutonium as they burn
uranium. Fast reactors have lost favour in the west as the world builds up a
potentially dangerous stockpile of surplus plutonium. However, the Russian
plan includes five 800 MW fast reactors of a new design, the BN-800. The
first is due to be built at Chelyabinsk in the South Urals.
Kochetkov points out that a 600 MW fast breeder, the BN-600, has run safely
and efficiently at Beloyarsk since 1981. Last year its availability rating
was 80.6 per cent - considerably better than the 76 per cent achieved by
Russia's nuclear plants as a whole. 'I believe the fast reactor is
intrinsically safer than a conventional thermal reactor but it is not easy
to convince even the specialists of that,' he laments.
To answer the criticism that fast reactors will produce more unwanted
plutonium, IPPE engineers have re-designed the BN-800. 'The original design
produced 30 per cent more plutonium than it burnt,' Kochetkov says, 'but the
final design has a breeding ratio of about one; that means the amount of
plutonium built up will be no more than the amount burnt. We could continue
that process to cater for public perceptions of the dangers of nuclear
proliferation, so that the reactor consumed more plutonium than it
produced.'
Another way of disposing of surplus plutonium - which is more popular in the
west than burning it in fast reactors - is to combine it with uranium and
burn the resulting 'mixed oxide fuel' or Mox in PWRs. IPPE is putting the
final touches to a new facility to test Mox fuel elements. But Kochetkov
does not hide his reluctance to go down the Mox road: 'The IPPE directorate
believes it is more profitable to use the plutonium in fast reactors.'
Outside observers believe the Russian nuclear expansion programme as a whole
is far too grandiose to be practical. Russia itself could not possibly raise
internally the tens of billions of dollars that would be required to carry
out the plans on the scale proposed; western donors are far more interested
in making the existing Russian nuclear industry safe than investing in its
expansion. Yet a severely reduced version of plans might be credible - and
even that would be the envy of the stagnant western nuclear industry.
Meanwhile, the fragmented Russian industry, with its many duplicated
facilities, is forced to compete within itself for scarce orders and funds,
both from within Russia and from the west. The main competition for IPPE is
the Kurtchatov Institute, the nuclear development centre in Moscow.
The international profile of IPPE would be raised enormously if it wins a
bid recently submitted to the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development in London for Dollars 45m to build a nuclear safety centre at
Obninsk. The proposed centre - a joint venture between IPPE and Rockford
Technology, a Canadian company based in Vancouver - would concentrate on
training the operators of Soviet-designed reactors, using the latest
techniques of computer simulation.
'The human element is the weakest link in Russian nuclear safety,' says Mark
Prelas, a nuclear engineering professor at the University of Missouri in the
US, who is a regular visitor to nuclear plants in the former Soviet Union.
'The most economical way to improve safety by an order of magnitude is to
provide a standard training programme for engineers and operators of power
plants. Russia currently has no such standards because the industry is so
fragmented; there are well-trained groups but no overall standards.'
The Russian nuclear industry inevitably has mixed feelings about western
safety concerns. Most of the engineers who designed the current generation
of reactors remain proud of their work and believe western anxieties are
greatly exaggerated. At the same time they are keen to take advantage of
those fears to attract western funds.
While the industry waits for large-scale western aid to pay for safety
improvements, it is beginning to sell its services abroad. For example,
radio-isotopes for medical diagnosis and treatment are in short supply in
the west, following the closure of many of the research reactors that used
to produce them in the US and Europe; Russian reactors such as those at IPPE
are now making up the shortfall.
'Our income from abroad has grown three to four times over the past year,
with very beneficial contacts for the institute,' Murogov says. 'The
mentality of our scientists has had to change drastically; for the first
time in their lives they have to think about the application of positive
results.'
Not all the foreign business goes directly to the state-owned nuclear
institutes. Some goes to the private companies being formed by their staff.
IPPE, for example, has spawned Brand Engineering, named after the Brothers
Androshenko who founded it, which is selling computer programming services.
IPPE plans to continue running its first nuclear reactor until its 50th
anniversary, if it passes a thorough safety review scheduled for 1997. It
remains to be seen whether NP-1 will still symbolise the power and
continuity of the Russian nuclear industry early in the next century, or
will seem then like a quaint historical relic.
