FT  12 JUL 94 / Eli Lilly to test new formula: Planned purchase comes as the
US drugs industry is reshaping
Eli Lilly's planned purchase of PCS, a pharmacy benefits management company,
looks set to complete the reshaping of a big part of the US drugs
distribution business. If finalised, it will bring to three the number of
benefits managers sold in less than a year, for a total consideration of
around Dollars 13bn.
Two others, Caremark and Value Health, have formed close ties of their own
with drugs manufacturers in recent months, though they have stopped short of
outright sale.
In a low-growth US drugs market, manufacturers hope that control of
distribution will help them gain market share. Pharmacy benefits managers
fill out prescriptions for big buyers of healthcare. Through their
formularies - lists of recommended drugs - they exercise considerable
influence over the drugs patients buy.
According to figures provided by the distributors, their influence on drug
buying habits is growing fast. The five mentioned above claim more than 75m
people on their formularies, accounting for nearly one in three Americans.
PCS, the biggest by this measure, claims 30m people as customers. Its growth
has come from converting existing customers to the formulary approach,
though it has also won some big new contracts.
PCS is widely believed to be less interventionist in its sales of drugs than
rivals like Medco. The Merck subsidiary takes an active approach to doctors'
prescribing habits, telephoning physicians and encouraging them to switch to
Medco-recommended drugs whenever a patient submits a prescription for a drug
not on its formulary. In future, PCS is likely to emulate Medco more
closely. 'They have the informatics capacity to intervene more than they
do,' said Mr James Cornelius, Eli Lilly's chief financial officer.
Eli Lilly probably needed to acquire a pharmacy benefit manager more than
most pharmaceuticals companies. The group's sales growth during the first
quarter this year slowed to only 3 per cent, a far cry from the heady double
digit growth of the early 1990s, and certainly worse than most of its
competitors.
The company has been especially hit by the increasingly acute competitive
environment in the US. All Eli Lilly's most important markets - antibiotics,
anti-depressants and ulcer therapies - have been undermined by price
competition. Bulk purchasers of medicines have effectively made such
products commodities.
Take Prozac, Eli Lilly's top-selling anti-depressant, the first central
nervous system medicine to achieve sales of more than Dollars 1bn. Although
Prozac was first into the market, a slew of competitors such as Pfizer's
Zoloft and SmithKline Beecham's Paxil have undermined the drug's growth.
Eli Lilly has also performed poorly in the increasingly difficult antibiotic
market, Ceclor, the group's top-selling antibiotic, lost its US patent
protection in 1992, and posted sales down 9.5 per cent to Dollars 515m.
Successor drug Lorabid has proved disappointing.
Finally, Axid, the company's fourth most important medicine, continues to
compete in an increasingly turbulent anti-ulcer market. SmithKline Beecham's
competitor product Tagamet, lost US patent protection in May. Early data
suggest Axid's share of new prescriptions is falling.
The theory put forward yesterday by Mr Randall Tobias, Eli Lilly's chairman
and chief executive, is that PCS Health Systems can offset this increasingly
difficult environment.
It remains to be seen, though, whether the pharmacy benefits managers can
sustain the difficult balancing act of pushing one manufacturer's products
while at the same time convincing their customers that they are providing
the best drug at the best price to each patient. PCS yesterday said that its
acquisition by Eli Lilly would make no difference to the selection of drugs
on its formulary, for instance - though such a stance seems disingenuous
given Eli Lilly's willingness to pay Dollars 4bn in cash for the
distributor.
Judging by Wall Street's initial reaction yesterday, Eli Lilly is paying too
much to secure this line of distribution. The slide in its share price and
the prospect of a ratings downgrade reflected a general belief that the deal
would weaken the company financially and fail to produce sufficient sales
growth to justify the price tag.
Some of the cash should come from future sales of businesses. Mr Cornelius
said the company plans to raise Dollars 500m-Dollars 600m after tax from the
sale of its 40 per cent stake in Elanco, an agricultural products company
jointly owned with Dow Chemical. An approach has been made to Dow, which has
first right to buy the stake. A further Dollars 1bn will come from the
previously announced flotation or sale of the company's diagnostics
businesses, which will be completed by the end of this year, Mr Cornelius
said.
With around Dollars 1bn in cash and slightly more than Dollars 1bn in debt
at the moment, Lilly's balance sheet can bear the strain of Dollars 4bn of
new debt. After paying off Dollars 1.5bn from the proceeds of sales, it
would be left with a debt/equity ratio of around 40 per cent, Mr Cornelius
said.
It will take time for the financial ramifications of the deal to turn
positive, though - even based on Lilly's assumptions. According to the
company, it will not be until 1997 that higher sales as a result of the PCS
acquisition begin to outweigh the extra debt-servicing costs.
