FT  24 JUN 94 / Sanofi to pay Kodak Dollars 1.68bn for prescription drugs
arm
Sanofi, the French pharma-ceuticals and cosmetics group, is to buy the
prescription drugs business of Sterling Winthrop, a subsidiary of Eastman
Kodak of the US, for Dollars 1.68bn (Pounds 1.1bn).
As part of the deal, Sanofi will sell its minority stake in Sterling Health
Europe, which sells over-the-counter products, back to Kodak.
Mr Jean-Francois Dehecq, chairman of Sanofi, which is a subsidiary of
Elf-Aquitaine, the recently privatised French oil group, said the move would
strengthen the company's presence in the pharmaceuticals industry,
particularly in the US. This was important for the sales and marketing of
products in Sanofi's pipeline, including Clopidogrel, an anti-thrombotic
drug, and Tiludronate, aimed at the prevention of osteoporosis. Following
the deal, Sanofi's annual pharmaceuticals sales will amount to more than
Dollars 3.2bn.
He said the acquisition would be financed by the sale of the group's
bio-activities businesses, one of the group's main business areas with
annual sales of about FFr7bn (Pounds 832m).
Mr Dehecq said the price paid represented a multiple of 1.4 times the sales
of the businesses acquired, which was lower than recent big acquisitions in
the pharmaceuticals industry.
Sanofi's earnings per share would be increased by between 10 and 15 per cent
next year as a result of the deal, he said.
The announcement follows Kodak's decision in May to sell its various
healthcare activities and focus on its core businesses. Sanofi, which had a
far-reaching alliance with Sterling Winthrop, said at the time it was
interested in acquiring a significant part.
Mr Dehecq said the acquisition of the Sterling Winthrop businesses would
also allow economies in the management and marketing structures of the group
and that research and development activities would be strengthened through
the deal.
Sanofi, which faced pressure from its parent company not to increase
borrowings or launch a capital increase, will finance the acquisition
through disposals, principally in its bio-activities division which includes
food additives, gelatine, and veterinary products. Disposals will also be
made in the cosmetics division, although Yves Saint Laurent and Yves Rocher
will not be on the slate.
