FT  10 SEP 94 / Reds alert in hostile skies: Russian defence salesmen may
not look smart, but they should not be written off
Appearances can be deceptive - especially in the world of defence. The
Russians were not the smartest figures at this week's Farnborough Air Show.
They could not afford expensive stands with imaginary high-tech battles on
giant video screens; and they have something to learn about the production
of glossy corporate literature in the peculiar, breathless style cultivated
by arms companies.
They are, however, finding customers - and not just among former allies.
With their craggy, lived-in faces, Russian pilots are glamorous figures in
their own, no-nonsense way, but they lack the permanent sun tans affected by
their western counterparts.
They often also have less cash. About half the exhibitors who came from
Moscow to Farnborough two years ago could not afford to return. 'Our
engineers are paid miserably. They only get 250,000 roubles and they could
make 2m roubles a month from a back-street trading business,' said one
salesman.
Though some of the first fruits of east-west co-operation in civilian
aviation were on display - including the new Ilyushin-96, a wide-body
passenger aircraft with engines from Pratt &amp; Whitney of the US - aficionados
of military aircraft had to search a bit harder for the Russian
contribution.
The Tsagi institute, one of the cradles of Soviet research in aviation and
space, was well represented - at the exhibition stand of the UK government's
Defence Research Agency, its partner in a recent co-operation deal.
However, Professor German Zagainov, Tsagi director, was keener to stress the
civilian uses of his institute's work in theoretical aerodynamics: from the
measurement of gas flows to the drying of timber. Tsagi has had remarkable
success in contracting out the use of its facilities near Moscow to
aerospace companies from the US, Britain and Germany without arousing fears
that commercial or military secrecy will be compromised.
'We are used to respecting confidentiality of our clients,' said the
professor, whose well-cut suit and courteous manners marked him out as
Farnborough's most polished Russian. 'For years, we worked in conditions of
absolute secrecy,' he added, with the hint of a smile.
Yet the west would be making a bad mistake if it took the Russians' low-key
style as a sign they can be written off.
The Russians have a quiet certainty about the superiority of their products.
Mr Viktor Puzanov, chief engineer at MAPO, manufacturer of the legendary Mig
fighter, is convinced that the latest models can hold their own against any
challenge from US or European rivals.
Migs are already in service in 40 countries, mostly former Soviet allies.
For MAPO, June's Dollars 550m sale of 18 Mig-29 aircraft to Malaysia was a
landmark success: achieved in a region long seen as subject to western
commercial and political influence.
Besides the Migs, Russia's greatest hopes lie with work-horse helicopters
such as the Mi-17, made by the Kazan helicopter company in Tatarstan and
favoured by oilmen and geologists in remote parts of Latin America and
Indochina. 'I've been flying these helicopters for 20 years and I have never
heard of a mechanical failure,' said Mr Yuri Pornin, an Mi-17
representative, to a sceptical westerner. 'They are as sturdy as tractors.'
It is important for the Russian salesmen to break out from traditional
markets. The Russian defence industry is undergoing a painful, but possibly
invigorating, shake-out.
On one hand, the virtual freeze on weapons procurement imposed by the
government two years ago is drawing blood, with lay-offs and factory
closures. On the other, Russia has identified defence equipment as one of
the few industrial products in which it has an advantage. President Boris
Yeltsin threw his weight behind the creation this year of a state agency,
Rosvooruzhenie, which will monopolise the export of guns and missiles.
On paper, Russian arms sales have plunged since the Soviet collapse, from an
annual level of almost Dollars 10bn a year - comparable with the US - to
barely Dollars 2bn. But these figures are misleading. In the Soviet era,
arms deliveries to allies were on such soft terms as to be virtually free.
Only since 1992 has Russia properly entered the commercial arms race.
One country with which Russia has rapidly revived its defence relationship
is India. A group of Indian businessmen, based in Singapore, has joined the
makers of Mig in a joint venture known as Mig-Apio, which will try to
facilitate the purchase of Russian aircraft by Asian governments. 'The aim
is to respond more flexibly to our clients' needs and get away from the
inertia of the state sector,' said a representative from MAPO. The Malaysia
deal illustrates what that flexibility can mean: part of the payment is in
palm oil.
The Indian government, meanwhile, is giving Russia the job of upgrading more
than 100 of its Mig-21 fighters. It is hoped this will encourage the world's
other Mig users to upgrade their aircraft with Russian help, rather than buy
new western aircraft.
As Tass news agency commented caustically last month, Russian Migs have been
studied by the Royal Air Force in a manner that 'did not exclude the chance
of encountering them under combat conditions'. This does not, of course,
mean the RAF expects to go to war with Russia; but the greater the success
of Russia's marketing campaign, the more likely it is that the west will
find itself in confrontation with a country that is one of Moscow's
customers.
Companies that supply military aircraft to western governments do not view
this prospect as an unmitigated disaster; it is the kind of thing that keeps
them in business.
