FT  18 AUG 94 / World Trade News: Drought-hit Japan is to import water
A 30 per cent cut in Tokyo's water supplies is the latest symptom of a long
hot summer, which has this week forced large industrial users to enter the
international market for water, and the government to abolish regulations
inhibiting bottled water imports.
Japan Energy, a big petroleum refiner, is shipping at least 31m litres of
industrial water from South Korea, Hong Kong, China and possibly Vietnam.
The water will be used as a coolant at facilities which would otherwise have
had to cut back production.
Japan's chemical and semiconductor industries may also be forced to seek
foreign water supplies, with local authorities across the country having
called on industrial plants to halve their domestic water consumption.
Meanwhile, Japan Energy will spend some Y11m (Dollars 109,500) on its
initial shipment of 6m litres, but may, at least, be relieved that it is
paying less than 1 per cent of the Tokyo retail price.
Tokyo's main source of water, the Tone reservoirs, will dry up by the end of
August if the weather continues as predicted by the Meteorological Agency.
Bottled water has been disappearing fast off the supermarket shelves and
domestic water producers with order books worth as much as 100 times daily
output say they may have to ration distribution.
The ministry of health and welfare said yesterday that it would revise its
standards on mineral water to bring them closer to international criteria.
The revisions are likely to come too late to have much impact this summer,
but promise to benefit European suppliers in the longer run.
Imports such as Evian and Perrier have a roughly one-fifth share of a
Japanese market worth upwards of Y30bn a year. Others, like Badoit, have
been restrained by ministry regulations which limit the presence of numerous
trace elements. Manganese and iron are among those which may come off the
list.
The ministry is also seeking to relax controls specifying taste, colour and
smell. 'Until now they have wanted mineral water to taste as much like tap
water as possible,' said one Japanese television commentator last night - a
requirement which rather defeats the purpose of the industry.
After five years of rapid growth, import penetration of bottled water
flattened last year. It is commonly sold at a premium of nearly a third to
domestic brands and cuts in employee bonuses have brought greater austerity
in recession-bound Japan.
In this harsher climate, foreign suppliers have found one niche. The
ministry prohibited the manufacture in Japan of plastic bottles of half a
litre or less in capacity, giving the low recycling rate for the bottles as
a reason. This ban has allowed 330ml bottles of brands such as Volvic to
dominate the dancefloors of Tokyo's nightclubs.
With industry now being forced to import water, the Japanese government's
sudden concern about the country's lack of water recycling or desalination
plants has also raised hopes among foreign contractors.
The health and welfare ministry is considering giving more help to regional
governments next year to enable them to build desalination plants to convert
seawater to fresh water, which is cheaper than building new dams.
However, the minister for international trade and industry, Mr Ryutaro
Hashimoto, is insisting that Japan has the necessary technology to build
such water plants.
Its first large plant, capable of producing 40,000 tonnes or 40m litres of
water a day, is already being built in the southern islands of Okinawa.
