FT  22 DEC 94 / UK Company News: QMH chief issues warning - AGM told of
threat of collapse if Pounds 1.3bn debt restructuring rejected
Mr Stanley Metcalfe, chairman of Queens Moat Houses, the hotels group,
warned shareholders attending the annual meeting in London yesterday that
the company could collapse if they refused to approve the Pounds 1.3bn debt
restructuring announced last week.
'If shareholders do not approve the restructuring, insolvency is almost
certain to occur,' Mr Metcalfe said.
They will be unable to vote on the proposals, however, until all of Queens
Moat's 74 lenders approve the package. One lender is still resisting the
deal.
The AGM lasted a shorter-than-expected two hours, and resulted in the
overwhelming approval of all eight resolutions to adopt the 1993 accounts
and re-elect directors and auditors.
The 200 or more shareholders who attended were clearly not prepared for a
repeat of last year's angry four-hour AGM.
'I am not staying all day,' muttered one elderly investor. 'I want to get
home for Christmas.'
Investors did, however, want clarification on the restructuring proposals
which could leave the banks with 60 per cent of the group.
Mr Alan Reed, a Bristol-based solicitor, felt it was inappropriate to vote
on the re-election of directors until the restructuring had been considered
by shareholders.
Mr Reed, who is the personal solicitor to Mr John Bairstow, Queens Moat's
previous chairman and chief executive, called for an adjournment of the AGM.
Mr Metcalfe, armed with some 304m proxies, brusquely dismissed Mr Reed's
proposal as 'totally inappropriate' and insisted that it be put to a poll.
Shareholders, angry at the time a poll would take, were vociferously opposed
to a vote but Mr Metcalfe refused to listen to calls from the floor.
Eventually, Mr Reed withdrew his call for an adjournment.
Shareholders also quizzed the board over new contracts which could this year
more than double the salaries of the chief executive, finance director and
chief operating officer, through several incentives.
'Don't you think it is inappropriate,' asked one investor, 'when
shareholders are making such substantial sacri-fices that executive
directors should be awarded further bonuses?'
Mr Metcalfe's response was simple: 'No. Sorry. I don't agree with you.'
Investors were more reassured by the board's comments on trading. The UK
division was meeting the industry average of Pounds 7,400 gross operating
profits per room. On this basis, the UK hotels division could achieve gross
operating profits of about Pounds 66m.
Mr Andrew Coppel, chief executive, said he was confident Queens Moat had the
management to carry the company 'through the process of recovery and
beyond'.
