FT  19 DEC 94 / FT Guide to the Week
MONDAY 19
EU-Turkish customs union
Foreign ministers of the European Union and Turkey meet in Brussels to
discuss establishment of a customs union in 1996. Opposition from Greece and
human rights campaigners will probably force a postponement of a decision
for a couple of months.
Bosnia: Armed forces chiefs from 11 Nato countries concerned in the Bosnian
conflict meet to consider ways of reinforcing the UN mission in former
Yugoslavia. They will be joined by other interested parties, including
Russia and Germany, on Tuesday.
European Union fisheries ministers meet in Brussels to sort out Spanish and
Portuguese entry to Union fishing waters. Felipe Gonzalez, Spain's prime
minister, will push for integration into the common fisheries policy by
1996, but the French, UK and Irish are worried about the impact on stocks.
BCCI: A settlement for creditors of the failed Bank of Credit and Commerce
International proposed by liquidators Touche Ross goes before a London
court.
Gulf Co-operation Council leaders, meeting in Bahrain, are expected to
review their commitment to double their joint forces in the Gulf.
FT Surveys: Sweden and Czech Republic.
TUESDAY 20
Fed meets on interest rates
Most analysts do not expect the Federal Reserve's policy-making Open Markets
Committee to raise short-term rates this side of Christmas, but a half-point
rise to 6 per cent remains a possibility.
China and its main trading partners meet in Geneva to take stock of
Beijing's eight-year-old application to join the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade and its successor, the World Trade Organisation. Gatt
members will try to persuade Beijing to keep talking past its end-year
deadline for a 'substantive agreement'.
De Beers, which accounts for at least 80 per cent of world trade in uncut
diamonds, reveals its 1994 sales. After first-half sales of Dollars 2.58bn,
it eased back, so the total is expected to be about the same as last year's
Dollars 4.366bn.
UK parliament rises for the Christmas recess (to Jan 10).
WEDNESDAY 21
Italian politics: The fate of Silvio Berlusconi's embattled right-wing
coalition government will be decided by a confidence debate immediately
after approval of the 1995 budget. Berlusconi will be testing whether all
coalition members, especially the populist Northern League, are willing to
continue his eight-month-old mandate.
THURSDAY 22
Say when on Schengen
Ministers from seven EU states meet in Bonn to decide when the Schengen
free-travel accord should come into force.
Interior ministers from Germany, France, the three Benelux countries, Spain
and Portugal are expected to set March 25 as a date for the abolition of
border controls, although France may request a 6-month transition period.
The Bundesbank central council is to fix 1995 parameters for German money
supply growth as measured by the much-maligned but stoutly-
defended M3 formula. The factors influencing the decision - permissible
inflation levels and potential for economic growth - will also be weighed in
the routine contemplation of interest rates, which some observers persist in
believing may be reduced today.
FRIDAY 23
Romania's left-wing minority government faces its sixth no-confidence vote
in two years in office. The opposition Democrat Party's motion was sparked
by mass protests by thousands of unpaid workers in the western industrial
town of Resita last week.
Holidays: Japan (Emperor's Birthday). European Union institutions close
until Jan 2.
SATURDAY 24
Elections in Kyrgyzstan
Kyrgyzstan votes for a two-house legislature. President Askar Akayev was
criticised for dissolving parliament in September, but his proposed
constitutional reforms were strongly supported in a referendum the next
month. Mr Akayev hopes the new parliament will give greater support to his
economic reforms, which is backed by the International Monetary Fund.
Holidays: Sweden.
SUNDAY 25
Japan's new electoral system takes effect. It replaces the current 511-seat
lower house of parliament, elected from Japan's unique multi-seat
constituencies with a 500-seat parliament of 300 single-seat constituencies
and 200 proportional representation seats, chosen from 11 electoral regions.
Uzbekistan holds its first multi-party elections since independence.
Holidays: Main markets closed for Christmas Day.
MONDAY 26
A Turkish court is to give its verdict on 124 Islamic fundamentalists
suspected of starting a hotel fire in the town of Sivas that killed 33
people attending an arts festival.
TUESDAY 27
US consumer confidence
The US Conference Board's December consumer confidence indicator will be
scanned for signs of stabilisation after last month's 12 point-jump.
WEDNESDAY 28
UK economy: Chancellor Kenneth Clarke meets Eddie George, governor of the
Bank of England, for their monthly discussion of monetary policy. The City
thinks interest rates have further to rise, but analysts do not expect a
decision so soon after December 7's  1/2 point increase in base rates to
6.25 per cent.
THURSDAY 29
US leading indicators for November are expected to show little change for
the third month running.
FRIDAY 30
UK chancellor Kenneth Clarke starts a tour of Malaysia, Thailand and Vietnam
to drum up business for the UK financial services industry.
Holidays: Japan (markets closed to Jan 3), Philippines.
SATURDAY 31
Treuhand shuts up shop
Germany's Treuhand privatisation agency, the world's largest holding company
set up in 1990 to privatise east German industry, ceases operations. With
more than 13,000 enterprises originally on its books, the agency has either
sold off or shut down the region's industry. In all, it raised DM160bn
(Dollars 102bn) from investment guarantees and will save 1.5m of the 3.5m
pre-1990 industrial jobs.
SUNDAY 1
Brazilian presidency:
Henrique Cardoso (left) takes office. Mr Cardoso, of the Social Democratic
party, was elected on October 3 and is expected to push for economic reforms
to consolidate the success of the Real currency in cutting inflation.
Compiled by Patrick Stiles.
Fax: (+44) (0)171 873 3194.
