FT  26 MAR 94 / Late for the dance: IBM's attempts to find a new role
Though still the largest computer company in the world by far, IBM knows it
will no longer set the pace for its rivals. 'I don't think we should plan on
owning huge segments of the economic value of this industry (in the
future),' Mr Lou Gerstner, IBM chairman and chief executive, said on
Thursday. 'We are not going to set our mental attitude or our economic
structure on that assumption.'
Unveiling plans to revive IBM, after three years of heavy losses, Mr
Gerstner acknowledged that the company has failed to respond to changes in
the computer market. The company's biggest mistake, he said, was to ignore
the shift away from mainframe-based centralised data processing to networks
of personal computers.
IBM is now fighting to catch up. 'We're arriving late to the dance, but not
too late,' Mr Gerstner said.
For many companies, he said,computer systems based on networked personal
computers 'have turned out to be rife with problems, and those problems open
a very wide door of opportunity for IBM'.
He cited the case of an unnamed but 'very large financial institution with
tens of thousands of personal computers' which faced considerable
difficulties managing a network of computers acquired by different
departments at different times and running various software applications. Mr
Gerstner said the institution's chief information officer went to bed at
night never quite sure where the company's data on customers was stored.
'There is a very critical need to create information management tools for
distributed (networked) computing,' Mr Gerstner said.
IBM also hopes to become a leading supplier of technology for 'information
superhighways'. IBM will have a two-pronged approach to what Mr Gerstner
said would become an increasingly 'network-centric world'.
First, the company aims to become a big supplier of equipment and services
to the telecommunications and cable television companies that build the
'highways'. It also wants to build on its traditional strength in supplying
complex computer systems and offer company-wide networks.
As IBM searches for its new role in the rapidly changing world of
information technology, it is making painful adjustments; downsizing its
workforce and operations, cutting back research and development spending and
reorganising its salesforce.
Faced with intense competition from specialist companies - the 'piece-part
players' as Mr Gerstner calls them - IBM is retraining its salesforce to
create product specialist and industry focused groups.
'We have to make size pay for IBM, rather than size being a detriment,' said
Mr Gerstner. 'This is a major challenge. If we are ever going to succeed we
have to change IBM's culture.'
IBM hopes that the new phase the industry is entering will weaken the hand
of specialist suppliers. 'Customers have become very sceptical of the
constant flood of new information technology,' said Mr Gerstner. 'A customer
said to me: 'maybe you guys should slow down the pace of technology
innovation'.'
No longer able to set the pace of innovation, IBM is questioning the value
of its competitors' technology. 'How powerful a computer do you really need
on your desk,' asked Mr Gerstner, raising a question that his predecessors
at IBM would never have voiced.
