FT  26 APR 94 / UK Company News: McKechnie ahead 22% but US loss hits shares
Shares of McKechnie, the Midlands-based plastics and components group,
yesterday fell 24p to 500p reflecting concern about the group's continued
losses in the US.
In the half year to January 31, McKechnie's plastics operations in the US
lost Pounds 2.1m, compared with operating profits of Pounds 1m.
This acknowledgement of continued problems overshadowed a 22 per cent rise
in the pre-tax line from Pounds 10.8m to Pounds 13.2m and a return on sales,
excluding the US, up from 9.3 per cent to 10.2 per cent.
The market had expected that McKechnie would have resolved its problems in
the US of restructuring and retooling against a background of difficult
markets, especially on the packaging side.
Assertions that, as Mr Michael Ost, chief executive put it, 'we are now in
recovery mode' were not enough to stabilise the share price, however.
Turnover increased from Pounds 140.8m to Pounds 191.5m and was ahead in each
of the group's operating regions, including the US.
In the UK, McKechnie was helped by the contribution of Savage, last year's
acquisition which increased the group's exposure to household products.
Elsewhere, there were improved performances from Australia and New Zealand
where McKechnie has benefited from the economic recovery. During the first
half the UK and the Pacific, with respectively Pounds 8.1m (Pounds 5.8m) and
Pounds 5.3m (Pounds 2.8m), were the main sources of operating profits.
Generally, the growth in operating profits came more from increased
productivity than from any improvement in trading conditions. However, the
group said there were 'signs of growth' in its main markets and it was
looking forward to 'encouraging results for the year'.
The interim dividend is held at 5p on earnings per share 8 per cent up at
10.3p (9.5p).
COMMENT
There is no doubt that the US is an embarrassment to McKechnie. For all the
explanations of difficult markets and steep learning curves, it is difficult
to understand why management has taken so much longer to grip problems there
than anywhere else. This is a pity because the rest of the McKechnie story
is full of good news: Savage is making better than expected contributions,
the Pacific markets are a joy to behold and, generally, the group is ready
for cyclical upturns on individual markets. The second half always produces
higher returns and the full year could produce pre-tax profits of Pounds 31m
to give earnings of 24p per share. Although that puts the shares on a
challenging multiple of about 21, support could come from upward revisions
of US profits once the problems there are fully solved.
