FT  25 MAY 94 / Mandela pleases business
Such has been the revolution in the economic rhetoric of the African
National Congress that President Nelson Mandela might have drawn yesterday's
state of the nation address to the multi-racial parliament from a textbook
on financial and fiscal orthodoxy.
It has come more likely, however, from the pen of Finance Minister Derek
Keys, source of all orthodoxy in the previous National party government, and
now trusted adviser to Mr Mandela.
Gone are the days when ANC leaders sent markets into hysterics with comments
about repudiating debt or nationalising industry. In the words of one
leading businessman, 'they sound more and more like Tories all the time'.
Given that the speech seems to have been aimed primarily at calming white
fears and reassuring overseas investors - far more than at the domestic
constituency, which was promised little of concrete substance - it is
scarcely surprising that the business community reacted well.
The credibility and cost of the government's Reconstruction and Development
Programme can only be tested over time. But it is hard to fault its
intentions, as outlined in yesterday's speech: over the five year span of
the RDP, government consumption expenditure will be held at constant levels
in real terms and the budget deficit will continue to decline from last
year's levels of 6.8 per cent of gross domestic product; some R2.5bn (Pounds
450M) will be dedicated to the RDP in the first budget, to be unveiled on
June 22, but this will come entirely from rationalising and redirecting
government expenditure, not from additional borrowing or a rise in general
taxation. Though there could be a temporary rise in taxation in later years,
Mr Mandela committed himself to avoid a 'permanently higher general level of
taxation'.
The catalogue of prudent commitments is long. Monetary policy will remain on
its recent steady course (and Reserve Bank Governor Chris Stals will remain
in his post to ensure that it does); the battle to cut inflation will
continue; the private sector will play a central role in generating growth
and government will create an investment climate conducive to new
investment.
No one knows whether these commitments will survive the pressure to deliver
on the RDP's promises, which include building 1m new houses over the next
five years, and supplying electricity to 2.5m more among a host of other
social service improvements. But Mr Mandela's approach appears to be both
cautious and gradual: saving R2.5bn on the first year's budget will be
difficult but probably not impossible, and is far more realistic than
earlier estimates. Minister Keys says it represents 3 per cent of the
budget, which can be covered by the current attrition rate in the civil
service.
Further productivity improvements in the civil service to fund a government
commitment rising to R10bn in the fifth year of the programme (a cumulative
commitment of some R37bn over five years) is likely to prove far more
difficult. Mr Mandela has promised to protect white civil servants' jobs
while at the same time advancing blacks through the service and the cost of
nine new provincial bureaucracies will further burden central government.
Furthermore, ANC ministers seem to have unrealistic expectations of the
speed with which the government's efficiency can be improved.
But Mr Keys seems content to let the new government learn its own lessons
about feasibility. He suggested yesterday that Minister without Portfolio
Jay Naidoo, charged with implementing the RDP, would find it nearly
impossible to spend the R2.5bn allocated in the forthcoming budget, and this
would temper demands for further funds in subsequent years.
Ultimately, Mr Mandela may face the prospect of breaking promises to his
people, or busting through deficit barriers.
