FT  22 APR 94 / Survey of Egypt (16): The British still come - Violence has
damaged earnings from tourism
There is a tent encampment just outside Aswan, where soldiers from Cairo do
seven-day stints guarding the city against the fundamentalist Gama'a
Islamiyya. Its members have targeted Egypt's Dollars 3bn tourism industry
which, since 1988, has outstripped oil as the country's main source of
foreign exchange.
A little further down the airport road is the construction site of a tourism
catering school.
Given the effect of the militants' campaign, which has reduced arrivals from
3.2m in 1992 to 2.5m last year and income down from Dollars 2.1bn to Dollars
1.3bn in the same period, one might wonder why they bother with the catering
school.
Both the tent encampment and the construction site represent elements of the
government's campaign to crush the activists and revive an industry which
employs, directly or indirectly, 5m of Egypt's 61m population and is seen as
the simplest route to creating further employment quickly.
Mr Mamdouh Beltagui, the tourism minister, believes that the international
reaction to the deaths of at least three tourists, a bomb at the pyramids,
another outside the Egyptian museum in Cairo and attacks on cruise ships and
tourist buses in Upper Egypt, has been overdone - particularly by the
western press - to devastating effect.
Occupancy rates in Cairo are just 53.5 per cent at best. In Aswan, whose
economy is 60 per cent reliant on tourism, the rates this year are just 35
per cent.
Luxor, which is almost 100 per cent reliant on the industry via tours of the
Valley of the Kings, Tutankhamen's tomb and the Karnak and Luxor temples, is
empty and tense with only 38 per cent occupancy . . . and that only with
discounts of up to 50 per cent on hotel rooms.
Rates at Hurghada and Sharm el Sheikh, the new Red Sea/Sinai resorts which
cater for the sun, sea and sand market, are doing rather better: they are up
to 55 per cent so far this year, against a 1993 average of 27 per cent and
43 per cent respectively .
There is little physical or political cover for the militants in the desert,
so it is no surprise that the resorts escaped the militants' campaign.
Moreover, tour operators have been successful in marketing Sinai as a
distinct destination, breaking any association between these resorts and the
rest of Egypt.
But it is less clear why Luxor, predominantly reliant on cruise ships which
now rarely ply the Nile from Cairo via Assiut, has been spared .
Apart from the government's ferocious clampdown on the fundamentalists -
thousands have been rounded up and many lives have been lost among the
police and suspects - one explanation is that any terrorist would be torn
limb from limb if he was caught in the town by local business people who
depend on the daily flows of visiting cruise passengers.
Egypt's archaeological heritage, contained primarily in Luxor, Cairo, Aswan
and Abu Simbal, is where its long-term future lies.
'People only come to Egypt because it's an ancient civilisation,' says Mr
Adel Akladios, general manager for American Express which has a large
tourism business in Cairo.
For the moment, 'It has become a delay destination, but not a cancellation
decision.'
This is nothing new. Egypt became a serious 'delay' destination after the
1985 Achille Lauro hi-jacking and riots by Cairo security police in 1986.
The industry had barely recovered when it was hit by the Gulf War.
'It will take another one or two years before things are under control,'
says Mr Akladios. 'Someone gets killed in Washington every five minutes but
that doesn't get talked about. Tourists are targets in other countries. But
Europeans have a gut fear of Islamic fundamentalism. If it's Islamic they
think it's bloodthirsty. It's something they just don't understand.'
He believes visitors will get used to the idea that 'Egypt is no longer 100
per cent safe. They will know that all they have to do is avoid places like
Assiut,' the poverty stricken town which has long been the fundamentalists'
stronghold .
Mr Akladios says the British have been the most sanguine and have continued
to come in large numbers. 'They are used to living with the IRA.'
The biggest drop has been among high-spending Americans, together with
Scandinavians, the French, the Germans, Italians and Spaniards.
Gulf tourism, which accounts for 45 per cent of the market, has been largely
maintained. Egypt has embarked on an aggressive marketing campaign - having
never in the past felt the need to advertise its obvious treasures.
Burson Marsteller, the world's biggest public relations company, has been
hired. Saatchi and Saatchi has also been taken on. A budget of Dollars 42m a
year has been approved for advertising and Mr Beltagui, who took over from
Mr Fouad Sultan last October and has considerable political clout, appears
frequently on the world's television screens.
The success of this campaign is seen as crucial, not just to the fortunes of
hoteliers and cruise ship operators, but to the general economy. One in 15
jobs already depends on tourism and it is seen as the best hope for creating
many more.
