FT  06 JAN 94 / National curriculum: A history lesson
1988
Mr Kenneth Baker, education secretary, pilots the most ambitious package of
reforms since the war through the House. His Education Reform Act allows
schools to opt out of local authority control, and establishes a national
curriculum for England and Wales.
After arguments with Mrs Margaret Thatcher, which both have now recounted in
their memoirs, Mr Baker ensures a comprehensive national curriculum
including English, mathematics, science, technology, a modern language,
religious education, art, history, geography and physical education, to be
compulsory from the age of five through to 16. Mrs Thatcher had favoured a
curriculum covering only the 'basics' of English and mathematics.
Pupils are to be tested at the end of four 'key stages' - at the ages of
seven, 11, 14, and 16. Education department officials form working parties
to decide on the curriculum for each subject, while the Schools Examinations
and Assessment Council decides how they should be assessed. The resulting
tests are based on 'standard attainment targets', and are designed to be
part of a continuously assessed curriculum.
1991
Mr Kenneth Clarke, education secretary, announces plans to publish 'league
tables' of schools' results, based on their pupils' performance in national
curriculum tests, and in GCSE exams.
The first tests for seven-year-olds take place. Mr Clarke announces plans to
'streamline' them for the following year, after teachers complain they are
too time-consuming, and appoints Lord Griffiths, then chairman of the
Thatcherite Centre for Policy Studies, to chair the SEAC. His brief is to
introduce simple 'paper and pencil' tests.
1993: The Boycott
All three teachers' unions vote to boycott the national curriculum tests,
objecting both to the workload the tests create, and their educational
content.
In April, Mr John Patten, now education secretary, appoints Sir Ron Dearing
to carry out a review. Four weeks later, Patten announces concessions on
testing from 1994 onwards, abandoning plans to test subjects other than
English, maths and science.
The boycott goes ahead in June, with almost total support from teachers. In
August, the government accepts Sir Ron's interim findings, which give
teacher assessment greater weight, and reduce the proportion of school time
prescribed by the curriculum to between 75 and 85 per cent. All plans for
league tables of seven-year-olds and 14-year-olds are scrapped.
1994
Sir Ron confirms his earlier findings, and makes recommendations which
entail the total abandonment in all but name of the national curriculum
after the age of 14. Mr Patten accepts the findings.
