FT  23 JUN 94 / London Stock Exchange: Confident close as dollar sentiment
improves - Market report
Reports that President Clinton planned to make a statement on the US dollar
reached London towards the close of trading, underpinning a rally in share
prices as British government bonds rose sharply. The stock market, already
encouraged by a steadier trend in the dollar and by the minutes of the
latest meeting between the UK chancellor of the exchequer and the Governor
of the Bank of England, moved higher in the final hour of trading to finish
at the day's best levels.
President Clinton's statement followed comments from Mr Alan Greenspan,
chairman of the Federal Reserve, that the inflation outlook in the US
appeared very reasonable. Bond markets, taking the view that defence for the
dollar might exclude higher interest rates in the US, advanced strongly.
The FT-SE 100 Index ended 20.2 higher at 2,960.4, the first recovery after
four sessions of losses. By Tuesday's close, the index had fallen by about
3.5 per cent since the market began to slide in the middle of last week.
After a slow start, equities began to edge ahead early yesterday with the
help of a steadier trend in the US dollar and in Federal bonds at the close
of the New York session. But an early Footsie rise of 19.5 was not held. In
the absence of genuine investor support, gains were halved as investors
waited for Mr Greenspan to begin his testimony to the House Budget
Committee.
Seaq volume was very slow to develop, and barely reached 200m shares by
mid-morning. Underlying confidence continued to improve when the minutes of
the May 4 meeting of the UK chancellor and the Bank of England Governor
indicated that fears that domestic interest rates were poised to rise might
have been overdone. Another modest reduction in money market repo rates in
Germany also helped to cool nervousness.
However, the London market was still no more than quietly firm when New York
opened and Mr Greenspan began his testimony by saying that he would not
speak about the dollar. It was late in the session when the President's
statement reached London, and the sudden recovery in share prices owed as
much to technical factors as to genuine investment buying. Marketmakers were
only too happy to buy stock to meet the wave of selling commitments taken
aboard on Monday and Tuesday.
Second line stocks were left behind as the market turned, and the FT-SE Mid
250 Index remained in the doldrums, closing 0.7 down at 3,461.2.
There were strong recoveries in some interest rate-related stocks which had
been hit hard in the market shakeout. Oil shares, too, returned to favour as
crude prices continued to make progress. Among the market's bid features,
Enterprise Oil moved higher, reflecting growing belief in the stock market
that its bid for Lasmo will fail; shares in Lasmo gave ground but remained
well above their level at the time of the Enterprise approach.
The late rush to buy stock caused delay in the Stock Exchange calculation of
total Seaq business. At 4.30pm, the Seaq total stood at 462.4m shares,
compared with 544.5m in the previous session, with non-Footsie shares making
up only about 52 per cent of the day's equity business. However, retail, or
customer, business on Tuesday was worth only Pounds 926.4m, indicating that
the big investment funds had not been heavy sellers of stock as the market
plunged.
