FT  16 MAY 94 / Market v state in education: America
American parents are voting with their children's feet. Despairing at the
quality of public (government-run) schools and either unable or unwilling to
pay for private tuition, many now prefer to teach their children at home.
Nearly 500,000 children - 1 per cent of the school-age population - are
taught at the kitchen table compared with only about 15,000 in the early
1980s.
The 'home-schooling' fad in the US is an extreme example of a global trend:
parents in most industrial countries are demanding a greater say in how
their children are educated. In the past only a minority of wealthy parents
actively sought the best schools (often private) for their children. Most
families were passive consumers of education, allowing local educational
authorities or school districts to assign their children to a school,
usually the nearest. On matters of curriculum, teaching methods, discipline
and so forth, parents typically deferred to the superior wisdom of
educational 'experts.'
This age of educational deference is now passing, as Schools: a Matter of
Choice, a report by Mr Donald Hirsch of the Paris-based Organisation for
Economic Development and Co-operation makes abundantly clear. He examines
six countries - the US, England, Sweden, the Netherlands, Australia and New
Zealand - and finds that, to different degrees, all are experimenting with
policies to expand parental choice, enhance the range of educational options
and devolve power to school principals.
Some countries - such as Sweden - have increased choice by offering
substantial subsidies (85 per cent of the cost of education in the public
system) to parents who select private schools. Others, such as England, have
opted to expand choice within the public sector by allowing open enrolment
and through financial rules allowing money to follow pupils. In the US,
school districts have widened parents' options by supply-side measures: the
deliberate creation of 'magnet' schools - schools that offer specialised
education by concentrating on, say, science or the performing arts.
Teachers will find much to admire in Mr Hirsch's report, which exploits the
OECD's unique ability to make cross-country comparisons. He illustrates the
global pressure for greater choice with 16 'case studies' that describe
reforms on the ground in cities as diverse as Haarlem in the Netherlands,
Whangarei in New Zealand and Milwaukee in the US. And he seasons the factual
analysis with a thoughtful commentary on the theory behind greater
competition in education.
To my mind, however, the tone of the report is disturbingly collectivist. He
argues that parental choice may not lead to greater educational pluralism
because schools 'may compete to deliver the same thing'. He claims that
research cannot demonstrate that choice raises educational quality because
the effects of other relevant differences between schools cannot be
separated out (on this criterion no economic research would reach a
conclusion). And he gives credence to educationalists' self-serving claims
that parental choice can inhibit their ability to set priorities. In
typically wishy-washy OECD style, he concludes it is beyond the report's
scope to decide 'whether greater choice of school is a good or a bad thing'.
Well, this reader can decide. Greater choice of school is indisputably a
good thing. To bring home the absurdity of the traditional restrictions,
imagine that the same policies were adopted for other educational media such
as books.
Suppose, with the exception of a small 'private' sector for the rich, all
books were produced by teams of government employees and supplied free of
charge to grateful families. By analogy with public schooling suppose
further that each family was allocated only the books produced by
bureaucrats in its local 'book authority' or 'book district'. Under such a
system books would surely be of uniformly low quality, although the bindings
might be fancier in richer areas.
Now imagine that a bold educational reform is proposed: book choice. Instead
of being forced to read the books produced by their local book authority,
families can choose books from any book authority. Moreover, since reformers
also stipulate that 'money follows books', the revenue earned by each book
authority now depends on the number of books it 'sells'.
Families will obviously benefit from this expansion of choice (which
corresponds roughly to the enhanced choice of school now allowed in
England.) But sceptics such as Mr Hirsch may well claim that it cannot be
proved statistically that average book quality has risen. They will worry
that middle-class families are taking more advantage of the increased choice
than poor families. And they may complain that since all the book
authorities are competing to provide the same types of books, the extension
of choice is illusory.
In a sense the objections are valid. Since with the exception of the small
private sector all books would still be produced by teams of government
employees, the range of choice would be limited. Yet we all know the
solution: liberalise the book market completely. Let anybody write a book.
Let book sales be determined by public demand. If some poor families cannot
afford books, then give them book vouchers or cash subsidies. Do not make
the mistake of thinking that since everybody ought to read books, the
government should seize control of 95 per cent of book production.
I do not claim there is an exact analogy between books and schools as
educational vehicles, but it is close enough to demolish arguments against
greater choice in education.
