FT  17 DEC 94 / Clinton team throws down tax gauntlet
Administration officials yesterday challenged voters to measure tax cut
proposals from the new Republican majority in Congress against the programme
outlined by President Bill Clinton in a televised speech on Thursday.
'Are they targeted to the middle class? Are they targeted to working
families in this country? Are they fully and honestly paid for so that the
deficit does not increase?' Mr Leon Panetta, the White House chief of staff,
asked yesterday.
Over five years, Mr Clinton's proposals would cost a total of Dollars 60bn
(Pounds 36.5bn), and include:
A Dollars 500 tax credit for each child under 13 for families with incomes
below Dollars 60,000 a year, with reduced credits for incomes up to Dollars
75,000.
Tax deductibility for up to Dollars 10,000 a year of college tuition fees,
for families with incomes up to Dollars 100,000 a year.
An expansion of Independent Retirement Accounts, which offer a tax shelter
for savings, to raise the income limit for tax deductibility from Dollars
50,000 to Dollars 100,00 and to allow no-penalty withdrawals for purposes
such as education expenses, the purchase of a first home or catastrophic
illness.
The consolidation of 60 worker training programmes into a single voucher
programme to pay for training.
Vice President Al Gore will on Monday provide details of spending cuts
totalling Dollars 24bn from reorganisations of the Departments of Energy,
Housing and Urban Development and Transportation, as well as the General
Services Administration and the Office of Personnel Management, including
privatisation of the naval petroleum reserve and the air traffic control
system.
Moreover, Mr Clinton, who in his 1993 budget declared a 'hard freeze' on
discretionary spending up to 1998, said he would continue to freeze spending
at 1993 levels for another two years. That will provide Dollars 52bn more
savings.
Mr Lloyd Bentsen, who is about to step down as treasury secretary, said it
was essential that any tax cut should not increase the deficit. 'We've come
too far in cutting the budget deficit to let the next Congress turn back and
start cooking the books,' he said yesterday.
Mr Bentsen said that 87 per cent of the tax cuts proposed by Mr Clinton
would benefit families earning less than Dollars 100,000, while 54 per cent
of the tax cuts promised in the Contract with America manifesto on which
congressional Republicans have campaigned would go to those with incomes
above Dollars 100,000. The Republicans have called for a similar tax credit
of Dollars 500 per child, but for families with incomes up to Dollars
200,000, and also want to cut capital gains taxes.
'Now who do you think is trying to take care of middle income families?' Mr
Bentsen asked.
But Congressman John Kasich, who will chair the budget committee when the
new House of Representatives convenes in January, said the administration
should 'drop the class warfare'. 'We need to stop that division between one
income group and another,' he said.
If there is to be a class war, however, Democrats have already launched
their offensive and appear confident that they can win.
Congressman Richard Gephardt, the new Democratic leader in the House,
announced his own tax cut proposal earlier this week for all taxpayers
earning less than Dollars 75,000, with or without children, dismissing the
Republican plan as 'a tax break for every child of the rich'.
Mr Clinton's tax cuts would probably be phased in, and details were still
being hammered out yesterday. Treasury officials have to fit the cuts year
by year into the pay-as-you-go rules of the budget law, which require tax
cuts to be offset with spending cuts or other tax increases.
Feature, Page 8
