FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (27): Make it a
long-term investment - How to choose them, 1 / Switching can be as expensive
as buying and selling shares
Choosing an outstanding unit trust is in many ways harder than picking
shares. There are over 1,500 UK authorised unit trusts to consider - and
that's without taking any account of the growing number of offshore trusts.
What's more, there is only patchy consensus on the best way of selecting
trusts. But here are some pointers:
Caveat emptor: Start by being aware of some common pitfalls. Picking a trust
at random is likely to be about as successful as selecting the Derby winner
with a pin. But the field is much larger, so your chances of being lucky are
correspondingly reduced.
Responding to a tempting-looking advertisement is nearly as chancy. Some of
the ads may relate to very good funds, but many are for brand-new funds, and
those for existing funds often lean heavily on the fund's place in relative
performance tables.
Too often new specialist funds are launched when a particular stock market
or sector has already risen sharply, and new investors join in after the
party is over.
Funds which do well enough to come top in any of the proliferating league
tables are often relatively risky, and likely to produce below-average
performances in different circumstances.
The basic flaw in this kind of approach to trust investment is that it is
expecting the impossible: consistent, outstandingly good performance. Most
experts suggest that a relatively consistent solid performance is the best
you can hope for.
One fund or many? One of the benefits of investing through unit trusts is
that it pushes a substantial investment task - stock selection - on to the
fund managers. But the investor still needs both to clarify his own
investment objectives and to decide how to spread his resources between
different types of asset (eg, bonds, shares, property, cash etc) and between
different countries or businesses.
If you want to keep your own involvement to the minimum, you can opt for a
single fund whose investment objectives appear to overlap with your own.
Managed funds, balanced funds and the model-portfolio funds run by a number
of different groups are all possibilities. These will normally have a wide
spread of different assets, and will aim to alter the emphasis of the
portfolio as market conditions and expectations change. The snag, of course,
is that not all the managers get it right. So careful selection is still
necessary.
An interesting alternative - for investors whose objective is simply to
invest in a particular equity market - is index funds, often known as
tracker funds. These hold shares selected on purely mathematical criteria in
order to ensure that the resulting portfolio will mimic the performance of a
particular stock market index. Turnover and costs are both unusually low.
And although such funds always do slightly worse than the index they track,
they do better than most managed funds concentrating on the same stock
market. Points to watch here are which index the fund is designed to track,
and what the costs are. The funds with the lowest charges should do best.
Picking individual trusts: If you are ambitious, interested and prepared to
work at your investments, you may prefer to pick your own portfolio of unit
trusts. But only do so if you are happy to take your own asset and sector
allocation decisions, and clear-minded enough to ensure that these fit your
objectives and risk tolerance.
You will find some suggestions for building a portfolio on page 21 of this
review. But remember that switching from one trust to another can be as
expensive as buying and selling shares. So pick your trusts with the
intention of holding them for the long term.
Fund analysts consider a number of different statistics, several of which
are explained on the facing page. And an increasing number of
fund-measurement services are now producing performance and analysis
services aimed at the UK personal investors.
A couple of them are planning to introduce star rating systems, based on
their statistical analysis, notably variations of risk-adjusted returns.
Such systems have been very popular in the US.
The analysts themselves do not claim that their systems will help you pick
the funds likely to do best in future. And most academics reckon that
attempts to base predictions of future performance on past performance are
vain. Good performance does not repeat itself, and even risk-adjusted
performance figures have no predictive power (but see John Cuthbert's
argument, opposite). The only past patterns which do appear to have any
value in foretelling future performance are bad ones: 'A really rotten fund
is likely to remain a really rotten fund,' comments Professor Elroy Dimson,
of the London Business School. John Bogle, a leading US fund manager,
agrees: 'The purpose of all this information is for greater understanding,
not for forecasting.'
