FT  21 APR 94 / Showdown in the last gasp saloon: Smokers and cigarette
makers in the US are facing unprecedented hostility
You've heard of no smoking offices, no smoking flights, no smoking zones and
no smoking days. Now meet the no smoking country - or something well on the
way to it.
Smokers in the US, and the cigarette makers they keep in business, have
never had it so bad. After two decades of relatively ineffectual opposition
from anti-smoking activists, they face an unprecedented outbreak of
hostility from politicians, government officials, business and the public.
In many settings, the expression 'Mind if I smoke?' now prompts the sort of
reaction that might once have been reserved for the suggestion: 'Mind if I
slay?' So reviled has the habit become that, if legislators and their
supporters succeed in their aims, smoking will be regarded as behaviour to
be indulged in furtively, if at all, in the privacy of the home, car, or a
special smoking chamber.
One example of the pressure is a bill before Congress that would ban smoking
in all buildings regularly entered by 10 or more people a week, except the
home. In effect, this would embrace all factories, offices, bars,
restaurants and night clubs - though specially designated smoking rooms
would be permitted if they were sealed off from the rest of the premises and
had separate outdoor ventilation.
That bill, sponsored by the anti-smoking Congressman Henry Waxman and backed
by the Clinton administration, is expected to go to a vote in a
congressional sub-committee in the next few days. Conceivably, it may fail.
But it is only slightly more restrictive than other measures under
consideration or already coming into force.
The US labour department's Occupational Safety and Health Administration is
seeking a federal ban on smoking in the workplace. Since bars, restaurants
and other places of entertainment are also places of work, they would be
included - though, as under the Waxman bill, sealed-off smoking rooms would
be allowed.
The Food and Drug Administration, another federal agency, has claimed it has
evidence that the tobacco industry is adding nicotine to cigarettes to keep
smokers addicted. It has asked Congress to rule whether it should start
controlling the sale of cigarettes as a drug or, alternatively, whether
nicotine in cigarettes should be banned.
The US defence department has banned smoking in all military workplaces,
ranging from military bases to tanks and battleships. The Clinton
administration has also banned smoking in school buildings and health
centres.
Hundreds of ordinances have been passed by states, cities or local
communities banning smoking in public areas. San Francisco, San Jose and
other Californian cities have banned smoking in nearly all indoor spaces
except private houses. New York's city council has unveiled plans to toughen
up existing restrictions on smoking in bars, restaurants and workplaces and
to extend them to outdoor areas such as parks, playgrounds and sports
stadiums.
McDonald's, the fast-food company, has followed examples set by the Taco
Bell and Jack in the Box chains by banning smoking in all 1,400 of its
company-owned (as opposed to franchised) restaurants in the US. Many stores,
shopping malls and sports stadiums are already smoke-free.
President Bill Clinton has proposed a 75-cent-per-packet increase in the
excise tax on 20 cigarettes to 99 cents per packet to help pay for reform of
the US healthcare system. Even this is not enough for some legislators, who
are pushing for a tax increase of up to Dollars 2 per packet.
These developments contrast sharply with earlier history of anti-smoking
activity in the US. Although 30 years have passed since the US surgeon
general, the country's chief medical officer, concluded that smoking could
cause lung cancer and other fatal diseases, until recently the anti-smoking
lobby had found itself outgunned by the tobacco industry.
In Congress, cigarette makers could automatically be assured of support from
representatives of the tobacco-growing states, such as Kentucky, North
Carolina and Virginia. But that was only part of the story. Because of the
millions of dollars the tobacco industry spent on lobbying and contributions
to lawmakers' election campaigns, its political influence extended much
further.
As a result, the US tobacco industry largely escaped stringent anti-smoking
measures. Although health warnings started to appear on cigarette packets in
1966 and cigarette advertising was banned on radio and television in 1969,
almost the only federally imposed restriction on smoking was the ban
applying to domestic flights lasting fewer than six hours, introduced in
1990; and the federal excise tax, though increased several times, is still
only 24 cents a packet.
At the beginning of last year, however, two things happened that changed the
climate. One was a report from the US Environmental Protection Agency that
classified tobacco smoke as a class-A carcinogen and blamed passive smoking
for an estimated 3,000 lung cancer deaths a year. The other was a
declaration from the Clintons on Inauguration Day that the White House was
to be a smoke-free zone.
The Environmental Protection Agency report has had far-reaching effects in
the US because it has enabled non-smokers to claim that cigarette smoke is
not just an irritation, but a menace to their health.
It is largely on the back of this report and later ones giving more weight
to it, that the US has seen a wave of anti-smoking ordinances aimed at
safeguarding the health of non-smokers in public places.
Meanwhile, the Clintons' anti-smoking stance has undermined the political
influence of the tobacco industry, shifting the balance of power in favour
of anti-smoking activists.
Could it be curtains, then, for Philip Morris, RJR Nabisco, American Tobacco
and the other US cigarette makers? Certainly, they are on the defensive.
Such is the abuse being heaped on the tobacco industry, and so great the
obstacles being thrown in its path, that it is tempting to ask why its
executives do not simply give up and try something else.
One reason they have not is that, though the US market may be turning ugly,
new markets for cigarette exports are opening up worldwide. For example,
Philip Morris and RJR Nabisco ship more than 10bn cigarettes a year to the
former Soviet Union, adding Dollars 100m a year to sales. The total market
in the former eastern bloc countries is estimated at about 700bn cigarettes
a year, far exceeding the 485bn consumed last year in the US.
The cigarette makers, wary of accusations that they are exploiting ignorance
of smoking-related health risks in less developed countries, play down the
export opportunities, saying that profit margins on overseas sales are lower
than on domestic sales. In any event, prospects in the US may not be quite
as bad as they seem.
For one thing, cigarette manufacturers still derive big profits from the US
market: Philip Morris and RJR Nabisco alone made operating profits totalling
Dollars 4bn from domestic tobacco sales of Dollars 15bn last year, even
during a vicious price war. As long as that kind of money is available, the
industry will fight to the last to defend its market. Last month, for
example, Philip Morris filed a Dollars 10bn lawsuit against the ABC
television network for broadcasting a programme claiming that the company
added nicotine to its cigarettes.
There must also be doubts about how quickly the government could move
towards total prohibition, if it developed the will to do so. Apart from the
political considerations, a sudden collapse in the Dollars 43bn a year spent
on cigarettes in the US would leave a big hole in the economy; and a cut in
the Dollars 16.5bn a year collected in tax revenue could be even more
awkward, especially at a time when government is looking for funding for
healthcare reform.
Meanwhile, although total cigarette consumption continues to fall in the US,
there are signs that the proportion of people who smoke has bottomed out at
about 25 per cent, and may even be rising again among the youth, women and
ethnic minorities. Moreover, according to Ms Faith Popcorn, a New York
marketing consultant, some middle-class adults are sick of healthy living
and have started lighting up in a rebellion against political correctness -
a trend she calls 'pleasure revenge'.
Smokers, it seems, have little to look forward to but vilification. They
will also find it harder to find an appropriate or convenient place to
indulge their habit. But neither they, nor the tobacco industry, believe
they have quite had their last gasp - at least, that is, not yet.
