FT  22 JUL 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Russia's aluminium exports as
high as ever
Russia has trimmed its aluminium output but its exports of the metal are as
high as ever, according to statistics provided yesterday by trade delegates
at a meeting of the big aluminium producing countries in Canberra.
Nevertheless, those involved - Australia, Canada, the European Union,
Norway, and the US as well as Russia - pledged to continue support for the
voluntary agreement that aims to cut up to 2m tonnes from world aluminium
production for two years so as to bring the market back into balance.
Analysts said that outcome was to be expected as aluminium prices had risen
nearly 50 per cent from last November's 8-year lows. The three-months
delivery price closed at Dollars 1,532.50 a tonne on the London Metal
Exchange yesterday, and at that level nearly every producer is profitable.
The Anthony Bird consultancy group estimates in its latest Aluminium
Analysis that operating costs at western smelters are averaging Dollars
1,135 a tonne while Russian costs are Dollars 1,234. 'Although Russian costs
are rising, at today's prices even the Russians can make money.'
Bird suggests the industry has had 'an impressive success' in implementing
the production cuts but it expects no more of them. Neither does Mr Nick
Moore, analyst with stockbrokers Ord Minnett. He points out that the latest
International Primary Aluminium Institute statistics show the average daily
rate of production at western smelters in June was the lowest for 46 months.
'Currently the industry is operating at an annual rate of 14.174m tonnes -
an impressive 1.13m tonnes lower than the all-time peak of 15.306m tonnes
seen in December, 1992,' he adds.
Data released in Canberra show Russian aluminium output in June was 6.4 per
cent lower than in November at 220,800 tonnes against 236,100 - equivalent
to an annual cut of about 195,000 tonnes and well below the 500,000 tonnes
the Russians hoped to achieve by August. Russian exports in the first five
months were about 800,000 tonnes, equivalent to an annual rate of 1.9m
tonnes, roughly the same as in 1993.
The Canberra delegates warned in their communique that the aluminium market
balance was 'still delicate'. And Bird says: 'If aluminium prices continue
the torrid pace of recent weeks and anticipate too much too soon, the
recovery could fade before it has properly begun'.
