FT  18 JUL 94 / Business Travel: City for explorers - Peter Wise offers tips
on getting around and staying in Lisbon - and the etiquette of doing deals
The Portuguese, with self-deprecating humour, like to describe Lisbon as a
city of the developing world, rather than a European capital. The country's
historical involvement with Africa, Asia and the Arab world is evident in
the city's architecture, culture and cuisine - but on a technical level, it
functions almost on a par with the most modern of its European counterparts.
Doing business in Lisbon is rarely arduous and the hospitality of the
Portuguese usually makes it a pleasure. The city from where discoverers such
as Vasco de Gama and Fernao de Magalhaes (Magellan) set out in the 15th and
16th centuries enjoys being discovered by newcomers.
Lisbon will be welcoming more and more foreign businessmen over the next few
years, as the host to Expo '98 and the promoter of important infrastructure
projects, including new road and rail crossings over the Tagus river.
Visitors will discover that taxis are the best way to travel. They are
cheap, reliable and plentiful in the city centre. Except at rush hours,
nowhere is much more than 20 minutes away. Unless you are travelling to the
country's interior, it is not worth hiring a car (but if you do, it is often
cheaper to book outside Portugal).
There are good reasons for hailing a cab. First, it is virtually impossible
to park in Lisbon. Second, public transport is crowded and uncertain. The
yellow trams are fun but slow. Third, driving in Lisbon can be frightening.
Portugal has the highest road-accident rate in Europe. US soldiers at a Nato
base on one of the most dangerous roads out of Lisbon have had T-shirts
printed saying 'I survived the Marginal'.
The few sharks among Lisbon taxi drivers wait around the airport. The most
frequent trick is to clear the meter when you reach your destination and ask
for a higher fare. There is a 50 per cent surcharge for heavy luggage, but
it should be registered on the meter. Tolls are not shown, and are charged
double to cover the driver's return.
Company headquarters, banks, financial markets and government departments
are scattered around Lisbon. But most are within easy reach of the main
hotels.
The Tivoli, Ritz, Meridien and Sheraton offer the best five-star
accommodation. However, businessmen are increasingly staying at new three-
and four-stars hotels. The Sol Lisboa, Amazonia and Dom Rodrigo Lisboa,
which offers self-catering apartments for longer stays, provide good service
and ample space.
Most Portuguese businessmen speak English and French. A single foreign
visitor is enough for a meeting of 20 Portuguese executives to be held
entirely in English. A few words of Portuguese from a foreigner are taken as
a compliment, but not expected. It is not advisable to try out your Spanish.
The Portuguese do understand it, but pride themselves on the individuality
of their own language.
Punctuality is prized in Portugal, but rarely practised. As a foreigner,
however, you are expected to be on time.
The Portuguese are not overly formal. But the Anglo-Saxon habit of quickly
adopting first names can affront some sensibilities. Women wear skirts; men
wear suits or jackets and ties.
Lunch is a vital part of doing business. It begins at 1pm or 1.30pm and
lasts a minimum of 90 minutes, more often two hours. The city is teeming
with good restaurants, but a few are especially favoured for business
meetings. They include the Veranda at the Hotel Ritz, Gambrinus, Hotel da
Lapa, Casa da Comida and Chester. The latter attests to the penchant of
Lisbon businessmen for traditional British styles, from oak-panelled rooms
to tweed jackets. The Portuguese do not take a siesta and dinner starts no
later than 9pm.
Breakfast is a non-event, and it is unwise to organise business meetings
around it.
The most frequent business journey out of Lisbon is to the northern city of
Oporto. The aircraft is faster and more reliable than the train. Portugalia,
a small private airline, tends to be more efficient on this route than the
national carrier, TAP-Air Portugal.
On a free day, visit the romantic palaces of Sintra or the rolling plains of
the Alentejo.
Lisbon is this year's European Capital of Culture, making it a fertile city
for night life. The medieval Bairro Alto is a lively district of Fado music
houses, boxing clubs, boutiques, bars, restaurants, discotheques and
bordellos. Over the past three years, the clubs along the Avenida 24 de
Julho, beside the Tagus, have become the most fashionable. The action goes
on until dawn. No one has yet worked out when the young professionals who
dance the night away there actually sleep.
