FT  27 SEP 94 / Yeltsin calls for new N-arms pact: Disarmament proposals
include production ban and missile cut
Russian President Boris Yeltsin yesterday called for a nuclear disarmament
treaty requiring the world's five big nuclear powers to stop production of
nuclear material and cut their arsenals of strategic missiles.
Mr Yeltsin's initiative - which met a cool response from some US officials -
came in a broad-ranging address to heads of government and foreign ministers
at the United Nations General Assembly.
He outlined a sweeping agenda of nuclear disarmament measures, ranging from
completion next year of a nuclear test ban treaty and 'open-ended and
unconditional' extension of the nuclear non-proliferation treaty to a new
'treaty on nuclear security and strategic stability' between the five powers
 -Russia, the US, China, the UK and France.
The proposed treaty could include an end to the production of fissile
material for military use; a ban on the re-use of fissile materials in
weapons; and further cuts in the five nuclear powers' warheads and missiles.
But the US last week said that it did not plan any further near-term cuts in
the number of its nuclear warheads. Pentagon officials said they wanted to
maintain a nuclear 'hedge' because Russia had been slower than they had
hoped to implement cuts already agreed in its nuclear arsenal.
Mr Yeltsin said the extension of the non-proliferation treaty next year
would require 'additional and more precise security guarantees' for the
non-nuclear states, and called for a special meeting of the UN Security
Council at foreign minister level to discuss a resolution on positive
security guarantees.
He also offered Russian troops for a UN stand-by force to be permanently
available for peacekeeping operations, and called for a real role for the
UN's military staff committee.
Earlier in the day President Bill Clinton also promised to work for a
convention to halt production of fissile materials, as well as for test ban
and non-proliferation treaties. But the US president's principal initiative
was to support the efforts of UN secretary-general Boutros Boutros Ghali to
limit the use of anti-personnel mines.
Mr Clinton called for the eventual elimination of the 85m such weapons which
are now believed to be scattered in 62 countries, and proposed that
countries reduce the proportion of landmines in their stockpiles that do not
self-destruct or deactivate themselves, as well as banning exports of mines
to countries which have not signed the convention on conventional weapons.
Jurek Martin, US Editor, in Washington, adds: Mr Lloyd Bentsen, US Treasury
secretary, yesterday urged Russia to quicken the pace of economic reform
while taking additional steps to control inflation.
He said adoption of a tougher fiscal budget could release Dollars 8bn to
Dollars 10bn (Pounds 6.4bn) in western assistance already promised at the G7
summits. Pegging the rouble on the foreign exchange markets 'would bolster
market confidence by delivering an effective Dollars 6bn currency
stabilisation fund'.
Russian budget under fire, Page 3
Yeltsin's link to capitalism, Page 8
Editorial Comment, Page 19
Bear's new clothes, Page 19
