FT  29 JUL 94 / London Stock Exchange: Granada dilemma
Whispers were reaching the market that Granada Group, the television and
catering concern fresh from its successful takeover of LWT, might be
considering hitting the acquisition trail again. Gardner Merchant, the
catering group sold by Forte last year to management and set to come to the
market later this year, was being mooted as the most likely candidate, with
a price tag of around Pounds 600m being attached.
Leisure analysts, while agreeing that the move would make strategic sense to
Granada, said that it was unlikely given both its recent foray and Gardner
Merchant's imminent flotation. 'Granada would have to pay a lot to stop that
happening,' was the view of one seasoned professional. Forte, which will
reap 25 per cent from any float, crept a half-penny forward to 232p, while
Granada managed a penny gain to 533 1/2 p.
ICI put on 4 at 837p after the UK's leading chemicals company released
second-quarter figures above the range of analysts' forecasts and
accompanied them with a strong statement.
The profits of Pounds 141m translated to a first-half gain of Pounds 234m,
against forecasts of Pounds 205m to Pounds 225m. Sir Denys Henderson, the
chairman, said: 'This is the most tangible evidence yet that our customers
are emerging from recession.'
Forecasts for the full year shifted from a range of Pounds 400m to Pounds
450m to between Pounds 450m and Pounds 500m, but many analysts remained just
holders of the stock, arguing that it was already expensive.
SmithKline Beecham fell as initial reports suggested that the US Food and
Drug Administration's advisory committee had decided not to approve the
company's best selling drug Tagamet as an over-the-counter treatment for
heartburn.
The shares dropped 11 1/2 to 408p but, after the market closed, SmithKline
announced that recommendation had been given subject to one or two small
points. It said that if those points were cleared up, the drug would not
have to be referred back to the advisory committee.
News that Medeva, the pharmaceuticals company, had lost a significant
European appeal case came too late to affect the shares, which ended steady
at 134p. But one analyst said the decision to uphold the patent on a
hepatitis B drug held by Biogen, of the US, could prompt a significant fall
in the Medeva share price when the market opens today.
The hepatitis B vaccine is seen as one of the prime sources of Medeva's
earnings growth in the next five years. Analysts had been looking for sales
of around Pounds 30m next year.
News that conglomerate Hanson had made a Pounds 96.1m recommended offer for
Scholes, manufacturer of electrical products, at 250p a share was not the
blockbuster bid that many had expected. Analysts are looking for further
acquisitions but some said that much depended on the strength of the dollar
and its impact on the group's high level of dollar denominated debt. Scholes
rose 57 to 250p while Hanson improved 3 to 258p, the shares receiving
further support from a recommendation by Nomura which urged investors to
switch their holdings from industrial conglomerate BTR, which eased 2 to
370p.
Office equipment group Danka Business hardened 3 to 333p after reporting
bumper first-quarter profits
Rolls-Royce advanced 7 1/2 to 188 1/2 p, with investment bank Lehman
Brothers reported to have been an aggressive bidder for stock in the second
half of the session, to cover a position on a warrant issue.
Food processing equipment manufacturer APV firmed 2 to 114p after NatWest
Securities upgraded profits expectations for the current year by Pounds 1.8m
to Pounds 26.8m.
Motor dealer Lex Service, which reported disappointing figures on Tuesday,
relinquished a further 10 at 437p.
