FT  09 MAY 94 / Leaders gather to see Mandela sworn in: Haggling over
cabinet posts continues
Foreign leaders began arriving in South Africa yesterday for the
inauguration of President Nelson Mandela tomorrow in a ceremony due to be
televised live to millions around the world.
Mr Mandela, whose African National Congress will be formally installed as
majority party at the opening of the new national assembly this morning,
stressed over the weekend what is likely to become the dominant theme of his
presidency, calling for reconciliation between all races.
Meanwhile, outgoing President FW de Klerk continued to juggle with his
selection of candidates for the six cabinet posts allocated his defeated
National party, at the same time pursuing efforts to secure one of the
security portfolios, both of which have been claimed by the ANC.
The new government also encountered its first public relations setback when
it was disclosed that Mr Mandela, who has been calling for cuts in political
salaries, will receive R575,000 (Pounds 107,000) a year before allowances,
well above the rate for most western heads of state and considerably more
than Mr de Klerk's current salary of R266,000. The figure was fixed by a
committee established by the outgoing government.
After the parliamentary session, Mr Mandela will travel to Pretoria tonight
and will be formally sworn in as president tomorrow morning.
More than 180 world leaders, including more than 40 heads of state, are
arriving in the country for the inauguration and the overworked organising
committee is frantically trying to ensure adequate security precautions and
sort out last-minute logistical problems for the ceremony, which will be
attended by more than 150,000 people. Confidence in South Africa's ability
to handle an exercise of this kind has been shaken by the ineptitude shown
in the organising of the elections themselves.
Speaking to a cheering crowd at a Christian thanksgiving service led by
Archbishop Desmond Tutu at a stadium outside Johannesburg yesterday, Mr
Mandela stressed the need for everyone to carry through the peaceful spirit
of the election period.
'It is time for all South Africans to remember they are one people,' he
said.
Yesterday's rally was the culmination to a weekend in which Mr Mandela
addressed all the country's main religious groupings, attending a synagogue
and mosque in Cape Town on Saturday.
Although the ANC announced its list of cabinet ministers on Friday,
continuing the pragmatic approach displayed by all political leaders during
the election process, Mr Mandela suggested over the weekend that some
reshuffling might still occur. The National party is known to be
particularly unhappy that both the defence and law and order ministries have
been allocated to ANC officials.
Under the new constitution all parties receiving more than 5 per cent of the
national vote are entitled to representation in the cabinet.
The government will comprise 18 cabinet ministers from the ANC, six from the
National party and three from Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi's Inkatha Freedom
party.
Neither the NP nor Inkatha has yet announced its cabinet choices, but the
incumbent finance minister, Mr Derek Keys, will keep his job, a move
intended to reassure both the international community and the local business
sector that no radical economic policies are intended. It is not yet known
what portfolios will be offered to Chief Buthelezi, nor whether he himself
will accept a post.
The new parliament will sit for five years during which it will serve as
legislative assembly and, in conjunction with the senate, draw up a final
constitution.
Membership of the senate, which will have 90 members, 10 from each region,
has not yet been finalised. It is expected to meet for the first time later
in the week.
Meanwhile, eight of the country's nine new regional parliaments were sworn
in over the weekend and the new provincial premiers elected. The ANC assumed
control of seven of the legislatures while the National party, led by the
outgoing minister of law and order Mr Hernus Kriel, was installed at the
head of the Western Cape.
Because of the slow pace of vote counting in the province, the parliament of
KwaZulu/Natal, where Inkatha will have a wafer-thin majority, will only be
sworn in on Wednesday.
