FT  19 AUG 94 / Drugs sector lifts its trade surplus by 26%
The pharmaceuticals industry increased its trade surplus by 26 per cent from
Pounds 1.33bn in 1992 to Pounds 1.67bn last year, the biggest percentage
rise since 1980.
Exports were up from Pounds 3bn to a record Pounds 3.69bn, while imports
rose from Pounds 1.66bn to Pounds 2.01bn. Nearly half of the exports were to
the European Union, with North America accounting for about 15 per cent. The
trade surplus with Japan was more than Pounds 200m, an increase of more than
50 per cent.
Dr Trevor Jones, the recently appointed director-general of the Association
of the British Pharmaceutical Industry, said the industry's success was
based on its research and development spending.
'Only through such investment can the momentum of advances in healthcare be
maintained and new medicines be developed,' he said.
Dr Till Medinger, association president, said: 'The industry has to renew
itself every 15 years by developing new medicines. Any company without
innovative drugs in the pipeline would have difficulties surviving.'
The sector had increased its annual R&amp;D spending to nearly Pounds 1.4bn,
compared with less than Pounds 400m a decade ago.
However, for the UK industry to succeed it needed a stable environment,
'neither sheltered by government and subsidy, nor shackled by unnecessary
controls on the availability of medicines,' Dr Jones said.
The recent government-imposed 2.5 per cent cut in drugs prices had been
particularly harsh, he said. The industry provided the nation with its
medicines at a daily cost to the National Health Service of only 18p per
person.
NHS pharmaceutical costs were Pounds 4.09bn last year, equivalent to 10.9
per cent of total expenditure. That compared with 10.1 per cent last year.
Dr Medinger played down the fact that UK drugs spending was the fastest
growing in Europe. He said the growth was from a low base, with the UK
spending less per person on prescription medicines than any other European
country.
The association plans to make a big push with the Department of Trade and
Industry to attract US biotechnology groups and Japanese pharmaceuticals
companies.
Dr Jones said: 'Japanese companies need to internationalise, but those
(investing) in Europe have tended to choose Germany. With London recently
chosen as the location for the European Medicines Evaluation Agency, the UK
would prove an ideal base for Japanese groups.'
