FT  18 MAR 94 / Brazil may complete debt restructuring without IMF
Brazil is actively studying whether to complete its Dollars 52bn (Pounds
35.60bn) commercial debt restructuring without the formal blessing of the
International Monetary Fund.
Going ahead without IMF approval of a standby loan would make the
restructuring more expensive and also deprive Mr Fernando Henrique Cardoso,
finance minister and potential presidential candidate, of the kudos of IMF
backing.
But Mr Cardoso, who was yesterday due to meet Citibank, the restructuring's
closing agent, in New York, is being urged to finalise the deal rather than
risk another extension beyond the April 15 deadline. Bankers fear it may be
hard to approve another extension and that the deal would be delayed by
October's elections.
According to the deal's timetable, Brazil must give notification by tonight
that the April 15 deadline will be met and old debt swapped for new. This
deadline has already been extended and bankers say it cannot be stretched
further.
Mr Cardoso had hoped to persuade the IMF to agree a letter of intent for the
standby loan during meetings on Wednesday. Such a letter would have
kick-started the whole deal, and allowed the US Treasury to issue
zero-coupon bonds as part of the guarantee for the restructuring.
Brazil is the developing world's largest debtor, and the the only one of
Latin America's big four debtor countries - the others being Mexico,
Venezuela and Argentina - not to have completed a Brady-style foreign bank
debt deal.
Although the IMF was supportive of Mr Cardoso, it did not commit itself to
granting the stand-by. It is thought to have insisted that Brazil run a
budget surplus this year, but Brazil was only prepared to offer a balanced
budget. The IMF has also grown wary of Brazil, which has signed but failed
to deliver on eight letters of intent and two standby agreements in 12
years.
For the deal to go ahead, the banks need to agree a waiver of the
restructuring's original requirement for IMF backing. Leading banks met
yesterday morning to discuss a waiver, which one banker described as
'do-able'.
Brazil also needs to provide an acceptable guarantee in place of the US
Treasury's issuance of zero coupon bonds. According to some reports, it has
been accumulating bonds through market purchases, although whether enough
bonds are available in the market is unclear.
Mr Cardoso had planned to spend a quiet weekend in New York with his wife
and decide whether to resign and run for president. Instead, he finds
himself up against an extremely tight deadline on the bank deal. Under
Brazilian law he has to resign by April 2 to contest the presidency.
Success for his domestic reforms, mainly designed to tackle annual inflation
of about 2,500 per cent, is seen as more important for his presidential
ambitions. But Mr Cardoso, a former academic who is well known in
Washington, also wanted the IMF letter and a smooth conclusion to the bank
deal. According to finance ministry officials, he will now use the IMF's
positive comments as 'the best possible endorsement' given that the economic
reform programme is still unproved.
