FT  14 OCT 94 / Parties zero in on Germany's pensioner vote
Mrs Cornelia Moll has lived all her life in Mitte, the heart of east Berlin.
Born in 1924, she survived the wartime bombing, the Russian occupation, the
communist takeover, the building of the Berlin Wall, and unification. 'I
love the freedom,' said Mrs Moll. 'What I want for the future is security
for myself, my children, and my friends.'
Mrs Moll is one of the 16.6m pensioners whom Germany's political parties are
trying to woo in Sunday's federal election. And 'Sicher in die Zukunft' -
sure of the future - is the slogan that Chancellor Helmut Kohl's governing
Christian Democrats have adopted to attract them. 'The pensioners make up
over 30 per cent of the electorate. They could be one of the main deciding
factors,' said Mr Hans-Joachim Veen from the conservative Konrad Adenauer
Foundation.
Since 1949, the CDU has always succeeded in capturing the pensioner vote.
'The turnout is very high among this group,' said Mr Veen. 'No party can
afford to ignore them, unlike the younger generation who are very complacent
and indifferent about politics.'
In the 1990 federal elections, 81 per cent of pensioners voted compared to
64 per cent of 18 to 25 year olds. More than 51 per cent of the over-60s
voted CDU, 31 per cent for the opposition Social Democrats, and 13 per cent
of east Germans voted for the Party of Democratic Socialism, the successor
to east Germany's communist party.
But in this election, the CDU's traditional constituency is being challenged
by the SPD and PDS. 'We know we have always failed to win the vote of the
elderly and have failed to retain our voters when they reach pensionable
age,' said Ms Petra Machroth, an SPD official responsible for this group.
'However,' she added, 'in recent state elections we have noticed a shift in
voting patterns.' In the 1990 state election in Lower Saxony, and a year
later in Rheinland-Palatinate over 40 per cent of pensioners voted SPD.
'They swung the election for us,' said Ms Machroth. 'During this election
campaign, we have concentrated much more on the pensioners,' she said,
adding that 18 months ago the SPD set up a special unit, called Sixty Plus,
which is headed by Mr Hans-Ulrich Klose, the party's parliamentary leader.
But SPD officials admit they are running against the tide. The SPD has
131,000 pensioners, or 15 per cent of its total 860,400 membership - no
match for the CDU's 214,000, the equivalent of 33 per cent of its full
membership.
The PDS, however, is in a strong position to win over a percentage of the
pensioner vote in east Germany. In the federal 1990 elections, 46 per cent
of pensioners in east Germany voted for the CDU, 26 per cent for the SPD and
13 per cent for the PDS. But since then, the PDS has managed to attract the
over-60s into its ranks: 60 per cent of 130,000 strong membership are
pensioners; more than 30 per cent of the PDS voters belong to this age
group.
The CDU has tried to counter this influence by guaranteeing east Germans'
pensions at almost west German levels, and promoting itself as the party
which will fight crime, almost an unknown phenomenon for east Germans before
unification.
Despite such attempts, SPD and CDU officials agree that the east Germany's
3m pensioners, about 30 per cent of the region's electorate, are split
between the PDS and the CDU. 'It's all very well giving us good pensions.
But money is not everything. My son is unemployed. But there is something
else that upsets me. At my age, its not nice to be told by the CDU that the
past 40 years of life in eastern Germany were wasted and we have nothing to
show for it.'
In the 1990 election Mrs Moll said she voted for the PDS and the Greens. On
Sunday, she said Mr Kohl will not get her vote. 'My two votes will go to the
PDS. I know they can't guarantee my security. But my vote is a protest one
against Bonn, unemployment, and the arrogant way our past has been
dismissed.'
