FT  18 MAR 94 / Trail cools in search for Ulster accord: David Owen on the
breakdown in relations between the key players
Less than a month ago talks co-ordinated by London aimed at forging a
lasting settlement for Northern Ireland were proceeding in a businesslike
and constructive manner.
Today the process is in effect on hold and the corridors of Westminster are
thick with intrigue and recrimination. Whispering campaigns are under way
against the leaders of the two largest political parties in the province.
The speed and degree of the mood change must be disconcerting to those who
confidently assert that the talks will move smoothly after a pause for the
campaign for June's European elections and the 'marching season' which will
follow in July.
The odds are still that these optimists will be right. Some exchanges in
yesterday's Saint Patrick's Day session of Northern Ireland questions in the
Commons were positively playful, suggesting the situation could improve as
rapidly as it has deteriorated.
But the level of spleen vented, principally in private, between the main
protagonists is already such that it may leave scars. Bridges burnt over the
next three months in the interests of campaigning may not be as speedily
repaired as some imagine.
The whispering campaign against Mr James Molyneaux - some government
loyalists are calling into question the Ulster Unionist party leader's
tactics during the London-Dublin peace initiative - appears to stem from a
cooling of his relations with Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland
secretary.
This dates from London's decision last month to send Dublin a checklist of
ideas covering relations in Ulster and between the province and the Irish
government. Senior Ulster Unionists say this broke a pledge by ministers
that they would be shown this document before anyone else.
At the end of last month Mr Molyneaux showed his irritation by attacking Sir
Patrick for 'to some extent torpedoing' the talks process.
Senior Ulster Unionists say Mr Molyneaux subsequently declined to take a
copy of the checklist offered to him by Sir Patrick at a private meeting,
although other senior Ulster Unionists are now understood to be in
possession of the document.
London says Sir Patrick showed Mr Molyneaux the checklist, in common with
the leaders of the other Northern Ireland parties engaged in bilateral
discussions co-ordinated by Mr Michael Ancram, the Northern Ireland
minister. The UUP has said it is willing to continue bilateral talks.
Many observers argue that relations between the UUP and London were bound to
cool given the party's anxiety to protect its flank against the hardline
Democratic Unionist party ahead of the European elections. By this line of
reasoning, UUP leaders were waiting for a pretext to force a rift.
The UUP, for its part, has started to pursue its own whispering campaign -
against Mr John Hume, the Social Democratic and Labour party leader - with
renewed intensity.
They say that he does not represent the views of his party in insisting that
the 'nothing is agreed until everything is agreed' formula governing the
talks must be adhered to come what may.
Their aim is to isolate Mr Hume and bring about a situation in which an
assembly, with safeguards to protect minority rights, could be set up in
Northern Ireland, irrespective of whether agreement was possible on either
north-south relations or relations between London and Dublin.
A Lords debate on the province earlier this month showed that this view is
not confined to Ulster Unionists.
Lord Brookeborough, a Conservative peer, said: 'The SDLP looks not a little
split with John Hume getting too close to Dublin and Sinn Fein for many of
his party members' liking.'
In the same debate Lord Fitt - who left the SDLP in 1979 and now calls
himself an independent socialist - said the 'nothing is agreed . . . '
formula 'can only lead to the defeat of the whole operation'.
Meanwhile, the DUP - sensing a chance to undermine the Downing Street
declaration - has started to call for a united unionist front against the
document.
Mr Peter Robinson, the party's deputy leader, called earlier this week for
all pro-union groups opposed to the joint declaration to form a
co-ordinating unit to advance their case to government.
