FT  22 OCT 94 / Markets: GM delivers a nasty jolt to share prices - Wall
Street
The stock market's vulnerability to rising interest rates and poor corporate
earnings was there for all to see this week when a sharp hike in bond yields
and unexpectedly disappointing earnings from General Motors sent share
prices tumbling.
Aside from the occasional setback, the Dow Jones industrial average has been
on a steady upward path for most of the past two weeks, and seemed poised to
break through 4,000 thanks primarily to another quarter of strong corporate
earnings.
Yet, on Thursday morning the market received a nasty jolt when GM released
its latest quarterly results and the bond market nosedived on a surprisingly
strong regional economic report from the Philadelphia Federal Reserve.
The news from GM was particularly unwelcome, for one of the constants in the
market for most of this troubled year has been the strong performance of the
domestic car manufacturing industry. Earlier this month GM was the subject
of a flattering cover story in Fortune magazine entitled 'Dollars 11bn
Turnaround at GM', and Detroit was basking in the approval of Wall Street.
Thus, it came as a particular shock this week when GM reported net income of
Dollars 552m for the third quarter. At first glance, that looked like an
impressive recovery from the company's loss a year ago of Dollars 112.9m.
The results, however, were skewed by a one-off accounting adjustment which
lifted earnings by Dollars 200m. When that contribution was stripped out,
the figures were a lot less encouraging. Analysts were particularly troubled
by the disappointing performance of GM's international operations, where
profits tumbled 60 per cent to Dollars 240m.
Although GM blamed some of its troubles on two strikes in North America, the
group has clearly been struggling to keep up with demand, and it is still
failing to get control of its costs.
The response from investors to GM's travails was instantaneous. The shares
were sold heavily from the minute the figures were released, and by the end
of the day GM's stock price had dropped Dollars 3 3/4 to Dollars 43 1/8 .
The extent of investors' unhappiness was evident in the extraordinary amount
of selling - turnover was 16.8m shares, almost seven times the normal daily
average. The decline wiped some Dollars 2bn off GM's market value.
The selling was not confined to GM - other auto stocks also took a beating,
with Ford and Chrysler both racking up losses - and was not confined to
Thursday. By late morning Friday, GM shares were down another Dollars 1 3/8
at Dollars 41 5/8 , taking the total loss since the earnings were released
to more than 11 per cent.
If the news from GM was not bad enough, the stock market also took a beating
in the latter half of the week from a sharp rise in bond yields, which edged
towards the dreaded 8 per cent mark. The selling of bonds was triggered by
two sets of data which undermined fixed-income investors' view that the
economy was slowing down sufficiently to dissuade the Fed from raising
interest rates one more time as an precautionary measure against inflation.
The first figures were from the Commerce department, which announced that
housing starts in September jumped 4.4 per cent. The increase took the
annualised rate of housing starts to a 1.5m units, the highest since
December. The second, even more disturbing, set of statistics came from the
Philadelphia Fed, which reported a surge in its index of regional business
activity during October. Especially worrying was the news that prices paid
and received had climbed sharply in the month.
Fresh weakness in the dollar also depressed bond prices this week, and with
them stock prices. In fact, on Friday it was another drop in the US
currency's value which finally pushed the yield on the benchmark 30-year
government bond above 8 per cent - the first time long-term interest rates
have been that high since early 1992.
Although some analysts had been predicting a stock market rout if bond
yields went above, and stayed above, 8 per cent, it did not materialise.
Sentiment, however, was clearly affected by the lates upward move in yields.
The rise in long-term rates and GM's unhappy third quarter overshadowed what
was another generally positive week for corporate earnings. IBM reported
third quarter results which comfortably exceeded analysts' forecasts, yet
the computer group's shares fell when the figures were released. The decline
was indicative of two things: it underlined the general malaise of the wider
market, and it proved that 'Big Blue - for decades the bellwether of the
stock market and the country's most eagerly followed company - is no longer
the force it once was.
 -----------------------------
Monday       3923.93  +  13.46
Tuesday      3917.54  -  06.39
Wednesday    3936.04  +  18.50
Thursday     3911.15  -  24.89
Friday       3891.30  -  19.85
 -----------------------------
