FT  01 NOV 94 / Cuba opens up to more investment from overseas
Cuba is to open up more of its recession-hit economy to foreign investment,
including real estate, services and sugar production.
Vice-President Carlos Lage told a news conference in Havana at the weekend
that the government was also preparing a new foreign investment law that
would give more protection to overseas investors, who are already active in
Cuba in activities ranging from oil exploration to citrus production.
Cuba began opening up its state-run economy to external investment after
1989 to offset the devastating impact of the collapse of its preferential
trade and aid ties with the former Soviet bloc.
'From now onwards, no productive sector will be excluded from investment by
foreign capital,' Mr Lage said. Up to now, raw sugar production,
traditionally the island's biggest export earner, had been explicitly closed
to foreign investment. But the sugar industry is in deep crisis and has
suffered two consecutive disastrously low harvests.
Mr Lage also announced that, in defiance of a continuing US economic embargo
against Cuba, representatives of more than 69 US companies had visited the
island in the first half of this year to discuss business prospects.
In some cases, letters of intent for future contracts had been negotiated to
take effect when the US embargo was finally lifted by Washington.
Representatives of two British sugar companies, Tate &amp; Lyle, and ED&amp;F Man,
have held talks this year with Cuban investment officials.
Shortages of essential inputs previously supplied by the former Soviet
Union, such as fuel, spare parts, fertilisers and herbicides, have crippled
Cuba's sugar production since 1990.
On Cuba's economy, Mr Lage said it was still too early to talk of recovery.
But he cited some positive signs, such as the growth of foreign investment,
particularly in tourism and oil exploration, improvements in construction,
cement and nickel production and progress in the government's efforts to
stabilise the country's internal finances.
