FT  02 SEP 94 / UK Company News: Strong demand lifts T&amp;N to Pounds 61m -
Engineering group confirms interest in German vehicle parts maker
T&amp;N, the engineering and motor components group, yesterday confirmed it was
considering a bid for Kolbenschmidt, the German vehicle parts manufacturer.
Mr Colin Hope, chairman and chief executive, said T&amp;N had held talks with
Metallgesellschaft, which holds 47 per cent of Kolbenschmidt, but failed to
agree a price.
Announcing a sharp increase in first-half profits, Mr Hope warned that a
deal could be hampered by possible cartel problems in Germany, where the
enlarged group would control up to 40 per cent of the piston products
market.
Buoyant demand helped lift pre-tax profits from Pounds 39.4m to Pounds 61m,
on turnover ahead 27 per cent at Pounds 985m (Pounds 774m) in the six months
to June 30.
Although operating profits rose to Pounds 76.3m (Pounds 54.2m), the
improvement was dented by increased asbestos-related costs of Pounds 13.9m
(Pounds 9.8m) as the group topped up its liability provisions against future
legal costs and compensation claims.
Asbestos pay-outs and the second instalment on its Pounds 100m acquisition
of Goetze, the German piston ring producer, contributed to negative
operating cash flow of Pounds 6.9m, compared with a Pounds 33.3m surplus.
In a bid to strengthen its balance sheet and reduce borrowings, the group
announced an enhanced scrip alternative to its interim dividend of 7.5p
(10.85p). If all shareholders opted for the scrip - involving new ordinary
shares to a value of 11.25p for each share held - T&amp;N would retain cash of
Pounds 46m: a saving of Pounds 37m on the dividend pay-out and Pounds 9m of
advance corporation tax. It also promised a final cash dividend of not less
than 3.35p if the scrip is taken up.
Mr Hope said savings from the scrip would help reduce the group's ACT
problem, caused by having to use unrelieved UK profits to cover asbestos
liabilities in the US.
Earnings per share, meanwhile, rose from 7.7p to 4.8p.
COMMENT
T&amp;N has successfully exploited the upturn in vehicle demand and achieved
double-digit profit margins two years earlier than most analysts expected.
But it has an Achilles' heel - cashflow. The burden of asbestos compensation
and rising capital expenditure threatens to overshadow the group's
performance in outstripping profits forecasts by 20 per cent. The enhanced
scrip - designed to save cash - looks attractive at first glance but risks
diluting future earnings per share, as does the prospect of funding further
acquisitions through paper. Although full-year pre-tax profits are expected
to reach Pounds 115m, the shares look somewhat full on a forward multiple of
17.1, despite the strong growth potential.
