FT  10 NOV 94 / Dollars 1m to give away - in cyber-bucks
Wanted: 10,000 cyber-junkies to participate in an experiment to test a new
electronic payment system specially designed for use on the Internet. Each
volunteer is required to spend Dollars 100 in cyber-bucks during the
experiment.
DigiCash, an Amsterdam-based company that specialises in developing new
electronic cash payment systems, has invented a form of digital money with
which people can pay for products or services bought on the Internet, the
international system of computer networks.
Mr David Chaum, a former academic who taught at University of California and
New York University before becoming managing director of DigiCash, said the
digital payment system - dubbed E-Cash - had been devised for use by
conventional banks as an alternative form of payment on the Internet that
protects the privacy of the user.
DigiCash has for the past week been operating E-Cash on an experimental
basis. A number of commercial companies, including Encyclopedia Britannica
and Wired, the technology magazine, are participating in the trial by
allowing the DigiCash volunteers to pay for their products in apocryphal
'cyber-bucks' using the E-Cash system.
During the trial DigiCash is giving away a total of Dollars 1m in
cyber-bucks to up to 10,000 volunteers, each of whom will be allowed to
spend Dollars 100. Each participant can withdraw their Dollars 100 from the
DigiCash 'bank' in 'digital coins', each of which is in the form of a
numerical code.
If the volunteers want to access an article from Wired on the Internet, they
pay for it with digital coins. Wired then verifies that the payment is valid
by checking the numerical code of each 'coin' with the DigiCash bank through
the Internet. If the bank approves, the purchase goes ahead.
DigiCash hopes that commercial banks will offer E-Cash as an alternative to
their standard payment systems. Mr Chaum said he hoped soon to conclude
negotiations with a UK bank which is interested in introducing E-Cash. A
conventional bank would operate the system in the same way as the DigiCash
bank in the trial.
Commercial transactions on the Internet are currently paid for with bank
debit or credit cards. The main advantage of the E-Cash format to users is
that it enables them to conduct their Internet transactions in privacy.
The numerical code on each digital coin is calculated according to a
mathematical formula devised by DigiCash. This ensures that the bank sees a
scrambled version of the user's original code and therefore, although it
validates each 'coin', it does not monitor individual transactions.
So far the E-Cash trial is going very well, according to DigiCash. After
only one week on-line it has signed up 1,000 volunteers and new recruits are
flooding in at the rate of 80 or 90 a day.
