FT  06 JUL 94 / UK Company News: Riding along on the crest of the waves -
Charles Batchelor on Stena Sealink's investment in Pounds 63m high speed
catamarans
British holidaymakers gearing up for their trips abroad are being offered
two main choices by the marketing men: a fast no-frills journey through the
Channel tunnel - when it opens for passenger traffic - or a slower, more
relaxing crossing by ferry.
There are other, less heavily promoted, options: hovercraft, which have
never caught on because of the noise and spray, or small Hoverspeed
catamarans popular with day trippers.
Next year, travellers will have another choice, with the arrival of large
high speed catamarans - twin or triple hulled vessels which can travel twice
as fast as conventional ferries - on short sea routes around the UK.
Earlier this month Stena Sealink announced it had commissioned three
catamarans, each capable of carrying 1,500 passengers and 375 cars - five
times the capacity of the largest 'cat' currently in service.
The new Pounds 63m vessels, which are being built in Finland, are longer
than a football pitch and nearly as wide.
Sea Containers, owner of Hoverspeed and the largest operator of catamarans,
has also ordered a new generation of Super SeaCats more than twice the size
of its existing vessels.
The new SeaCats, which are due to come into service in 1995, will be able to
carry 600 passengers and 180 cars.
Catamarans have been in commercial service in British waters since the late
1980s, but the early vessels were unstable in choppy seas and made
travellers sea-sick.
These problems have diminished as the cats have grown larger and the
designers have developed techniques for stabilising them in rough seas.
The limited capacity of the earlier vessels restricted the routes on which
they could be used, although their ability to travel at up to 40 knots
(46mph) meant they could make more frequent journeys.
The rapid expansion of demand for cross-Channel sailings during the late
1980s and early 1990s persuaded the ferry operators that they needed to
increase capacity.
They were faced with a choice between ordering superferries capable of
carrying up to 1,800 passengers or the relatively small catamarans then
available.
The ferry companies were not convinced that speed was a sufficiently strong
selling point to justify the higher prices they would have to charge.
P&amp;O European Ferries, which claims the largest share of the cross-Channel
market, has yet to be persuaded of the advantages of catamarans. The company
has had study teams looking at them for many years, but remains unconvinced
about their reliability.
The opening of the Channel tunnel, which is being marketed primarily on the
speed of its service, finally persuaded the ferry operators that they should
consider cats seriously.
Stena Sealink concluded that the only advantage the tunnel could claim was
speed; supercats, it decided, could match it for speed but still offer all
the facilities of a superferry.
Unlike the ferries, catamarans provide an airline style service with
guaranteed seats arranged in rows in a single main cabin. The height of the
vessel and the the distance of the passenger cabin from the engines provides
a smooth ride, in stark contrast to the noise and spray which limited the
popularity of the hovercraft.
The first catamarans to come into service were passenger only, but they have
been superseded by car-carrying vessels.
'We decided the future lay in car-carriers rather than passenger-only
vessels,' said Mr Sam Spindlow, marketing manager of Condor, which operates
a catamaran service between the Channel Islands and the mainland.
The next stage for catamarans is to progress from carrying cars to carrying
trucks and coaches.
When the first of Stena Sealink's new supercats comes into service on the
Holyhead-Dun Laoghaire route across the Irish Sea in the spring of 1995 it
will be capable of carrying up to 50 trucks, trailers or coaches as well as
cars and their passengers.
Carrying freight means the operator can earn a steady revenue from his
vessels all year round instead of just being dependent on the tourist
traffic in the peak summer months.
Unlike Stena Sealink, Sea Containers has no plans to carry freight on its
catamarans. The company is still waiting for proof that the freight market
will pay a premium to make fairly small time savings on the short sea
routes. Unloading trucks and trailers also makes for longer turn-round times
in port. Sea Containers operates its small Hoverspeed catamarans on the
Folkestone-Boulogne route, popular with day trippers; between Belfast and
Stranraer; and, on charter, between the Isle of Man and the mainland.
Outside the UK it operates catamarans between Gothenburg and Frederikshavn
and across the River Plate between Argentina and Uruguay. It recently
chartered a vessel for use in the Arabian Gulf.
Demand for catamarans around the world exceeds supply, said Mr James
Sherwood, chairman of Sea Containers. The company is looking at several new
routes, including one between mainland Venezuela and the holiday destination
Isla Margarita.
The initial response of the operators of traditional ferries to the
introduction of catamarans was to cut their prices sharply, said Mr
Sherwood. He expects that as the catamarans become more established this
fierce price competition should ease.
With the Channel tunnel gradually building up its capacity this may prove a
forlorn hope on the cross-Channel routes. But whatever the outcome the high
speed catamaran is here to stay.
