FT  17 AUG 94 / More short breaks and less haggis: Gloomy news about holiday
industry earnings
As tourism destinations Scotland and Ireland have a lot in common. Both have
picturesque sea lochs and mountains, a distinct history and rainy climates.
But there is an important difference between them.
Scotland's tourist revenues have fallen in real terms in recent years, while
the Republic of Ireland's have risen. Scotland earned Pounds 1bn more than
Ireland in 1987 but the republic has now overtaken it. The number of tourist
visits to the Irish republic has been growing by 6 per cent a year while
those to Scotland have fallen by 1 per cent.
These were among the grim facts spelt out yesterday by Mr Derek Reid, the
new chief executive of the Scottish Tourist Board. Mr Reid, a former
managing director of Cadbury-Schweppes' food side who was instrumental in
the management buy-out of Cadbury-Typhoo to create Premier Brands in 1986,
said Scotland had suffered not just from the UK recession but from the
effects of the Gulf war on its main overseas market, the US.
But he did not spare past policies of the board. It was no good 'trying to
make water run uphill' by trying to persuade English people to spend their
main holiday in Scotland when they wanted to spend it abroad. In future the
board would focus efforts in England on selling short breaks.
The industry had failed to respond to the demand for out-of-season holidays.
'We have talked about short breaks and seasonality in every strategic plan
ever written - yet the graph of seasonality has scarcely altered,' he said.
As a specialist in promoting brands he was evidently appalled that the board
had had four different campaigns in the English market with differing
consumer messages in the last five years. 'This is not the way to create
Scotland the brand,' he chided.
'We can carry on as we are,' Mr Reid said, 'but this will inevitably lead to
a continuation of the slow, gradual decline. Or we can embrace a strategy of
going for growth.'
The new strategy for the Scottish tourist industry involves clearer
marketing. An advertising campaign aims to give the country more emotional
appeal, avoiding references to haggis, tartan and bagpipes.
Greater cohesion of the tourism effort is being sought, following the
reallocation of roles among public bodies involved in tourism. Mr Reid said,
however, that there was still a plethora of Local Enterprise Companies - the
economic development bodies - and area tourist boards (these are being
reduced) and the industry had to ensure that 'the left and right hands are
working together'.
Mr Reid's most obvious anxiety is about the shortage of public money for the
industry. Scotland's official spending on marketing in 1993-94 was only
Pounds 7m, compared with the Republic of Ireland's Pounds 17m and New
Zealand's Pounds 25m in 1992-93. The board's marketing budget is frozen
under public spending limits.
The Irish republic, Mr Reid pointed out, was also far outspending Scotland
in capital investment - Pounds 37m out of public funds in 1991 compared with
Scotland's Pounds 15m.
With the government resources currently available, a growth rate of 1 per
cent a year was the maximum Scotland could achieve, with a 3 per cent rise
in spending from overseas visitors and static spending by English and
Scottish tourists.
But if the government were to allocate another Pounds 5m to the Scottish
Tourist Board for spending on UK marketing and another Pounds 2m for
overseas marketing, plus a substantial boost to training and capital
spending, annual growth of 3 per cent was achievable, he said, although that
would still be less than the Irish republic and below the OECD average.
Mr Reid sugared his discreet plea for more government money by saying that
the private sector might be able to contribute Pounds 1m for every Pounds 5m
of state funding for marketing.
