FT  20 JUL 94 / Towards a leaner, greener bank: World Bank president plots
the future of the institution
The World Bank will become leaner, more agile and more responsive to a
rapidly changing world, Mr Lewis Preston, the bank's president, pledged
yesterday.
He said he was attempting to streamline the organisation, reduce costs and
become more open and accountable. 'We still have a way to go - but the bank
is changing,' he said.
He said the nature of the bank's contribution to development was changing.
In its first half-century, now ending, the two arms of the bank - the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International
Development Association - had served principally as a supplier of
development capital for third world countries.
But, in view of the greatly increased availability of private investment
capital, it was now putting more emphasis now on its role as an adviser to
client governments. It would increasingly act as a catalyst and facilitator
of private sector investment in the third world and former communist
countries. Mr Preston was speaking at a Washington news conference to launch
a report - Learning from the Past, Embracing the Future* - which sets
long-term goals for the bank on the 50th anniversary of its creation at
Bretton Woods, New Hampshire.
He set out six principles which would guide the bank's future evolution. It
would try to be more selective in the tasks it undertook; to rely more on
partnership with other institutions; to be more responsive to clients'
needs; to put more emphasis on the results of projects; to save resources by
improving its cost-effectiveness; and strive to maintain its high standing
as a borrower on global capital markets.
These principles would guide the bank's response to five key development
challenges in coming decades. These would be the promotion of economic
reforms likely to help the poor; increased investment in people, especially
through education, healthcare and family planning; protection of the
environment; stimulation of private sector development; and public sector
reform to create an environment where private enterprise could flourish.
The report is a response to growing criticism that the bank is not adapting
rapidly enough to a changed global financial landscape.
In the past five years, flows of private capital to developing countries
have quadrupled to Dollars 120bn (Pounds 77bn), dwarfing the bank's own
total commitments of about Dollars 20bn.
Independent experts, including the Bretton Woods Commisssion, a group headed
by Mr Paul Volcker, a former US Federal Reserve chairman, have pressed for
significant staff cuts at the bank, on the grounds that larger private
capital flows to 'emerging markets' have rendered some of its former tasks
obsolete.
Left-of-centre pressure groups - including the '50 years is enough' campaign
 -have also taken aim at the bank, arguing that many of its projects have
harmed the environment while doing little to help the poorest groups in
developing countries.
Although the bank's total lending has fallen sharply in real terms during
recent years, it has continued to expand rapidly. It now has about 11,000
people on its payroll, up from 8,000 in 1989 and 7,000 in 1984. It has more
than 6,000 'higher-level' professional staff (including consultants), an
increase of a third in five years and of more than 50 per cent in a decade.
Its administrative budget (mostly staff costs) has increased by 44 per cent
to Dollars 1.4bn in the past three years.
In the institution's defence, Mr Preston says the demands on the bank have
increased enormously in recent years.
For example, it is playing a central role in helping to guide the transition
to capitalism in former communist countries. He has also needed to upgrade
the bank's skill-base in areas such as the environment, private sector
development and human resources.
Mr Preston said that the goal of a leaner bank 'means fewer people', but he
refused to say how many staff he expected to shed in coming years.
'Ultimately, it is the shareholders (member governments) who determine what
activities the bank engages in.'
He said the bank intended to charge fees for advisory services to client
governments, conceding that, if it offered services free of charge, it would
be providing unfair competition for private sector consultancy groups, which
are also seeking work as advisers to third world governments.
The bank is charging fees for advice in two countries at present, but the
costs of advisory services are normally absorbed in the interest charges on
associated loans. Mr Preston said that charging fees had not been feasible
until recently because the bank had no cost-accounting system and so had not
known what to charge.
Looking back, 'the mistake the bank has paid the highest price for was not
recognising the importance of the environment,' he said.
The bank had wrongly assumed that there was a confict between development
and the environment, but was now committed to the concept of 'sustainable
development' - meaning policies which promote economic growth and an
improved environment.
Mr Preston's 'vision statement' appears unlikely to quell criticism of the
bank.
Yesterday, Oxfam, the British-based charity, said it was a 'profoundly
disappointing document which avoides addressing the real challenges.' Oxfam
claimed that the bank's structural adjustment policies 'continue to impose
unacceptable and unnecessary social costs on the poor, especially women.'
This reflected 'the absence of effective public scrutiny of the bank's
operations,' it added.
* Available from The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street, N W, Washington DC,
20433, USA.
