FT  12 MAR 94 / Survey of Residential Property (3): Where German efficiency
falls down - Lack of information can turn buying a home into a complicated
process
The German residential property market is neither transparent nor efficient,
says Oscar Kienzle, head of Knight Frank &amp; Rutley's German operations.
He explains: 'Go to Knight Frank in London and they will tell you exactly
how much you have to pay to buy a flat in Knightsbridge. The market there is
efficient in that, if you are prepared to pay more than the odds, you will
definitely get what you want.
'From the seller's point of view, the converse holds true - drop your price
from the market level and you'll find a buyer.'
But that, says Kienzle, is not the case in Germany where information on what
is for sale and for how much is hard to come by. There are no 'for sale'
signs and national chains of estate agents are few.
As you might expect in Germany's strongly regionalised economy, the market
is local in character. Knowledge gleaned in Munich will not be of much help
if you are posted to Frankfurt or Dusseldorf.
Even within the regions, the market is fragmented. In the Frankfurt area,
for example, few agents will be able to give you an overview of prices for
the whole city and its satellite towns.
The market in the Frankfurt region is controlled by at least 1,000 Maklers
(brokers), most of whom specialise in a small area. The expert on the market
for flats in the expensive west end of the city centre is unlikely to know
much about villas for sale in nearby dormitory towns such as Bad Homburg,
Bad Vilbel or Kronberg.
Assuming fluency in German, and a degree of familiarity with local tax law,
you should reckon on at least a year between arriving in Germany and buying
a house, says one banker who has just bought a property on the outskirts of
Frankfurt.
'The most important thing you must bring with you when you're considering
buying a house is time,' agrees Kienzle.
The inefficiency of the market means there are bargains to be had
occasionally - but you have to be there long enough to spot them when they
become available.
It follows that international executives who might be posted to Frankfurt
would be well advised to rent a flat or a house on arrival and buy only if
they are likely to be staying for five years or more.
The chance of making a substantial capital gain in less than five years is
small, says Dr Walter Fuhrberg, managing director of Blumenauer Immobilien,
one of the larger property agencies in Frankurt.
House prices in the Frankfurt area have risen at 4 to 5 per cent a year
since the late 1980s - not enough to justify a speculative purchase,
especially in view of the costs and complications of buying. This a far cry
from the giddy price movements in the UK residential property market.
But the stable price development reflects Germans' deep-rooted fear of
inflation as well as a reluctance to treat home-buying as a form of
financial speculation. 'Germans do not regard houses and flats as a
commodity, as something to be bought and sold,' says a broker in the
Stuttgart area.
'Buying a house is very serious and very formal. For most people, it is an
enormous step signifying that you've made it and you are settling down for
life.'
Indeed, in Germany as a whole, only around 40 per cent of the population
owns a house, compared with a Europe-wide average of 60 per cent.
If you are very rich, there are tax advantages associated with owning
residential property and renting it out.
There are also tax benefits if you build your own property - very popular in
a country where, unlike Britain, there is little sentiment attached to
living in an old house.
Another incentive to buy comes from the low cost of money: interest rates
for home loans have fallen far more steeply that short-term rates in the
past 18 months.
In the Frankfurt area, prices range from DM500,000 (Pounds 200,000) for a
small flat in a good area to DM5m or more for a villa in the Taunus hills
outside the town. Rents range from DM15-DM25 per square metre, often with a
service charge and bills on top.
It could be that the cost of financing a mortgage is now below the rental
costs of living in a similar property. Against this, you must weigh the fee
of 5 per cent of the value of the house (plus value added tax) which you pay
on purchase and maintenance costs. There are also the non-financial
considerations - such as the sheer complexity of finding and buying the
house in which you would like to live.
Renting remains the most straightforward option for all but the most
long-term expatriates. At the top end of the market, there is no shortage of
properties, and rents have fallen over the past couple of years.
Renting is not without its complexities and frustrations, however.
There is nothing more irritating than paying a fee to the Makler, who often
seems to have done nothing other than put an advertisement in the paper and
wait to be overwhelmed by calls from expatriates. The fee is two months'
rent, plus VAT, fixed by law.
