FT  19 FEB 94 / Briefcase Q&amp;A: Eligible for indexation
In Briefcase (January 15/16), you say CGT indexation can now be used to
mitigate gains but not to increase losses on gilt unit trusts. Could you
tell me:
1. Does the application of indexation apply in retrospect from the date of
purchase or only from the date when the Finance Bill became law?
2. Does the new rule apply to all gilt and/or fixed-interest unit trusts?
What is the CGT position regarding transfers of investments (unit trusts)
from spouse to spouse. Do such transfers, carried out in accordance with the
the standard stock transfer form, now constitute a disposal by the
transferer, or does the original base rate still apply for indexation?
1. All assets disposed-of after November 29 last year are eligible for
indexation allowance from the month of acquisition to the month of disposal
(up to the amount of the unindexed gain, if any).
The denial of indexation relief against gains on gilt unit trust units etc
(after March 19 1990), and on shares in UK building societies and industrial
and provident societies (after July 3 1987), is to be abolished by
sub-sections 7 and 11 of clause 89 of the Finance Bill, as published on
January 11*.
The restoration of indexation relief for gains on building society shares
will benefit trustees, in particular, on the occasion of deemed disposals at
market value (when the market value reflects accrued income and is,
consequently, above par).
2. Such transfers have always constituted a disposal by one spouse and an
acquisition by the other; but they have been, and continue to be, treated as
made for such a consideration as will give the transferer neither a gain nor
a loss.
The difference, broadly speaking, which is made by sub-sections 4, 5, 6 and
11 of clause 89, is that a transfer after November 29 will not give the
transferee the benefit of the transferer's indexation (up to the month of
the transfer) unless, and then to the extent that, the transferee has a
potentially taxable gain on her or his eventual disposal.
In making plans on the basis of the Budget proposals and the original
(417-page) version of the Finance Bill, you must bear in mind that every
finance bill is amended substantially by the government of the day during
its passage through the House of Commons. The present bill is unlikely to
receive its third reading until quite late in April.
*'(7) Sections 103 (collective investment schemes, etc.), 111 (building
society etc. shares), 182 to 184 (groups and associated companies) and 200
(oil industry assets) of that Act (all of which relate to indexation
allowance) shall cease to have effect.'
'(11) This section shall have effect in relation to disposals made on or
after 30th November 1993.'
No legal responsibility can be accepted by the Financial Times for the
answers given in these columns. All enquiries will be answered by post as
soon as possible.
