FT  10 JAN 94 / International Press Review
FRANCE
'A power is born', declared Le Monde on the launching of an independent Bank
of France last week. 'It is a landmark in French finance', proclaimed
L'Agefi, the business daily.
Le Nouvel Economiste, the influential weekly, even designated the nine
members of the new monetary policy council, appointed last week, as 'the
guardians of the franc'.
But there were dissenting voices from the broad consensus on the importance
of the event. 'The real significance is without doubt less than is claimed'
said Le Quotidien de Paris, the right-wing daily, in an editorial. Most of
the council's powers would be superseded by the European central bank, the
paper argued. And until then, the absence of powerful representatives from
industry and agriculture was a real limitation: 'The sages risk being a
little disconnected from economic life.'
Most of the media, however, applauded the selection of the six lay members
who will sit alongside Mr Trichet, the governor of the central bank and his
two deputies. 'A council of strong personalities' was the description
offered by La Tribune Desfosses, the financial daily.
Like most of its counterparts, the paper argued that the council represented
a welcome diversity, with members drawn from journalism to insurance. It was
also a pro-European council, unlikely to rock the boat by changing course
from the government's cautious and relatively tight monetary policy.
Some concerns were voiced about the granting of control over monetary policy
to a non-elected body. But, as Liberation, the liberal daily, concluded, the
reform was above all pragmatic. Paraphrasing Deng Xiaoping, the Chinese
leader, it asked: 'What does it matter if the cat is grey or black, as long
as it catches the mouse?'
ITALY
Italian papers have had a bonanza since the new year reporting the chaos in
pharmacies following the introduction of complex new rules on drugs sales.
The strong human interest element of a rule change which has seen sick
patients queueing outside chemists' shops only to be turned away because
they lack a prescription has even knocked the political corruption scandal
out of the papers for a few days.
Both La Repubblica, the best selling daily, and Corriere della Sera, of
Milan, carried interviews with Mrs Maria Pia Garavaglia, health minister, in
which she made a spirited defence of the reforms, aimed at reducing
over-prescription and saving money on Italy's huge annual drugs bill. In
particular, she criticised the media for exaggerating the impact and
inconvenience of the new rules.
Her accusations did not, however, curb the space devoted by the newspapers
to the grievances aired by pharmacists, doctors and representatives of big
drugs companies.
The result was a virtual free-for-all, in which each group threw mud at the
other, and they all threw mud at the Health Ministry. Il Sole 24 Ore,
Italy's leading business newspaper, gave ample space to industry spokesmen
castigating the government for its ineptitude and issuing dire warnings
about the consequences of the reforms for drugs companies.
But in the more popular press, the human interest angle, focused on the need
from January 1 for prescriptions for many medicines that could previously be
bought without a doctor's authorisation, eclipsed the industrial story. Most
papers focused on horrific tales of haemophiliacs or Aids-sufferers turned
away from chemists' shops because their medications were no longer available
without a prescription.
Again and again, their plight was confused with the simultaneous reform of
the free medicines list. As a result, stories also abounded of patients
seeking familiar drugs, previously sold at the token price of L5,000 (Pounds
2), at their full retail value.
MEXICO
The ability of the Mexican government to control the press was tested to the
limit last week, as armed rebels in the southern state of Chiapas took over
several towns and attacked soldiers in their barracks.
In the first days of the uprising, the newspapers were filled with images of
the uprising, interviews with guerrillas, eyewitness accounts of army
bombings of supposed guerrilla strongholds, and descriptions of the deaths
of rebels and civilians in shoot-outs.
But by mid-week the government seemed to have had enough of the battle-line
descriptions, and the army cut off main routes to the conflict areas. From
then on the news was dominated by government press releases and
pronouncements by political leaders.
On Thursday most papers led with the government's terms for peace: a demand
for unconditional surrender; on Friday with President Salinas's promise to
consider pardoning Indians who co-operated with the government; and on
Saturday with the interior minister's reiteration that rebels were violent
extremists who manipulated Indians to join them.
Developments in the conflict, the number of rebels, their long-term threat
to national security, and army tactics in restoring order were generally
given less importance.
Editorials, with some exceptions, toed the government line. Excelsior, the
establishment newspaper, even concluded, in language remarkably similar to
the government press release, that the rebels were 'run by true
professionals of violence that only exploit the conditions of poverty of the
Indians and use them to damage Mexico. Their objectives, above all, are far
from the demands and interests of the community'.
However, more independent newspapers such as La Jornada and El Universal
called on the army to respect the human rights of Indians when putting down
the rebellion. Carlos Fuentes, the novelist, said in La Jornada that the
uprising was provoked by the misery in which most of Mexico's Indians lived.
'The Mexican political and economic system, unjust and anti-democratic, is
co-responsible for the explosion,' he concluded.
PAKISTAN
Last week's fight among members of the Bhutto family, on the anniversary of
the birth of Mr Zulfikar ali Bhutto, the late prime minister, triggered
speculation in Pakistan's press about the government's future, amid almost
united condemnation of the scrapping.
The killing of a civilian in police firing outside al-Murtaza, the family's
ancestral home, in the southern city of Larkana, and the subsequent
vitriolic accusations by Mrs Nusrat Bhutto against her daughter, Prime
Minister Benazir Bhutto, received front page coverage in local papers. But
the national dailies ran editorials urging the two sides to resolve their
differences. 'If this situation continues unchanged, the government will
face such a great damage which even its worst enemies have not been able to
inflict so far,' said Jang, the best-selling Urdu daily.
'The family feud has now assumed alarming proportions, and even if if does
not pose a serious threat to Benazir Bhutto's political authority, it is
bound to distract her emotionally from her job as the country's prime
minister', said the opposition-supported The Nation.
The largest circulation English-language newspaper, Dawn, warned that 'a
leadership crisis of this magnitude cannot remain confined' to the ranks of
the ruling PPP (Pakistan People's party). It was bound to have wide-ranging
political and administrative repercussions, the paper said.
But it was left to The Muslim of Islamabad to point to the irony that 'the
last nail in the coffin of party unity may have been hammered over the
founder's grave site'.
Reports from John Ridding, Haig Simonian, Damian Fraser and Farhan Bokhari
