FT  15 JUL 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (8): A long time
getting up again - Overseas investment 6 / Japan / Foreigners tend to be
more bullish than locals about the world's second biggest stock market, and
only pessimists steer clear
Getting the Japanese market right is an art that too often eludes western
fund managers.
After Wall Street and European markets had cracked in October 1987, many
pundits predicted that Tokyo was bound to crack too. In fact, it carried on
up for two years. Then, when some western pundits were beginning to argue
that the peculiar nature of the Japanese market meant that it could defy
gravity forever, it did crack.
Even now, the Tokyo market is only half its level at the end of 1989. Since
mid-1992, it has been making half-hearted attempts to pick itself off the
floor. And, although the yen's strength has meant that foreign investors
have done reasonably well out of Tokyo lately, the great leap upwards has
stubbornly failed to happen.
What marketing managers responsible for unit and investment trusts like best
is a stock market that has already risen strongly and is still going up.
There are not many of those around at the moment. So they are settling for a
second best: a market whose signal failure to perform so far can be used as
evidence of its enormous potential. Several of the big fund management
groups have launched new Japan funds recently.
How plausible is the story? Japan is the world's second largest stock
market. Indeed, before its fall, it briefly toppled the US from the premier
position. So for any professional investor to have no exposure to Japan
indicates extreme pessimism. This year, some fund managers with a global
brief have had an unusually high proportion of their money in Japan; others
have had none. Generally, foreigners are far more bullish of the Japanese
market than the locals.
The bullish argument is that Japan's economy has been out of synch with
those of the other major economies, but that increased domestic consumption
is finally getting growth going again.
Rising consumer spending power is reinforced by high public investment. And
despite the domestic political upsets, the only real worries are the
over-vigorous yen and the continuing trade dispute with the US.
Japanese shares already look very highly rated on past corporate earnings.
But unusually high fixed corporate overheads mean that relatively small
increases in sales can translate into large increases in corporate profits
and earnings.
Investing directly in Japanese shares is not a realistic proposition for
personal investors. But there is a fair choice of both unit and investment
trusts specialising in Japan. Normally we would suggest that investment
trusts were a better vehicle. But heavy investor demand means that shares in
many Japanese investment trusts are looking pricey: most investment trust
shares are now selling at discounts to their asset values, but some Japanese
trusts are still at premiums. Until that anomaly vanishes, unit trusts could
be a better bet.
It is worth remembering that many fund management groups operate both unit
and investment trusts. So if you like a particular manager's approach, you
may have a choice of vehicles.
The Review's regular coverage of world stock markets begins on page 11
