FT  21 SEP 94 / Leading Article: The role of a third party
Britain's Liberal Democrats are right. Cannabis should be decriminalised.
The law prohibiting use or possession of small amounts of the drug is
difficult to enforce and, in consequence, low on the list of police
priorities. Chief constables would like to see it removed from the statute
books. As matters stand, its distribution is managed by gangsters at the
wholesale level and petty criminals at the retail. This is absurd. There
would be some risk in decriminalisation, since all drugs are potentially
dangerous. Yet there is no evidence that cannabis is any more harmful than
either tobacco or alcohol.
The above would be a sensible set of propositions for Mr Paddy Ashdown to
put forward. Instead the leader of the Liberal Democrats has expressed
distaste, bordering on alarm, following his party's vote at its annual
conference in Brighton in favour of ending prosecutions of 'pot' smokers.
Perhaps he anticipated the prissy horror expressed by some of Britain's
tabloids. Possibly he feared the loss of some support for his party, which
has in the past been dogged by its image as a home for sandal-wearing,
muesli-eating activists.
If so, his concerns were misplaced. The Liberal Democrats may or may not be
destined to play a role in national government. That depends upon whether
the Labour party finds that it can govern with their support, but not
without it, after the next election. Meanwhile the third party commands the
allegiance of between a sixth and a fifth of the voters, a mandate
substantial enough to support its aspiration to be taken seriously.
To deserve to be taken seriously, Liberal Democrats must put forward radical
ideas, particularly when many people know in their bones that a particular
proposal is right. That above all is their role, and they can claim some
success in pursuing it. They have brought political opinion a long way
towards constitutional reform, with a large part of the Labour programme
lifted straight from Lib-Dem manuals. Notions such as the earmarking of
taxes may yet become topics for respectable debate. Some activists'
favourite schemes, such as a minimum wage or the abolition of the monarchy,
deserve to be rejected by the party leadership, but that is no reason why
they should not be aired.
The two larger parties are extremely cautious about saying anything that has
not been market-tested, sanitised and measured against its supposed impact
on the electorate. Mainstream politicians who come up with original ideas
find themselves forced to abandon them by the relentless inquisition of the
popular press. This is a stultifying atmosphere, in which fresh approaches
to intractable problems are unlikely to emerge.
The Liberal Democrats should be different. Mr Ashdown should loosen up a
little. He would do us all a favour, and perhaps win greater respect and
support that way than by trying to be Little Sir Echo.
