FT  10 FEB 94 / Refugees find doors bolted: Financial constraints are
forcing Europe to tighten procedures against asylum seekers
As the European Commission mulls over its recent discussion paper on asylum
and immigration, a small drama has begun to unfold in Germany that threatens
to add a new edge of controversy to the debate.
Immigration offices across Germany have notified the tens of thousands of
Croat refugees who have fled from the former Yugoslavia that they will have
to start returning to Croatia from April 1.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has warned that, if the
Croats - who number between 70,000 and 100,000 - are deported, many would
find themselves being returned to places currently controlled by the Serbs,
or else to places where their homes have been destroyed.
But with Germany facing an acute shortage of suitable accommodation for the
refugees, the authorities seem determined to lift the deportation ban which
previously guaranteed the Croats' right of refuge, even though they had not
applied for political asylum.
The German decision stems not so much from political pressure from the far
right, but rather from the intense financial constraints adding a new edge
of urgency to the EU's debate on the issue.
In the past 10 years asylum applications across Europe have risen tenfold -
from some 65,400 a year in 1982 to nearly 680,000 in 1992, with Germany
alone accounting for nearly 75 per cent of this.
One reason has been the growing availability of air travel, which has
brought political refugees from places as diverse as Sri Lanka and Somalia
into Europe's airports and sea ports.
However, another reason has been Europe's tough immigration policies, which
have left many would-be immigrants convinced that their best chance of entry
lies with an application for political asylum.
In an attempt to combat these so called 'economic migrants', the Commission
is now calling for greater co-ordination between the member states, both in
their policies to keep out the illegal migrants, and in their treatment of
legally resident immigrants.
Meanwhile, one by one the European countries have been tightening their own
asylum procedures.
Last summer Germany rescinded its constitutional right of stay for political
refugees and added new amendments to its liberal asylum laws which mean that
those entering Germany via a safe, third country can be sent back to that
country.
The British Home Office has taken on nearly 500 extra staff to deal with
asylum applications, toughened its methods of detecting fraudulent
applications and introduced vigorous new fines for airlines and ships which
carry illegal immigrants.
Partly as a result of these procedures, asylum applications fell last year
for the first time in ten years, to slightly over 550,000, compared to
679,900 in 1992.
The main factor in this was a 25 per cent fall in the German applications.
However, falls were also seen in the UK and France, which together received
a total of 55,007 last year, down from a combined total of 104,200
applications in 1991.
Meanwhile, as Mr Henrik Oleson, of the intergovernmental consultations on
refugees points out, these overall figures conceal an even greater fall in
the numbers of Third World refugees, since the total includes the huge
increase in refugees from the former Yugoslavia.
Governments insist that, even with this reduction, this figure is still far
more than European governments can bear - the immigration budget in Germany
last year reached DM5bn, while in the UK the comparable figure was Pounds
1.4bn.
However, the new procedures have provoked strong protests from some refugee
groups, who argue this is discriminating against genuine refugees.
The UNHCR has collected a dossier of stories which illustrate that in some
cases airline staff have unwittingly turned away valid claims of political
persecution, while refugees who reach Europe are often left for long periods
in limbo, with their legal rights varying significantly between countries.
The tightening of procedures has itself generated new problems for
neighbouring countries, as asylum seekers look for new points of entry.
After Germany tightened its regulations last year, both Belgium and the
Netherlands saw a rise in applications.
The European Commission believes the solution to this problem is better
co-ordination among member states, both in its treatment of legal immigrants
and in its policies to deter the false asylum seekers.
Refugee groups are already warning that if Europe adopts a more co-ordinated
policy, as the Commission's recent paper suggests, this could create a
spill-over in eastern Europe.
'We are already seeing rising numbers of refugees in countries like Poland
and the Czech republic, and these countries do not have the resources or
experience to deal with this,' says Mr Philip Rudge, director of the
European Council for Refugees and Exiles.
Unless the German government changes its latest policy, it seems that the
100,000 Croat refugees currently living Germany will soon become the latest
statistic in this trend.
Many in the refugee world argue that the best long-term solution would be a
more open immigration policy that gave would-be immigrants a chance of
entering Europe in more legal manner.
