FT  27 SEP 94 / Survey of Business Locations in Europe (14): When it's all
in the mind - The company's moving. . . David Lawson seeks to define 'the
quality of life'
One Monday morning, a US manager arrived back from holiday to a memo from
the chief executive telling him to find a European outlet. 'He had heard
that a competitor was opening a plant in Spain, and felt we ought to get
inside the Single Market boundaries, too.'
No problem, he thought. Another memo to the research department, and within
a week the manager had a neat table of local salaries, rents and transport
costs. He picked out two or three similarly attractive locations for the
board, 'just so they could feel they were making the decision.'
Northern Spain, southern Italy and Bulgaria went into the meeting. 'They all
had the cheapest all-round costs. I figured we would cover expenses within
two years,' says the manager. The board chose France.
In retrospect, the manager saw his mistake. Financial factors may come first
in location choices; but other, often more tenuous, matters run a very close
second - and sometimes elbow their way to the top. They package together as
'quality of life'. But what is 'quality', and how is it measured?
'It is different things to different people,' says Jean Crawford, who
handles international moves for UK consultant Jones Lang Wootton. A Japanese
company, for instance, would be looking for a clean, modern environment -
with the obligatory nearby golf courses. A British or US business is more
likely to want places with some character and history - plus nearby soccer
or softball pitches.
Both demand good housing and schools providing the international
baccalaureate so their children will not miss out. Other factors also go
into the pot, such as low crime rates, good parking and access to
countryside.
The US company in the above example is strongly involved in electronics and
research. It needed to take key staff across the Atlantic and attract others
from around Europe. Unlike the manager, who is a lawyer, founder members on
the board had spent time working abroad and knew technical staff would not
go to northern Spain, let alone Bulgaria.
No financial incentives would make up for another element. They chose a
'technopole', one of the high-tech growth centres in the south of France,
because staff would feel comfortable mixing with the people from similar
backgrounds, says the manager - now an ex-manager, which is why he prefers
to remain anonymous.
These centres of technical excellence are among the most successful magnets
for international business in Europe, according to Ms Crawford. 'They have
produced the right environment, the right mix of people and, of course, they
have the right climate.'
Quality of life is not always crucial to attract investment. The surge into
eastern European centres, for instance, would never take place if factors
like housing and entertainment took precedence. Here, the drive for new
markets takes precedence.
But where places offer relatively similar incentives, such as tax-breaks and
staff availability, the tenuous attractions of quality of life can make all
the difference.
One problem is that no one has come up with a definitive measure to which
centres, and investors, can refer. Professor Richard Estes, of the
University of Pennsylvania, has tried his best, having spent 20 years
assessing the relative merits of different countries. Danish newspapers
recently jumped for joy when he reported that the Scandinavian country had
held on to top place, while US journals were glum about its position towards
the bottom of countries in the developed world.
But Prof Estes feeds in factors such as the status of women and human rights
to produce his Index of Social Progress. And these factors are unlikely to
interest high-paid executives and their families.
A plethora of indices is available in the UK, but each has a slightly
different message. Reward Group simply assesses each region's cost of
living. Strathclyde University goes to the opposite extreme, feeding in
nearly 50 factors for grading centres on whether they are good places to
live. These range from health services to pollution levels, which naturally
puts areas like Scotland, Wales and south-west England top of the UK list.
Chris Boulton, of property consultants Hillier Parker, agrees that these
will be high among the priorities for more than 1,000 US companies that
expect to move to the UK in the coming year. Perhaps it is no coincidence
that Bristol, the main business centre of south-west England, also emerged
as the most desirable UK city in a poll of more than 500 British companies
by Black Horse Relocation. The study also found that quality of life was the
most important personal factor in choosing a location, gaining more than
half the votes, and compared with only 30 for cost of living.
Similar conclusions could be applied right across Europe, but Michael Kaltz,
a partner in management consultants Ernst &amp; Young, warns that preferences do
not always match actions. 'It depends on who is making the decisions,' he
says. Senior executives may not be moving to the new centre, so quality of
life may not play as big a part as finance.
They may also pick out the wrong 'attractions'. When Ms Crawford analysed
the wishes of staff in one organisation, the vast majority of those under 25
asked for access to cinemas and clubs. Senior staff had opted for the
theatre and opera.
In this maze of often contradictory factors, a few common consistencies
emerge. 'The average executive will look first to their creature comforts,'
says Anita Saunders, who has handled hundreds of international moves for
Hamptons Relocation. 'They want good housing, good schools, their
own-language TV and newspapers, good local restaurants and shopping, and an
area where they can mix with people of their own kind.' That does not mean
the same nationality, but people of similar interests and background.
Amsterdam and Utrecht seem to meet many of these demands. Madrid, the
Algarve and Paris are also high on the list. Frankfurt and Brussels 'lack
soul', while London is considered expensive and congested, she says. East
European centres are chosen because executives have to go there for new
business. Quality of life hardly comes into the equation.
Holland also comes high on Ms Crawford's list, particularly for the
Japanese, as they can do business in English without paying high British
property costs.
But at the end of the day, investors and executives have to make a trade-off
between financial factors, lifestyle and personal preferences, says Mr
Kaltz. 'Most European capitals will offer an acceptable quality of life.
Selection will often boil down to personal preferences, and no index will be
able to determine those.'
