FT  13 MAY 94 / Debate and doubts over rosy trade figures
Debates about price deflators do not usually leave markets buzzing. But as
the City yesterday analysed the latest UK trade statistics, there was a
question over whether the apparently upbeat figures could be believed.
The Central Statistical Office and Customs and Excise board, which yesterday
unveiled the results of a review into the new system of collecting trade
statistics and calculating price deflators, insist that they can be
believed.
Although the review led to a small revision in last year's trade deficit,
and numerous other changes in price and volumes figures, the CSO says it is
confident that the new statistical system is now capturing most of the UK
trade flows.
But this confidence is not shared by some in the City, who continue to
complain that the statistics are painting an overly rosy picture of the UK
trade balance - and at odds with other data, such as surveys by the
Confederation of British Industry. Mr Bill Martin, chief economist at UBS,
for example, believes that even after yesterday's revisions the CSO is still
underestimating imports by some Pounds 4bn a year.
'The CSO has tried very hard in this review, but I think it still misses a
lot of trade,' he said.
The debate centres over the switch-over last year towards a new EU-style
statistical system, known as Intrastat.
Prior to the single market, UK trade flows used to be measured as they
passed through ports. However, because these 'trade posts' are illegal under
the new single-market, the CSO collects its statistical data directly from
companies.
Since this system collects figures on imports and exports through value
added tax returns from companies, the assumption has been that this system
would underestimate imports.
The CSO's review yesterday confirmed some of these fears, revising its
figure for EU imports for 1993 up by Pounds 0.3bn.
But this revision was far lower than most market expectations, and most of
the other revisions were minimal and unlikely to seriously change the GDP or
output figures.
The CSO suggested that in some respects the new system might be more
accurate in recording trade passing through 'entrepot' ports such as
Rotterdam.
Under the old system, imports from non-EU countries arriving in the UK via
Rotterdam were often recorded, incorrectly, as EU imports.
