FT  24 SEP 94 / Travel: On Safari - Come on safari with me, says Michael J.
Woods, who likes to go in search of the simple bear necessities of life,
from Yellowstone and Yosemite national parks in the US, to the Arctic, Italy
and all of Africa
The black bear waddled across the forest road. He was a rotund bear, ready
for his winter sleep. Under his thick, dark coat, rolls of fat shimmied as
he walked.
He moved unhurriedly through the trees for he was a smug, snug bear. Before
long he would be dropping off in his den, leaving the woods, still aflame
with their fading red and golden foliage, and waking to bursting buds and
bird song.
He was my very first bear after a quest which I had pursued for years. And
he had turned up in a totally unexpected location, just three miles from a
large shopping complex in New Hampshire.
My search for bears had taken me to Yellowstone and Yosemite national parks
in the US, to the Canadian Arctic, to Spitsbergen and to Italy's Abbruzzo
national park. In some of these places bears were rare, in others they
merely avoided me, but I was never disappointed: other wildlife more than
made up for their absence.
A British Airways Holidays fly-drive trip took me to both Yellowstone and to
Yosemite. In Yellowstone I had excellent views of large buffalo herds, of
elk, white-tailed deer, moose, coyote and a whole regiment of squirrels and
chipmunks, as well as a magnificent range of thermal effects, including Old
Faithful.
Yosemite was equally exciting. Although the wildlife was not as prevalent,
it was very tolerant of people.
Furthermore, Yosemite has beautiful landscapes, a wonderful variety of
massive granite domes and more record-breaking waterfalls in a small area
than anywhere in the world.
I came close to seeing polar bears in the Arctic when, travelling over the
sea ice around Baffin Island with several Eskimo, we came across the bloody
remains of a seal and great flat-footed tracks padding away through the
snow. Again, the area had much to offer, from nesting guillemots and
restless old squaw ducks to gyr falcons and even, lying unblinking among the
lichens of the newly-exposed spring tundra, a human skull.
Spitsbergen, or Svarlbad, is a Norwegian archipelago which lies well within
the Arctic circle to the north of Norway. In the winter it is ice-locked, so
I went there in the summer with NSR Travel to join a ship called Polar Star
and cruise around the islands. We watched reindeer among the ruins of old
polar explorers' camps, admired walruses on ice floes and enjoyed dolphins
playing under our bows.
Italiatour took me to Abbruzzo national park where a few European brown
bears still survive just 100 miles from Rome. Although I searched for almost
a week, they eluded me. But walking in the mountains I had my best-ever
views of chamois and enjoyed the masses of spring flowers of this
surprisingly empty area.
Koalas, of course, are not strictly bears, so perhaps that is why I found
them easy to see, especially on Kangaroo Island, off southern Australia, a
paradise for those keen on wildlife. This is the third biggest Australian
island, and has a large breeding colony of sea lions; visitors to their
beach can get within yards of mothers with pups, as well as bulls.
All along the coast are nesting sea eagles and ospreys, while a range of
waterbirds lives in the billabongs. Craig Wickham, who runs safaris on the
island, also takes clients looking for echidnas and possums at night.
New Zealand has no bears. Indeed, it had only two mammals of its own. Then
man introduced some more which promptly set about destroying the native
lizards and ground-nesting birds. The Department of Conservation, anxious to
save the country's native wildlife, has removed introduced mammals from the
island of Tiritiri-Matangi in Hauraki Gulf maritime park.
Visitors can see projects for reafforestation and for the reintroduction of
native birds such as kiwis and takahes, as well as a number of other
endangered species. Similar proposals are in hand for other islands in this
Park.
There are no bears in Antarctica, either, but if you want to see wildlife at
close quarters in a wilderness of beauty on an unimaginable scale, then the
Antarctic is hard to beat. A cruise ship like the World Discoverer will drop
you among bustling penguins in noisy, chaotic colonies hundreds of thousands
strong.
You can drift in dinghies past lounging crab-eater seals, menacing leopard
seals and ill-tempered elephant seals, and watch whales under your very
nose.
A notable bird of the Southern Ocean is the wandering albatross, one of the
world's largest birds, with a wing-span of almost 12ft. Among the smallest
are humming birds. Many are found in the Caribbean and 13 species can be
seen at Trinidad's Asa Wright nature centre.
Although generally considered elusive, Britain's mammals, which no longer
include bears, can be surprisingly easy to see. During the autumn rut the
three largest deer species - fallow, sika and red - are at their most
striking. As they are preoccupied with securing mates, they are both
dramatic to watch and often unguarded.
The Scottish highlands, Exmoor, the New Forest or any one of the deer parks
throughout Britain should be fruitful places to visit.
For more information mammals, a useful booklet, Where To Watch Mammals, is
published by the Mammal Society. There are numerous wildlife holidays
available in Britain, and some of the best are run by universities such as
Exeter, Nottingham and Bristol, and by the Field Studies Council.
None, however, includes bears. It will be a long time before I experience
another wildlife sighting as exciting as my black bear in New Hampshire, US.
Information: Discover New England, Park Farm, Folkestone, Kent CT19 5DZ
(0303-226606).
British Airways Holidays (0533-463311).
Eclipse Sound Outfitting, Pond Inlet, NWT, Canada (819-899 8790).
NSR Travel, 21-24 Cockspur Street, London SW1Y 5DA (071-321 2048).
Italiatour, 204 Holland Park Avenue, London W11 4XB (071-371 1114).
Craig Wickham, Wanderer's Rest, American River, Kangaroo Island, South
Australia (0848-33140).
New Zealand Tourism Board, New Zealand House, Haymarket, London SW1Y 4TQ
(071-173 0360).
World Discoverer, Clipper, Suite 301, Albany House, 324-326 Regent Street,
London W1R 5AA, (071-436 2931).
Trinidad, Tobago and Guyana tour, World of Wildlife, Abercrombie and Kent,
Sloane Square House, Holbein Place, London SW1W 8NS (071-730 9600).
Where to Watch Mammals, The Mammal Society, 15 Cloisters Business Centre, 8
Battersea Park Road, London SW8 4BG (071-498 4358).
Department of Continuing and Adult Education, University of Exeter, Cotley
Streatham Rise, Exeter EX4 4PE (0392-411902.)
Learn at Leisure, University of Nottingham, 14 Shakespeare Street,
Nottingham NG1 4FJ (0602-516526).
Department for Continuing Education, University of Bristol, 8-10 Berkeley
Square, Clifton Bristol, BS8 1HH (0272-287172).
The Field Studies Council, Preston Montford, Montford Bridge, Shrewsbury,
Shropshire SY4 1HW (0743-850674).
