FT  20 OCT 94 / Treasury to cut one in four senior staff
The Treasury yesterday announced a far reaching shake-up of its structure
and operations, which will involve the loss of about one in four senior
staff.
The number of senior posts will be cut from 99 to 72 while a new
departmental structure, involving seven divisions instead of nine, will be
created.
The plans will have a knock-on effect on staffing levels throughout the
Treasury, and are likely to increase pressure in Whitehall to reduce senior
posts and reshape other departments.
The changes are also designed to stop the Treasury from 'second-guessing'
other government departments on small items of expenditure. Instead, it
should focus on the strategic issues which determine the long-term trend of
public spending.
Under the reforms, the Treasury would transfer some of its duties, such as
the supervision of Civil Service personnel management and pensions, to other
government departments.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, has suggested that the Treasury's
economic forecasting function might also be subject to government's market
testing programme and put out to competitive tender in two years.
The proposed changes follow a management review, overseen by Sir Colin
Southgate, chairman of Thorn EMI, and form part of the government's
fundamental review of public spending, started early last year.
The Treasury reforms are planned for implementation in April next year. A
further reduction in senior staff posts from 72 to 68 is planned by 1997-98.
However, senior staff numbers will fall by slightly less than the number of
posts, since staff will be given longer between jobs to prepare for their
next posting. The Treasury hopes to achieve the cuts with voluntary
redundancies but did not rule out compulsory lay-offs.
Although many of the departing staff can look forward to well-paid jobs in
the City, on top of redundancy packages, the review is causing disquiet
among Treasury officials. Some believe the ability of the Treasury to do its
job will be undermined.
Ms Liz Symons, general secretary of the First Division Association which
represents senior civil servants, described the proposed cuts as 'drastic'.
She said: 'The worry is that the Treasury will not be able to do the job it
is charged with doing.'
The report's authors admit that 'we have little doubt that the immediate net
effect on morale is likely to be adverse'.
Sir Terry Burns, permanent secretary, addressed staff yesterday about the
proposals. The Treasury, which has budgeted running costs of Pounds 81m in
1994-95, gave no indication of the likely savings from the review.
Treasury cuts herald Whitehall reform, Page 13
Editorial Comment, Page 25
