FT  03 MAY 94 / Gaullist splits widen over unemployment
France's persistent unemployment is driving an ever-deeper wedge between the
ranks of the country's governing Gaullists. Mr Jacques Chirac, the party
leader, yesterday endorsed the idea of a referendum on the issue to
underline his difference with the gradualist jobs policy of his
fellow-Gaullist prime minister, Mr Edouard Balladur.
The unity of the Socialist left is, however, being equally threatened by the
creation of a strong rival list in next month's European parliament
elections by Mr Bernard Tapie, amid evidence that the populist Marseilles
politician is being egged on by President Francois Mitterrand.
Despite facing multiple investigations for alleged financial irregularities
and football bribery, Mr Tapie has now attracted heavyweight candidates to
his Mouvement des Radicaux de Gauche (MRG) list. They include Mrs Catherine
Lalumiere, former secretary general of the Council of Europe and an
associate of Mr Mitterrand.
'With such a team, one would need to be an incredibly bad captain not to go
far in this European (parliament) championship,' said Mr Tapie. He has just
been disqualified for life from involvement in football after the French
soccer authorities decided - ahead of an investigating judge - that Mr
Tapie's Olympique-Marseille rigged a game last year.
Mr Tapie claimed over the weekend that his only goal was to outscore the
far-right National Front in the Euro-poll; both are around 9-10 per cent in
the opinion polls. But if competition from Mr Tapie also ensures a poor
showing for Mr Michel Rocard, the Socialist party leader may see his
candidacy in next year's presidential elections fatally undermined.
The jobs referendum idea came at a weekend RPR Gaullist rally ironically
from Mr Philippe Seguin, whose presidency of the national assembly ought to
incline him towards representative democracy rather than rule-by-plebiscite.
But Mr Seguin has emerged as the sharpest thorn in the side of Mr Balladur,
whose government the assembly leader dismissed as merely 'one of
transition'.
Mr Seguin gave no idea of how the unemployment issue might be made
susceptible to a yes/no referendum verdict, but his call for 'a complete
reversal' of jobs policy won endorsement from Mr Chirac, who spoke to RPR
faithful chanting 'Chirac president'. Mr Balladur had earlier tried to
persuade the party rally there was no contradiction between his economic and
labour policies, and that the best hope for reducing France's dole queues
was the gradual economic recovery now under way.
