FT  07 DEC 94 / Arts: Go tell it to the Martians - Television
Figures published last week by the Church of England show that in 1991-92
only 2.3 per cent of the population was attending Anglican churches. So if
97 per cent of the population now stays away, why do the mass media devote
so much time to church matters, from women priests to the 'politically
correct' Bible? A good question but for another column. Television which,
even in the days of the 'god slot', rarely concerned itself with religious
belief, much preferring to have Harry Secombe sing a nice song, now pays
virtually no attention to the central tenets of religion - faith, the
divine, self denial - favouring instead either programmes designed to
comfort the elderly or series concerned with ethics.
It has been said that when people stop believing in god they do not start
believing in nothing but in anything. Sure enough British television
channels are now competing to show programmes which pander to a rapidly
broadening spectrum of increasingly daft ideas, ranging from poltergeists to
'angelic intervention'. If you object to BBC1 featuring an alleged psychic
in the opening programme of the British national lottery you are likely to
be called a killjoy. If you suggest that an ITV series purporting to show
hypnotism on screen is not only highly questionable (if hypnosis made yellow
objects invisible to the subject of Monday's programme, why did he not see
straight through the close-fitting yellow suit of the man who was
'levitating' the bottle to the body beneath?) but also possibly dangerous,
you will be told 'It's only a bit of fun'.
But is it really a bit of fun when television begins to pursue the
irrational with as much, or more, enthusiasm than the rational? On Sunday
last week BBC2's Timewatch devoted 50 minutes to the theory that the sphinx
is much older than the pyramids: 'A radical new view of history, pushing the
dawn of civilisation back by thousands of years'. It began with a seemingly
reasonable argument about the speed of weathering, the claim being that the
sphinx was more deeply eroded than the pyramids because it was much older.
In the letters column of The Times one writer pointed out that the sphinx
was buried in the sand for much of its history and, unlike the pyramids, its
limestone could thus have been eroded by the slow seepage of water. Another
reminded us that the pyramids were originally 'streamlined' in a cladding of
finely dressed limestone thus avoiding erosion.
How could the Timewatch team be so inefficient as to overlook such seemingly
obvious and telling arguments? That is hardly the point, as anyone who saw
how the programme ended will have realised. Having relied, up to then, on
John West, a tour guide with no qualifications in archaeology or anything
else, whose method was described as 'part psychic intuition, part
showmanship', they finally turned to a man named Richard Hoagland. He showed
us a photo of the surface of Mars with what could have been an odd smudge
or, if you had a powerful imagination, a large stone carving of a head in
the desert. So it seems the big question is: was Egypt's sphinx built by
Martians? Timewatch used to be a reliable, generally admirable, series. What
on earth is going on?
Next day Horizon, an older and even more highly regarded series, spent 50
minutes on a subject which America's pulp paperbacks and screaming tabloids
have been exploiting for decades: abduction by aliens. Millions of Americans
(mostly women, judging from this programme) claim to have been whisked away
to flying saucers by little grey men so Horizon happily trotted around and
interviewed a few of these poor people. They assured us they were not
dreaming, they really did 'inter-act with these beings', and if not a single
one of the capsules which the aliens habitually stuff up human noses has
ever been found that is simply because they are all sneezed out and . . .
and what? And lost in the fluff under the bed presumably. Presenter Dr Sue
Blackmore suggested that belief in alien abduction could best be explained
by sleep paralysis or temporal lobe seizure, hence, it may be said, no
irrationality on the part of Horizon. But is this really the most important
thing for Britain's oldest science series to be spending its money on?
Next day, Tuesday, BBC1 screened Natural Neighbours. The billing asked 'Can
we talk to the dolphins? Do they have the power to heal our bodies and our
minds?' and the narration began by describing the dolphin as 'this mystical
animal'. Once again American women loomed large among the believers who were
seen jumping off a motorboat in the Bahamas to swim among dolphins and then
return to declare how good they felt. It was, to say the least, unfortunate
that in the case of the most extreme example, a 17-year-old English girl
said to be suffering from ME, we were shown just seven seconds of her and
her dolphin together in the water, during which time she did not seem aware
that he was behind her. Not to worry, though, the girl assured us 'I didn't
have to tell him I was ill'. Anyone who has kept a horse knows there can be
a remarkable degree of communication between man and animal. Anyone who has
seen the effect of an affectionate dog on a geriatric ward knows that an
animal can make the ill feel better. But dolphins healing our bodies? What
is the BBC coming to?
Nothing quite as extreme or as silly as ITV. On Friday's Strange But True?
Michael Aspel first gave us ghosts: not only the Phantom Monk Of The
Stockbridge By-pass but also the ghosts of the children who might have been
killed in an ancient mining disaster and now chose to dance in circles among
the electricity pylons. To illustrate this, Aspel had film of them doing it.
Well perhaps not film of the actual ghosts; as throughout the whole history
of the camera, this programme seems to have been unable to get any authentic
photos of ghosts, so they did a nice reconstruction. OK, a nice
construction. Well all right, a rather naff and silly bit of invention
designed to appeal to the credulous. In the second half we had an account by
yet another American woman of how her male partner fell down a cliff and was
killed while she somehow arrived at the bottom unharmed. Angelic
intervention, she reckoned. No one was rude enough to ask 'How come the
angels dropped your bloke?'
Of course there is no denying that material of this sort attracts big
audiences. It seems that many people need the irrational in their lives:
deprive them of supernatural beings called 'gods' and they will jump at the
chance to hear about supernatural animals or superior beings from other
planets. Television which is now concerned first and foremost with ratings
can therefore be expected to offer more and more of this claptrap.
