FT  30 MAR 94 / World Trade News: US waves flag for workers' rights in WTO -
Negotiators encounter some bumps along the road to Marrakesh
Today's meeting of top trade negotiators was meant to tie up proceedings
before the Marrakesh meeting on April 12-15 when the Uruguay Round accords
on global trade liberalisation will be signed.
Since concluding the round last December, there have been three months of
checking and polishing. Negotiators were due formally to nod through the 28
Uruguay Round texts (550 pages), 81 country tariff schedules (15,000 pages),
95 services schedules (2,500 pages), three (short) accompanying ministerial
decisions and a political declaration.
It was, of course, too good to be true. Last week, the US set the stage for
ill tempers at Marrakesh by insisting that worker rights are put on the
agenda of the new World Trade Organisation, due to succeed Gatt next year.
Washington says it will not approve the ministerial declaration unless it
contains a reference to early consideration of the relationship of the
trading system and 'internationally recognised labour standards'.
This move, which flouts an understanding among negotiators not to raise new
issues before Marrakesh, has irritated even trading partners sympathetic to
the idea, such as the European Union. Developing countries, which are
opposed to any discussion of worker rights in Gatt or the WTO, are incensed.
This was almost certainly foreseen by Washington. However, the Clinton
administration is under pressure from US labour unions to take a muscular
stance against 'social dumping' - the loss of trade, investment and jobs to
low-wage countries.
Washington's interest in the issue is also long-standing. The US tried
unsuccessfully to put worker rights on the Uruguay Round agenda and later,
equally unsuccessfully, proposed a Gatt working party 'to explore the
possible relationship between internationally recognised labour standards
and trade'.
More recently, international pressure has grown from trade unions and
politicians for a Gatt 'social clause' to give teeth to the labour standards
set by the International Labour Organisation. Gatt rules already permit
countries to prohibit goods made with prison labour, but otherwise are
silent on the subject.
The ILO's director-general, Mr Michel Hansenne, notes that there is an
important distinction, often blurred, between the use of trade sanctions to
enforce universal or 'absolute' human rights - where the concern is or
should be humanitarian - and the use of sanctions against countries alleged
to be competing unfairly through low wages or working conditions.
Almost all those arguing for a Gatt social clause say they are not trying to
remove the comparative advantage of low cost nations. Sir Leon Brittan, EU
trade commissioner, says the focus should be on the ILO's core human rights
conventions relating to child exploitation, slavery and other forced labour,
and freedom to form trade unions.
Trade unions have pressed for a broader social clause covering minimum work
safety standards and non-discrimination in the workplace.
US officials, for their part, remain deliberately vague. 'We don't have a
defined agenda or set views,' said one Geneva-based US official this week.
'But we do have a legitimate interest in discussing the issue with trading
partners.'
Developing countries are suspicious that industrialised nations are using a
professed concern over human rights to cloak straightforwardly protectionist
aims.
Their doubts are shared by Mr Peter Sutherland, Gatt's director general. In
a robust speech this month he argued that drastic trade remedies against
so-called social dumping were the wrong approach.
'Such politicisation of trade policy-making turns it into the equivalent of
breaking off diplomatic relations or suspending aircraft landing rights,' he
said. Introducing it into the co-operative WTO framework 'would place the
system at immediate risk of collapse.'
Behind these words lies the fear that the fragile North-South unity over
trade forged in the Uruguay Round could be shattered, posing a threat to
other issues on the WTO agenda. Developing countries were won over to talks
on trade and the environment only after they were persuaded that they too
had much to gain from coherent multilateral rules based on keeping the
trading system open and non-discriminatory.
Mr Sutherland is keen on working towards a future agreement on foreign
investment rules, where he sees a common interest between rich and poor
nations, and for the organisation to become more involved in questions of
trade and development.
The obstacles to putting trade and worker rights on the WTO agenda look
formidable. Without an incentive to make discussing the subject worthwhile,
developing countries have every reason to keep saying no.
