FT  11 JUL 94 / Split over BCCI chief's plea-bargaining: Government wants
co-operation, New York's DA wants a longer jail term
The plea bargain involving Mr Swaleh Naqvi, former chief executive of the
defunct Bank of Credit and Commerce International, accepted in Washington on
Friday, has left the US Justice Department and the New York district
attorney's office at daggers drawn.
The department believes it has secured the most important BCCI conviction so
far in the US and won the co-operation in continuing investigations of the
number two official at the bank. But the district attorney's office believes
Mr Naqvi will be given an unnecessarily light sentence, with little
guarantee that he will be able significantly to advance the BCCI
investigation.
The department may have taken a calculated risk in negotiating a deal with
Mr Naqvi. It hopes his promise to co-operate will help unravel the colossal
fraud at the bank, closed by international regulators three years ago, more
than a long and possibly difficult trial would.
In unveiling the plea bargain, federal lawyers said Mr Naqvi would
co-operate with the Justice Department, the Federal Bureau of Investigation
and any other federal or regulatory agency as directed by the US
authorities.
Mr Joseph diGenova, Mr Naqvi's lawyer, told the court his client had already
assisted the US authorities and would continue to co-operate fully,
reviewing and identifying the hundreds of thousands of BCCI documents now in
the US.
Under the deal, Mr Naqvi pleaded guilty to charges of fraud, conspiracy and
racketeering. Sentencing, likely to comprise a jail term of 6-8 1/2 years
after taking into account almost three years Mr Naqvi spent in custody in
Abu Dhabi, is due in October.
However, even before the deal was presented in court it came under fierce
attack from Mr Robert Morgenthau, the New York district attorney, whose
office has aggressively pursued the BCCI investigation for five years.
Mr Morgenthau wrote to the court on July 5 complaining that the sentence
called for in the plea bargain was too light and urging a jail sentence of
17 1/2 years or more. 'The defendant's crime was a long-term, calculated
crime of treachery,' the letter said.
But the objections of the district attorney's office run deeper. 'Where I
come from you plea-bargain with the little fish to get the big guy, not with
Naqvi to get the little guys,' said one official. He was sceptical about the
extent of Mr Naqvi's past and future co-operation with the US authorities.
Mr Naqvi pleaded guilty to defrauding US regulators and to engaging in a
conspiracy with Mr Agha Hasan Abedi, BCCI's founder, secretly to control
four US banks, including Washington-based First American Bankshares.
But according to Mr Morgenthau's office, these charges ignore the true
scandal at the heart of the BCCI case - that it was a huge international
conspiracy to defraud the public. New York officials say they will pursue
charges against Mr Naqvi at state level and have expressed their
determination that he should 'serve time in New York' for his crimes.
However, Mr Naqvi's defence team is likely to argue that the New York
indictment involves charges covered in the plea bargain and runs counter to
the 'double jeopardy' clauses of the US constitution.
As far as the Justice Department is concerned, the hostile reaction from New
York is just sour grapes and the plea agreement and the proposed sentence
are fair.
In its submission to the court the department cited fears of a long and
expensive trial as one of the reasons for taking the plea-bargain route. Mr
diGenova reinforced that argument by saying that had his client come to
trial he would have challenged every document brought in evidence and the
reliability of key witnesses.
Department officials also point to the difficulties Mr Morgenthau's office
experienced in its case against Mr Clark Clifford, former US defence
secretary, and his law partner Mr Robert Altman, whom it accused of
conspiring with BCCI in the takeover of First American Bankshares.
Mr Altman was acquitted last year and charges against Mr Clifford were
dropped because of his ill health.
While the US authorities question Mr Naqvi behind closed doors, and Mr
Morgenthau tries to push him into open court, there is another court
proceeding which could throw light on the mechanics of the BCCI scandal.
In June, three former BCCI non-executive directors filed suit in the US
against Abu Dhabi, the bank's majority shareholder, seeking Dollars 100m
(Pounds 65.7m) damages for the harm done to their reputations by the bank's
collapse.
Lawyers for the three are seeking access to the BCCI documents in the US,
claiming they will give a much fuller account of the fraud than has so far
emerged and throw light on the role of Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan al-Nayhan,
the ruler of Abu Dhabi.
