FT  11 AUG 94 / Cancer charity sells drug rights
The Cancer Research Campaign, a medical charity, has joined with Xenova, a
biotechnology company, to develop a new cancer drug.
Cancer Research Campaign Technology, the charity's technology transfer arm,
has sold the worldwide marketing rights to the drug Daca in return for cash
payments and royalties should the drug be marketed.
The payments are based on the progress of the drug through trials up to a
maximum of Pounds 1.7m.
If clinical trials go to plan, the drug could be approved at the end of the
decade. Stockbroker Lehman Brothers estimates that it may eventually
generate Dollars 250m in sales.
Daca is still in the early stages of development. Less than a quarter of
drugs make it to the market from this stage.
CRC and Xenova, which is based in Slough, Berkshire, are taking the
development forward because laboratory tests showed that low doses of Daca
overcame two main types of drug resistance - a common cause of failure of
chemotherapy - in various tumours, including colon, skin and lung cancers.
Mr Louis Nisbet, chief executive of Xenova, said he may resell certain
marketing rights, such as those in Asia, to large drug companies to secure
more funding for the final, most expensive, clinical trial stages.
The compound was discovered by scientists at the Auckland Cancer Society in
New Zealand and handed to the British charity for further investigation.
Dr Paul Bevan, Xenova's research director, said the drug worked by blocking
two enzymes, topoisomerase I and II, involved in the uncontrolled
replication of cancer cells. Existing anti-cancer drugs of this type hit
only one or other of the two.
The effect is to kill rapidly dividing cells in tumours. Such an approach is
already used in chemotherapy drugs which kill cells by other means, so
side-effects such as hair loss, infection and anaemia are also possible with
Daca.
Daca appears to overcome drug resistance that arises when cancer cells are
able to to pump out chemotherapy drugs before they can work.
The deal is one of a series CRC has done with the private sector. But it is
more unusual for Xenova, whose collaborations in the past have been with
companies such as Genentech and academic centres such as Purdue University
of Indiana, rather than charities.
Xenova, which specialises in rapid screening of large numbers of potential
drugs derived from fungi, bacteria and plants, floated its shares on the
Nasdaq market in the US last month.
