FT  29 JUL 94 / 'Electrobus' hits the road in fight to cut pollution
A commercial bus operator yesterday started trials of electric 'hybrid'
buses which emit much less exhaust pollution than conventional buses - but
which cost two-and-a-half times as much to buy.
Exeter-based Transit Holdings has paid Pounds 100,000 for each of the two
Electrobus 18-seat vehicles which are taking to the streets of Torquay,
Devon, making Iveco Ford the first manufacturer to supply such buses for
regular operation in the UK.
Mr Harry Blundred, Transit's chairman, said the company, which operates 750
buses in the West Country and Oxfordshire, would assess the reliability and
operating costs of the buses before deciding whether to expand the hybrid
fleet. A decision would almost certainly be made within a year.
The buses are powered primarily by a one-litre Fiat Uno car petrol engine
which is pre-set to run quietly at a fuel-efficient speed.
This engine, which is fitted with a catalytic converter, drives an
electrical generator which in turn provides current to an electric motor
driving the wheels. The generator also charges storage batteries so that the
electric motor can be fed extra power, such as when it is climbing a hill.
The bus is capable of operating on its batteries, with the petrol engine
switched off, for 20 minutes in every hour. Because it recharges its
batteries on the move, it is not subject to the severe range restrictions of
wholly battery-powered vehicles.
Howver, its complexity means that the hybrid costs Pounds 100,000, compared
with less than Pounds 40,000 for the conventional diesel-powered Iveco Daily
buses on which the hybrids are based.
But Mr Blundred said he believed that the price could come down to Pounds
70,000 if the buses were produced in volume, and that over a lifespan of at
least 10 years their operating costs might prove to be only 10 per cent to
20 per cent more than the diesel versions. About 30 of the buses have gone
into service in Italy.
Because of the higher costs Transit envisaged the vehicles being used only
on town and city-centre routes, where the need to reduce exhaust pollution
was greatest.
Mr Blundred said that if operating costs were higher than hoped, support
might be be needed from the European Commission to establish viable fleets
of the buses.
