FT  11 MAR 94 / Survey of European Property (8): Rome and Milan are poles
apart - With 1m sq m taken by government and other public sector occupants,
the capital's property market is less sensitive to recession / Italy
Few were surprised when leading Italian bankers were arrested last month,
and real estate operations became the subject of an investigation by the
mani pulite (clean hands) magistrates' team. The surprise was that the
magistrates took so long in making the connection. Politics and property
find their nexus in banks, particularly where top bankers are politicians'
appointees.
The arrests took place at a difficult time for the property sector, already
hard-pressed by the effects of recession. Bricks and mortar had enjoyed a
solid reputation in Italy as zero-risk investment, but this is changing.
'Banks are having to decide how to deal with shaky construction companies.
They now seem more prudent and readier to turn off the cash tap. There have
not yet been clamorous cases of company failure, but the problem is growing
and banks are finding themselves with unwanted property portfolios,' says a
manager with a leading Rome real estate agency.
Property values divide borrowers and lenders, the sharp drop in prices since
the beginning of the 1990s lying behind the increasing concern about loans
secured against real estate collateral. Prices of office accommodation have
fallen by as much as 50 per cent in the capital, albeit weakening less in
the best locations.
This is reflected in rents which are now significantly lower in money terms
than two years ago. 'They have declined from a maximum of L750,000 to
L650,000 a sq m a year for good quality offices in prime locations in the
historic centre,' says Mr Roberto Trella, managing director of Richard Ellis
SpA, the British company's Italian subsidiary.
Strict planning constraints mean that supply is virtually static in Rome's
centre. Vacancy rates of around 5 per cent are half those recorded in the
outskirts.
Ministries and public bodies are important in Rome's market. This may
explain the generally low standard of properties. 'Most of recent
construction has been speculative. Buildings are not highly specified and
are generally not satisfactory for international users,' says Mr Trella.
With about 1m sq m of the 6m sq m total within Rome's GRA ring road taken by
government and other public sector occupants, the capital's property market
is less sensitive to the recession than elsewhere.
Indeed, the figures show that recession and other adverse factors have
bitten deeper in Milan, the other pole in what is essentially a bi-polar
Italian market. 'Milan's office stock amounts to about 8.5m sq m. Vacancy
rates are now between 8 and 10 per cent in the centre and between 20 and 25
per cent in the outskirts,' says Mr Trella.
Milan's property bubble, in which rents and capital values rose by 300 per
cent between 1985 and 1990, burst before the more gentle deflation started
in the capital. The peak was reached at the end of 1990, anticipating the
recession's onset, and arriving more than two years before the mani pulite
magistrates made their first public moves. Mr Trella says: 'Annual rents for
prime city centre accommodation are now below L550,000 a sq m, against
L750,000 three years ago.'
Nevertheless, strict planning policies, favouring residential use and
preventing the construction of new buildings in Milan's centre, give a firm
base to the property market. And as the country's business capital, with its
stock market, leading domestic financial institutions and the head offices
of leading industrial companies, Milan is the natural location choice for
foreign companies setting foot in Italy.
At the centre of the country's principal manufacturing areas, Milan is also
close to the country's important trading partners, and enjoys good transport
connections to the outside. And unlike Rome, which suffers from very poor
services, Milan has reasonable public transport. With these positive
features, it is difficult to envisage the demand for business accommodation
shifting from Milan to other Italian cities.
'Yet Milan does nothing to promote itself,' remarks Mr Paul Bacon, partner
at Healey &amp; Baker's Milan office. Whereas other big business centres
actively seek to attract newcomers, the Lombardy capital does not push
itself.
In addition to its innately strong position, perhaps another reason is the
shortage of good property. 'There is a lack of quality in the market. Even
in the centre, most property is of poor quality. Inadequate lifts are
normal, and almost two thirds of buildings do not have air conditioning
systems,' says Mr Bacon.
He considers, however, that opportunities exist for foreign investors.
'Companies have been downsizing during the recession, and searching for cost
saving by reducing office requirements and relocating from the centre to the
outskirts. This has created investment opportunities.'
'Prices have dropped by between 30 and 35 per cent from their peaks, and
Milan is now looking cheap compared to other cities,' observes Mr Bacon,
adding that yields have risen from 5 per cent to 6.5 per cent. This is an
attractive factor for north European investors seeking income flow.
'Italian investors tend to buy for capital growth. Discouraged by political
uncertainty and falling prices, they have been absent from the market since
the end of 1992.' Mr Bacon expects that the property markets in Rome and
Milan will become more like those in other leading European cities, with a
greater presence of international investors. He also believes that Italian
institutions will align themselves with international practices.
'We are likely to see change in three areas. First, legislation will lead to
the creation of property funds. Second, Italian insurance companies will
give greater emphasis to yields. Third, Italian banks will become more
aggressive, and the average loan ratio will increase from 50 to 70 per
cent,' predicts Mr Bacon.
And when will the market turn up? Political and economic factors will
decide. The uncertainty that clouds Italian politics will probably not be
cleared by the parliamentary elections at the end of March, and an upturn in
the economy does not seem imminent. Few would wager that the bottom has been
reached in the property market.
