FT  10 FEB 94 / 'Grossly distorted allegations': Text of a speech by civil
service boss Sir Robin Butler, attacking media reports of the Scott inquiry
I would like to make a brief statement to the inquiry as head of the home
civil service.
I have consulted Sir David Gillmore, head of the diplomatic service, who
wants to associate himself with my remarks.
In accordance with the inquiry's wishes, I have given the inquiry an advance
copy of this statement.
In the course of the inquiry, officials from the home civil service and
diplomatic service have provided you with a vast amount of evidence and
testimony, both written and oral, on the matters under investigation.
Of those who have provided either written or oral testimony, or both, many
if not most have moved on to new posts and responsibilities since their
involvement in the matters now under investigation, and their co-operation
with the inquiry has been a major additional burden for them to carry
alongside their other duties.
I should like to record here my gratitude and admiration for the way in
which the civil service has met this task.
I also draw attention to the meticulous way in which records have been kept
and preserved: without a clear audit trail, this inquiry would have had no
prospect of reaching the truth.
The task of assisting the inquiry has been made more fraught and onerous by
grossly distorted and prejudicial allegations in the media about the role of
government and individuals, including civil servants, in these matters.
While I make no criticism or complaint about the inquiry's procedures, the
absence of the restraints on comment about the course of proceedings which
would apply if this was a court of law has permitted wild allegations and
pre-judging of issues in media reports.
I take just two examples about the subject matter of the inquiry that has
become known as the arms-for-Iraq inquiry.
One is the constant references, which have become common currency, to 'arms
sales to Iraq'. There were in fact no licences for the export of arms, that
is lethal goods, issued by the British government in this period.
The second is the references to public interest immunity certificates as
'gagging orders'.
As the inquiry is well aware, the effect of such certificates is no more
than to put in the hands of the court the decision whether the information
covered by the certificates should be disclosed to the defence.
As regards comments on individuals I can use my own case as an example
(though others have fared much worse).
Even before I have given evidence to the inquiry, there have been comments
and scrap-book items like 'The Butler did it', 'Cabinet chief linked to
Iraqi gun cover-up' and 'The trail of blood running through Whitehall in the
wake of the arms-to-Iraq affair leads to the door of the Cabinet secretary'.
These are only examples of the general tone of coverage. While I hope and
believe that people do not give this sort of report more weight than it
deserves, such prejudicial press comment has been distressing for
individuals concerned, and for their families, colleagues and close friends.
The victims are often middle-ranking officials who could not have expected
to be thrust into the limelight in the way in which they have.
The civil servants concerned have been asked not to respond to the press and
to leave the issues to be judged by the inquiry.
I would like here to thank them and their families publicly and most
sincerely for their co-operation and forbearance in this respect.
I repeat that I neither make or imply any criticisms of the procedures of
this inquiry but I register my concern and my confidence, on behalf of the
civil servants involved, that the inquiry will in due course put the record
straight and undo, so far as in its power, the damage which has been
unfairly done to our system of government, to the reputation of the civil
service and to individuals.
