FT  06 MAY 94 / Markets recover after going to brink
Jittery stock, bond and currency markets were belatedly giving Spain's
embattled prime minister, Mr Felipe Gonzalez, the benefit of the doubt
yesterday as he struggled to regain the initiative in the face of a series
of corruption scandals that have rocked his government.
The stock market began the day by plunging to a one-year low and the peseta
depreciated sharply until investors' nerves steadied as Mr Gonzalez, in a
pre-lunch press conference, pledged to regain the initiative.
A succession of scandals, which have prompted the resignation of two cabinet
ministers and turned the former head of the paramilitary civil guard into a
fugitive from justice, claimed their most senior political victim yesterday
when Mr Carlos Solchaga, former finance minister, resigned as parliamentary
leader of Mr Gonzalez's ruling Socialist party.
Hours earlier Mr Mariano Rubio, twice appointed by Mr Solchaga as governor
of the Bank of Spain, was arrested and imprisoned on fraud charges along
with his friend and former broker Mr Manuel de la Concha, a former head of
the Madrid stock exchange.
Mr Gonzalez's announcement that he would neither resign nor call a snap
election checked an early morning run on the peseta that brought it down to
Pta83 against the D-Mark from Wednesday's Pta82.1 fix and the currency ended
the day at Pta82.3.
The prime minister's move also reined in a widening spread in benchmark
10-year bond yields. The spread for the domestic bonds pushed up to 320
basis points against Germany's long-term bonds before falling to close to
300 basis points amid considerable volatility.
The Madrid stock market general index, which had dropped to a year-low of
307 in early trading after a fall of nearly six points on Wednesday, rallied
in the afternoon to close at 316.25, 1.5 per cent up on Wednesday's close.
Analysts stressed that the beleagured Mr Gonzalez may have only gained a
passing relief for the Spanish markets. 'It could be only a temporary
respite,' said Mr Antonio Pulido of Madrid broker's FG. 'We have not seen
volatility like this since the general elections last June.'
The consensus view is that the political uncertainty which fuelled the
volatility will not be wholly resolved until after the European elections on
June 12 when the government's popularity will be tested.
'On June 13 we will know whether Gonzalez is really strong enough to ensure
stability,' said Ms Monica Morales, a senior broker at Societe Generale in
Madrid.
The markets still appear to perceive Mr Gonzalez as living on borrowed time
and as a hostage of the Catalan nationalists in parliament who have so far
supported his government. They forecast that a humiliating defeat for his
Socialist party next month would prompt the Catalans to withhold their
support and trigger an October election.
The markets also fear, in particular, that a further bout of corruption
disclosures by the press could rock Mr Gonzalez's credibility once more.
'There are still a few loose cannon on the Spanish deck,' said Mr Robert
Maxwell of Madrid brokers Maxwell and Espinosa.
