FT  20 MAY 94 / Survey of Greek Banking and Finance (4): Fears persist of a
forced devaluation - The drachma looks more fragile
The drachma is looking increasingly fragile in the wake of Greece's sudden
decision on May 14 to lift all remaining curbs on short-term capital
movement.
While the move was welcomed as a bold attempt to pre-empt speculative
assaults on the Greek currency, fears persist that the government may be
forced to devalue.
In theory, the July 1 deadline for bringing Greece into line with the rest
of the EU on freedom of capital movement could have been extended by six
months. But as recent events on Greece's currency markets have shown, a
prolonged waiting period would only encourage speculation against the
drachma.
In raising interest rates to record levels immediately after the
liberalisation, Greece followed the strategy of other European governments
faced with a currency crisis. Opinion remains divided over whether it will
be enough to protect the drachma.
Pressure on the Greek currency eased when the interbank lending rate jumped
to over 100 per cent following capital movement liberalisation. Clearly,
such high interest rates cannot be sustained for long: most Greek dealers
set the end of May as the limit.
'The moment that interest rates start to decline, the pressure will build
again,' a dealer said. 'It's hard to believe that devaluation can be staved
off.'
The optimists are betting on a faster depreciation of the drachma over the
next few weeks as a way out. This would upset the central bank's 'hard
drachma' policy, intended to restrict depreciation this year to about 7 per
cent, but would not necessarily - according to some analysts - have a big
impact on the inflation rate
The Bank of Greece is already at a disadvantage in not being able to call on
other EU central banks to help support the drachma, as Greece has never been
a member of the union's exchange rate mechanism (ERM).
Devaluation is to be avoided at all costs, the government claims, because
the effects on inflation, now hovering around the 10 per cent mark after a
slow but steady decline, would outweigh the advantages to Greek exporters.
With exports covering only one-third of the import bill, the argument
carries considerable weight.
And a devaluation would be bad for Greece's growing trade with its Balkan
neighbours, where large amounts of drachma are hoarded as a convertible
currency and a hedge for the unpredictable Albanian lek, Bulgarian lev and
Romanian lei. 'There is an active but informal drachma zone in the Balkans
and confidence would be shaken by a devaluation, especially since a lot of
trade is conducted on a cash basis because of weaknesses in the local
banking systems,' one economist said.
Greece's own foreign exchange reserves were at record levels until the
central bank spent about Dollars 1bn to support the drachma in the week
before capital controls were lifted.
High interest rates on Ecu- and dollar-linked bonds, which attract
institutional investors from abroad, together with large transfers of EU
funds helped to boost Greece's reserves to over Dollars 10bn at the end of
1993 - enough to cover almost two-thirds of yearly imports.
Two new Ecu- and dollar-linked issues were launched immediately after
capital liberalisation was announced, as part of the government's strategy
to prevent an outflow of capital. At the same time, the complex
administrative procedures for handling short-term capital movements are
likely to discourage many small and medium Greek investors from transferring
funds abroad.
Among other things, details of an investor's tax status are required for
transfers above Ecu2,000. This measure will help to deter Greeks from moving
funds abroad that derive from the black economy. At present, a high
percentage of such income is invested in tax-free government bonds.
The government's next task, as it tries to preserve currency stability, will
be to reduce the deficits that make Greece's overall financial position so
precarious.
As a result of the drachma crisis, the finance ministry had to cancel its
mid-month issue of treasury bills, the main instrument used to finance the
public sector deficit. When the next issue takes place at the end of May,
economists predict a sharp rise in interest rates.
Expanding the privatisation programme is one way of increasing revenues,
according to government officials. In addition to the planned flotation of
the state telecoms company on the Athens stock exchange, discussions are
under way on a listing later this year for two profitable state-controlled
oil refineries.
The finance ministry is preparing additional measures aimed at curbing tax
evasion, with a view to raising an extra Dr200bn this year.
'The constraints imposed by Greece's new exposure to the realities of
international financial markets realities should encourage the government to
follow more responsible economic policies,' a banker said.
