FT  14 JUL 94 / UK Company News: Suffering pain to recapture past strengths
 -A look at the strategies adopted by the high street lenders in their
efforts to attract funds
For the past five years TSB, the retail bank, has been deliberately making
less and less money from its depositors. It has been telling them to
transfer funds to high interest accounts, and in the first half of this year
a further Pounds 300m drained out of its low interest accounts.
In the past, this loss of cheap deposits would have made most bankers tear
their hair out, but Mr Peter Ellwood, TSB's chief executive, is proud of it.
'Now we can tell people truthfully that we offer competitive products. Five
years ago, we were saying one thing and doing another,' he says.
Mr Ellwood is not alone. Over the past two years, National Westminster has
paid higher interest to attract savers - so narrowing spreads between its
loans and deposits. It has moved from having to borrow Pounds 2bn from
wholesale markets to fund branch lending to having a Pounds 4bn retail
funding surplus.
Mr Richard Goeltz, NatWest's chief financial officer, says the bank is
accepting lower returns because it must lend the surplus on whole- sale
markets, where margins are narrower than on cor- porate loans. 'We are
taking some short-term pain to achieve a long-term objec- tive.'
Banks' renewed emphasis on deposit-gathering provokes scepticism from
building societies, which have made a name as a better place for savings in
the past two decades. But there is some evidence that it is more than a
passing fad - that banks are serious about recapturing a past strength.
The gloomiest observers say that banks still pay a huge price for past
errors. Mr John Aitken, an analyst at UBS, says banks would have Pounds 50bn
more in retail deposits if they had maintained their 1975 market share. He
estimates that this seepage costs them Pounds 2.5bn in profits each year.
Mr Aitken believes banks stopped growing then, and are now recognising their
loss by cutting branches and staff. 'Banks used to be regarded mainly as
repositories for funds. They were safe, even if they did not give you much
for it, and they did not lose large amounts by unwise lending,' he says.
Banks are now attempting to retrieve this position, and reverse this trend.
they have a number of motives for doing so:
Taking deposits is less risky than lending, the side of the balance sheet on
which many concentrated in the 1980s. Deposit-taking may not earn much, but
it carries no risk of future loss. 'Let us say our strategy is wrong. Well,
we can rectify it in a couple of months by changing rates,' says Mr Goeltz.
It employs no capital, nor is much absorbed by the wholesale assets into
which surplus retail deposits are put. 'The returns do not look frightfully
good, but you do not have to put much capital against it, so it can still be
good business for shareholders,' says Mr Patrick Perry, treasurer of
Barclays Bank.
Retail funds help banks' balance sheets in two ways. One is that they are a
stable funding source. Wholesale funds, lent in large tranches by banks or
by institutions which have surplus cash, fluctuate in price and supply can
dry up quickly if financial markets are volatile, or a bank appears unsafe.
The second is that retail funds tend to be cheaper at the margin. Once a
bank has set up a branch network, the marginal cost of gathering deposits is
usually lower than borrowing from wholesale markets. The relative costs are
more difficult to calculate if branch costs are added to the equation.
Banks are placing more emphasis on selling financial products such as life
assurance rather than lending money. They see savings and deposit accounts
as a risk-free means of expanding their customer base. They hope that they
will be able to persuade such customers to buy other things from them.
The last factor is the highest priority for most. Mr Goeltz says that it lay
behind NatWest's deposit push from early 1992. 'We recognised then that the
bank had to develop alternative income streams. The key is to satisfy more
customer needs from essentially the same infrastructure,' he says.
However, gathering deposits does not bring simple cross-selling gains. Mr
Ellwood says that TSB customers with home mortgages tend to buy an average
of three other products from the bank. This is because mortgages give banks
obvious chances to sell related products such as home insurance.
Mr Dennis Holt, general manager of personal banking for Lloyds Bank, admits
that savings accounts have 'less built-in loyalty'. He says banks can
improve their chances by persuading savers to buy long-term products such as
the three-year stepped income deposit account launched by Lloyds this month.
Mr Ellwood says banks now have greater chances to cross-sell to savers
because of technology. TSB this year achieved a 20 per cent response to a
mailshot offering personal loans - 10 times the normal response - because it
had already credit-scored the customers to whom it sent the offer.
But whatever the attractions of gathering deposits, banks now face a problem
in finding a proper use for them. 'Most of us now have a surplus of retail
deposits because of poor loan demand. It is difficult to find suitable
outlets,' says Mr Richard Orgill, Midland's deputy chief executive.
The problem is compounded by the fact that societies are now having to bid
strongly for retail funds to compete with National Savings, and are offering
attractive rates. Bankers say that some societies are giving savers rates
which are too high to make a profit if the funds are lent wholesale.
This competition for funds is one reason cited by banks for wanting to buy
building societies. Some see it as an opportunity to buy back the retail
deposit strength they have lost over the past 20 years. Without this elegant
solution, banks face a tough struggle to rebuild market share.
Mr Goeltz says that banks must be consistent to re-establish a good
reputation. 'There is a cost to convincing customers that we are a valuable
ally in the savings market,' he says. That cost could start to look very
high if banks cannot quickly achieve the other sales for which they hope.
