FT  12 APR 94 / Leading Article: Confrontation with the Serbs
The confrontation narrowly avoided two months ago has now taken place. In
February, Bosnian Serb forces complied with Nato's ultimatum and pulled back
their weapons around Sarajevo, allowing a marked relaxation of tension in
the Bosnian capital and raising hopes of a more general peace throughout the
country. At the weekend, by contrast, they ignored clear warnings from the
UN and persisted in shelling the town of Gorazde.
On Sunday Nato aircraft went into action against them. Yesterday, after
appearing momentarily to back off, the Serbs undertook a further escalation,
reimposing the blockade of Sarajevo, resuming the shelling of Gorazde, and
targeting the very UN personnel whom the Nato air strikes had been designed
to protect.
A further Nato bombing raid knocked out three armoured personnel carriers
and a truck but appeared to have no other effect. Serbia itself, which in
the past few months had seemed anxious to play the peacemaker in order to
get UN sanctions lifted, yesterday stood firmly, if so far only
rhetorically, behind its Bosnian protege. President Slobodan Milosevic
announced that he no longer accepts the UN's objectivity, and will deal with
it only through the Russians. Russia's position has thus become both more
crucial and more uncomfortable.
In February Mr Yeltsin warned strongly against Nato air strikes, arguing
that they would go beyond what the UN Security Council had authorised, and
then intervened to prevent them by sending Russian troops to serve under UN
command in Sarajevo. This enabled the Serbs to withdraw without total loss
of face. A week later, when Nato shot down four Serb aircraft that were
violating the UN no-fly zone, Russia did not protest, but took refuge in
feigned uncertainty about the aircraft's true identity. Since then Mr Vitaly
Churkin, the Russian special envoy, has played a constructive role in
negotiating a ceasefire in Croatia, and in persuading the Serbs to make some
further tactical concessions in Bosnia.
Mr Yeltsin's public protest at not being consulted before Sunday's air
strikes appears to have encouraged President Milosevic to raise the stakes.
Mr Milosevic seems to be gambling on trying to prise Russia apart from the
west. However, the Russian protests yesterday were cautiously phrased, and
did not amount to an outright condemnation of the strikes themselves.
Additionally, it is even less plausible now than it would have been in
February to accuse Nato of acting unilaterally or bypassing UN procedures.
This time the ultimatum came from the UN secretary-general. He was careful
to base it on the first and least controversial of the UN Security Council
resolutions authorising the use of force in Bosnia, namely the one that
allows the UN to call on Nato for 'close air support' when its own forces
and other personnel are endangered in the execution of their humanitarian
mandate.
President Bill Clinton, who spoke to Mr Yeltsin by telephone on Sunday
night, must have made clear that the credibility of both Nato and the UN are
now at stake. There is no doubt that the UN action so far has been
justified. Russian help in defusing the crisis is more welcome than ever.
But there can be no question of allowing the Serbs to win.
