FT  01 NOV 94 / Manweb's finance director leaves
Manweb, the Chester-based electricity distribution company, yesterday
announced the sudden resignation of Mr John Astall, its finance director.
In a brief statement to the stock exchange, the company said that Mr Astall
'has today, by mutual agreement, tendered his resignation as a director with
immediate effect'. Mr Astall, 44, will leave the company at the end of
November, and an announcement regarding his successor will be made in due
course.
It is understood that Mr Astall, who was part way through a rolling
three-year contract, will not receive any compensation. His 90,000 share
options have also been cancelled.
The news hit the Manweb share price. After registering a 12p advance, it
slipped to close 4p up on the day at 807p.
A spokesman said that there was 'nothing sinister' in the resignation. He
commented that Mr Astall, who joined the company three years ago from a
subsidiary of Vickers, the engineering group, was from a different cultural
environment and 'did not sit comfortably with the Manweb way of doing
things'. In the circumstances, Manweb had decided that 'a quick clean break
is the best way to go about it,' he said.
He stressed that there had been no falling out over strategy, and he also
denied rumours that Mr Astall's personal conduct had been the cause of his
resignation.
The resignation came as a surprise to analysts who said that Mr John
Roberts, the chief executive, and Mr Astall had frequently appeared together
when presenting the company's results.
'They were seen as a family, a close-knit team,' said one of them. 'It seems
strange that they should suddenly have a cultural falling-out.'
There were no big strategic issues facing Manweb which could have created a
division among top executives. Manweb has a policy of concentrating on its
core business of electricity distribution.
In its latest financial year, Manweb raised its profits by 14 per cent to
Pounds 126m pre-tax, on turnover up from Pounds 920m to Pounds 930m. It is
due to announce its interim results on December 14.
