FT  15 DEC 94 / Deceptive image of anonymity: Henning Schulte-Noelle,
Allianz chairman, explains the insurer's strategy
Corporate might is not something about which senior executives at Allianz,
Europe's largest insurance company, like to boast. They chuckle at the
difficulty visitors have finding the group's Munich headquarters, with its
anonymous postwar facade and small nameplate.
But this public image is increasingly deceptive. The company recently paid
an estimated DM6.4bn (Dollars 4.1bn) to buy the direct insurance operations
of Swiss Re, the world's second-largest reinsurance company.
The deal will increase Allianz's premium income by about 20 per cent, from
DM65.5bn last year. It will also take the company within striking distance
of becoming the world's largest insurance company, toppling Nippon Life
which had premium income equivalent to about DM90bn last year.
For Allianz's 52-year-old chairman, Mr Henning Schulte-Noelle, the prospect
of global domination is not yet something to brag about. 'I haven't really
thought about that,' he says. 'It is not really a strategic objective.'
One reason may be that Allianz is likely to be forced by anti-trust
authorities to dispose of part of the Swiss Re package - the
Vereinte/Magdeburger insurance group. Half the latter's annual premium
income of about DM7bn comes from Germany's second largest private health
insurer, Vereinigte Kranken, and Allianz already has a majority holding in
the market leader, Deutsche Krankenversicherung.
Mr Schulte-Noelle expects a decision by the authorities 'pretty soon' but
says a forced disposal 'has been a possibility we have had to keep in mind
since the very beginning'. Both German and foreign companies have expressed
interest in buying Vereinte.
Another reason Allianz prefers not to boast about its size is that rapid
international growth in the past decade has left it with some headaches.
One is Fireman's Fund, the US insurer Allianz acquired four years ago for
Dollars 3.3bn which has performed below the industry average. Mr
Schulte-Noelle defends the purchase, made under his predecessor, Mr Wolfgang
Schieren. 'We feel that Fireman's Fund was a good buy for us. The results
have much improved over the years and the progress achieved would be even
more visible with a market turn.'
A second problem is Deutsche Versicherungs, the former state insurance
monopoly in east Germany that Allianz acquired in 1990. The acquisition has
so far cost the company DM2bn, and has yet to be profitable, despite rapid
premium increases and a substantial restructuring to turn the operation into
a modern insurance business.
Mr Schulte-Noelle expects Deutsche Versicherungs to move into profit in
1995, with a much reduced underwriting loss. However, the company has not
yet built up the investment portfolio needed to provide the sort of income
that bolsters results elsewhere in the group. In the long run, he expects to
prove that the east German venture has enhanced shareholder value.
When Mr Schulte-Noelle took over the top job at Allianz in 1991, premium
income had doubled in the previous five years. He admits there were good
reasons for calling a halt to further acquisitions to allow a period of
consolidation.
But, he says, Allianz could not ignore the opportunity offered by the Swiss
Re deal. The company had long wanted to expand in Switzerland. With Swiss
Re, it acquired insurance companies Elvia in Zurich and Lloyd Adriatico in
Italy, as well as Vereinte/Magdeburger.
The search for growth opportunities continues, says Mr Schulte-Noelle. He
wants to increase the company's share of the life market in the UK, where it
owns Cornhill Insurance. He is also targeting the emerging markets of Asia
and eastern Europe.
A forced disposal of Vereinte might be used to create other expansion
opportunities says Mr Schulte-Noelle. If it has to be sold, he will seek a
deal that fits with Allianz's long-term strategy - and not just maximise
sale proceeds. 'Price is of course the single most important criterion, but
it could also be of importance to us that the buyer of Vereinte may have to
offer something in terms of helping us in other markets.'
But the Allianz chairman dismisses suggestions that the company would
attempt to foil foreign companies entering the German market. Mr
Schulte-Noelle says Allianz has already taken steps to defend itself from
fiercer competition at home as the European Union deregulates the insurance
market.
Germany will be among those affected most by EU directives which since July
have allowed Europe's insurance companies to sell policies anywhere in the
Union on the basis of regulations in their home states. Local controls on
the wording of policies and on rates have also been removed.
In response, Allianz has reorganised the non-life side of its business into
divisions serving three consumer groups - personal customers, small and
medium-sized commercial business, and large industrial clients. The company
is also preparing to adapt its products rapidly in response to changing
demands. But Allianz is 'not going to play marketing gimmicks just for sake
of coming up with something new'.
For instance, Mr Schulte-Noelle does not expect unit trust-linked life
policies to become more popular, as in the UK. Germany's history, he says,
means most customers put caution to the fore. 'This may change because
private wealth built up after the war is now being transferred to a new
generation and people have more money to play with.'
But for all the preparations Allianz has made to hold on to its home market
share, Mr Schulte-Noelle does not foresee EU directives leading to a sudden
influx of products designed in other countries. 'I don't see any major
development of cross-border selling of personal lines because insurance
markets are essentially local markets. If you want to get a share of the
cake you have to be a local competitor.'
Similarly, he does not expect any immediate upset to traditional
distribution channels. Under the new EU rules, he expects to see no less
reliance on trained sales agents tied to selling Allianz products. 'There is
no authority any more checking products in advance and saying 'don't worry,
this is a product that we have looked into and which you can trust' . . .
Deregulation will rather strengthen the role of the captive sales
organisation, such as we have, in coming years.'
Thus Mr Schulte-Noelle does not expect direct telephone selling techniques,
pioneered in the UK by Royal Bank of Scotland's Direct Line, to make
substantial inroads into the German market. Soliciting customers by phone is
anyway forbidden by the German courts.
That should give Allianz the opportunity of build on the success it and
other German insurers have had in pushing up rates on motor and industrial
policies. As the spate of car thefts that so disrupted the motor sector in
recent years has become less alarming, underwriting results have been
boosted further.
In turn, an improved performance in the German market should help ameliorate
investors' fears about the short-term costs of an aggressive international
acquisition strategy. Although Allianz shares have performed below the
market average this year, Mr Schulte-Noelle says they have provided an
annual average post-tax return of 17 per cent over 10 years against 10 per
cent for the Dax index of leading shares listed in Frankfurt. To make the
shares more attractive for smaller investors, the company intends to divide
its shares - currently worth DM2,420 each, into smaller units.
There remain questions about the impact of Allianz's international strategy
on the value of its shares. 'There is a risk,' says Nomura Equity Research,
'that the Allianz earnings curve over the medium term will be
unspectacular.'
Last year, Allianz boosted pre-tax profits by 25 per cent to DM2bn, but this
year's performance has been more sedate. Mr Schulte-Noelle says total
underwriting losses this year will be below DM1bn after DM1.2bn in 1993.
Investment earnings will be affected by the downturn on bond markets.
Shareholders may thus take some comfort from the group's disinclination to
talk about becoming the world's biggest insurer. Mr Schulte-Noelle is
setting his sights on quality rather than size - 'the world's best, that is
the objective I would prefer'.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Allianz: heading for global domination
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Global insurers by total premiums, 1993
COMPANY                 COUNTRY              Dollars bn
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Nippon Life               Japan                    57.4
Allianz                 Germany                    49.3*
Dai-Ichi Life             Japan                    40.3
Surmitomo Life            Japan                    36.1
State Farm                   US                    32.5
UAP                      France                    26.8
Meijl Life                Japan                    25.9
Prudential (US)              US                    24.1
Metropolitan Life            US                    19.5
Zurich                    Switz                    19.4
Aashi Life                Japan                    19.2
Allstate                     US                    17.7
Axa                      France                    17.7
Mitsui Life               Japan                    16.6
Munich Life             Germany                    16.5
Yasuda Life               Japan                    15.9
Generali                  Italy                    15.9
Prudential (UK)              UK                    13.6
Swiss Re                  Swiss                    12.4
ING                       Neths                    11.5
Tokyo Marine &amp; Fire       Japan                    11.9
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
* Assuming purchase of Swiss Re subsidiaries as of 1993
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: BZW
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
