FT  15 FEB 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Pressure mounts for cuts at
Russian aluminium smelters
Russia's aluminium smelters have been given until Thursday this week to come
up with proposals that will enable the government to meet its undertaking to
cut annual aluminium production by 500,000 tonnes over the next six months.
Smelter managers have been told by Mr Oleg Soskovets, first deputy prime
minister, to decide among themselves who should cut output and by how much,
according to western industry observers.
The Russian industry is looking particularly towards its two biggest
smelters, at Bratsk, which has an annual capacity of 850,000 tonnes, and the
760,000-tonne Krasnoyarsk plant to make most of the cuts. Smaller smelters
say they have no room for manoeuvre as whole communities depend on their
output. Cuts at the two big smelters would not be a matter of life and death
as it would be for them.
However, both Bratsk and Krasnoyarsk are resisting the pressure, pointing
out they are now private entities with private shareholders to think about.
Only Novokuznetsk so far has volunteered a contribution. It will close one
building for modernisation and take 30,000 tonnes, or about 11 per cent,
from its annual capacity of 280,000 tonnes.
'I am sure the smelters will come up with a solution - it is too big a risk
for them not to,' said Mr Horst Peters, general manager, technology
marketing for VAW of Germany, which is helping Novokuznetsk to modernise. He
pointed out that, although the smelter managers had considerable
independence from Moscow, they understood that if they did not agree to make
output cuts the European Union might continue to restrict Russian aluminium
imports and that anti-dumping charges might be made by the US industry. 'The
smelters understand there has to be joint action or their two biggest
markets might be blocked,' said Mr Peters.
The smelter managers also understood the connection between record London
Metal Exchange aluminium stocks and low prices, he added.
Mr Peters suggested the Russian smelters were already under considerable
financial pressure and having to cut costs in the face of squeezed margins.
At the Siberian smelters, for example, average wages had been increased from
the equivalent of Dollars 50 a month to Dollars 300 in the past year and 'a
year ago they had a margin of Dollars 800 a tonne, now they are struggling
to survive.'
