FT  04 MAY 94 / Survey of the Restructuring of Eastern Germany (16): High
pressure policies - Gas privatisation benefits are disputed
The Treuhand privatisation agency and the government in Bonn have succeeded
in modernising east Germany's gas network. But if they also aimed at a truly
competitive industry they have some way to go.
In the opinion of the London-based Royal Institute for International
Affairs, 'domination by west German companies (in eastern Germany) meant a
missed opportunity to strongly boost competition. As yet, no clear benefits
for small consumers have emerged.'*
This missed opportunity occurred in the summer of 1990 when Verbundneztgas,
or VNG, east Germany's gas transmission company, was placed under the
Treuhand. The agency allocated 35 per cent of the shares to Ruhrgas,
Germany's largest gas company, and 10 per cent to Brigitta Erdgas-und Erdol
(BEB) in Hanover. (Ruhrgas also has a share in the latter.)
Under pressure to open up the remaining shares to non-German gas producers
and transmission companies, the Treuhand finally distributed its own 55 per
cent share to Elf Acquitaine, Statoil, Gazprom, Gommern and British Gas,
each with 5 per cent stakes. The rest were distributed to eastern
municipalities which obtained 15 per cent plus one share, and to
Wintershall, the gas arm of BASF, Germany's largest chemicals group, which
also received 15 per cent plus one share.
However, given Ruhrgas's close connections with the municipalities, VNG is
effectively dominated by the Essen-based company - 'Ruhrgas controls 60 per
cent of VNG. You could have had competition had Wintershall received equal
shares to Ruhrgas,' says Mr Herbert Detharding, chairman of Wintershall.
After bitter wranglings with the Federal Cartel Office, at which Wintershall
in particular tried to increase its stake as a means of breaking down the
monopoly structure, and endless disputes over the price to be paid for
Russian gas sales to VNG, the ownership structure for VNG remains unchanged
and stable and guaranteed gas supplies are now finally in place for eastern
Germany.
Eastern Germany's gas sector has enormous potential, largely because growth
is coming from a very low base. This is because the former east German
communist regime relied heavily on brown coal, or lignite, to fuel the
manufacturing sector and industrial sector. Until unification, lignite
accounted for over 70 per cent of the primary energy market, and natural gas
a mere 10 per cent; for domestic consumers the ratio was about the same.
Several studies, including reports drawn up by the Ifo economics institute
in Munich, Prognos in Basle and Esso in Hamburg, reckon that gas consumption
in eastern Germany is set to increase from 56bn kilowatt-hours, to between
200bn and 225bn kwh by 2010.
To meet this extraordinary growth potential, VNG has embarked on an
ambitious modernisation programme. It entails converting town gas production
plants - currently fed from a low quality gas  - to natural gas; the
construction or conversion of long-distance gas pipelines and regional and
local pipeline systems; the conversion of underground town gas storages; and
the conversion of gas heaters, cookers, and other gas-fired installations.
Mr Wolfgang Eschment, a member of VNG's board, says 820,000 households, the
equivalent of a third of east Germany's 2.8m users of town gas, had already
been converted to natural gas by 1992 and a further 1.2m by the end of 1993
 -'by 1995, I reckon we will have converted about 80 per cent of all these
customers.'
VNG, backed by Ruhrgas, did not waste time in finding new customers. The
fact that VNG had close links with the municipalities - who are represented
on VNG's board - meant that they could win contracts without undue
competition in the towns and cities. In addition, to ensure almost blanket
control over the gas sector in many municipalities, VNG has obtained
sizeable stakes in energy companies, particularly in Leipzig, one of the
fastest growing economies in eastern Germany. It has also secured contracts
allowing it to supply 100 per cent of natural gas needs, apart from Leipizg,
to other cities, including Halle and Freiberg.
Since 1991, the integrated gas pipeline system operated by VNG, and
Erdgasversorgungsgesellschaft, or EVG, the Leipzig-based gas transmission
company in the states of Thuringia, Saxony and Saxony-Anhalt in which VNG
has a 50 per cent stake, exceeded 4,495km. The two companies operate an
integrated gas pipeline network of more than 8,800 km. A report by VNG
estimates that with these pipelines in place, by 2000 its new customers will
include a third of all dwellings in eastern Germany.
VNG's two underground facilities of Ketzin and Kirchheilingen have also been
converted and others have been expanded providing total storage capacity for
VNG of about 1.82bn cubic metres by 1992, while the first pipeline
connection with Poland was constructed in late 1992.
Despite the conversion programme, sales of gas have yet to stabilise. VNG's
total sales in 1992 amounted to 85.8bn kwh, some 8 per cent less than in the
previous year. Of this amount, sales of town gas fell by 31 per cent to
13.4bn kwh, as households started to switch to natural gas.
VNG admits that neither new nor existing customers can help compensate for
the sharp fall in sales of industry, caused largely by the collapse of
eastern Germany's manufacturing base. 'But there is no doubt about the
growth potential of the region's gas industry,' says Mr Eschment. 'Our
customers know we give them an excellent back-up service and a good price.'
But are the consumers being given choice?
Despite limited entry into the tightly-controlled market by British Gas and
Wintershall, VNG, and its patron, Ruhrgas, do not face any serious
competition. Moreover, the way in which gas is distributed in eastern
Germany means that the consumer pays a heavy price for gas.
As in western Germany, Ruhrgas sells its gas to distributors, which, as is
the case in the east. The distributors in turn sell the gas to the
municipalities, which are responsible for distributing and selling gas and
electricity to the consumers, and where the eventual price of gas is set.
Essentially, the consumer ends up paying for two sets of middlemen.
What Wintershall wanted was to sell gas directly to the eastern consumer,
thus making it cheaper. But given VNG's close relations with the
municipalites, and since the cities themselves have the concessions rights
enabling them to issue permits for anyone entering the transmission grids,
the chance for the east German consumer to exercise choice in price and
supplier has been severely limited.
For his part, VNG's Mr Eschment argues that since the restructuring of the
gas sector eastern Germans have gained an efficient and modern network
backed by investments totalling DM346m in 1992. This includes DM160m
targeted on the construction or extension of natural gas pipelines, and
DM56m on engineering and telecoms equipment.
* German unification and EC Integration: German and British perspectives.
Editors, Barbara Lippert and Rosaline Stevens-Stromann. RIIA/Pinter
Publishers. 1993.
