FT  26 NOV 94 / Goldman Sachs wins key role in Telekom sell-off
The German government yesterday named German and US banks to head the DM15bn
(Pounds 6.2bn) sale of shares in state-owned Deutsche Telekom, setting the
stage for one of the world's biggest equity issues.
Mr Wolfgang Botsch, the postal minister, ended weeks of waiting with the
announcement that Goldman Sachs, the US investment bank, would join Deutsche
Bank and Dresdner Bank as joint leaders of the global issuing consortium
after intense speculation over which foreign bank would play the most
prominent role.
With fees of about DM400m involved in the partial privatisation - a quarter
of the group's shares will be sold in the first tranche early in 1996 - the
issue attracted interest from 22 foreign banks.
They were screened at a 'beauty contest' in Bonn where they made
presentations to government and Deutsche Telekom officials in September.
Goldman Sachs was considered the favourite, because of its performance in
the contest, its telecommunications knowledge and its work with Deutsche
Telekom on acquisitions. But other banks, notably Merrill Lynch of the US,
were also in the running. European banks lobbied hard for a British bank to
be a co-leader.
UK investors are expected to take up to DM3bn of the issue and the US market
about the same. SG Warburg, the London-based investment bank, will head the
UK consortium, while the US group leadership will be shared by Goldman
Sachs, Deutsche Bank and Merrill Lynch.
Deutsche Bank was given a more prominent role than many bankers expected,
since it will be spokesman for the global consortium. It will also head the
bookbuilding operation in which investment demand is assessed and the issue
price worked out. 'This takes the investment banking activities of Deutsche
Bank a huge step further,' said Mr Ronaldo Schmitz, a director.
The German bank surprised the financial community a month ago by deciding to
locate its main investment banking activities in London, where it owns
Morgan Grenfell, the UK investment house. It said the Deutsche Telekom share
sale would make a strong contribution to the German financial market and the
development of an equity culture.
Up to DM9bn of the issue by Deutsche Telekom, the largest telecommunications
concern in Europe, will be sold to German investors. The company also
intends to list shares on Wall Street, making the choice of a US bank as
joint global manager almost inevitable.
Few surprises, Page 13
See Lex
