FT  17 DEC 94 / Plan to clarify building society membership
Everyone who puts money into a building society would become a member of
that society under plans drawn up by the government to clarify the
relationship between societies and their savers.
The Treasury intends to do away with the difference between deposit accounts
 -in which savers do not become society members - and investment accounts,
where they do get membership rights.
The move is part of the Treasury's review of what powers societies should
have and how they should be answerable to the 30m-plus individual members
who own them.
The results are expected to be published in mid-January, but legislation to
implement the review's conclusions is unlikely to be introduced before 1996
at the earliest.
The change to a single type of savings account is intended to ensure that
customers are in no doubt about whether they are members of the mutually
owned societies.
Removing the distinction between investments and deposits could also have
the effect of speeding up conversion plans being considered by societies,
since the change is likely to make it harder for a society's board to get
members' consent to becoming a public limited company.
The 1986 legislation on building societies restricts the allocation of cash
or free shares when a society changes status either by being taken over or
by becoming a public limited company.
It says that only members who have been investors for at least two years can
benefit, although a wider range of members can vote. The presence of a group
of members who can vote but who are ineligible for a handout reduces the
prospect that a society will meet the requirements of the 1986 act, which
sets high proportions of investors who must approve conversion for it to go
ahead.
The two announcements this year by societies planning to become public
limited companies have raised aspects of this issue.
When Cheltenham &amp; Gloucester, the sixth biggest society, said how it would
allocate the Pounds 1.8bn cash bid for it by Lloyds Bank, it decided to
include depositors but had to leave out relatively new investors. This meant
that some people who had saved with the society for many years but had
switched between accounts could not share in the money.
When Halifax and Leeds Permanent, two of the UK's biggest societies, last
month announced plans to merge and then convert, they closed their
investment accounts and almost immediately opened deposit accounts. This
enabled them to take in savings without acquiring new members who would then
have an interest in delaying approval of conversion plans until they too
could benefit.
In other respects the Treasury's conclusions resemble the suggestions made
by the Building Societies Association.
These include giving borrowers more voting rights and loosening the
restrictions on societies' activities.
Proposals suggesting consultative committees of members and places on a
society's board reserved for directors nominated by members have been
dropped.
Lex, Page 20
