FT  13 JUL 94 / Business and the Environment: Same journey, different routes
 -Peter Knight assesses the effectiveness of Europe's leading environmental
campaign groups
It is as easy to dismiss the influence of the thousands of environmental
campaign groups across Europe as it is to take them too seriously. This is
because their activities - campaigning, exposing, protecting, conserving and
monitoring - are diffuse and difficult to measure.
Environmental politics is also highly passionate, based largely on
personalities and rife with in-fighting. This does not, however, detract
from the fact that some environmental groups enjoy an influence which is way
beyond what the unwary expect.
It was, for example, the Norwegian Society for the Conservation of Nature
which marshalled grassroots dissatisfaction with plans to build winter
Olympic facilities in environmentally sensitive areas. This brought change,
not only in Norway but deep within the Olympic movement.
The change has already affected the criteria on which Olympic bids are won -
as can be seen from the involvement of Greenpeace by the organisers of
Sydney's successful bid to host the games in 2000. The Olympic movement is
now expected to promote the environment as one of its central philosophical
pillars, which will affect the bidding cities and commercial sponsors.
The new democracies of eastern and central Europe have also witnessed a rise
in the number and influence of environment-based political groupings. And in
the UK, near-naked, drum-beating members of the Donga Tribe - a loose
affiliation of activists who practise a mild form of civil disobedience -
have attracted unprecedented middle-class support for their campaign against
the government's road-building plans.
The most influential groups in Brussels are the best established: Friends of
the Earth, Greenpeace, the Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF) and the Royal
Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB) working with BirdLife
International.
'The groups who are practised at getting their message into an easily
understandable form are these four. Top of my list are WWF and RSPB,' says
Ken Collins, MEP, chairman of the European Parliament's Environment
Committee.
The influence of the well-established European Environment Bureau, a
federation of diverse conservation and environmental groups throughout
western and eastern Europe, appears to be slipping. This is mainly because
it finds it difficult to reach consensus on controversial issues. But it
also appears to have a problem with presentation. 'Instead of making it
short and snappy they go in for awfully wearisome and hectoring briefings.
Effective lobbying is about being selective with information,' says Collins.
Ann Robinson, head of policy at the UK's Institute of Directors and the
rapporteur on the European Union's recently enacted habitats directive, says
she found the RSPB 'absolutely brilliant'. The RSPB works on a broad range
of issues, including agriculture policy, coastal issues, the North Sea and
EU structural funds.
But environmental campaigners might be in for a more difficult time in
Brussels. Business has become more effective at lobbying and there has also
been a shift towards issuing discussion papers before moving to a draft
directive.
Environmental groups can be classified according to a sliding scale of
environmental tenacity - their greenness. The scale starts at the paler
shades with groups that largely support and are supported by the
establishment, and moves towards the darker greens who are less
conventional.
WWF is the world's biggest and best-established conservation organisation
with offices in 28 countries. It is supported by business (through
sponsorship programmes), governments and eminent persons, such as His Royal
Highness Prince Philip, its international president.
Its position at the heart of the Establishment is both its strength and
weakness. It might have the ability to influence influential people and so
create change, but its associations can and do hamper its effectiveness
because of the inevitable conflict of vested interests. Maverick groups
recently won worldwide support for a ban on the ivory trade, while the WWF
was compromised by its connections and took a considerable time to swing
behind the widespread grassroots support of a ban.
Colour of green: light. Attitude: diplomatic. How effective: fast gaining a
reputation as a respected critic of some of the EU's policies, especially
its structural funds.
RSPB is the biggest and probably richest voluntary wildlife conservation
organisation in Europe, with more than 850,000 members, mainly from the UK's
middle classes. It is the UK partner in BirdLife International, which
lobbies for policies that will protect birds.
The RSPB's interest affects a broad range of policy making. Its main
principles are that: economic development should be sustainable and
bio-diversity should be maintained; concern for the environment should be an
integral part of EU policies; policy making must be open and democratic;
laws and policies protecting nature must be rigorously enforced.
Colour of green: light. Attitude: diplomatic. How effective: acknowledged as
respected and effective lobbyists in the European Parliament and the
Commission. Friends of the Earth is an international network of groups -
some calling themselves FoE and others by local names - with representation
in most parts of the world. Groups within the network enjoy a large amount
of autonomy, which means that FoE's influence is largely related to its
local strength.
If FoE differs from other environmental groups, it is in the way it extends
its involvement to social and development issues such as the rights of
indigenous peoples. It has programmes, campaigns and projects including
development banks, trade and the environment, tourism, ozone depletion,
packaging, desertification, wetlands, marine issues and forests and climate
change.
Colour of green: medium to (sometimes) dark - depending on locality.
Attitude: emphasises dialogue, sometimes with barbs. How effective:
contributes valuable information to debates, but has a limited effect on
European policy making; concentrates on the Commission rather than the
Parliament.
Greenpeace has grown fast from its Canadian origins as a one-man,
anti-nuclear crusade through highly successful anti-whaling and anti-sealing
campaigns. In 20 years, it has become a Dollars 150m operation located in 30
countries over five continents, with a fee-paying membership of nearly 5m
supporters.
Its successes and failures are based on its ability to operate in aggressive
absolutes - calling for bans and boycotts through clever information
campaigns. While the group continues to run these campaigns, maturity has
brought the inevitable dissension in the ranks and the softening of some of
its approaches. Greenpeace now says it combines its traditional direct
action with market-driven persuasion.
Colour of green: medium to dark. Attitude: prickly, direct action, research,
market-driven campaigns. How effective: good at raising awareness but
organisational problems in Brussels have reduced the group's potential to
influence directly European policy making.
European Environmental Bureau in Brussels represents around 150
environmental groups, including some members of WWF and the FoE network. Its
membership is varied and includes Ecoglasnost from Bulgaria, the
Rhododendron Eco-Club from Romania and the Czech Academy of Sciences.
Colour of green: light to medium. Attitude: represents members' views. How
effective: part of the furniture of Brussels; finds it difficult to
represent varied interests of its members.
