FT  29 JAN 94 / Letters to the Editor: Regional role for BBC
Sir, The news that the BBC is conducting a feasibility study into situating
a national radio network outside London is to be welcomed ('Radio 2 may be
moved to Midlands', January 24). However, there is a case for arguing that,
on its own, this would not redress the imbalance between metropolitan and
non-London BBC operations.
The recent Heritage Committee report on the BBC recommended that regional
autonomy should be written into the BBC's charter. Re-potting a national
radio network outside London would not meet that requirement. What of the
remaining two English regions, and the three national regions? And what of
BBC television at a time when ITV's 'regional' structure is likely to buckle
under the weight of mergers and rationalisation?
BBC policies for regional broadcasting - local journalism, centres of
excellence and proportionality - should be part of a broader strategy for
regional devolution. This could be given a high-profile public focus if, for
instance, BBC2 were to support increased volumes of local programming and
significantly higher proportion of networked programmes produced by the BBC
centres and independent producers in the regions. To meet the needs of
regional audiences and provide substance to the policy of non-London
production each of the BBC's regional centres would have to be given
significant scheduling and commissioning responsibilities.
The fact that Radio 2 seems to have been singled out for relocation
indicates that, although BBC policy-makers are conscious of regional
weaknesses, they have yet to grasp the long-term significance of regional
autonomy as a unique feature of licence-fee funding for public broadcasting.
As the media revolution gathers pace, perhaps the BBC should bear in mind
the slogan of another revolution - 'no taxation without representation'.
Philip Reevell,
head of corporate affairs,
The Mersey Television
Company,
Campus Manor,
Childwall Abbey Road,
Liverpool L16 0JP
