FT  10 FEB 94 / World Stock Markets: India rises despite the Asian wobble
While the rest of Asia wobbled on Monday in reaction to the slight increase
in US interest rates at the end of last week, India went in the opposite
direction as some foreign investors decided to switch portfolios.
However, in spite of a fall back from high levels yesterday, the performance
cannot be seen as a 'one-day wonder'. In fact, many emerging markets
strategists favour the sub-continent as having the potential to show a
strong performance in 1994, with Foreign and Colonial, for instance,
forecasting 55 per cent growth.
Mr Michael Edmonds, of Olliff and Partners in London, says that the country
has good prospects, founded in the main on stability in the political arena.
Furthermore, a satisfactory improvement in exports - a better than expected
gain of some 20 per cent in the nine months to the end of December 1993 -
has underpinned expectations of broader economic growth.
He adds that new investment funds have been launched recently, following the
government's relaxation of restrictions on foreigners towards the end of
last year, and suggests that export-orientated sectors, and the textile
sector in particular, are in fund managers' sights.
The Asian wobble at the beginning of the week caught no-one off guard - a
rise in US rates having been discounted in the markets - but did provide an
excuse for some foreign and domestic investors to take profits. Thailand and
Hong Kong were the heaviest casualties, the former already having a
disappointing year as measured by the IFC.
Morgan Stanley chose this moment to review its exposure to emerging markets,
reducing their weighting in its global portfolio by 1 percentage point to 4
per cent. At the same time it lifted its asset allocations for Singapore and
Malaysia by 2 points, and 4 points respectively from zero.
This, it said, took into account the fact that both markets had good
potential, and had underperformed since the beinning of this year.
In Latin America, Venezuela came into its own last week as foreign
institutions decided that the time was now right to come in, encouraged by
the pose being adopted by Mr Rafael Caldera, the country's new president,
and his government.
Mr Victor Galliano of LatInvest remarks that although the macroeconomic
picture continues to look bleak, there is a feeling that things cannot get
any worse; and the economics team appointed by the president has a
pro-market attitude.
The equity market is likely to remain volatile in 1994, he says, with the
possibility of further fallout in the wake of the collapse of Banco Latino.
