FT  10 OCT 94 / Management: Bumping into office etiquette
By the time you read this, I will be sitting at home with my feet up
enjoying the first week of a long holiday. Normally I would refer to this
period as maternity leave, but 'holiday' is the term that a senior colleague
used the other day. It was, he now assures me, an unfortunate slip of the
tongue, which he would never have made had he not been so weighed down with
work. I accept his excuses, yet take his embarrassment as evidence that
pregnant women present a problem of office etiquette.
From next week UK law will be changed, so that employers will no longer be
able to fire pregnant women, nor refuse maternity leave if they have not
worked there for two years. Yet changing the rules may prove simpler than
teaching men how best to behave around their bulging workmates.
Initially I had planned to write an etiquette guide to help them out. But
the more I thought about it, the more I realised it was an impossible task.
Some women love to be fussed over, be made to sit down and brought cups of
tea. Others wish to have their growing girth ignored and view any remarks as
a slight on their professionalism.
You have to feel sorry for men who are trying to deal with the situation
sensitively. What ever they do they cannot win. I find myself irritated when
business contacts I scarcely know ask me whether this is my first child and
then tell me all about their own families. Equally, when I waddled into a
meeting with a stomach the size of a watermelon I was put out to have my
condition unremarked upon.
To complicate matters further, a remark that is acceptable from one man may
be out of order from another. Lord Weinstock has not only committed the sin
of interrogating me about my family, he has reprimanded me for sitting in
his office when I should have been at home with my children. Instead of
kicking him, I was amused, charmed even.
Still, there are a few rules that can be applied in most cases:
Never touch. This should go without saying, yet at least one colleague has
approached my belly hand outstretched.
Never ask anyone if they are expecting, unless they are unmistakably
pregnant. The chances are they have just put on weight.
Do not immediately ask pregnant women if they are returning to work
afterwards. This implies you have shunted them into a non-serious class.
As the bulge gets larger and larger, try not to look alarmed. It is annoying
to be told that you should be in hospital when you still have several weeks
to go.
On the subject of friction between the sexes at work: I seem to have
irritated quite a few fathers by saying last week that mothers make great
managers. To set the record straight, I meant that anyone who has put in the
hours civilising children will have learnt a few management lessons. If I
didn't pay lip service to the New Man, it was because I assume there are not
many of them about, especially not among Financial Times readers.
Even so, maybe I should have mentioned fathers. One management consultant
has written to me explaining that the modern manager is not complete unless
they play the parts of both mother (rich in instinct and feeling) and father
(strong on intellectually justifiable analysis). It is my turn to be
irritated again.
We have seen management consultants take over big business, the BBC, the
health service, schools . . . there can barely be a private or public sector
organisation left that does not use them. But still consultants are not
satisfied. Now they want to take over the reins of government. In a letter
to the FT last week, the head of Bain &amp; Co pointed out that all the main UK
political parties have the same strategy, but all are useless at
implementing it and hopeless novices when it comes to management.
So let's get rid of politicians and have management consultants instead.
Which will you vote for: Bain, McKinsey or Boston Consulting Group?
One event I will be sorry to miss on my holiday is a seminar next month on
'Quantum Leadership' which has been described as 'magnificent' by Business
Week magazine. John Wareham, the brains behind it, is a member of the wacky
school of management gurus who wears a paisley waistcoat and has his glasses
on his head. His one-day seminar promises to teach you about 'energy and
aggression, lust and libido', 'the fallacy of the okay gal/guy and why more
than 80 per cent of job candidates are mentally ill'.
I will miss him in Europe this winter but I am cheered to see his world tour
continues next year. Perhaps I shall book in at his Bermuda gig, though I'm
not sure where I'll get the Dollars 1,150 entrance fee from.
