FT  21 NOV 94 / Survey of the World Nuclear Industry (8): Long association
with the industry / Profile of GEC Alsthom
GEC Alsthom's engineering systems group at Whetstone near Leicester has a
long association with the nuclear industry, as the former home of some of
the manufacturers of the UK's old Magnox power stations.
In the modern era, with nuclear power station building in decline or
non-existent in the UK and many other countries, the focus of the
Anglo-French engineering group's nuclear activities is changing. But it is
still achieving considerable success, albeit in ways that might not have
been envisaged 20 or 30 years ago.
Over the past few years, the bulk of GEC Alsthom's nuclear activities have
been brought together within the engineering systems group, whose managing
director is Mr Martin Melling.
The main exception is the production of large steam turbines that form the
conventional 'turbine island' of nuclear stations. These are made by GEC
Alsthom's electromechanical division. GEC itself still retains NNC (National
Nuclear Corporation), which is known mainly for designing and building
nuclear power stations but is moving increasingly into the servicing and
maintenance side of the business.
Mr Melling's group employs some 2,300 people of which 1,450 work in the UK.
He estimates that just over half the group workforce is engaged in nuclear
activities - at Whetstone, at a similar but smaller facility in Grenoble,
and at the recently acquired Schilling Development, a California-based
specialist producer of robotics handling equipment.
With the exception of the reactor pressure vessels themselves, which GEC
Alsthom does not make, its nuclear presence is one of the industry's most
wide-ranging.
It is a world leader in the design and supply of plant, systems and
equipment for the nuclear industry, and undertakes a complete range of
contracts from preliminary design studies to turnkey projects. Worldwide, it
has more than 25 years of experience on PWR installations in Europe and the
Far East.
As for growth prospects, Mr Melling divides his group's nuclear activities
into four. The PWR activity is declining, and as supplier of equipment into
the reactor island, rather than the main elements of the reactor, GEC
Alsthom faces intense competition in markets such as Asia, where local
content is often obligatory.
There is a stable business in refurbishment and modernisation, however, and
in the area of servicing and maintenance. A good future is seen in outage
management, where contractors have to perform maintenance or refurbishment
during a fixed 'outage' of the plant or part of it, although this is also
highly competitive. Inevitably, the leading players in the nuclear industry
have all moved into this arena as markets for new plants have dried up.
Then come two growth areas where Mr Melling believes GEC Alsthom has
something unique to offer. The first is in dry storage of used fuel, as a
way to postpone reprocessing or as an alternative to it. Over the past 15
years GEC Alsthom has developed technology that can handle used fuel from
both PWR and AWR reactors.
As the UK's policy was for reprocessing, the company identified the US in
the late 1980s as good potential market for its modular vault dry store
(MVDS), winning an order in 1989 to build an MVDS at Fort St. Vrain,
Colorado, where the nuclear station was being decommissioned.
'This was a breakthrough in selling to the US and in validating the MVDS
concept internationally,' says Mr Melling. Another important deal was signed
in 1992, to provide a spent nuclear fuel store for the Paks nuclear station
in Hungary. Paks supplies 40 per cent of the country's electricity and was
looking for ways to store its spent fuel, most of which had formerly gone to
the old Soviet Union.
GEC Alsthom is marketing the system worldwide, exploring opportunities from
eastern Europe to South Africa. In the UK, GEC Alsthom has since 1990 been
discussing with Scottish Nuclear an application of the system for AGR fuel.
A Government decision is awaited which would allow the scheme to go ahead,
involving dry stores at Torness and at Hunterston.
The second growth opportunity seen by Mr Melling is the related one of
general waste management. 'There is a big market for technology that can
supply solutions to the problem of the safe handling of nuclear waste,' he
says.
The company aims both to sell systems and individual products in this
sector, where the expertise of Schilling is especially relevant. Again, the
US is marked out as a growth area.
The other side of GEC Alsthom's nuclear-related business is the
'conventional' end. The company, or its antecedents GEC and Alsthom, have
supplied 20 per cent of the steam turbines and generators used in the
world's nuclear stations.
Formerly, GEC depended heavily on the UK market, and GEC Alsthom had to make
big cuts in its manufacturing base in the early 1990s after the UK nuclear
station programme was shelved - a victim of the 'dash for gas' that spawned
a big development of combined cycle stations.
Alsthom, meanwhile, was a big supplier to Electricite de France, and GEC
Alsthom is supplying two 1,500MW steam turbine generators to both the Chooz
and Civaux nuclear stations in France. The company still has about 1,000
people engaged in nuclear-related turbine and generator work, at Rugby in
the UK and Belfort in France.
With the slowdown in the French nuclear programme, GEC Alsthom is looking to
export markets, where both its parents had made considerable inroads. The
two 1,000MW steam turbines supplied by GEC to the Daya Bay nuclear station
in China have put GEC Alsthom in a good position to win further business
there, says Mr Michael Barrett, managing director of the electromechanical
division's steam turbine business.
The key to success in China, and to varying extents in other Asian markets
for nuclear power, will be the development of partnerships to meet local
content requirements. GEC Alsthom is one of the few companies in the world
with the capability to build the large steam turbines used in nuclear
stations, and will hope to use its expertise to help the Chinese build them,
says Mr Barrett. It already has a collaboration agreement in China, and is
hoping to develop this further.
