FT  07 MAY 94 / Books: Poet's life as art
ELIZABETH BISHOP: ONE ART, SELECTED LETTERS edited by Robert Giroux Chatto &amp;
Windus Pounds 25, 668 pages
Of the great American post-war poets, Elizabeth Bishop was by far the most
sane. Her friend Robert Lowell was a manic depressive; her mentor Randall
Jarrell threw himself under a truck; other near contemporaries, such as John
Berryman and Sylvia Plath, also committed suicide. Bishop by contrast never
acted the tortured genius. She had a bizarre, difficult life, she was
absorbed in her art - often taking a decade to find the right word to finish
a poem. But when she died in 1979, it was her 'modest lifelong
impersonations of an ordinary woman' that were remembered.
And so it is in her letters, where the ordinary woman, honest, affectionate,
domestic, dovetailed with the extraordinary poet, reserved, finicky, always
striving for the perfect composition. For anyone interested in how life
becomes art, this volume is a joy. An odd invitation to take Marianne Moore
to the circus, for instance, recalls Efforts of Affection, where the two
poets feed performing elephants brown bread. In the letters, formal Miss
Bishop lets her hair down, but is still just an echo away from the offbeat,
understating, impeccably polite poet. Her art has always seemed curiously
mannered; in the light of these letters, it looks more like the natural
extension of her temperament.
Literary New York on the razzle, then, has Bishop's charmed restraint. At a
breakfast party Mary McCarthy 'wept into the batter' when she made lumpy
popovers. Bishop got drunk on vodka at the Lowells, fell and broke her
shoulder, and 'I find I owe you Dollars 105 for my delightful ambulance ride
through the park.' There is much good living ('please eat a lobster for me')
little gossip ('the newly married Valerie Eliot looks like an English
pudding'), almost no confessions. When Lowell pours out that proposing to
her was 'the might have been for me', Elizabeth replies, four months later,
only with an effusive thank you for a Christmas gift, ending 'remember me to
your lady.'
Nevertheless, Bishop's letters form a vivid autobiography. Born in 1911, her
mother went mad, she was orphaned at five, brought up by grandparents, and
felt rootless until her forties - as the string of rapidly changing
addresses confirms. After stardom at Vassar, Bishop was taken up by Marianne
Moore, and won the Pulitzer Prize for her first poems, North and South, in
1946. Letters to Moore and Lowell here stand out as labours of love:
elegant, contrived almost as works of art, generous yet distant - Miss Moore
takes four years to ask Miss Bishop to call her Marianne.
In 1951 Bishop, now famous, visited Brazil and fell ill in the Copacabana
Beach penthouse of her hostess, Lota de Macedo Soares. As she recuperated,
Lota fell in love with her and asked her to move in. 'It was the first time
anyone ever offered me a home, or so much. Lota's gesture meant - just
everything.'
She loved exile. Lota was devoted but strict - when visiting poets stayed up
chatting, she pounded on the wall, ordering them to go home - and they
fought over Bishop's drinking (a friend ambiguously called her 'the soberest
poet we've had here yet.') After 15 years Elizabeth returned to New York.
Lota, ill and depressed, cabled that she was following. They met at Kennedy
Airport; at 6.30 the next morning, Lota crept out of bed, took an overdose
and died.
Elizabeth probably needed those close to her to live on the edge of madness
 -she committed her next lover to an asylum - while she survived and rooted
herself in the everyday. Salamanders, sulking babies, housepainting, trips
to the post office, making a custard, fill her letters: as in her best
poems, emotion and meaning suddenly emerge from a casual moment. Of
confessional poets she writes, 'You just wish they'd keep some of those
things to themselves.' As the opposite of a kiss-and-tell memoir, this book
is a revelation about the private woman behind Bishop's poetry.
