FT  02 SEP 94 / European Profile: Lesson for man who hopes to tame Eta - The
Spanish justice minister's anti-terrorist policy appears to have backfired
While the IRA ceasefire nudges the British and Irish governments towards
framing a peace settlement for Northern Ireland, politicians in Spain are at
odds over how to deal with Eta, the Basque separatist organisation which to
date has given no sign of ending a campaign of violence that, like Ulster's,
stretches back 25 years.
The row centres on a discreet partial parole policy for selected members of
the 525-strong jail population of Eta members - a terrorist prison count
that bears comparison with that of Northern Ireland. This policy is
sponsored by Mr Juan Alberto Belloch who in May added the responsibilities
of the Interior Ministry to his existing job of justice minister.
An independently-minded magistrate before he joined the socialist government
last year and now considered one of the most influential members of Mr
Felipe Gonzalez's cabinet, Mr Belloch has discovered that dealing with Eta
as a minister is a lot more complicated than passing sentences on the
group's gunmen in a courtroom.
His partial parole policy, which has been fiercely rejected by the
conservative Partido Popular opposition and has had no immediate impact on
Eta's commitment to violence, threatens to derail both his own reputation as
a minister and the Spanish parliament's long-standing bi-partisan approach
to terror-ism.
Mr Belloch seeks with his initiative to hasten the end of Eta by denting the
separatist organisation's 'patriots behind bars' propaganda.
Critics contend that the policy risks allowing Eta to raise its operational
ability by regrouping released gunmen and by attracting new recruits on the
grounds that the government is 'soft' on terrorism.
Known as the Biministrio because of his dual ministerial responsibilities,
Mr Belloch had a second successive day of talks yesterday with opposition
parties in preparation for a formal all-party of meeting this month which
will attempt to re-establish a consensus on counter-terrorism policy.
Mr Belloch faced hostile questioning in parliament a month ago when he
admitted that 14 Eta members, who were not named but are understood to be
serving long sentences on murder counts, had received partial paroles which
allow them out of prison during daytime and at weekends.
The controversy over the disclosure of the policy coincided with an Eta bomb
attack in Madrid that killed one of Spain's key army officers, General
Francisco Veguillas who as director-general of defence policy had played a
key role in the modernisation of Spain's armed forces.
Mr Belloch was accused in parliament of failing to consult the opposition
over his initiative and of breaking a formal understanding that any partial
freedoms for jailed Eta members would only follow a sustained ceasefire by
the separatist organisation. 'The (bi-partisan) agreement was that while Eta
continued to kill, Etarras would go to prison, not leave it,' said the
conservative opposition spokesman, Mr Federico Trillo. The row over the
prison policy continued during August as youths sympathetic to Eta clashed
with security forces during the Basque region's summer fiestas. Earlier this
week, on the peak day for returning holidaymakers, Eta showed its muscle
again when it took a leaf from the IRA's violence manual and bombed railway
tracks linking the cities of Pamplona and Zaragoza.
As one of the chief legal officers in Bilbao, the main city in the Basque
region before he became a minister, Mr Belloch balanced stiff sentences for
Eta gunmen with a close watch on the possible maltreatment of separatist
suspects. He took a particularly strong line in supporting fellow
magistrates investigating a celebrated case concerning police involvement in
a shadowy anti-Eta death squad.
To the minister's acute embarrassment, the initial details of his
controversial partial parole initiative coincided with the extension of
similar partial freedom privileges to two former police officers who in 1991
received 108-year sentences for their part in the anti-Eta death squad. Mr
Belloch knew both men well from his days as a magistrate in Bilbao.
The minister hotly denied that the former policemen had gained a partial
parole in exchange for remaining silent over the government's alleged
involvement in the 'dirty war' against the separatists.
Mr Belloch argued that by extending an olive branch to members of Eta who
had shown good conduct in jail he could drive a wedge between those who
wanted to break with the violence and those who remained hard-core
terrorists.
The storm created over his initiative has now prompted Mr Belloch into
hawkish language. 'While I am minister there will be no relationships, no
negotiations, no dialogue, no taking of any temperatures and no contact of
any kind with the terrorists,' he said after meeting the conservative party
spokesman on security affairs.
