FT  12 JUL 94 / International Company News: Eli Lilly to test new formula -
Planned purchase comes as the US drugs industry is reshaping
Eli Lilly's planned purchase of PCS, a pharmacy benefits management company
which is part of McKesson, the US healthcare group, looks set to complete
the reshaping of the US retail drugs distribution business.
If finalised, it will bring to three the number of benefit managers sold in
less than a year, for a total consideration of around Dollars 13bn (Merck
paid Dollars 6.7bn for Medco last autumn, while SmithKline Beecham has
agreed to buy Diversified Pharmaceutical Services for Dollars 2.3bn).
Two others, Caremark and Value Health, have formed close ties of their own
with drugs manufacturers in recent months, though they have stopped short of
outright sale.
In a low-growth US drugs market, manufacturers hope that control of
distribution will help them gain market share.
Pharmacy benefits managers fill out prescriptions for big buyers of
healthcare, such as the Blue Cross/Blue Shield organisations which provide
health coverage at state level to many Americans, or companies which pay for
their workers' healthcare benefits.
Through their formularies - lists of recommended drugs - they exercise
considerable influence over the drugs patients buy.
According to figures provided by the distributors, their influence on drug
buying habits is growing fast. The five mentioned above claim more than 75m
people on their formularies, accounting for nearly one in three Americans.
PCS, the biggest by this measure, claims 30m people.
It also has one of the fastest-growing customer lists (the number of people
on its formularies has grown around 50 per cent in the past year). Much of
this growth has come from converting existing customers to the formulary
approach, though PCS has also won some big new contracts: this year, for
instance, it added nearly 1m people with the BlueCross/Blue Shield of North
Carolina.
Eli Lilly probably needed to acquire a pharmacy benefit manager more than
most pharmaceuticals companies. Its sales growth during the first quarter
this year slowed to only 3 per cent, a far cry from the heady double-digit
growth of the early 1990s, and certainly worse than most of its competitors.
The company has been especially hit by the increasingly acute competitive
environment in the US. Eli Lilly's most important markets - antibiotics,
anti-depressants and ulcer therapies - have been undermined by price
competition. Bulk purchasers of medicines have in effect made such products
commodities.
For example, Prozac, Eli Lilly's top-selling anti-depressant, was the first
central nervous system medicine to achieve sales of more than Dollars 1bn.
Although Prozac was first into the market, a raft of competitors such as
Pfizer's Zoloft, SmithKline Beecham's Paxil, and American Home Product's
Effexor, have undermined the drug's growth. Allegations by the Church Of
Scientology that the medicine can cause suicidal and violent behaviour have
also affected volumes.
Eli Lilly has also performed poorly in the increasingly difficult antibiotic
market.
Ceclor, the group's top-selling antibiotic, lost its US patent protection in
1992, and posted sales down 9.5 per cent to Dollars 515m. The successor
drug, Lorabid, has proved disappointing.
Finally, Axid, the company's fourth most important medicine, continues to
compete in an increasingly turbulent anti-ulcer market. Tagamet, SmithKline
Beecham's competitor product, lost US patent protection in May. Early data
suggest Axid's share of new prescriptions is falling.
Eli Lilly has responded by increasing its research and development
investment to create new drugs that would be less susceptible to price
competition. R&amp;D investment rose 10 per cent to Dollars 955m in 1993, and by
an estimated 7 per cent to Dollars 1.020bn this year.
However, there are few new drugs in the pipeline, according to analysts.
The theory put forward yesterday by Mr Randall Tobias, Eli Lilly's chairman
and chief executive, is that PCS Health Systems can offset this increasingly
difficult environment.
It remains to be seen, though, whether the pharmacy benefits managers can
sustain the difficult balancing act of pushing one manufacturer's products
while convincing their customers that they are providing the best drug at
the best price to each patient.
PCS yesterday said its acquisition by Eli Lilly would make no difference to
the selection of drugs on its formulary, for instance - though such a stance
seems disingenuous, given Eli Lilly's willingness to pay Dollars 4bn in cash
for the distributor.
Judging by Wall Street's initial reaction yesterday, Eli Lilly is paying too
much to secure this line of distribution.
The slide in its share price and the prospect of a ratings downgrade reflect
a general belief the deal will weaken the company financially and fail to
produce sufficient sales growth to justify the price tag.
Some of the cash should come from sales of businesses. Eli Lilly said it was
continuing with its plan to concentrate on pharmaceuticals by floating five
of its nine medical devices businesses during the fourth quarter this
financial year. The remaining operations will be sold separately. However,
the company still expects to borrow some Dollars 2.5bn to finance its
acquisition.
