FT  21 OCT 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: A glittering future for Turkey
 -The way is open for a gold mining industry
The way is clear for a gold mining industry to develop in Turkey, according
to Mr Norman Hardie, vice president of projects and corporate development
for Metall Mining Corporation of Canada.
Hardie suggests that in five years Turkey might well have five gold mines
producing 12 to 15 tonnes of the precious metal between them.
Development of the industry can go ahead now that final approval has been
given by the environment ministry for a gold mine - Turkey's first - at
Ovacik, 100km north of Izmir. Behind the project is Eurogold, a joint
venture between Metall and Poseidon Gold of Australia.
Eurogold has been battling since 1991 to get various approvals - 11 in all -
and Mr Hardie says other mining companies with promising gold projects in
Turkey have been hanging back to see the outcome of Eurogold's pioneering
work.
Fierce opposition to the Eurogold project was based on local fears about the
use of cyanide to leach out the precious metal, a common practice throughout
the world. There was also concern about the impact the mine would have on
tourism - the deposit is only 12km from the historic city of Bergama.
Mr Hardie said the Ovacik mine would meet, and in some cases exceed,
international standards adopted in the most environmentally conscious
countries in the world. The mine would add interest to tourism in the area
by offering tours of the mill.
Eurogold has so far spent Dollars 15m on the project which is expected to
cost another Dollars 35m to Dollars 40m. Mr Hardie said two banks - Barclays
and Dresdner - have agreed to provide Dollars 31m of project finance.
The mine will have 200 employees and another 1,000 jobs will be indirectly
created.
Ovacik, a high-grade deposit with an average of nearly 10 grams of gold in
each tonne of ore, is expected to produce about 100,000 troy ounces of gold
a year at a full cost of Dollars 250 an ounce. Present reserves are enough
for at least eight years.
Other companies with gold projects in Turkey include Cominco of Canada,
Gencor of South Africa and the RTZ Corporation of the UK. Eurogold has also
spent Dollars 10m on exploring other parts of Turkey.
