FT  01 JUN 94 / Wine business struggles for a buyer
Wine production at Lamberhurst, one of England's biggest and best-known
vineyards, is being wound down after the business failed to attract a buyer
as a going concern.
The guide price for the vineyards, including a 17th-century farmhouse, a
restaurant and farm shop, has been halved to Pounds 750,000 and the property
is being re-offered for sale on a freehold basis.
Mr Kenneth McAlpine, 73, the vineyards' founder and owner, put the business
on the market for Pounds 1.5m last September because he wanted to retire.
Mr James Crawford of Knight Frank &amp; Rutley, the estate agents selling the
property near Tunbridge Wells, Kent, said there was a 'lack of confidence in
the wine trade in the face of competition from other countries, cheap
imports and duty on wine going up every year'.
Mr McAlpine, a director of the Sir Robert McAlpine construction company,
said several potential buyers from the UK and abroad had thought it would be
'fun' to own a vineyard as a hobby. 'But when they discovered it was a
business with a turnover of Pounds 750,000 a year, they didn't want the
hassle of running it.'
Production, which used to account for a tenth of UK wine output, has been
reduced dramatically, he said. 'We're not cultivating much of our vineyard
at all.' The restaurant and vineyard tours will close in September.
But Mr McAlpine, who has been in the wine business for 21 years, is
determined to maintain the Lamberhurst name if the new price fails to find a
buyer keen to revive the vineyard.
He plans to keep three or four acres of the 42 acre-vineyard to produce red
wine from a new German grape. He will also continue to buy grapes from other
English vineyards to make Lamberhurst white wines on a smaller scale.
He will cut output from last year's 350,000 bottles - already well below
peak years of 500,000 - to 100,000, focusing on high-quality, high-priced
wine. He intends to retain a long-term lease on the winery so he can
continue production.
If the rest of the vineyard falls into disuse, Mr McAlpine will
paradoxically have contributed to what he regards as the solution to the
industry's problems. A glut of wine has pushed prices down and made
production uneconomic, so England's 2,500 acres of vineyards must be
reduced, he said.
'In three or four years, England, and the rest of the world, will have
reduced production and prices should start going up again.'
