FT  08 JUL 94 / Leading Article: The G8 and a plan for Bosnia
On the face of it, the world leaders assembled in Naples do not need to do
anything about Bosnia. Their foreign ministers have already worked out a
peace plan and the ball is now in the court of the warring parties, which
have been given until July 19 to decide their response.
Yet Bosnia certainly will be on the summit agenda, if only because the
Italian hosts have placed it there. As a close neighbour of the former
Yugoslavia, with an obvious interest in the outcome of the war there, Italy
is understandably irritated at its exclusion from the 'contact group', in
which the EU is represented by Britain, France and Germany. Beyond that, the
inclusion of Russia for the first time in the political part of a G7 summit
offers a timely opportunity for the leaders of Europe, America and Russia to
emphasise, and to cement, their new-found unity on the conflict.
It is indeed this unity of sponsorship which constitutes the main novelty in
the plan, and the only element which gives it any better chance of success
than its predecessors. Otherwise the content is broadly familiar, and has
not changed significantly since last November, when France and Germany
produced their 'action plan' and persuaded the EU to back it. Indeed, the
basic principle of a de facto partition within a de jure union was agreed as
long ago as last summer. The EU merely adjusted the percentages somewhat in
favour of the Moslems, while offering Serbia the carrot of lifting
sanctions. In March this year the US negotiated an agreement between Moslems
and Croats, so that since then the main focus has been on the share of
territory allotted to the Serbs, namely 49 per cent, as opposed to the
roughly 70 per cent that they hold at present.
Arms embargo
To the carrot is now added a stick, in the shape of a warning that if the
Serbs reject the plan, the UN security council will lift the arms embargo,
enabling the Moslems and Croats to pursue the war more effectively. At the
same time the Moslems and Croats are warned that, if they reject the plan,
sanctions on Serbia will be lifted. In either case, the UN protection force
(Unprofor) would almost certainly be withdrawn. But if both sides accept the
plan it would be strengthened, notably with a large US contingent.
The question now, therefore, is whether the unity of the contact group is
strong and credible enough for both sides to take it seriously. Unhappily,
there is still much room for doubt on that point. The Moslems know that the
US is far from enthusiastic about deploying troops to support a plan which,
with good reason, it regards as morally tainted: a plan that would partially
ratify Serb 'ethnic cleansing' by leaving in Serb hands several towns which
had Moslem majorities before the war. The US has consistently advertised its
preference for lifting the arms embargo; and last week in the Senate a
resolution which would have forced the administration to pursue this option
unilaterally failed by only one vote.
Desperately familiar
Similarly the Russians, and indeed the British and French, have so often
voiced opposition to lifting the embargo that the Serbs will not easily be
convinced that they are willing to agree to it, even if the peace plan
fails. Both sides will see the next phase not as one in which they have to
accept the plan and implement it in good faith, making the best of a bad
job, but rather as one in which each manoeuvres to avoid implementing it
while letting the other take the blame. Indeed, President Izetbegovic has
admitted this with disarming frankness: 'We will be saying yes, since the
Serbs will be rejecting it.'
All this is desperately familiar from the time of the Vance-Owen plan, and
the danger is that the contact group will be unable to agree either on which
side is responsible for the plan's failure, or on how much extra time to
give them to come round. It is therefore vital that the leaders of the
countries concerned take advantage of being together in Naples to make clear
their personal commitment, not only to the plan as such but to specific
criteria by which the co-operation of the parties will be judged, and
specific courses of action to be taken if they do not co-operate.
