FT  07 APR 94 / Survey of Danish Banking and Finance (12): Trying to come
out on top - Profile of Topdanmark
Denmark has experienced two disasters in which insurance groups Hafnia and
Baltica, have collapsed as a result of injudicious investments by their
holding companies. There remains a question mark against the future of a
third group, Topdanmark (Top), which has landed itself with a similar
problem.
Mr Henning Birch, Top's chief executive since 1985, resigned on March 26,
joining Hafnia's and Baltica's former managing directors, Per Villum Hansen
and Peter Christoffersen. He was succeeded by Mr Kaj G. Schou, formerly head
of Top's accident insurance business.
Top's future is of interest outside Denmark. It is a participant in Eureko,
the European insurance partnership which includes the UK's Friends
Provident, AVCB of the Netherlands, Wasa from Sweden, and Occidental of
Portugal. Top has a 12 per cent stake in Eureko, which in turn has owns 30
per cent of Topdanmark.
Top's other big shareholder is the Danish mutual group, Tryg Insurance, with
about 19.5 per cent. Last autumn Tryg announced that its stake in Topdanmark
was for sale, but there were indications last week that Tryg may change its
mind following Mr Birch's resignation.
Topdanmark's serious error was the acquisition, in 1989, of the Jutland
regional bank, Aktivbanken, for DKr1.4bn. It turned out to house a cupboard
full of skeletons; since 1989 the bank has cost Top another DKr1bn in
losses.
The chairman of the supervisory board, Mr Oluf von Lowzow (whose titles
include Lord-in-Waiting and Master of the Royal Hunt) has blamed the extra
provisions on 'misunderstandings' on the part of the supervisors - an
allegation promptly and emphatically rejected by Mr Eigil Molgaard, the
chief supervisor himself.
Tryg's managing director, Mr Alf Duch-Pedersen, has also publicly questioned
the value of the Eureko investment, which cost Top about DKr500m. But in
1993, according to Topdanmark's accounts, the group made a profit of DKr46m
from Eureko.
The costs of the investment in Aktivbanken pose a serious problem for
Topdanmark: it has to refund about DKr1.5bn of long-term debt in 1995 and
1996.
At the annual meeting of shareholders in May, Mr Lowzow is expected to spell
out the group's plan for getting itself off a potentially dangerous hook.
