FT  08 AUG 94 / Unions stand up for non-members / TUC to debate
representation and rights in the workplace for all
The Trades Union Congress is about to launch a fundamental debate on the
future of labour law that could lead to a transformation in union attitudes
towards legal rights.
An interim document going to next month's congress argues - for the first
time in TUC history - that workers, not just trade union members, must have
legal workplace rights and representation.
A group of senior union leaders plans to visit Sweden and Germany in
November to see systems of employee representation in the workplace. Some UK
union leaders are certain to resist the TUC view. They would rather press
simply for new laws from a future Labour government which would provide them
with means for union recognition from reluctant employers and exclusive
rights for their members.
But Mr John Monks, the TUC's general secretary, knows that Mr Tony Blair,
the Labour leader, does not favour restoring the legal immunities and
privileges that unions enjoyed before the Conservatives came to power 15
years ago.
Mr Monks is keen to show that today's unions are concerned with all
employees, not just their own members who now account for only a third of
employed workers. There are no trade unionists in 49 per cent of workplaces
and there is a further 9 per cent of places in which unions are not
recognised by employers. The TUC's conversion to legal rights for workers
and not just trade unionists has also been strongly helped by the
development of European Union employment law.
This December all member states of the EU except the UK are expected to
approve the works council directive. This will establish information and
consultation arrangements for employees in large multinational enterprises.
Each company will have a negotiating body to represent employees, whose
members will be elected or appointed according to the rules established by
each member state. If agreement within a company cannot be reached on this,
a 'statutory fall-back arrangement' will apply which involves imposing a
council, with an agreed EU format, on the company. Britain has opted out of
this proposal but nearly 100 companies based in the UK will be obliged to
establish such bodies because of the size of their operations on the
Continent.
Pressure for the development of employee representation is also growing
after recent European Court judgments that the UK had infringed directives
on collective redundancies and transfer of undertakings by not providing for
employee representation.
The UK government is still deciding what to do about a judgment which rules
that workers, and not just trade unionists, are entitled to consultation and
information on such matters.
The TUC argues that the employee representation required by EU labour law
needs to be integrated with its own proposed 'step by step' strategy to
enable unions to secure recognition from employers. It talks of a 'twin
track' approach to extend legal rights to individuals as well as unions. The
TUC is convinced unions will be able to show workers as well as employers
that they are needed in the workplace.
As the interim document explains: 'Unions will be able to show that only
they have the resources, independence and track record to provide effective
representation for individuals and to make the best use of information and
consultation machinery.'
