FT  23 FEB 94 / 3i banks plan summer flotation
The high street banks that own 3i, the leading provider of risk capital to
small and medium-sized businesses in the UK, have agreed to float part of
the company this summer.
The long-delayed attempt to obtain a Stock Exchange listing for 3i, owned by
six clearing banks and the Bank of England, will be announced by the company
this morning. The flotation could place a value of Pounds 1.5bn on 3i
shares.
3i directors expect the banks to sell about 40 per cent of the company, and
believe this could be worth about Pounds 600m. They estimate the current
market value of the company's assets at up to Pounds 1.7bn, compared with
Pounds 1.3bn last year.
This morning's announcement will disclose only the flotation timetable. It
is likely to say that 3i will definitely proceed with a partial flotation
this summer, subject to force majeure such as a stock market crash, or an
unexpected change in the value of company assets.
Efforts to float 3i, the UK's largest venture capital company, have been
dogged by delays since the idea was mooted in 1990. Mr Alan Wheatley, 3i's
former chairman, resigned in April after the last attempt was postponed.
Conditions for a 3i flotation have since improved. Barclays and National
Westminster, which own 41 per cent of the company between them, are thought
to have believed at the time that a delay could increase the value of 3i
shares.
Shares of comparable venture capital investment trusts have risen sharply
since then and now trade at an average price of 89 per cent of the value of
net assets. Given net assets of Pounds 1.7bn, this would value 3i shares at
about Pounds 1.5bn.
The banks would have to sell at least 25 per cent between them to achieve a
listing under Stock Exchange rules, although a 3 per cent stake held by Bank
of Scotland could count towards the 25 per cent without being sold.
3i, which was founded in 1945, is the biggest enterprise of its type in
Europe. It performs a crucial role in the finance of small and medium-sized
businesses by taking long-term minority stakes in them to help them grow.
Although it contributes to banks' profits through dividends and a rise in
the value of its investments, there is also some overlap between their
activities. Most of the banks also provide loan and equity finance to small
companies.
There has been renewed speculation that 3i is preparing for a flotation
since it announced earlier this month that it was raising a Pounds 236m fund
for investing in continental Europe. This was its first move into managing
funds for others.
This diversification could make flotation easier if fees from fund
management increase earnings. 3i's pre-tax profits rose to Pounds 56m for
the year to last March after a turnaround in performance in the second half.
Neither the company nor the shareholder banks would comment last night.
Lex, Page 22
