FT  18 JUL 94 / Survey of South Africa (29): Success stories needed - The
black business community
'Blacks will never make good entrepreneurs - they don't have the head for
it,' was the indiscreet comment made at a corporate lunch in Johannesburg
recently. Surprisingly, however, the speaker was not a recalcitrant white
executive disparaging the new order, but a youngish black executive.
The comment highlights the big problem facing the government and corporate
sector in trying to nurture a credible black business community.
For years in South Africa, black business was something of an oxymoron: as
blacks were not allowed to own property or conduct business in the cities,
independent economic activity was limited to activities such as shebeens or
spaza stores - the speakeasies and corner stores that litter the country's
black townships.
At the same time, denied access to education, training or finance, few were
given the wherewithal to try and compete in the rough and tumble world of
business.
The result has been a lingering lack of faith about black capabilities in
the business world - a problem that has been highlighted by the difficulty
of trying to encourage blacks to buy shares in black-run companies. 'There
is still a basic lack of trust in black skills and that will only wear off
in time,' notes Mr Thami Mazwai, editor of Enterprise, a black business
magazine.
Part of the problem is a continued lack of leading black success stories.
Although most big companies have also appointed some black faces to their
boards, few hold executive positions. And while the past year has seen a
flurry of takeovers by black businessmen of leading companies - including
two life assurers, a merchant bank, and The Sowetan, the country's biggest
daily paper - the deals are largely engineered by white conglomerates, and
the companies often retain white managers.
But however unsatisfactory such a situation might be, many regard it as the
only viable route to economic power. 'In the short and medium term, blacks
will succeed in business only through linkages with whites,' notes Dr Nthato
Motlana, President Nelson Mandela's personal doctor and a key figure in many
of the empowerment transactions. 'Total control is unrealistic at this
stage.'
One move that might start to shift the balance of power, however, has been
the announcement by Anglo American, the country's largest corporation, that
it intends to split up subsidiary mining house Johannesburg Consolidated
Investments into three parts and sell off two of them, one incorporating the
group's gold mines and the other its leading industrial shareholdings, to
blacks.
But despite the high expectations raised by the plan, Mr Julian Ogilvie
Thompson, Anglo chairman, warns that its final execution could take years.
'We mustn't let media hype create a situation where we make a deal that is
structurally and financially unsound,' he notes, observing that the
completion of the planned moves requires alterations to existing legislation
on corporate restructuring and working out some highly complicated
shareholder arrangements.
Given these problems, black business has begun to increasingly look to the
new government for help in creating a suitable environment for business
development. 'We can use the same method as the Afrikaners, utilising the
state to help nurture business,' says Mr Archie Nkonyeni, president of the
National African Chambers of Commerce, the country's largest black business
federation.
Accepting the importance of black enterprise, government is likely to help
steer state business to black companies where possible, or insist that white
companies use black sub-contractors when filling tenders. Last year African
National Congress pressure managed to get black businessmen a stake in the
country's new cellular phone operators and companies such as Thebe
Investments, a private company with close ANC links, are expected to benefit
from deals with the new government.
Also high on the government agenda is the encouragement of black
entrepreneurs and the growth of small and mid-sized black businesses that
can build up black capital and create jobs. The state-run Small Business
Development Corporation has shifted its focus to black applicants and the
government is trying to put pressure on banks to help finance more black
business schemes in other sectors.
Another promising route to empowerment is through franchising and joint
ventures with foreign companies which can supply both skills and financing.
International giants such as Coca-Cola and Pepsi have both recently decided
to return to South Africa with the stated aim of helping black business.
But despite the flurry of initiatives, the sobering fact remains that blacks
still control only a very small, if rapidly growing, proportion of South
African business. In a community robbed of skills and capital by decades of
apartheid, economic victory is likely to take more than a generation to
achieve. And while a black elite is already reaping the benefits of change,
the masses will have to wait a little longer.
