FT  23 AUG 94 / World Trade News: Oil companies 'using older tankers'
Many of the world's largest oil companies are continuing to charter very old
tankers despite concerns about the threat old vessels pose to the
environment.
Tanker owners also appear to be cutting down on maintenance and repair work.
These findings emerged from two surveys carried out for the International
Association of Independent Tanker Owners (Intertanko).
The surveys looked at the age profile of chartered supertankers, vessels of
more than 200,000 tonnes, and at the time tankers spent undergoing repair in
dry dock.
The Kuwait Petroleum Company topped the list of large charterers using
vessels with an average age of 18 years followed by Total, the French group,
with an average of 17 years.
British Petroleum and Exxon used chartered fleet which was on average 16
years old. The average age of supertankers chartered by all companies in the
first seven months of 1994 was 14 years with Shell, the Anglo-Dutch group,
employing vessels with an average age of 13 years and Mobil of the US using
a fleet of 12 years.
All of the top 10 charterers were prepared to use individual vessels up to
20 years old, frequently a time when the need for significant repairs
emerges and owners decide to sell or scrap.
But fears that the increasing age of the world tanker fleet in itself poses
a higher risk of oil spills and environmental damage does not appear to be
born out despite insurance industry pressure to levy higher premiums on
older ships.
Commenting on the survey findings, leading oil companies said age was only
one factor they took into account.
'We carry out regular positive vetting,' BP said. 'You can have a
three-year-old ship which has not been maintained as well as an 18-year-old
vessel.'
Exxon said it would be chartering newly built tankers over the next two
years, but emphasised that it assessed 'a ship's condition, history, owner,
operating practices and management. We don't exclude a ship solely because
of its age.'
But the increasing average age of the world tanker fleet and stricter
controls should have led to a rise in the number of tankers undergoing
upgrading and repair in dry dock, Intertanko said.
Yet only 300 tankers entered dock in the first half of 1994 compared with
nearly 900 in the whole of 1991. They spent on average 22 days in dock
compared with 26 days in 1992.
Owners appear to be delaying work because of financial pressures, Intertanko
said.
