FT  22 OCT 94 / All in the Mind: Switched on to pain
Anyone who suffers frequently from a bad back - and that includes one in
four Britons, according to a recent study - knows all too well that science
has not been very good at controlling pain. But scientists are catching up.
It has long been believed that pain is the body's alarm signal to prevent
further damage (such as to a finger on a hot stove). But why then do we feel
chronic pain, long after the body could take avoiding action? Recent
research suggests an answer.
The main point is that signals about damage do not always pass straight into
the part of the brain that experiences pain. The signals can be blocked or
amplified by switches in the spinal cord. And signals that have nothing to
do with damage can be switched into the alarm system so that they cause
pain.
Scientists are now trying to understand how to manipulate the switches so
that pain can be controlled.
Acute pain after an external stimulus is still best thought of as a damage
warning. Specialised nerve cells in all parts of the body activated by
stimuli, such as from a cut or a burn, send signals into central pathways of
the brain and nervous system where electrical activity causes the sensation
of pain.
The brain works out where the pain has come from by knowing which part of
the pathway is stimulated.
For example, a knock on the 'funny bone' causes pain over a wide area of the
hand and arm because it strikes the nerve-carrying signals from this area. a
Indeed, one of the cornerstones of neural science is the idea that the
sensations we experience from a particular stimulus may be different,
depending on which pathways in the brain are activated.
This helps to explain some of the puzzles about the damage-warning theory of
pain. For example, why does vigorous rubbing of an injury sometimes relieve
pain, whereas in other circumstances the lightest touch can be agonising?
How can an amputated limb hurt? Why, in chronic pain, does the alarm
continue to ring long after it has served its purpose? The answers come from
research on the switches that block or redirect pain signals.
The first suggestion that pain signals could be blocked from entry into the
spinal cord came in the mid-1960s. It was proposed that they pass through a
sort of gate that can be closed by a circuit activated by other sensory
signals.
There is now much support for the gate theory. Rubbing the skin relieves
pain because it generates sensory signals that activate the circuit that
closes the gate. Acupuncture and electrical stimulation of the skin work in
the same way. Morphine's analgesic effects occur because it mimics a
chemical that closes the gate.
The gate can also be closed by signals descending from higher levels of the
brain, to block pain if we need to act to avoid something even worse.
Wounded soldiers can often disregard injuries until they are out of
immediate danger.
A different set of spinal switches amplifies pain. Prolonged or intense
signals in the damage-sensing neurones have two effects. Central pain
pathways become more sensitive to their normal inputs so that pain is
amplified. They also become sensitive to signals caused by touching or
moving the skin, so that these, too, cause pain, but no damage.
This intensification of prolonged pain has doubtless evolved to immobilise
any part of the body which has become badly injured. So any sensations that
result from a disturbance of the injured part (such as a hand or foot) are
rerouted into the pain pathway, even when a similar movement would not in
other circumstances have caused direct pain. The unfortunate consequence is
that chronic pain conditions, for example from inflamed nerves, are made
worse.
The pains that may be experienced in an amputated limb and by patients whose
spinal cord has been severed (paraplegics) probably also owe much to this
mechanism
For even when a limb has been amputated its pain pathway in the central
nervous system remains and can be activated.
Paraplegics usually lose all sensation below their spinal injury, but they
may be left with severe pain. In some cases the spinal pathway carrying pain
signals may be intact and other sensory signals may be channelled into it.
Scientists do not yet understand the details of the mechanism of central
sensitisation, but it is the focus of important research in universities and
in the pharmaceuticals industry.
A drug to reverse its effects - still many years away - would lighten
thousands of lives darkened by chronic pain.
The author is professor of psychology at the University of Nottingham.
