FT  14 JAN 94 / Markets Report: Dollar surges against D-Mark
The dollar climbed sharply against the D-Mark yesterday on the back of
better than expected US retail figures and fresh gloom about the state of
the German economy, writes Gillian Tett.
In spite of Bundesbank intervention, the American currency broke through its
1993 high of DM1.7480, ending at DM1.752 in London, up nearly two pfennigs
from the DM1.732 levels that had been registered in overnight trading in
Tokyo. The dollar's strength also dragged sterling up to a new 16-month high
against the D-Mark, which weakened across Europe yesterday.
The dollar's rise against the D-Mark started early in European trading,
following the news of more German job losses. Coupled with retail figures,
which indicated that West German retail sales in November had fallen by 2.5
per cent, the data fuelled the market's increasingly negative sentiment
towards the D-Mark.
However, it was the publication of the US retail sales figures and consumer
price index which triggered the most dramatic jump.
Although the 0.2 per cent rise in the December US CPI was broadly in line
with expectations, the 0.8 per cent rise in December US retail sales was
better than market forecasts of 0.3 per cent. This was the ninth consecutive
monthly rise in retail sales, and contributed to an annual retail sales
growth of 6.2 per cent, the largest for four years.
Shortly before the publication of the figures at 1.30pm, the Bundesbank was
rumoured to have intervened to hold the dollar down on the European markets,
which had been fairly steady during the morning, trading around DM1.7370.
However, the release of the figures prompted the dollar into an immediate 1
1/2 -pfennig rise against the D-Mark, taking it briefly above DM1.7510. An
attempted intervention by the Bundesbank at the DM1.7440 level, to the tune
of 'several hundred million dollars', according to Mr Michael Feeny of
Sumitomo Bank, failed to hold the currency for more than a few minutes.
Shortly afterwards the Bundesbank was rumoured to have intervened again,
through German banks. But although this briefly held the currency below
DM1.7500, it later rose above a second technical barrier of DM1.752, where
it finally closed in London. In volatile afternoon trading in New York it
fluctuated around this level before ending at DM1.7513.
How far the dollar could defend these sharp gains was a matter of some
dispute.
As Mr Nick Parsons, chief economist at CIBC, pointed out, the dollar's
trajectory was partly powered by the fact that scepticism about its ability
to break the DM1.7480 barrier had left the market quite short in dollars up
to this level. But once this barrier was breached, the market had to buy.
As a result, many dealers believe that the US currency could rise further
still. But though optimism about the short term prospects for the US economy
remains strong, opinion is more mixed about longer term outlook.
One key question dogging the markets is whether the Federal Reserve will
tighten US rates soon. With the CPI and producer price figures broadly in
line with market forecasts, many dealers think that the relatively benign
inflationary conditions make early tightening less likely.
For the moment this may not significantly weaken the dollar. But Mr Neil
MacKinnon, chief economist at Citibank, thinks that the market's optimism
could prove to be exaggerated over the longer term.
The immediate issue preoccupying the markets, though, is the degree to which
the Bundesbank is willing to defend the D-Mark. The Bundesbank has not had
any occasion to defend the D-Mark since the dollar last hit the chart point
of DM1.7480 in July 1993. And though yesterday's intervention was carried
out through reserve management, dealers are nevertheless wondering how the
Bundesbank will respond if the dollar pushes much higher.
As Mr Peter Luxton of Barclays Bank points out, a weaker D-Mark is likely to
be 'the last thing the Bundesbank wants', not least because it would make it
harder for the Bundesbank to introduce the interest rate cuts that many
believe will be needed to fight Germany's recession.
The dollar's strong rise pulled sterling up to another new high against the
D-Mark in the 16 months since the ERM crisis of September 1992. The pound
breached the DM2.62 level and finished at DM2.6209, up from the previous
day's close of DM2.6072. At this level it is some five pfennigs higher than
at the beginning of the year. However, it softened against the dollar to
Dollars 1.496 from Dollars 1.5013.
With sterling's rise against the D-Mark now being driven by gloom about
Germany's economy and optimism about UK recovery as well as the dollar's
rise, dealers predict that the pound could rise further.
Meanwhile, the Italian lira firmed after Mr Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, the
Italian prime minister, resigned. This is expected to lead to early
elections, and dealers say hopes that Italian political uncertainty might
soon end could boost the lira further. It yesterday finished at L971 against
the D-Mark, compared to Wednesday's close of L974.7.
The Bank of England yesterday predicted a shortage of Pounds 2.15bn in the
London money markets. It provided Pounds 2.116bn help during the course of
the day, through bills at 5 13/32 per cent.
