FT  18 NOV 94 / UK Company News: FKI falls 15% and takes lead on FRS 7
FKI, the acquisitive engineering group, became one of the first companies to
adopt the new FRS 7 accounting standard when it reported a 15 per cent
decline in interim pre-tax profits from Pounds 22.1m to Pounds 18.7m, after
an exceptional charge of Pounds 12.4m.
There was also a Pounds 1m provision for reorganisation at Rhombus, the
German caster manufacturer acquired for Pounds 26m in June. Under FRS 7,
which comes into force for accounting periods starting next month,
provisions relating to acquisitions must be taken against profits rather
than relegated to the balance sheet.
Mr Jeff Whalley, chairman, said: 'The new standard does make things clearer
and we hope to get some credit for adopting it early.'
In spite of the Rhombus provision, the figures were in line with City
expectations and the shares closed 6p higher at 168p.
Turnover for the six months to September 30 was Pounds 377.7m (Pounds 350m),
including Pounds 13.7m from acquisitions. The exceptional charge relates to
goodwill previously written off against reserves, on the sale of three
businesses to Wellman in July.
Earnings per share 2.03p (3.52p) or 4.8p excluding the exceptional charge.
The dividend is up a third to 2p.
Excluding acquisitions, operating margins from continuing businesses topped
the 10 per cent target set in 1992. The shares have underperformed recently
on worries that following the sharp improvement in margins, further profit
growth would be more difficult.
Operating profits rose by Pounds 10.8m to Pounds 36.6m of which Pounds 8.5m
came from Truth, the US window and door hardware manufacturer acquired for
Pounds 66.5m a year ago.
Truth, which makes almost three-quarters of its profits in the first half,
boosted the hardware profits to Pounds 20.8m (Pounds 7.9m) on turnover of
Pounds 135.7m (Pounds 72.9m).
Of the other divisions, materials handling profits were slightly down, due
to delayed orders which will benefit the second half, and automotive showed
continued recovery from a low base.
However engineering profits fell almost Pounds 3m to Pounds 4.26m due to
problems at Bristol Babcock. It is being reorganised after failing to
replace some large power station instrumentation contracts in Kuwait.
COMMENT
Now that FKI has achieved its margin target, helped by its success in
pushing up prices, the City has started to worry about where the growth
comes from next. Rumours that it was planning a rights issue to fund an
abortive acquisition also unsettled the shares which have underperformed the
market by a fifth since March. Even so, assuming profits of Pounds 65m in
the year, the shares are on a multiple of almost 17. The rating fully
reflects the achievements to date and the quality of the management team.
