FT  30 APR 94 / Finance and the Family: Commission? We just don't need it -
Brogan, 14th in a series on fee-based advisers
It is not easy for an independent financial adviser to move from commission
to fees. Pat Brogan knows that only too well. In 1991, Brogan - who founded
Pat Brogan Life &amp; Pensions in Perth, Scotland, 15 years ago - gave himself
three years to accomplish the task. He has discovered he was
over-optimistic.
'We have been working actively on moving the clients totally on to fees and
I thought we could do it within three years. But I have raised that to six
years now,' says Brogan.
'I found that people looked at me as if I had two heads when I said we were
going to put together a totally fee-based client base. But I hope the day
will come when we get away from commission altogether. Then we will be a
profession.
'Once you are charging a fee, you don't have to worry where you are putting
clients' money. You have complete freedom of investment choice, and you can
really try to build up clients' wealth. And I want to know what my income
will be. Every profession expects that.'
Brogan finds that younger clients are the most resistant to fees. He
believes this is largely because they have little experience of other
fee-based professionals such as accountants and solicitors. So, to encourage
them, he has introduced a Pounds 15 to Pounds 20 a month retainer service as
a sort of starter pack. 'It is too cheap,' he agrees, 'but young clients are
not difficult to look after and they are our future.'
Rather surprisingly, Brogan has also met some resistance to fees among his
corporate clients. The firm provides financial advice for several small
companies with annual turnovers ranging from Pounds 500,000 to Pounds 15m.
Some continue to believe they will save money if they stick to
commission-based advice.
Brogan says: 'I tell them that if they retain me for Pounds 7,500 they will
be far better off, but they say they don't want to pay that way. Some
managing directors are very good at making money but they are not very
sophisticated in financial matters.'
Many of Brogan's clients come through his corporate connections; others have
been recommended by existing clients - he does not advertise. He also has a
client base in the Shetlands and he spends five days a month there. 'In the
past 18 months, many clients have come to us because of the drop in interest
rates,' says Brogan.
Most of his clients want investment advice. Typically, they will have around
Pounds 150,000 in investments, a property worth around Pounds 100,000, and
perhaps another property somewhere else.
'Most want income from their capital,' says Brogan. 'They are either getting
towards the end of their working life or they have just retired, so we have
to be cautious because they have no chance of making money again. We try to
point that out very early on. We say, if you want a risk investment, don't
come to us.'
This caution means Brogan will actively manage only a small proportion of a
client's investments. On a Pounds 100,000 portfolio, he would advise that
only Pounds 15,000 should go into more volatile holdings. The remainder is
likely to be in relatively stable investments, such as insurance bonds and
National Savings.
Brogan looks 'for investment houses that will provide us with the
information we need and will keep in touch with us.' He adds: 'I talk to a
lot of people. It is a question of constantly monitoring clients' affairs.'
Clients choose if they want a quarterly, half-yearly or annual meeting with
Brogan. All files are replicated, so that the same dossier is with the firm
and with the client. The firm does not handle client money and Brogan
requires a client signature before taking any investment action.
Brogan believes the financial planning pace is rather more measured in
Scotland than elsewhere. 'We may take less risk and we do things at a slower
pace sometimes. We never push clients.'
On average, Brogan takes two meetings to get the information he needs from
clients, and another 14 to 21 days to prepare a report. A further period
elapses. There is then a a third meeting to sign the agreement. 'That's the
fast track,' he says. 'On the slow track, it can take six months to two
years.
'We insist on seeing both the husband and the wife, and we will also look at
a couple's inheritance tax position and involve their solicitor in what we
are doing. As a profession, we should be working with a client's accountant
and solicitor. We should not be in competition with them.'
Involving other professional advisers is central to another job Brogan is
tackling as the Scottish branch chairman of the Institute of Financial
Planning, an association still in its infancy in Scotland.
'I am putting together a study group of financial advisers who have the same
goals as I do. The institute should grow from that basis. We want to involve
solicitors and accountants and to create a nucleus of fee-based advisers,'
he says.
But he warns: 'We must be seen to attract the right people. I would be
horrified to introduce my corporate lawyer to some of the people in this
industry. We must keep them out of the IFP by raising the standards to a
level that they can't achieve.'
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
                          THE INDEPENDENTS
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
Name of financial adviser:          Pat Brogan Life &amp; Pensions
Address of head office:             8 Tay Street,
                                    Perth
                                    PH1 5LQ
Date firm was established:          1979
Regulator:                          Fimbra
Funds under management:             Pounds 7.2m (investments)
Number of clients:                  650
Number of offices:                  One
Mimimum investment accepted:        Pounds 25,000
Services offered:                   Investment and pension planning:
                                    life assurance; health insurances
Fees:                               1.25 percent plus VAT initial and
                                    1 percent annual
 --------------------------------------------------------------------
