FT  18 MAY 94 / Management: Antibiotics offer new cancer hope - Drugs can
kill a germ which may cause serious stomach problems / Health check
It is barely two decades since drugs like cimetidine revolutionised ulcer
treatment, sparing many patients the knife. Now it has been discovered that
a simple course of antibiotics may cure ulcers and even certain forms of
stomach cancer.
The BBC's Horizon programme on Monday night told the story of the
appropriately named Stephen Hope. He is one of several people with lymphoma
of the stomach who have been treated successfully not by surgery or
radiotherapy but by antibiotics against the bacterium Helicobacter pylori.
H. pylori was discovered about 100 years ago but misunderstood until
recently. It was almost an accident that, while looking for a suitable
research topic, young gastro-enterologist Barry Marshall became interested
in H. pylori in 1983. Among other things, he tried giving himself the germ
and eradicating it in his patients. Both were a great success, even if his
efforts met with little acclaim at first.
H. pylori is highly resistant to stomach acid, which kills most known germs.
It moves in corkscrew fashion, penetrating deep into the stomach lining. In
the last ten years, research has increasingly implicated it in gastritis,
gastric ulcer, duodenal ulcer, gastric cancer, and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of
the stomach.
Around 95 per cent of patients with duodenal ulcers and 80 per cent of those
with gastric ulcers are thought to carry H. pylori. According to a study
just published in the British Heart Journal, there is also evidence that the
bacterium is associated with a higher incidence of coronary heart disease,
though a causal relationship is unproven.
H. pylori is often acquired in childhood, especially among poorer
households, where it may spread from person to person. Infection with H.
pylori increases with age - at 50, around 50 per cent of us are infected; at
70, around 70 per cent.
Eradicating the bacterium can now be done fairly simply. A fortnight's
treatment with two drugs (the antibiotic amoxycillin and the anti-ulcer drug
omeprazole) does the trick in around three-quarters of patients infested
with H. pylori.
This regime is easier than its predecessor, triple therapy, which involved
more tablets, had more than a 20 per cent incidence of side-effects, and
precluded alcohol for the duration of the treatment.
It is now possible to test for H. pylori (one such test costs about Pounds
26 per person). But many gastro-enterologists believe that all patients
proved to have a duodenal ulcer should be offered eradication therapy,
whether or not they carry H. pylori.
Studies point out that patients treated in this way feel better and relapse
less often than those given conventional anti-ulcer treatment, and the
treatment may cost less in the long run. A report from general practitioners
in Suffolk suggested recently that annual savings of at least Pounds 120 per
patient could be achieved.
Some authorities would also agree that eradicating H. pylori is good
treatment for gastric ulcers, and the last year has seen increasing evidence
that it can work wonders for gastric lymphoma.
But this type of tumour accounts for only 5 per cent of all stomach
malignancies. So what hope is there for most stomach cancer sufferers? H.
pylori is thought to multiply the risk of stomach cancer by six, but is only
one of several factors - diet and blood group are also important. One
hypothesis is that a chain of sugars found only in type A blood may help H.
pylori attach itself to the stomach lining.
It is not yet known whether eradicating H. pylori affects gastric cancer (as
opposed to lymphoma). Nor is it clear how much it can offer those with
gastritis - specialists are now trying it, though many believe it will
confer few benefits.
A wider question is that since H. pylori can be tested for, might it be
worth treating those who carry it but do not have symptoms, in the hope of
preventing serious disease later?
At the moment, the answer is no. One problem is that the incidence of
infection with H. pylori is very much higher than the incidence of diseases
it is associated with. Until it is known precisely how the bacterium causes
harm, it would be fruitless to treat aIl carriers.
Prevention of stomach malignancies may therefore be around the corner. From
where we are now, however, that corner seems to be some way down the road.
The author is a London GP
