FT  09 MAY 94 / Survey of Bangladesh (8): Bumper rice harvests - Agriculture
is back on its feet
Like a punch-drunk boxer, Bangladesh has reeled from the blows of flood,
drought and cyclone. Its crops have been washed out, dried up and blown
away. About 300,000 people have died in natural disasters in the past seven
years.
But after a devastating cyclone in 1991, and despite flash floods last year,
agriculture is back on its feet, producing bumper rice harvests in the past
three years.
Agriculture dominates the Bangladeshi economy. It accounts for about 36 per
cent of total output, employs 60 per cent of the labour force and determines
incomes and consumption for the vast majority of Bangladeshis. Rice
dominates the sector, accounting for about 70 per cent of cropped land. The
rest is accounted for by pulses, wheat, jute, oil seeds, sugar plants, tea,
spices, vegetables and fruit.
Last year, Bangladesh achieved a long-sought goal of foodgrain
self-sufficiency. Rice production has risen from 14.2m tonnes in 1983 to
18.5m tonnes last year, keeping pace with the country's rising population. A
rice harvest of about 19m tonnes is expected this year, despite lower output
in the south-west region.
Mr Majid ul-Haq, agriculture and water minister, says the improvements have
been achieved through research, which has produced high-yielding rice
varieties as well as a greater willingness among farmers to experiment.
Research and development in the past 14 years have produced a wider use of
high-yield rice, improved farming methods, greater use of fertiliser and
more widespread irrigation, mainly through deep tube wells and irrigation
canals. The amount of cultivable land under irrigation has increased
markedly in the past few years from 17-20 per cent to about 35 per cent. Mr
ul-Haq says the figure could rise to between 42 per cent and 45 per cent if
Bangladesh resolves its dispute with India over sharing water from the
Ganges.
But Mr ul-Haq believes that improvements in rice yields and fertiliser use
could reach their limits in five to six years, by which time, the population
is likely to have risen to about 130m.
'The population growth that will come about past the year 2000 will really
pose some problems,' he says. The higher population will demand production
of several million tonnes more foodgrain. At the same time, housing will
encroach on agricultural land so the government will have to find new forms
of housing. 'Perhaps we are not rising vertically as fast as we should be,'
says Mr ul-Haq.
Research is under way to produce still higher-yielding rice seeds, and
varieties more resistant to flooding and higher water salinity. The
government is also encouraging a shift from rice to wheat, which requires
less water than rice and can be grown out of the rice seasons, although
yields drop in high temperatures. 'People have taken more to wheat. It has
taken us 30 years, but now it is quite common for wheat to be served in at
least one meal a day.'
The government is also encouraging the introduction of farm machinery. The
low cost of labour has discouraged investment, says Mr ul-Haq. But the need
for machinery has become more urgent because of the loss of cattle, used in
tilling, in recent cyclones. The government has started to lease farm
machinery to groups of farmers forming co-operatives and increasing farm
sizes.
Much of the land is broken into tiny plots with farms of less than one acre
accounting for about 40 per cent, while about 5 per cent of farm households
own and operate more than 25 per cent of agricultural land. This means that
recent technological advances have tended to favour a growing number of
large landowners, although aid agencies say that even the smallest plots of
land have benefited, particularly from the increased use of fertiliser. In
addition, agricultural employment has increased with the use of high-yield
rice, which is between 20 per cent and 50 per cent more labour-intensive
than traditional varieties.
But even today, despite improved harvests and lower rice prices, millions of
Bangladeshis are still going hungry. Some aid workers say the government is
still moving too slowly to improve farm outputs and that implementation of
new technology and farming methods is hampered by bureaucracy.
About 30m Bangladeshis cannot afford even 1,805 calories a day (20 per cent
less than the minimum intake recommended by the World Health Organisation),
according to a recent aid agency survey. The report - Fork in the Path:
Human Development Choices for Bangladesh - puts some of the blame on an
over-concentration on rice at the expense of more nutritional foods such as
beans and pulses. Foodgrains production would have to be increased by 1.7m
tonnes to feed the population adequately. Even then, says the report, the
poorest families in both urban and rural areas would be unable to buy enough
food: their only long-term hope for food-security is productive work.
