FT  13 MAY 94 / Sums don't add up: Dog days in Britain's independent schools
These should be halcyon days for UK independent schools. In the past year
state schools have been engulfed by teachers' industrial action over the
national curriculum - compulsory in state, but not independent, schools. The
dispute has shown no sign of abating this week in spite of the government
revising its proposals. State schools are perceived as having lower
standards and as abandoning 'traditional' values - such as competition in
team games.
All this should help independent schools, which usually prosper when parents
want to avoid the state sector. During the last spasm of trade union action
in the late 1980s, for instance, the percentage of the school age population
at independent schools increased from 6.5 per cent to 7.5 per cent,
according to Department for Education figures.
So why did independent schools lose pupils this year? The Independent
Schools Information Service last month revealed that the number at private
schools this school year - 462,719 - is 1 per cent lower than last year -
the third annual fall in succession.
Day schools have fared best. This year saw a 0.1 per cent increase in the
number of day pupils (0.6 per cent in London) although falls occurred in the
two preceding years. But heads of boarding schools have been alarmed by the
5.2 per cent fall in boarders this year - roughly equivalent to four schools
the size of Eton College. Since 1989, the number of boarders has fallen by
about 20 per cent.
No wonder the Boarding Schools Association, which represents most UK
boarding schools and is usually zealous about its independence, has called
for an extension of the government's 'assisted places' programme. It wants
the scheme, which pays school fees of selected children from low-income
families, to cover the seven-to-11 age group.
If recent trends are not reversed, rationalisation in the boarding school
sector seems inevitable. Already this year several small boarding schools
have closed or merged. Others have seen pupil numbers reduced to a level
where they may no longer be viable; fears are greatest for the survival of
schools which have traditionally emphasised their small size as a virtue.
The decline in the independent sector is partly explained by the weakness of
the economy. In the late 1980s, the economy was growing fast and the number
of parents deciding to send their children to fee-charging schools rose
rapidly. Now many find that fees are too high for them to make that choice.
But the economic downturn would not have had such an impact on numbers if
fees had increased in line with average prices. They did not. The
Independent Schools Information Service's figures show fees have
consistently risen by more than the retail price index during the last
decade. The rise of 2.6 per cent for this school year is the first time
since records began in 1982 that school fees have increased by less than
average earnings.
The average boarding fee at the most prestigious public (independent)
schools - those which are members of their representative body, the
Headmasters' Conference - is Pounds 3,574 a term compared with Pounds 2,090
as recently as 1989.
The main upward pressure on fees has come from teachers' pay settlements.
Average salaries for teachers at independent schools rose by 10 per cent in
1991-92 and 9.5 per cent the following year, although the increase this year
was only 1.5 per cent. But independent schools admit that during the 1980s
they overspent on luxury capital projects such as swimming pools and sports
centres.
One result of higher fees has been a trend towards parents choosing the
cheaper day schools, rather than boarding schools - hence the steeper fall
in the number of pupils at the latter. Boarding schools charge on average
Pounds 6,000 more per year than day schools.
Independent schools offer other explanations for their decline. There is
some legitimacy in the argument that the state sector is becoming more
competitive. Miss Janet Harvey, headmistress of the Lawnside school in
Malvern, Worcestershire, which will close at the end of this year because
its governors believe it is no longer commercially viable, points to the
breadth and curriculum options at large state schools, particularly the new
breed of sixth-form colleges. 'Boarding schools with less than 200 pupils
are not going to be viable in the future,' she says.
But that only explains why some of the smaller schools are threatened: most
independent schools have facilities of a quality which far exceeds those in
the state sector.
Other teachers believe social trends are working to the disadvantage of
boarding schools.
Mr Ian Small, headmaster of Bootham School in York and also this year's
chairman of the Boarding Schools Association, believes the public's image of
boarding schools has been distorted and is 'at least 30 years out of date'.
He cites the recent publicity for a book which claimed that Eton sacked its
headmaster in 1970 because of his over-enthusiastic use of capital
punishment. 'We are hampered by this image of the past. The amount of column
inches for that book was typical, but it's so out-dated,' he says.
Boarding schools have belatedly taken steps to improve their image. For
example, Cheltenham College, a boys' boarding school, last month offered
prospective pupils a 'free sample', allowing them to spend a night in the
school's boarding house, and then undergo a standard daily timetable. It
claims to have boosted recruitment as a result.
But improving the image of independent schools can only go part of the way
towards compensating for their main problem: that in many cases they have
priced themselves out of the market.
The modest rise in the number of day pupils this year suggests that there is
still strong demand for education outside the state sector. Though smaller
schools may have to close, that demand should keep most large independent
schools in business. But their prosperity will depend crucially on them
charging fees that the market can afford.
