FT  21 APR 94 / The Queen's Awards 1994: Serving seafood to the Far East -
Loch Fyne Oysters / James Buxton examines five companies which are leading
Scotland's export drive
Once a week a consignment of oysters, smoked salmon and other Scottish
seafood leaves Loch Fyne in Argyllshire to be airfreighted to Hong Kong.
There, the delicacies are eaten in leading hotels and an oyster bar, and are
supplied to delicatessens.
Loch Fyne Oysters, a business founded in 1978 by Mr Johnny Noble and Mr
Andrew Lane to assist the former's Highland estate, now claims to be the
market leader for smoked salmon in the British colony.
The export initiative began about eight years ago with a British Overseas
Trade Board-sponsored mission.
'We met Mr Andrew Smith, the Scot who manages the Hong Kong Hilton, and he
pointed us to the big distributors,' says Mr Lane. 'That man should get a
knighthood for what he does for Scottish companies.'
Loch Fyne Oysters rears oysters and other shellfish in the clear waters of
the eponymous loch.
But it is primarily a smoking business, smoking farmed salmon, eels, kippers
and trout which it buys from local producers.
The business will have turnover of almost Pounds 4m this year and intends to
expand by 25 per cent a year over the next four years.
'Rearing shellfish is a credibility thing,' says Mr Lane, managing director.
'If you produce oysters people realise your fish are fresh. We are perceived
as handling the fresh end of seafoods.'
Another crucial ingredient is being located in the Scottish Highlands, he
says. 'Many UK smokers hint at a Highland or a Scottish location in their
names even if they are based somewhere else. We are genuine.'
Loch Fyne Oysters employs 42 full-time staff at Cairndow, Argyllshire, and
also runs three oyster bars and seafood restaurants in England.
About 40 per cent of the company's turnover is exported, with the Far East
its main market.
Mr Lane said: 'We are flirting with Taiwan at the moment.' But Loch Fyne
also sells in Italy, Germany, France and Luxembourg.
