FT  21 NOV 94 / Survey of Germany (17): The sale is nearly over - Judy
Dempsey records the Treuhand's high-speed achievements
Four years ago, the Treuhand, the world's largest privatisation agency,
vowed to complete its operations by the end of 1994.
Set up to sell privatise the businesses of former communist eastern Germany,
the Treuhand then had on its books 13,700 state-owned enterprises, together
with 25,000 restaurants, hotels, pharmacies, bookshops and cinemas, and
40,800 pieces of land.
Its forecast seemed hopelessly ambitious. However, despite the enormous
scale of its portfolio, the agency has adhered to its timetable. Come the
new year, the Treuhand, which east Germans, at least in the early days,
hated with a vengeance, will cease to exist.
But this does not mean its task is ended. Although most of its work has been
completed, a new structure, which will begin its operations on January 1 and
will be entrusted with privatising the few remaining companies in its
portfolio. Part of the finance ministry, it will be called the
Beteiligungs-Management-Gesellschaft Berlin. The BMBG, as it is known, will
have an administrative budget of DM5m and will be divided into three
sections.
The first section will look after about 100 companies with more than 20,000
employees. So far 80 of these enterprises have been placed under the
so-called Management KGs, companies which are run by west German managers
who have a free hand to restructure them and prepare them for privatisation.
Separate from the Management KGs is a small group of partly privatised
companies in which the Treuhand holds a stake, or companies about to be
privatised. These include the SKET machine-building and engineering complex
in Magdeburg in the state of Saxony-Anhalt; Eko Stahl, east Germany's
largest steel mill in Brandenburg, of which a part is being sold to
Cockerill-Sambre, the Belgian steel producers; and Kali und Salz, the potash
mines in Thuringia.
Also under the BMBG is a section called the Auslaufaktivitaten, which will
supervise the completion of environmental clean-ups and land reclamation,
particularly in the lignite, or brown-coal fields. A small section within
the BMBG will look after the financing and legal issues, as well as
relations between the European Union and the five east German states.
Then there is the contracts department, which monitors all current
investment commitments and job guarantees. This department will remain under
the privatised Bundesanstalt fur vereinigungsbedingtes Sondervermogen (BVS),
while the Liegenschaftsgesellschaft der Treuhandanstalt (TLG) will continue
to exist for some time until it has completed the privatisation, or renting,
of east Germany's land and forests.
All told, the successor to the Treuhand will employ 45,000 and will have a
budget of DM8bn from 1995 until 1998. The total deficit over this period
will amount to DM45bn-DM55bn, which is already part of the Treuhand's total
debt of DM270bn.
The Treuhand's rapid pace of privatisation is illustrated by the statistics.
By the beginning of October 1994, only 354 of the 13,781 former communist
enterprises remained on its books. The entire retailing sector, including
the small shops, cinemas, bookshops and pharmacies, had been quickly
privatised in 1991 and 1992.
The agency says it has secured investment commitments exceeding DM206bn,
guarantees of more than 1.4m jobs, and proceeds from sales of nearly DM65bn.
But the tax payer will have to carry the Treuhand's DM270bn debt for many
years to come. The debt has arisen because of the Treuhand's philosophy. 'We
actually bought management for these enterprises, rather than sold the
enterprises,' Mrs Birgit Breuel, the outgoing president of the agency,
repeatedly explained.
Essentially this meant that in order to attract investors the Treuhand had
to pick up old debts and loans from east German enterprises which by the end
of 1994 will have totalled DM80bn. The agency had to provide an additional
DM15bn for capital increases, a further DM66bn for guarantees which provided
the enterprises with liquidity, and an additional DM8bn was allocated by the
Treuhand for enterprises that were unable to finance lump-sum severance
payments on their own.
With such a large debt, the question remains whether the Treuhand will have
created the conditions for a thriving privatised sector which will not only
expand but will help absorb some of the unemployment which officially is
running at 15 per cent. Unofficially it is 35 per cent when short-time work,
job creation and retraining schemes are taken into account.
The omens at present do not appear bright. The investment commitments and
job guarantee contracts undertaken by investors have been too ambitious. 'It
is true that their expectations about finding markets were too high,' said
Mr Heinrich Hornef, the Treuhand's financial officer. As a result, Mr Hero
Brahms, a Treuhand board member, said that the agency's contracts department
is at any one time renegotiating 10 per cent of all contracts. 'We do
everything possible to extend the timetable for investment commitments. The
thing we don't want to do is to buy back enterprises,' added Mr Brahms.
Nevertheless, many contracts for job guarantees include an obligation by the
investor to employ short-time staff, even if there is no work available. The
result is that this has delayed an increase in productivity, which is still
extremely low in the steel, machine-tool, and scientific instruments sector.
In these cases, productivity is still 40 per cent of west German levels,
thereby pushing up labour unit costs in the east. Last year, GDP per
employee in eastern Germany was 46 per cent of the level in the west, but
per capita wages and salaries rose to 70 per cent. In short, eastern unit
labour costs are 44 per cent above those in west Germany.
Another problem for east Germany's privatised sector is that it is not yet
competitive enough for the export market. The Bundesbank, Deutsche Bank and
the Berlin-based DIW economics institute have all shown that east Germany
still contributes only two per cent to Germany's total Gross Domestic
Product. 'The export potential of the east German economy still remains low
and this sector has not yet come out of the trough,' said a recent Deutsche
Bank Research report.
The share of exports in aggregate demand, including deliveries to eastern
Germany, is one-fifth, compared with west Germany's one third. And of total
domestic spending, a significant part is spent on imports, which are still
almost as high as GDP.
This implies that east German output only covers slightly more than half of
aggregrate demand.
Finally, the privatised sector remains seriously undercapitalised. A special
fund was recently set up by the finance ministry and the east German states
to extend fresh capital for investments and marketing. But this problem is
expected to remain for some time.
Treuhand officials think there is a bright side, however: the east German
economy is expected to grow by about eight per cent next year, although this
increase is coming from a very low base - the region's GDP fell by 30 per
cent between 1990 and 1992.
But any economic upswing is crucial for the Treuhand whose officials admit
that the real test for the agency is when the investment commitment and job
guarantee contracts end. When they do, managers will be given a free hand to
reassess their labour costs. That will inevitably affect their decisions
about reducing or increasing the work force. If the economic upswing
continues, the Treuhand might be able to say it has created conditions for a
vibrant privatised sector. But no one is placing bets. Just as few believed
the Treuhand would cease to exist after 1994.
