FT  09 DEC 94 / Personal View: Jobs for life still available to many
It is a widely held belief that 'lifetime jobs' have become a thing of the
past. This view informs debates on a wide range of topics including the
future of the welfare state, employment policy and training.
Presenting the report of Labour's Social Justice Commission, Sir Gordon
Borrie, the commission's chairman, wrote: 'Governments have failed to keep
pace with revolutionary changes that have transformed the nature of work and
society. There has been an economic revolution in skills and competition. It
. . . killed the notion of a job for life.'
Management expert Charles Handy also believes that 'no longer can one expect
to sell 100,000 hours of one's life to an organisation'.
The general argument is that with greater international competition and the
introduction of new technology, pressures on the labour market to adapt have
meant jobs of shorter duration.
Our research has found little evidence of such changes. In an annual series
of large, representative surveys, workers have been asked: 'How long have
you been with your present employer?' In 1975 the average for men was 10.4
years, and 6.3 for women. Nearly two decades later in 1992, the average for
men was 9.5 years and again 6.3 for women.
Two points follow from these figures. First, they provide scant evidence
that the pattern of a typical working life has changed fundamentally. For
men, this is a decline of about 8.5 per cent over 18 years; for women there
is essentially no change.
These small differences suggest that popular assumptions about a
transformation in the nature of jobs are misleading.
Second, it is clear that, on average, people hold their jobs for a long
time. These data relate to the length of time people have been in their
present jobs so far. We can use estimates of the chance of them continuing
in those jobs to calculate the average completed job tenure. In 1990, this
is about 18 years for men and 12 years for women.
Such numbers suggest that most people can still expect a stable long-term
job at some stage of their careers.
In fact, these averages summarise quite a complex pattern. The figures show
a lot of people with short jobs and a lot of people with very long tenures.
This is particularly marked for men, with 29 per cent having completed
tenures of less than five years, and 24 per cent with jobs lasting more than
30 years. If jobs lasting 20 years or more can be labelled 'lifetime' jobs,
the UK labour market in 1990 is still capable of offering such jobs to 45
per cent of all male workers.
It is also true, of course, that a substantial fraction of the workforce has
jobs that last only a very short time. But this has been the case for at
least the past 18 years, and there does not seem to be any substantial
increase in the number of jobs of short duration.
Looking back over the past 18 years, there has been a gradual increase in
job duration as the labour market worsened from 1979 to 1983, and a
subsequent fall as times improved through to 1990. Job duration increased
slightly between 1991 and 1992, as unemployment began to rise again.
There are two reasons that explain this cyclical pattern. First, fewer
people are hired in a recession, so there are fewer people who have been
working in their jobs for only a short time.
Second, those who are in work tend to remain in their jobs for longer. These
two factors mean average job duration tends to rise in recessions.
For men, the fall in the average length of a job has been greater since 1984
than the rise in the years before. It may be that part of this fall is due
to the sort of longer-term changes in labour markets that have been
discussed recently. But while there has been some change, the fall has not
been substantial.
One explanation of the relative constancy of these averages might be that
increases in the rate of job changes were cancelled or offset by changes in
the proportion of young and old workers. But analysing the changes by age
shows much the same pattern across age groups.
It may be that we are on the verge of a new world where jobs for most people
do not last very long. However, there is little evidence of such change
during the 1980s and early 1990s. The British labour market still offers
'lifetime jobs' to a substantial fraction of its workforce.
The authors are in the Department of Economics at the University of Bristol;
Simon Burgess is also a member of the Centre for Economic Performance
