FT  01 NOV 94 / Survey of Australia (8): Harvest in the hotels - Japanese
tourists flock in
The growing importance of tourism to the Australian economy was underlined
in 1994 by recognition of the diverse and complex sector as a leading stock
exchange investment indicator.
The pooling of nine leading tourism-related companies into a single
indicator, the Tourism and Leisure Index, represented a coming of age for a
sector which has had more than its share of credibility problems with
investors.
While the index will help to make a fragmented industry more accessible and
easier to analyse, it will reflect merely the tip of what is a very large
and growing iceberg. By September this year, companies included in the index
boasted a market capitalisation comfortably above ADollars 3bn, or around
one per cent of the benchmark All Ordinaries index.
But the new index sits atop a sector which now makes up more than 5.5 per
cent of Australia's gross domestic product, employs almost 6 per cent of the
country's workforce, generated foreign exchange earnings exceeding ADollars
10.7bn and accounted for expenditure estimated at Dollars 26.2bn last year.
Although the bulk of that expenditure total - ADollars 18.4bn - came from
domestic tourism, inbound tourism is expected to be the major growth area
for the rest of the century, boosted by Sydney's capture last year of the
2000 Olympic Games.
This climate of growth has already catalysed strong investment. The
Australian Tourism Commission (ATC) has identified tourism-related
accommodation projects worth almost ADollars 5bn scheduled for completion by
1996, including two new casinos.
The activity has also thrown up plans which will test equity markets,
including a float of the Federal Government's flagship airline Qantas,
possible refloating of the rival private airline, Ansett, and privatisation
of the country's airports. These proposals could call on markets for around
ADollars 7bn over the next five years, providing a keen indication of
investor attitudes to the tourism sector.
Some see even more at stake. Many analysts see tourism performance as an
acid test of the wider Australian economy's ability to compete
internationally into the next century. A recent study by ANZ McCaughan, the
Australian stockbroker, says tourism growth will largely reflect the
country's ability to win an increasing share of the global tourism market,
clearly one of the world's biggest industries.
ANZ McCaughan quotes estimates that tourism accounted for around 5.5 per
cent of world gross national product in 1993, with more than 500m tourists
spending almost ADollars 325bn. Tourism is widely forecast to create one in
nine new jobs in the world next year, rising to one in eight by the turn of
the century.
Australia has one crucial advantage in capturing more than its share of this
growth - its location in the Asia-Pacific region, the world's fastest
growing tourist area. ANZ McCaughan says in the 12 years to 1992, tourist
arrivals in the region grew at an annual average of almost 9 per cent, more
than double the world average. Continued regional outperformance is forecast
for the next decade.
Australia has more than matched this regional growth over the past decade,
with arrivals increasing at more than 9 per cent annually. This record, plus
the boost expected from the Olympic Games, recently led the ATC to confirm
its estimate that 6.8m overseas tourists would visit Australia in the year
2000, rising to 8.4m by 2004. This compares with 3.2m actual arrivals in
1993-4.
These forecasts reflect an estimated 2.1m overseas visitors generated
directly over the next decade by the Sydney 2000 Olympics, with the bulk of
business coming from Asia as slow economic recovery and intense competition
curb traffic from Europe and the US.
Japan remained the largest single source of inbound tourists to Australia in
1993, claiming 22.4 per cent of the total. This was shaded by combined
visitors from other Asian sources, which took 22.7 per cent. New Zealand
provided another 16.6 per cent of visitors, the US 9.4 per cent, UK/Ireland
8.1 per cent and other European countries 10.5 per cent.
While less numerous than their Asian counterparts, UK/Ireland and other
European visitors probably contributed more to the Australian economy
because their average stay was around 40 nights compared with just nine
nights for Japan and 32 nights for other Asian countries. The main reason
for the discrepancy appears to be that UK/Ireland and European visitors come
mainly to see relatives while most Asians come primarily for holidays.
ANZ McCaughan's analysis concludes that Australia's inbound tourism record
over the past decade largely reflects the emergence of the country as an
inexpensive place to visit. A weakening currency has helped, but the brokers
calculate that the cost of tourism related services in Australia are now
among the lowest in the industrialised world.
'Australia's tourism infrastructure is generally adequate for present needs
and there is every indication that it can respond quickly to actual and
estimated changes in tourism plans,' the analysis said. 'The national
attractions of Australia are such that great opportunities exist in the
growing eco-tourism market, reflecting in part the preferences of travellers
for more active, participatory or experimental travel experiences.'
