FT  14 NOV 94 / Coalition closes ranks for Kohl poll
Germany's coalition party leaders and managers struggled at the weekend to
prevent breaches in the ranks or other mishaps which might hurt Mr Helmut
Kohl's chances of being re-elected chancellor in tomorrow's Bundestag vote.
With a mere 10-seat parliamentary majority they can afford no more than four
defections or absences if Mr Kohl is to be assured of success in the first
voting round by gaining the required absolute majority of 337.
Party managers are concerned that anything other than a first-round win
could raise further questions over the coalition's ability to govern and
thus weaken Mr Kohl's authority.
Squabbling Free Democrats (FDP), the junior coalition partners, were told by
their leader, Mr Klaus Kinkel, that they would be taught how to behave if
they did not stop arguing over cabinet seats.
Mr Gunter Rexrodt, current FDP economics minister, emerged at the weekend as
the next victim of internal FDP dissent which has already led to rifts with
prominent members including the former economics minister, Mr Jurgen
Mollemann.
Mr Rexrodt said he believed his cabinet future was in doubt although he had
not been told anything official.
'The mood is very agitated in the party and there are not many signs of
human warmth,' he told a newspaper. The FDP is expected to have only three
seats in the new government instead of four, although the distribution of
the portfolios will not be announced until after the election of the
chancellor.
Mr Heiner Geissler, a senior Christian Democrat (CDU) party manager, warned
that a defeat for Mr Kohl could lead to fresh federal elections, implying
that the FDP, which lost 32 of its parliamentary seats in last month's poll,
might suffer an even worse fate in a new vote.
Meanwhile, Mr Wolfgang Schauble, the CDU parliamentary leader, summoned all
304 CDU Bundestag members to Bonn today for a 'roll call'. Mr Schauble said
he was determined to avoid any risk of missed aircraft or traffic jams
interfering with the chancellor's election.
In talks on the government's programme, concluded in record time on Friday,
the coalition parties agreed to relax nationality laws so that foreign
children born in Germany will be able to hold German nationality.
Measures which would make it easier to integrate the 6.8m foreigners living
in Germany had been the most thorny issue during the coalition negotiations.
The changes, made known at the weekend, were at least a partial victory for
the FDP, which had to overcome resolute opposition from the Christian Social
Union (CSU), the more conservative Bavarian sister party of Chancellor
Kohl's CDU.
One of the child's parents must have been born in Germany and both parents
must have been resident for at least 10 years before the children can
qualify for German nationality, according to weekend press reports.
See editorial comment
