FT  29 JUN 94 / French mount guard on Rwanda survivors
Colonel Didier Thibault believes that France's humanitarian expedition to
Rwanda has been an unqualified success.
Unfortunately, most of the people who needed the protection of Col Thibault
and the Eleventh Parachute Regiment of Toulouse are already dead.
Of the 55,000 Tutsis who lived in the district of Cyangugu, in western
Rwanda, only 11,000 are believed to have survived the ethnic slaughter
unleashed by the death of President Juvenal Habyarimana in an air crash on
April 6.
Between 2,000 and 3,000 Tutsis swam or rowed across to the island of Idjwi,
on the Zairean side of Lake Kivu. The remaining 8,000 are under the
protection of French troops at a refugee camp near the town of Cyangugu.
In six days, almost 1,000 French troops have established a presence along
the eastern shores of Lake Kivu, in the heart of government-controlled
territory. 'Calm is returning to this district. Tension has diminished. The
priests, the town mayors, and the population tell me so,' says the colonel.
Since the arrival of the French, there are fewer roadblocks in this area of
western Rwanda, and those which remain are adorned with French flags. Col
Thibault does not have orders to disarm the militias of the majority Hutu
tribe who man the roadblocks, but he has told them that their killing spree
must stop. He has requested local radio stations to stop broadcasting
inflammatory propaganda against the Tutsi minority.
At every village, he explains that France has come to protect civilians who
may be in danger.
Col Thibault says his troops have found few Tutsis on their patrols
throughout the district. Yesterday, the French evacuated 37 nuns, 23 of whom
are Tutsi, from the town of Kibuye, where virtually the entire Tutsi
community was massacred.
The euphoria which greeted the arrival of the French is felt exclusively by
the Hutu community, to which the government and the Rwandan army belong.
Col Thibault admits that his presence in government-held territory, and work
alongside the Rwandan army and paramilitary police, may compromise the
neutrality France professes to have.
In some parts of western Rwanda, French forces are patrolling less than 15km
away from where the government is fighting the Rwandan Patriotic Front, the
Tutsi guerrilla force. If the rebels press their advance, the French might
find themselves in the line of fire. They have a mandate to use force if
they come under attack.
The Tutsis herded into the refugee camp of Nyarushishi, and watched over by
Hutu gendarmes as well as the French, remain hostages in a hostile
environment.
'The militias would kill the last Tutsi survivors were it not for the
arrival of the French,' says a Tutsi priest, allowed to remain at Cyangugu's
cathedral when Hutu militias chose to spare his life. 'I cannot leave these
premises,' he says. 'I would be stopped at the first roadblock and asked for
my papers which identify me as a Tutsi, and I would be killed. We are like
prisoners here.'
He cannot envisage a day when Hutu and Tutsi will live together in Rwanda
again.
'What happened here was a systematic and calculated massacre of the Tutsi
community. The French have arrived too late. For us, it is finished.'
