FT  21 SEP 94 / London Stock Exchange: Renewed setback as trading volume
increases - Market Report
The UK stock market suffered a renewed setback yesterday following losses in
bond markets in Germany and the US. Most of the damage was done in the
morning when bond markets turned nervous ahead of the announcement, expected
this week, of the German money supply data. UK shares extended their losses
later after Wall Street, the US dollar and Federal bonds opened lower on
news of an unexpected widening in the US trade deficit in July.
The FT-SE 100 Share Index closed 41.8 points down at 3,037.3. Trading volume
increased, swollen by a substantial sell programme from a leading London
securities house. The programme, estimated at a worth of around Pounds 100m,
took in sizeable deals in shares of such blue chips as GEC, Prudential
Assurance, Sears, Barclays Bank and Lloyds Abbey.
The markets focus on the heavy fall yesterday morning in German bond futures
appeared to bear out increasing concern that continental European funds have
been sellers of UK stocks. But weakness in British government bonds pointed
to worries over the outlook for domestic interest rates and inflation.
Weakness in bond markets inevitably reflect fears that last week's half
point rise in UK base rates may soon be followed by a further rise if
inflation fears continue to increase.
At the same time, trading statements from leading UK companies have been
casting doubts over confident forecasts for a strong equity market
performance in the final quarter of this year. Shares in Tesco, the
supermarket group, made a cautious response to an interim trading report
which drew attention again to margin pressures in the industry.
Stock index futures trading played a less direct role in yesterday's
shakeout, the December contract on the FT-SE 100 Index closing fairly close
to the cash market, after allowing for a large fair value premium. The FT-SE
Mid 250 Index fell 23.5 points to 3,584.5.
Stock Exchange statistics disclosed that genuine investment activity was low
on Monday, when the market bounced from its recent weakness; retail business
was worth only Pounds 950.9m, one of the first genuine daily totals below
Pounds 1bn for many months. Seaq volume of 602.7m shares yesterday compared
with 469.1m on Monday, with non-Footsie business making up around 60 per
cent of the total.
Until the sell programme hit the market, trading appeared to be relatively
slack. But it was difficult to identify the timing of the programme, which,
in accordance with Exchange rulings on large deals, did not appear on the
trading screens until late in the day.
Market strategists admitted to some disappointment that the UK stock market
appeared to be proving more vulnerable to interest rate concerns that
expected. Some have argued that the pace of economic recovery and in
corporate profits and dividends would enable the market to shrug off the
rises in interest rates which are associated with this stage of the economic
cycle.
Analysts' estimates are still looking for a strong advance in the FT-SE 100
Share Index before the end of the year. On this basis, some market traders
have urged clients to buy stocks during the present shakeout.
There was a muted response to the estimated annualised growth of 4.7 per
cent in domestic M4 money supply in August. UBS commented to clients that
the trend in net lending appeared to be broadly flat and that companies had
been reducing gearing by borrowing from equity and bond markets in place of
bank borrowing.
The market is expected to continue focusing on the prospects for interest
rates in the US and in Germany, where the M3 money supply figures could
present the next challenge to markets across Europe.
