FT  07 DEC 94 / Management: All aboard for the Channel tunnel - A look at
the merits of having a union as a business partner
The executive of the GMB union formally decided yesterday to join a
consortium of companies in its Pounds 2.7bn bid to build the Channel tunnel
rail link.
We have been asked, along with other rail and transport unions, to take an
equity stake in return for an interest in a new railway and associated real
estate. The project includes two stations at Waterloo and St Pancras in
London and nearly 70 miles of track to the tunnel entrance.
When Costain, the UK building company with a turnover of Pounds 1.2bn,
approached me to ask the GMB to join the consortium - which also includes
international companies Hochteif, Nisimatsu, Siemens, Hambros Bank and
Prideaux Associates - even Costain admitted it was with some trepidation.
The view that a union could be a partner on the board of management is not a
common one in the UK.
But it is in Europe. Building unions into the consortium of a project is
just part of the procedure to win contracts on the Continent.
The British construction industry is becoming more Europeanised and its
working practices are likely to become more common, as major continental
construction firms increase their stake in the domestic construction market.
The Channel tunnel rail link is likely to employ 10,000 workers at its
height. Apart from the obvious benefits for the union in future membership -
the joint aim is to have a unionised contract - we were delighted to be
asked to be a part of the project that will bring so many badly needed jobs
to the south and London regions.
The GMB union can offer the workers a package, which includes health and
safety measures that will be too good to turn down. We have just appointed
five recruitment officers specifically for the construction industry, and
when it comes to recruiting on the channel link project we feel we will have
the edge because we will already have a foot in the boardroom. This will
allow us to have a major say in designing health and safety policies and
influencing site organisation.
The endorsement yesterday to proceed with the project will involve having
union representation on the supervisory board. Although there are bound to
be differences of opinion, the very involvement of unions on the board
should encourage a dialogue which will minimise any differences. That
dialogue has already begun.
The nature of this dialogue will be set in the boardroom, but also by the
investment that the union makes. As a symbol of our commitment to this
partnership the GMB is considering how much of an investment it can make.
Our finance committee will be considering the investment at its next
meeting.
Our discussions with the contractors suggested that there are at least three
advantages for employers in partnership projects of this nature. First, an
early input on the crucial area of health and safety can save millions of
pounds; second, we can establish formal industrial relations procedures,
ensuring the smooth completion of this project; third, we can give priority
to proper consultation at every stage of the project to ensure that the
workforce is fully informed and confident of management's intentions.
Both sides, an employer wanting good industrial relations and a progressive
and forward-looking union can gain a great deal from this partnership. The
pitfalls can be avoided before they occur.
The Channel link experiment is by far the biggest potential partnership
scheme but there are others on the horizon. These include a batch of
privatised road building projects which are also likely to attract
involvement by foreign construction firms.
Just as the future for the British economy lies in Europe, so the GMB
recognises the value of European involvement. We already have an office in
Brussels and are talking with the German construction union Bau Stein Erden
about forming a partnership in Germany. There are at least 30,000 British
and Irish construction workers in Germany alone.
The move throughout Europe is towards international construction firms.
Bouygues, the French group, employs 55,000 people, five or six times more
than the largest British contractor.
This firm and others are increasingly likely to look towards the British
market. The GMB union is ready to work with these companies - we would
consider working in partnership with companies in future projects. Companies
which recognise the value of social partnership are on the increase.
This is the future, not only for the construction industry, but for British
industry as a whole.
The author is GMB national officer for the construction industry.
