FT  23 JUL 94 / Shephard to focus on training for young
Mrs Gillian Shephard aims to make the improvement of academic and vocational
training for students aged 16 and over one of her top priorities at the
Department for Education.
As fresh details of changed ministerial responsibilities emerged yesterday
in the wake of this week's reshuffle, senior aides of the new education
secretary said she was keen to focus on the 16-plus age group which had been
'traditionally neglected'. Mrs Shephard was 'passionately concerned' about
the education of all students aged 16 and above whatever their ability, the
aides said.
Mrs Shephard's system of priorities may spark a change of culture at her new
department, which has long favoured the academic rather than the vocational.
As a former employment secretary Mrs Shephard is acutely aware of the
workplace dimension and is likely to accelerate developments which encourage
what is called 'parity of esteem' between vocational and academic
qualifications.
She is also likely to question her department's strategy of setting
aggressive targets for pupils staying on at school, and whether the
work-based route is better for some.
She is expected to welcome the planned introduction of qualifications which
assess practical skills into schools.
It was Mrs Shephard who started work at the Department of Employment on the
'modern apprenticeship' - a work-based training alternative to staying on at
school - which will be introduced next year.
She was also a keen advocate of a 'universal credit' being offered to all
young people at 16, whether staying on at school or leaving to take a
training place on Youth Training, the government's main training scheme for
unemployed young people.
Mrs Shephard's other priorities at the department are expected to include
nursery education and re-establishing what her aides describe as the
'constructive' dialogue she enjoyed with union leaders as employment
secretary
Details of ministerial responsibilities in the Department of Trade and
Industry and the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food were published
yesterday.
At the DTI, Lord Ferrers, the former Home Office minister, will assume
responsibility for small companies and consumer affairs, while Mr Tim Eggar
will take on the Post Office in addition to his energy-related duties. Mr
Charles Wardle, another former Home Office minister, will provide support
for Mr Eggar. Mr Ian Taylor will have responsibility for telecommunications
and some trade matters. At agriculture, Mrs Angela Browning will succeed Mr
Nicholas Soames as food minister.
Wish they were here, Page 7
