FT  08 AUG 94 / Business Travel: Hand in hand with US immigration -
Palm-reading could cut the queues at New York airports
Regular travellers to New York are developing an interest in palmistry. This
is not a shift to new-age philosophy, but a way of bypassing the queues and
endless form-filling that are part of entering the US.
The US immigration service's Inspass scheme, which identifies passengers by
their palms, is being tried for a year at New York's John F. Kennedy and
Newark airports in conjunction with airlines. British Airways says 4,000
regular passengers have joined the scheme through its frequent-flyer club.
Inspass - which stands for Immigration and Naturalisation Services Passenger
Accelerated Service System - can cut the time to complete immigration
formalities to 20 seconds. The system uses a reader to measure your palm -
each person's is unique - and record the details on a database.
British Airways says the system can cope with subtle changes to your hand by
updating the database each time you place your hand in the reader.
If you travel regularly to New York, it is worthwhile joining the scheme -
particularly as it is free while the system is on trial. To register, find
the Inspass office - there is one at each terminal - where your palm will be
guided into a measuring box and read by biometric technology, which encodes
your details on to a card.
You will also have to fill in a form, with the familiar questions on
drug-dealing, Nazi or spying activities. But once you are a member of the
scheme, that will be the last US immigration form you have to fill out, and
you can use the card on your next trip.
From then on, all you have to do when you arrive in New York is put your
hand in the box and the card through the reader, and key in your flight and
airline details. The computer issues immigration forms and unlocks the gate
into the baggage hall. This does not spare you from the customs officials,
but does allow you to skip the grilling by immigration personnel.
One regular user, Mr Lynwood Bell, a Canadian merchant banker, welcomes the
speed with which the system lets him into the US. But he has some
reservations: 'It's a clumsy system. For example, it doesn't use a swipe
card - you have to put it in a reader and it clunks through. The hand-reader
is awkward too. You have to manoeuvre your fingers around four small posts.'
He is also concerned about the complexity of the system: 'Every time I've
used it, someone has had to be rescued by the agent telling him which button
to push.'
However, he believes the system is a boon for the regular traveller to the
US: 'In spite of its shortcomings, it's a useful improvement on a slow
process.'
