FT  06 AUG 94 / The British way with murderers: Dominic Lawson considers
examples of English and American justice
This week's topical piece of advice to my readers: if you are going to
commit a murder, do it in Britain, not America - especially not in Texas or
Arkansas. Last week, Winston Silcott, currently serving a life sentence for
the fatal stabbing of Anthony Smith, was awarded Pounds 10,000 by Sir David
Calcutt, QC, the Home Office assessor, in compensation for the time Silcott
had spent in custody prior to his quashed conviction for the murder of
policeman Keith Blakelock.
The fact that Silcott had already been charged with the Smith murder, is,
under English law, deemed irrelevant.
Silcott's main response, in a letter sent to The Independent, was to protest
his guiltlessness for the murder of Anthony Smith. He was acting in
self-defence, he claimed.
Meanwhile, in Huntsville, Texas, on the same day as Winston Silcott's escrow
account was being set up by the Home Office, Robert 'Frenchy' Drew was
executed, by lethal injection, for the murder 11 years ago of a teenager
called Jeffrey Mays.
We read much about this in the British press because an English mother of
three, Judith Tomlinson, had become Drew's penfriend and had travelled to
Texas to plead for a stay of execution.
She believed Drew's protestations of innocence.
All to no avail: at 12.15am on Tuesday, he was injected with a lethal
combination of chemicals. He sobbed, coughed, snorted, and fell silent.
'I love you,' said Tomlinson, on the other side of a perspex screen. But
Drew was dead.
Perhaps it was not surprising that a number of British newspapers appeared
very sympathetic to Tomlinson. But I was surprised by how few, in their
accounts, did other than present the claims for Drew's innocence.
Only one gave space to the full details of the brutal murder of Jeffrey
Mays, for which Drew was convicted. It was said that when police arrested
Drew, at a strip club, he was found with the murder weapon and also had the
victim's watch, wallet and bloodstained shirt.
On the very next day, in Arkansas, three men, Clines, Richley and Holmes
were dispatched, also by lethal injection.
A long article in the Daily Telegraph, entitled 'And so they had to die'
stigmatised this procedure as 'a drastic frontier style of justice'. It
commented: 'The idea of three men being strapped, one after the other to the
same trolley to have their veins filled with poison may strike many as
grotesque.
'The three men, guilty of murdering an Arkansas businessman in a house
robbery that netted Dollars 1,200 in cash, were declared dead by doctors
whose fees for attendance were thus cut by the economies of scale.'
The timing, it seems to me, is not in itself grotesque. The three men had
been found guilty of the same murder. And the Telegraph's man was a little
brief with the details of the murder of the Arkansas businessman.
To be precise, Clines, Richley and Holmes first tortured the businessman's
wife and daughter, and then forced them to watch while they killed, not very
efficiently, the family breadwinner.
I am not arguing that we should reinstate the death penalty in Britain: but
it represents a form of the state's outrage against a terrible act by one of
its number upon another. That outrage is unfairly caricatured if the cause
of it is understated or ignored.
Opponents of the death penalty will argue, reasonably, that if we had the
ultimate sanction in Britain, Winston Silcott would probably have been
executed for the murder of PC Blakelock, for which his conviction was
subsequently found to be unsafe. Silcott's letter-writing to The Independent
would have been cut off in its prime.
A friend of mine once tried to explain the British system of justice to a
visitor from China, where the death penalty is widely enforced. 'We
believe,' said the Englishman, 'that it is better that 99 murderers go free
than one innocent man is hanged'.
The Chinaman paused for some seconds. 'Better for whom?' he asked.
Dominic Lawson is editor of The Spectator.
