FT  05 JAN 94 / Opel airs more VW evidence
Fresh evidence on the events surrounding the controversial defection of
General Motors executives to Volkswagen last March is expected to be aired
in a Frankfurt court today.
The civil hearing represents a renewed attempt by Adam Opel, the US group's
German subsidiary, to have seven former GM employees suspended from their
present jobs at VW on the grounds that Volkswagen used anti-competitive
methods to lure them away.
Opel lawyers are likely to try to support their case with hitherto
confidential information in the files of criminal prosecutors investigating
allegations of theft of documents and industrial espionage against Mr Jose
Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, and three of those who followed him to VW.
Two previous attempts to have the men suspended failed in summary hearings
at which no evidence was heard in public. One bid to win a temporary
injunction early last year was rejected on the grounds that Mr Lopez's
'charisma' had drawn his seven colleagues in his wake. An appeal against
that ruling failed on a technicality last month.
Mr Horst Borghs, an Opel board member, said at the time he expected a
different result after today's hearing.
Although the criminal investigation and today's civil case are formally
separate issues, both revolve around GM's fundamental claims of concerted
attempts to undermine its German business.
Opel also appears intent on pursuing all legal avenues partly to keep the
issues in the public eye until the completion of criminal investigations,
started in Germany last May and in the US during July.
The German probe is bogged down by a meticulous investigation of
computerised data seized last summer in a raid on VW headquarters and the
homes of Mr Lopez and his colleagues.
Opel won the first significant round in the protracted controversy last
April when a court barred VW from any further attempts 'systematically' to
poach GM staff. Opel had sought the temporary injunction on the grounds that
approaches to some 40 staff constituted an attempt to damage its business.
In that case Opel presented affidavits from around 20 senior employees,
mainly in key component purchasing and production departments, who said they
had been approached by Mr Lopez and others. Some were allegedly offered
double their salaries to change sides.
