FT  09 FEB 94 / Swoop for a tempting morsel: GKN's bid for Westland comes as
the helicopter industry undergoes restructuring
Westland's position as an independent company and the UK's only helicopter
manufacturer always looked vulnerable after its controversial rescue eight
years ago. But there is a particular irony in yesterday's Pounds 500m
takeover swoop by GKN of the Yeovil-based helicopter manufacturer.
Westland's financial crisis in 1986, precipitated by an abortive attempt to
develop the W30, a civil version of its Lynx military helicopter, led to a
full-blown cabinet crisis with the resignation of Mr Michael Heseltine, at
the time defence secretary, and the then trade and industry secretary, Mr
Leon Brittan.
The issue was whether Westland should end up under American control or as
part of a new European helicopter consortium led by Aerospatiale of France.
Yesterday the company appeared on the verge of falling into the hands of a
venerable British engineering company, better known for its expertise in the
car components industry.
Westland's initial reaction was to describe the GKN bid as 'unwelcome'. But
while GKN's timing caught it by surprise, it had already been bracing itself
for a takeover approach in the past few months. Ever since United
Technologies (UTC), the US conglomerate and owner of Sikorsky, the world's
biggest helicopter manufacturer, indicated last year it intended to shed its
18.7 per cent equity holding in Westland, the die appeared to be cast for
Westland's independence.
UTC's shareholding dated back to the original Westland rescue package, when
the US company was flanked by Fiat of Italy and Hanson, the industrial
conglomerate, as core shareholders of the UK helicopter group. In 1988, GKN
bought the Fiat and Hanson holdings, giving it a 22 per cent stake in the
company as well as a mutual agreement with UTC to have first rights on each
other's Westland interests.
Armed with UTC's agreement on Monday to sell its 18.7 per cent stake to GKN,
and with a big minority of the shares under its belt, the UK engineering
group launched its full bid. If successful, GKN will secure a more solid UK
base for Westland. The question is whether a takeover by GKN would provide a
long-term solution for Westland and helicopter development in the UK as the
industry consolidates in the US and Europe.
Mr Alan Jones, the Westland chief executive who will take over next month as
chairman from Sir Leslie Fletcher, has restructured the company during the
past four years and placed it on a sounder footing. Although helicopter
deliveries are at a low ebb - the company only delivered four last year -
there are encouraging prospects in the shape of Westland's new EH101 naval
and transport helicopter, developed with Agusta of Italy. It has continued
to make good profits from helicopter spares and overhaul business and is
bidding, in a partnership with McDonnell Douglas, for the UK army's Pounds
2bn requirement for a new attack helicopter.
Westland has also been cutting its cost base sharply, and has shed more than
2,000 jobs in the past six years. In addition, it has expanded in the civil
aerospace business, supplying components and structures for large airframe
programmes. Its Pounds 1.45bn order backlog guarantees it three years of
sales.
But for all this successful restructuring, Westland still faces a problem of
scale in an industry undergoing a profound shake-up. In Europe, Aerospatiale
of France has merged its helicopter business with that of Deutsche Aerospace
to create the Eurocopter joint company, the world's second-largest
helicopter manufacturer. In the US, McDonnell Douglas had considered selling
its helicopter division because it felt the operations would profit more
from forming part of a bigger group, while the company focused on its other
defence activities. McDonnell Douglas has since decided to hold on to its
helicopter business, but has made no secret that it would still consider a
sale if the right opportunity arose.
Although Westland might be too small to compete alone, its restructuring and
EH101 helicopter have made it an attractive target for GKN. Sir David Lees,
GKN chairman, conceded the improved outlook at Westland was an important
reason for his company's move. GKN acquired its original stake in Westland
as a means, eventually, of developing its defence activities. 'We looked
upon our stake in Westland as an option: it was a question whether we would
exercise that option or sell it,' Sir David explained.
Although GKN is the UK's leading supplier of light armoured vehicles, its
defence business occupies a modest position in its industrial portfolio. The
defence division had sales of about Pounds 120m last year, representing
deliveries of Warrior armed vehicles to the Ministry of Defence. This
compared with total group sales of about Pounds 2.5bn.
For GKN there were two stark options. First, it could seek control of
Westland or sell its stake; second, and more significant, it had to choose
whether to increase its overall presence in the defence sector or pull out
altogether. At a time when far-reaching changes are taking place among the
big contractors, all defence companies are facing the hard decision of
whether to persevere in the business or divest.
Sir David said the company had considered both options. Factors swaying the
decision included changes in the defence market following the cold war,
GKN's success in penetrating the Middle East export market last year with
its Warrior vehicle, and progress in Westland's EH101 programme.
Sir David believes the post-coldwar environment has increased demand for
rapid-deployment military equipment, such as armoured vehicles and
helicopters. Although defence spending has been cut, the emphasis is on
mobile battlefield equipment for localised conflicts, peacekeeping and
internal security. 'The threat of more regional conflicts like Bosnia,
Somalia or the Gulf are unfortunately very real. Helicopters and armed
vehicles are very useful products in these military situations,' he said.
Although GKN's contract to supply Warrior vehicles to the MoD ends this
year, an order for an unspecified number of armoured vehicles from Kuwait
will maintain Warrior production until 1997.
Apart from complementing GKN's activities in the specialised niche of
rapid-deployment battlefield equipment, Westland would provide the
engineering group with a hedge if future export sales of armoured vehicles
failed to meet expectations. Simply put, by the time the Kuwaiti contract
runs out in 1997, Westland should be starting the production runs of its new
EH101 helicopter.
Sir David said GKN started thinking seriously about expanding its defence
business last year, when there were signs that UTC was interested in selling
its stake in Westland. The US company is in the throes of its own
restructuring, and is competing against Westland in some product areas,
notably with its proposed S92 large helicopter which would rival the EH101.
Everything suddenly seems to have fallen into GKN's lap: the UTC holding has
now given it a 47 per cent stake in Westland and ultimate, if not perhaps
immediate, control of the helicopter maker; it has boosted the size of its
defence division into a Pounds 500m-sales-a-year operation, making it the
third leg of its core businesses, along with automobile components and
industrial services; it has also insured itself against any future swings in
the defence sector by positioning itself in both the armoured vehicles and
helicopter markets.
Whether this can provide a sound, long-term basis for GKN's expanding
defence interests and for the UK helicopter industry is an open question.
The prospect of the imminent revival of talks between British Aerospace and
the General Electric Company to establish a single, large UK defence group
could have profound repercussions for Westland and its prospective new
owner.
BAe has made no secret of its interest in eventually entering the military
helicopter business - the missing link in its comprehensive defence
aerospace activities. Two years ago, it joined forces with GEC to make an
unsuccessful bid for the EH101 contract from the MOD, but was beaten by
Westland, partnered by IBM. It has now linked up with the Franco-German
Eurocopter group to challenge Westland for the army's new attack helicopter
requirement. The predator is still prowling around Westland.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                      WESTLAND CHRONOLOGY
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1935 Westland Aircraft Ltd formed
1959 Acquires Saunders-Roe Ltd
1960 Acquires helicopter division of Bristol Aircraft Ltd and Fairey
     Aviation Ltd
1986 Westland crisis
1986 Financial reconstruction package approved, with US's Sikorsky
     (division of United Technologies) and Fiat acquiring minority
     shareholdings
1988 GKN acquires 22% holding in Westlake for Pounds 48m
1991 IBM and Westlake win Pounds 1.5bn prime contract for EH101
1994 Westland clinches Pounds 150m order from Brazilian army
1994 GKN buys United Technologies' stake in Westland and launches
     hostile bid for remaining 53%
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
