FT  12 OCT 94 / Business and the Environment: Farming the green fields - A
farmer mixing commerce and conservation
For the past 14 years Cyril Cole has been farming in a more environmentally-
friendly way on his mixed-stock farm, Lower Ash Moor, between Tiverton and
South Molton in Devon. He has dug ponds, planted trees and fenced off hedges
to prevent the cows eating them.
Last year he became involved in more extensive conservation when he took
over 30 acres of Culm grassland to manage under the Countryside Commission's
stewardship scheme.
He keeps this land in a traditional state, applying no fertiliser or lime to
the fields - just cutting the grass in August - where more than 130 species
of plants and wild flowers thrive. The scheme pays him Pounds 28 per acre
which goes towards interest on his bank loan for purchasing some of the
land.
Cole's efforts will be recognised today when the farm is announced as the
winner of the Silver Lapwing award sponsored by Booker Countryside, part of
the agribusiness group.
The award is presented annually to the agricultural holding which has done
most to combine wildlife conservation and landscape improvement with a
commercial farming business.
Cole's holding is in a difficult farming area just on the edge of Exmoor. It
has a high rainfall and short grazing season for his 40 dairy cows, 60
cattle and 70 breeding ewes. However, Cole manages to combine many
traditional skills with running a viable business.
He is currently being paid by the Countryside Commission to restore the high
'Devon bank' hedges that flank the grasslands.
Cole trims bushes on the side of hedges to make room for plants such as
heather, honeysuckle and primroses, and digs a ditch at the bottom of the
hedge to provide a moist habitat for toads, frogs and lizards. He has
surrounded many fields with ditches to create 'corridors' for small animals.
Cole has found so much interest in his conservation efforts that he is
considering setting up a farm trail and providing access for local schools.
