FT  05 SEP 94 / People: Business heart of west Belfast - Mackie
International is to be floated in London. Owner Pat Dougan talks to William
Lewis about his hopes for a post-ceasefire Northern Ireland
Pat Dougan sees himself as a man on a mission - to bring his children home
to Ulster. As owner and chief executive of Mackie International, the
precision engineering firm, the head office of which lies between the
Catholic Falls Road and Protestant Shankill Road, Dougan believes he and his
company are living proof that Belfast's religious divide can be beaten.
By overcoming sectarianism at Mackie - where 380 Catholics and Protestants
are working side by side to build a prospering business - Dougan believes it
may help tempt home his, and other children, to build a new peaceful Ulster.
'My children all left this country and that is a sad situation,' he says.
'They were all educated here and then cleared off.'
'I have a son in California, a son in the south of England, I have a
daughter living in South Africa, a daughter living in the Republic of
Ireland and one at university in Dublin,' he says. 'And mine is probably a
good example of families in Northern Ireland.'
Dougan was persuaded by Richard Needham, his friend and the then Northern
Ireland minister, to come out of retirement and take over Mackie.
Last Friday Mackie announced that it is to be quoted on the UK's Unlisted
Securities Market via a placing, a move which will be followed by a full
listing for the company on the London Stock Exchange. The company, which
specialises in the design, manufacture and installation of textile machinery
for a worldwide market, will be capitalised at around Pounds 20m. Dougan
last week spoke of his excitement at the company's flotation plans and his
personal commitment to the peace process in Northern Ireland.
The share placing follows a sharp recovery in the company's fortunes. In
1991 sales dipped to just Pounds 6.1m and Dougan says bluntly that the
company was 'dying'. However, this year the company is expected to make
pre-tax profits of about Pounds 2m on turnover of around Pounds 19m.
Flotation will enable Mackie to eliminate debts of Pounds 14.3m and help
finance a capital spending programme.
The significance of the flotation announcement is clear from the private
reaction of many of Ulster's business leaders. One said that he 'would pray
for Mackie's success and anything which shows the world' that after the IRA
ceasefire the region has once again become investment friendly.
Dougan agrees that the company's health is crucial to the well being and
future of west Belfast: 'This company could become the flagship of west
Belfast. If we can demonstrate to US and overseas investors that there is a
work ethic here, this will allow us to develop the skills of the community.'
Improvements in training facilities for local people are already under way
with the building of a new university site and training centre close to the
Mackie factory.
For Dougan, success at Mackie is his way of 'doing his bit'. Because of its
location in west Belfast, the company has a significance quite out of
proportion to the size of its business activities.
'The excitement is of this whole thing going forward. If we can create lots
more industry, then the opportunity will be for other families, just the
same as my family, to return to Northern Ireland,' he says. 'I feel I have a
contribution to make and I am trying to make it through this.'
It is certainly not money which keeps the 61-year-old Catholic happily
running a company which has a predominantly Protestant workforce and is
situated in one of the most volatile regions of western Europe. Due to the
success of Powerscreen International, another Northern Ireland company which
was floated and which Dougan chaired until 1990, he now owns about Pounds
2m-worth of property and 140 acres of farmland. His current 66 per cent
share holding in Mackie will fall to just under 21 per cent after flotation.
Dougan insists he will stay on to 'finish the job' at Mackie. 'I am very
excited by the whole prospect, I do not want to miss the success, and I do
not mean in a monetary sense. I want to be here when this thing is a total
success.'
His declared motives are confirmed by a former colleague. 'This man is one
of the old-fashioned good guys,' he says. 'By keeping that company alive, he
has done more than any politician to help end the problems in west Belfast.'
An adviser to Dougan says he is a 'truly dynamic individual who would think
nothing of getting on an aeroplane to Africa to clinch a deal. I find him
exhausting, he never stops'.
Dougan says that 'the World has always been the place I have sold my wares
in'. He sleeps four hours each night and works a 12-hour day, arriving at
the office each morning in time for a 7am start. Such high energy levels
will undoubtedly be needed to persuade City investors to put money into a
company situated in an area which many of them would not even dare visit.
And not without good reason. On Wednesday night, less than a mile from
Mackie's factory in Springfield Road, Republicans welcomed in the IRA's
cease- fire by virtually laying siege to the local RUC police station.
Eventually the crowd dispersed but it was a clear reminder of how tense and
volatile the mood of the local community still is.
Fortunately for Mackie, Dougan's enthusiasm extends to all parts of Northern
Ireland. He makes great play of the 'work ethic' in Ulster, especially among
Protestants, and shrugs off the idea that violence and intimidation have
ever affected him or his business. He claims never to have been threatened,
and says that 'industry has not been really been affected by the troubles'.
However, 'it has to be in the best interests of Northern Ireland to have a
cessation of violence'.
Thirty per cent of Mackie's workforce is Catholic but he says there have
been only a small number of sectarian incidents at the company in recent
years. For this he singles out the trade union movement for praise. 'It
helped keep things calm. The trade unions have worked tirelessly to keep the
peace on the shop floor,' he says.
And if enthusiasm does not do the trick Dougan raises the issue of duty. He
describes Mackie's flotation as 'the first opportunity the City of London
has had, post the cessation of violence, to show its confidence in Ulster'.
As for the politicians in Ulster, he believes they are 'generally an honest
lot but community leaders should be busy building bridges'.
And what if the peace in Ulster does hold? For Dougan the sky is then the
limit. 'We have the potential to do sales three times what we do now,' he
says.
