FT  07 FEB 94 / West divided on air strikes against Serbs: France calls for
urgent Nato meeting to try to force lifting of Sarajevo siege
Western countries were united yesterday in their condemnation of the latest
Sarajevo shelling, in which 68 people were killed. But they were still a
long way from agreeing punitive air strikes against the Bosnian Serbs.
President Bill Clinton called for an emergency meeting to discuss the US
response to the outrage, at which all options including air strikes were to
be considered.
However, Mr William Perry, the new US defence secretary, who flew back to
Washington from Munich at short notice, emphasised that Washington would not
launch air strikes without close consultations with western allies, which
have 28,000 ground troops in Bosnia.
Mr Perry said a longer term view had to be taken on Bosnia. 'If air strikes
are act one of a new melodrama, what is act two? What is act three? What is
the conclusion?
'Any consideration of air strikes has to take into account that there are
28,000 peacekeepers on the ground, lightly armed, and not prepared to fight
a war, surrounded by 200,000 combatants who are armed and are prepared to
fight a war.'
As UN-brokered talks collapsed on a possible truce between the Serbs and
Moslems, Mr Clinton called on the United Nations to identify those
responsible for the shelling on Saturday.
Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, UN secretary-general, who would make the final
decision on air strikes, late last night asked Nato to obtain authorisation
to launch such attacks against artillery positions responsible for attacks
on Sarajevo citizens. Nato has previously authorised only air cover for UN
troops.
Mr Clinton directed Mr Warren Christopher, the secretary of state, to
consult US allies on 'appropriate next steps'.
Mr Christopher said he did not rule out the use of air strikes against those
deemed responsible. UN experts have been unable to determine which of the
warring factions fired the 120mm mortar bomb into Sarajevo marketplace.
Among the European Union countries, whose foreign ministers are due to meet
in Brussels today, Germany and Belgium favoured asking the UN to give the
go-ahead to Nato air strikes. Britain and France called for an urgent Nato
ministerial meeting, which Mr Alain Juppe, the French foreign minister, said
should serve an 'ultimatum' on Bosnia's warring parties to lift the siege of
Sarajevo. Nato officials indicated a meeting would be held tomorrow.
That ultimatum should insist that Bosnian Serb troops were pulled back far
enough 'to make the shelling of Sarajevo materially impossible', said Mr
Juppe.
In addition, it should specify that heavy arms belonging to both Serb and
Moslem forces deployed within 30km of Sarajevo should be gathered under UN
control. Failing this, air power must be used to enforce these decisions.
Mr Douglas Hurd, the British foreign secretary said he remained cautious
about western military intervention. He said action should be taken only if
those on the spot believed it would help the three UN objectives: to stop
the fighting from spreading; to help politicians of all three communities to
negotiate a peace settlement; and to make sure that aid got through.
Bosnian Moslems appeal for help, Page 3
Editorial Comment, Page 17
