FT  13 APR 94 / Political Notebook: Ashdown returns from the shadows
The Liberal Democrats are contemplating a return to the political limelight.
After languishing in the shadows after the fleeting by-election triumphs of
last year, the party is looking forward to a burst of electoral success.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, gripped by depression at the end of 1993, is bubbling with
enthusiasm. The local and European elections and the Eastleigh by-election
offer the best moment since the early 1980s for the third force in British
politics.
In May, the party could win hundreds of additional council seats, taking its
nationwide total to around 5,000 seats - five times as many as it held in
1979.
It should trounce the Conservatives in Eastleigh. The by-election arithmetic
is complicated by a relatively high Labour vote. But the Liberal Democrats
need a swing of only 11.5 per cent against the Conservatives to seize the
constituency. In Christchurch they achieved three times that.
Then there are the European elections. Even the more cautious believe the
Liberal Democrats will win at least three seats in the Strasbourg
parliament. The optimists are thinking in terms of up to a dozen. They see
an opportunity to break out of the south-west and drive the Conservatives
from places such as Dorset, Hampshire and Berkshire.
So the summer will see Mr Ashdown promising once again to break the
two-party mould of British politics - but wondering in private how long it
will take for his party to slip back into the electoral shadows.
Another mid-term electoral triumph - and there are plenty of precedents -
will not answer the doubts that still sap the self-confidence of the
national leadership. The Liberal Democrats have emerged stronger than many
predicted from the ashes of the old SDP-Liberal Alliance. But the party
remains deeply ambivalent as to why it is here.
At grass-roots level, there is a large faction that says it must have no
truck with Labour in seeking to depose the Conservatives. Occasional deals
to run local authorities are not to provide the blueprint for a national
pact. If it takes another 50 years for the Liberal Democrats to replace
Labour as the alternative party of government, so be it.
For the party leadership that is a deeply depressing prospect. Like most
Westminster politicians they want real power. They see the only route as via
a strong performance in the general election followed by an accommodation
with Labour.
The evidence is on their side. For all the occasional by-election triumphs,
the Liberal Democrat vote has declined in direct proportion to the revival
in Labour support.
In the 1983 general election, the then Alliance got 27 per cent of the vote.
In 1987, the Liberals won 23 per cent. In 1982, the remodelled Liberal
Democrats were down to 18 per cent. The mould has not even been cracked.
Dewy-eyed activists insist this time it will be different. The Conservatives
have never been so unpopular, the Liberal Democrats have never been so
deeply entrenched in local government. Labour has still to prove it can be
more than a party of north England and Britain's Celtic fringes.
Mr Ashdown knows otherwise. The polls show that the protesting Tory voters
who have deserted in droves to his party have done so without any great
enthusiasm.
Most have no real idea of what it stands for. Apart from Mr Ashdown's stance
on Bosnia, the electorate is uncertain about his party's policies. A
much-trumpeted emphasis on better state education as the bridge between
individual opportunity and community politics will not fill the gap.
On the economy the party presents an untidy mish-mash of 1980s free-marketry
and traditional Liberal interventionism. It has failed to convince voters
that its flagship policy of electoral reform is rooted in principle rather
than self-interest.
In private moments, senior party figures will admit that only a spell in
government can provide the necessary infusion of pragmatism: and the only
way to get there is through a deal with Labour. None are ready to own up to
such heresy in public. Nor will Mr John Smith acknowledge that the Labour
party might yet prove unable to win on its own.
But leading figures in both parties are keeping open their private channels
of communication. A strong electoral performance by the Liberal Democrats
this summer would strengthen its bargaining position. There are already
influential figures in the shadow cabinet who believe an anti-Tory pact must
remain an option.
It may all come to nought. But Mr Ashdown knows the future for his party
lies not in breaking the mould but in reshaping it.
