FT  24 FEB 94 / Decision due today on MGN bid for Independent
Directors of Newspaper Publishing, owner of The Independent and Independent
on Sunday newspapers, will meet again today to decide whether to recommend
to shareholders the takeover bid by a consortium led by Mirror Group
Newspapers.
An announcement is thought possible today. But Newspaper Publishing's
independent directors would not comment on the outcome of a meeting held
yesterday, other than to repeat their commitment to making a response 'as
soon as practicable'.
The directors added: 'There is a constructive dialogue (with the consortium)
that needs to continue. The discussion we have had has been a useful one.'
The MGN-led consortium raised its bid on Sunday from 261.6p to 350p a share,
in a mixture of cash and MGN shares, valuing the company at Pounds 73.65m.
However, it did not raise the cash alternative of 250p per share.
Other members of the consortium, which already holds more than 47 per cent
of Newspaper Publishing, include El Pas of Spain and La Repubblica of Italy,
and three founders of the newspapers.
Newspaper Publishing's directors held back on Monday from recommending the
consortium's offer until it received more details. But it is thought likely
to recommend it - unless it receives a rival bid from Mr Tony O'Reilly, the
Irish publisher.
Mr O'Reilly's company, Independent Newspapers of Ireland, raised its stake
in Newspaper Publishing from 24.99 per cent to 29.99 per cent on Tuesday -
the maximum possible without triggering a full bid for the company - subject
to approval under competition regulations from the Department of Trade and
Industry.
The Irish company says it is keeping all options open although Mr O'Reilly
has consistently said his aim was to be a significant minority shareholder
who could play a positive role in revitalising the newspapers. Observers
suggest Mr O'Reilly would be deterred from launching a full bid by the high
price he would need to pay to woo the continental European shareholders.
