FT  08 JUL 94 / International Company News: Labatt's sizzle leaves Molson a
little flat : The balance of power between Canada's two brewers is shifting
The two groups which dominate Canada's beer market regularly poll
institutional investors and financial analysts to find out their views on
the companies' performance.
The collective wisdom for several years was that Molson Breweries was
powering ahead, leaving John Labatt drifting rather aimlessly.
However, the balance of opinion has shifted in recent months. Molson's
earnings have been dragged down by the troubled US division of Diversey, its
cleaning-services subsidiary.
Labatt, on the other hand, has gained favour with a flurry of initiatives
which began about two years ago. These range from greater financial
disclosure and aggressive cost-cutting, to a rising share of the domestic
beer market and a sharper focus on brewing and broadcasting, which have
emerged as its two core businesses.
Ms Irene Nattel, analyst at Barclays de Zoete Wedd Canada, echoes the views
of several analysts with her impression that Labatt has more sizzle than
Molson.
The difference was apparent in Labatt's announcement on Wednesday that it
was joining Femsa, Mexico's biggest beverage group, in a North American beer
alliance. Labatt unveiled its plans just 90 minutes before Molson's annual
meeting. In contrast to Labatt's upbeat message, Mr Mickey Cohen, Molson's
chief executive, told shareholders he could not quarrel with their 'somewhat
hesitant' view about Molson's prospects.
Labatt will pay USDollars 510m for a 22 per cent stake of Femsa's brewing
subsidiary, with an option to buy a further 8 per cent over the next three
years. The partnership will include the creation of a jointly-owned company
to distribute premium, high-margin beers in the US.
Labatt has extensive interests outside Canada, where beer consumption is
gradually falling. It has bought almost 600 pubs in the UK and owns Birra
Moretti, which has a 9 per cent share of the Italian beer market. Latrobe, a
US subsidiary, brews Rolling Rock, whose sales volumes climbed by an
impressive 15 per cent in 1992 and 9 per cent last year.
The Canadian company is signing up foreign markets for its pioneering and
popular Labatt Ice beer, which is passed over ice crystals as part of the
brewing process. Labatt Ice's most recent markets include Japan and Denmark,
and it is being launched in the UK by Carlsberg, the Danish brewer.
However, the Femsa deal will take time to digest. Labatt has also halted UK
pub acquisitions while it assesses the fast-changing UK beer market. But it
has not stopped searching for international alliances and acquisitions.
'What we're trying to do is to find opportunities outside Canada which give
us an opportunity to leverage our know-how in the industry and our marketing
know-how.' says Mr George Taylor, Labatt chief executive.
Some analysts link Labatt's new vigour partly to its emergence early last
year as a widely-held company following the disposal of a controlling block
held by the Toronto branch of the Bronfman family.
'Before, it was basically run by Brascan (a holding company of the Toronto
Bronfman family), presumably for Brascan,' says Mr Michael Palmer, analyst
at Equity Research in Toronto. 'Now, these guys are flexing their muscles.'
Mr Taylor retorts that 'we had established what we wanted to do before the
Brascan disposition'. In the year before the divestiture, Labatt sold a
diverse group of food-processing businesses, and laid the groundwork for
spinning off its US and Canadian dairy division.
The latest move, announced last month, is a plan to offer the public a large
slice of its sports and entertainment businesses. These include a 90 per
cent stake in the Toronto Blue Jays baseball team (which has won the World
Series championship for the past two years in a row, but is faring miserably
this season), and BCL Entertainment, a leading live-event promoter whose
clients include the rock groups the Rolling Stones and Pink Floyd.
The Canadian broadcast interests, which Labatt has identified as an area of
high potential growth, consist mainly of cable TV channels, including one
which is all-sports.
However, the company's future will be determined largely by the performance
of the beer division, which accounted for 77 per cent of Labatt's CDollars
2.3bn (USDollars 1.6bn) sales in the year to April 30. Beer contributed
almost 90 per cent of pre-tax profits of CDollars 292m.
The Femsa alliance gives Labatt access to the fast-growing Mexican beer
market, where per capita consumption is much lower than North America, but
is growing by 5 per cent to 7 per cent a year.
Mr Taylor predicts that Femsa Cerveza will be highly profitable, with
operating income rising at double-digit annual rates. He sees the alliance
as a springboard for expansion into other parts of Latin America.
The deal is not without its challenges, however. Femsa Cerveza's market
share has slipped in recent years to about 48 per cent. Its main rival,
Grupo Modelo, has the backing of Anheuser Busch, the largest US brewer.
Ironically, Labatt distributes AB's Budweiser beers in Canada.
Mr Taylor sees the looming battle as a David and Goliath encounter. 'We're
going to be more fleet of foot, and do the types of things that we've
demonstrated we can do in Canada and Italy,' he says.
