FT  01 MAR 94 / Yeltsin sacks head of domestic intelligence: Tit-for-tat
expulsion of US diplomat reminiscent of cold war
President Boris Yeltsin yesterday sacked the head of his domestic
intelligence service, apparently over the bungled attempt to stop the
amnesty of his enemies. He also presided over the first tit-for-tat
expulsion of a US diplomat under his rule.
The dismissal of Mr Nikolai Golushko as head of the domestic
counter-intelligence service, which only in December replaced the security
ministry, is the latest in a series of changes to the domestic remains of
the former KGB. He is likely to be succeeded by his deputy, Mr Sergei
Stepashin, a young former MP seen as something of a liberal.
When the Soviet Union broke up, the KGB was split up into the security
ministry and the external intelligence service. The latter, responsible for
spying on foreign countries, has not been subject to the same upheavals as
its domestic twin.
Yesterday, the External Intelligence Service's successful running of a mole
in the CIA claimed its latest victim: the expulsion of a US diplomat from
the Moscow embassy.
The Russian move, reminiscent of Cold War era tit-for-tat expulsions,
followed the expulsion of a Russian diplomat from Washington after the
arrest of Mr Aldrich Ames, accused of spying for the Soviet Union and then
Russia.
Although no explanation was provided, the domestic intelligence chief's
sacking appears to be linked to a separate domestic scandal over the amnesty
granted by parliament to Mr Yeltsin's bitterest foes.
The men were freed despite instructions from Mr Yeltsin to Mr Golushko, Mr
Victor Yerin, the interior minister, and Mr Alexei Kazannik, the
prosecutor-general, to treat the amnesty as a case of the parliament
exceeding its powers.
Mr Kazannik, who resigned at the weekend, said yesterday he had disagreed
with the objections formulated by Mr Yuri Baturin, the president's national
security adviser, that the parliament had granted a pardon, which it had no
constitutional right to do, rather than an amnesty.
In further fallout from the debacle, Mr Kazannik, a once devoted Yeltsin
supporter who criticised the amnesty and gave up his parliamentary seat for
Mr Yeltsin in the late 1980s, hit back at attacks from the presidential
entourage for alleged haste in freeing the leaders of the October coup.
He said his conscience was clear and criticised 'those who would want to use
the law as a doormat'.
