FT  25 MAY 94 / Superbug horror infects public imagination: Clive Cookson
reports on evidence that helps to allay anxieties about an unusual strain of
bacteria
Mutant flesh-eating superbugs, capable of killing a healthy adult within
hours, are rampaging through Britain.
Or, to put it another way, the media is indulging in one of its periodic
frenzies of terrifying the public with a medical horror story.
The facts feeding the hype are that seven people in the Gloucester area have
suffered from a virulent infection by an unusual strain of Streptococcus A
bacteria this year. The infection causes 'necrotising fasciitis', a
condition similar to gangrene which rapidly destroys tissue.
Three people died, three recovered after surgery and antibiotic treatment,
and the seventh, a 45-year-old woman, is in a critical condition in
Gloucestershire Royal Hospital.
Publicity about the cases, combined with an official alert issued by the
government's Public Health Laboratory Service, has brought reports of at
least six more cases of necrotising fasciitis - three fatal - in other parts
of Britain.
A woman died yesterday at Queen Mary's Hospital, Roehampton, south-west
London; she had apparently been infected while undergoing a Caesarean
section. Mr Terry Bowden, a 39-year-old builder, died earlier this year in
Lewisham Hospital, south-east London, 36 hours after noticing a swelling on
his leg.
But in Stirlingshire Mrs Roseann Millar, a 41-year-old nurse, survived after
emergency surgery to remove a large amount of muscle around her stomach.
Yesterday health officials said fears of a horrifying new epidemic were
misplaced.
Dr Christopher Bartlett, director of the PHLS Communicable Disease
Surveillance Centre, said: 'Public anxiety should be allayed by the fact
that we have examined all indicators of streptococcal infection in the
country and these are demonstrating no change in either numbers or patterns
of infection.'
He added: 'Clusters as reported from Gloucester are unusual but have been
reported elsewhere in the world and may be no more than chance occurrences.
'However, all appropriate microbiological and epidemiological investigations
are being conducted.'
Evidence that the Gloucester cluster is a coincidence, rather than a
spreading infection, comes from genetic investigation of the seven cases.
This shows that they were all caused by slightly different sub-types of
Streptococcus A bacteria.
Scientific tests have not yet shown whether the cases of necrotising
fasciitis in other parts of the country are linked in any way.
Streptococcus A is a widespread germ whose symptoms in today's
industrialised societies are usually no worse than a sore throat. But it can
release toxins which cause a range of far more serious diseases, including
not only gangrene but also pneumonia, toxic shock and rheumatic fever.
Puerperal fever, once Britain's main killer of women after childbirth, was
caused by streptococcus.
Professor Donald Ritchie, an expert on microbial genetics at Liverpool
University, says new strains of streptococcus arise through the action of
'phages' - viruses that infect bacteria and carry genes between them.
Scientists believe that the emergence of antibiotic resistance in bacteria
may be giving virulent strains more scope to evolve. But they say it is
extremely unlikely a new 'super-strep', capable of living up to this week's
newspaper headlines, has suddenly emerged.
