FT  05 NOV 94 / Arts: Connoisseurs come in from the cold - Speculators have
disappeared from the auction rooms as collectors return
The art and antiques trade continues to bump along in a repressed rather
than a depressed state. There is little action, but prices are certainly not
slipping down lower. The biggest quality fair of the year, Olympia in June,
did well, with a record attendance of over 37,500 and estimated sales in
excess of Pounds 21m. Dealers, major buyers at Olympia, are obviously now
optimistic enough to indulge, at last, in some re-stocking.
The first important event of the autumn season, the 20th Century British Art
Fair, was the most successful for four years, with over 1,000 works sold,
and there have been some strong auctions, most notably the country house
sales, where as usual buyers went berserk trying to secure a memento of the
Big House, however banal. Stokesay Court in Shropshire, promoted as a
Victorian time capsule, brought in Pounds 4.2m as against Sotheby's Pounds
2.5m estimate.
Routine sales in London in traditional areas, such as Old Masters, have
proved disappointing, but specialist auctions, such as Judge Bayne-Powell's
collection of miniatures, enjoyed strong collector bidding, with a 1645
miniature by Samuel Cooper selling for Pounds 89,500 as against a Pounds
25,000 top estimate.
It was a keen collector who paid the record price for a Dinky toy at
Christie's South Kensington, Pounds 12,650 for a 1930s delivery van bearing
the name of Bentall's. This is typical: speculators have completely
disappeared and traditional connoisseurs are sniffing the air again.
German art, especially the 20th century Expressionists, has ridden the
recession better than most. Christie's second annual auction in London in
this area brought in Pounds 7.7m and set artist records for Kirchner,
Corinth, Liebermann, and Jawlensky. But almost 30 per cent of the lots were
unsold, underlining the selectivity of buyers.
This weekend the pace picks up with the Kensington Antiques Fair, one of the
best established seasonal events, the draw at Kensington Town Hall while,
for the first time, the foyer of the Royal Festival Hall on South Bank acts
as home to the Contemporary Art Society Market. Every year anyone seriously
interested in contemporary art makes a point of visiting this show where
well-known artists (this year's crop includes Bridget Riley, Maggi Hambling,
Damien Hurst, Rachel Whiteread, and more) offer works priced between Pounds
100 and Pounds 2,000, with the CAS taking 30 per cent of the proceeds to
spend on buying art for galleries. On the first morning 150 items sold for
Pounds 80,000, but the work on the walls is constantly replaced.
Later this month, from November 16-22, the autumn Olympia starts. This fair
has quickly established itself as a popular event, with around 230 dealers,
many from the regions, taking space. Most exhibitors are offering a range of
antiques priced between Pounds 50 and Pounds 5,000, directed towards
Christmas shoppers.
The art market is acting as a faithful reflector of the economy - people are
becoming more prosperous, but are reluctant to spend. Earlier this year,
furniture sales benefited from the bonuses paid by certain City finance
houses, with young executives spending some of their windfalls on choice
Georgian and 19th century items, but 1994 has not been so prosperous in the
City. Until the house market improves substantially, the demand for general
decorative antiques will remain weak.
But at least the message is getting across that antiques make excellent
furnishings, of better craftsmanship than modern examples and likely to
hold, if not increase, in value. Sotheby's, which at one time was preparing
to stop selling low-priced items, is doing very well with its Colonnade
auctions, where few lots sell for more than Pounds 2,000. It brings new
young buyers into the auction rooms, the private buyers who have underpinned
the market in recent years.
Bonham's and Christie's, South Kensington, which specialise in this area,
showed the greatest expansion last season, and Phillips, the largest player
in this field with its network of regional auction rooms, also returned to
growth, with its busiest autumn in prospect for four years.
The problems at Lloyd's have made surprisingly little impact: there have
been fewer forced sales than anticipated, but those Lloyd's Names who
annually invested their bonuses in a painting or a Sheraton desk are notably
absent. Cork Street, home to many of London's leading dealers in modern and
contemporary art, was a traditional hunting ground for the culturally
inclined Names, and they have been much missed there.
But Cork Street has risen to the occasion by marketing itself more
energetically, and on November 26 and 27 there is the third annual Open
Weekend, with 19 galleries, from the mighty Waddingtons to the Atrium
Bookshop, open for business all day Saturday and Sunday, putting on a happy,
welcoming face.
One lesson the art and antiques trade has absorbed is that collectors are
not prepared to spend lavishly at the moment. Leading dealers are
concentrating on decorative works by popular artists, priced very
competitively. Old Bond Street dealer Frost &amp; Reed is preparing for
pre-Christmas buying with a December show offering a selection of works of
art all priced below Pounds 5,000.
Across the road, Agnew's has works by Whistler and Roussel, but prints
rather than paintings. The biggest London dealer, Richard Green, is
currently offering the ever popular Edward Seago while Colnaghi's has
temporarily abandoned Old Masters in favour of watercolours by Wefe Deliss.
Another established name, Hazlitt, Gooden &amp; Fox is showing contemporary
portrait painters, including John Ward and John Sergeant, with an average
price of around Pounds 5,000.
Roy Miles has the leading contemporary Russian artist, Sergei Chepik, who
works in a traditional format, while Marlborough Graphics is offering new
etchings on the theme of nursery rhymes by Paula Rego.
Anyone wanting to see the cutting edge of contemporary art can visit the
Tate, where the short-listed artists for the Turner Prize are currently on
show, but in the main this is a time of retrenchment, of massaging back to
life nervous traditional buyers while hoping that enough of the new rich,
who are surely out there, will catch the collecting bug.
The art world has experienced so many false dawns of a market revival that
it has almost given up hope of a substantial upturn. It might have to settle
for a slowly appreciating trade, built on connoisseurs rather than
speculators, and less inclined to be seduced by a trend. It makes for a less
profitable business but a more firmly based one.
