FT  06 DEC 94 / Leading Article: Can pay, will pay
The insurance companies and pension funds that control the largest block of
shares in British Gas have been among the least vocal of those complaining
about the 75 per cent pay rise granted to the company's chief executive, Mr
Cedric Brown. Is it realistic for the government to look to these
instinctive non-interventionists to exercise a restraining influence over
directors' remuneration?
Realistic or not, it is certainly logical, since institutional shareholders
are the legal owners of a majority of the equity in British industry and
commerce. If runaway pay packages in the boardroom are a symptom of the
divorce between ownership and control in the corporate sector, then some
tightening of ownership discipline would be a legitimate way to address the
licence that prevails in the absence of any objective benchmark or proxy for
market value.
The problem arises because of fundamental conflicts of interest. The
non-executive directors who sit on remuneration committees are usually
executive directors of other companies and have little interest in keeping a
lid on pay. The remuneration consultants who advise them have a greater
interest in pleasing the directors than the ultimate beneficial owners. The
question is how to inject a greater degree of independence into this
over-cosy dialogue.
Greater transparency would certainly help the institutions to exercise more
effective oversight. An obvious starting point would be to ban the practice
of bundling up resolutions at annual general meetings, so that contentious
issues of corporate governance are packaged together with resolutions with
wider shareholder appeal on which shareholders are asked to exercise a
single vote.
Nor is there any reason why directors' pay should be exempted from
individual disclosure. So, too, with other parts of the remuneration
package. While the accountancy bodies appear to have doubts about the
practicability of valuing directors' share options, City practitioners mark
options to market value daily on the basis of widely accepted computerised
models which would be perfectly adequate for annual disclosure purposes. An
equally obvious loophole in the law is the failure to require disclosure of
the large actuarial costs to the company of increasing directors' pay in the
year before retirement.
The usual argument against putting remuneration packages to a shareholder
vote is that incoming senior executives could not be persuaded to take new
jobs if the terms of their contracts were subject to a shareholder veto. Yet
this rests on a misunderstanding of the institutions, which - unlike some
members of the cabinet - are not instinctively hostile to high pay. Still
less are they keen to damage the competitiveness of British industry. To the
extent that incoming executives need additional reassurance, this could be
provided by companies publicising a clear statement of remuneration policy,
with which any new appointment would comply.
The bigger difficulty lies in the institutions themselves, since they, too,
as legal rather than beneficial owners, are subject to conflicts of
interest. Insurance company directors have their own pay packages to think
of, while pension fund trustees are often creatures of the company. Even
with greater transparency, they have no great incentive to deny
international-style pay packages to executives who run companies with
predominantly domestic revenues. In the absence of greater accountability
for the institutions themselves, the incentive to play an active watchdog
role will be weak.
