FT  31 DEC 94 / Fashion: Is glamour glitter - or a graceful line? - War and
Peace (Flesh versus spirit) / The Italian designers Versace and Armani
represent two opposing camps of high style. Each faction has its followers,
explains Brenda Polan
The fashion industry is a community more visual than verbal. So when it
needs to articulate its themes, it has an irritating yen for buzzwords which
mean nothing to outsiders. The current favourite, repeated mantra-like to
the point of mind-washing meaninglessness, is 'drop-dead glamour'.
You probably think you know what it means. It is Joan Crawford looking
dangerous in silver sequins and a soft-focus aura of light. It is Marilyn
Monroe in something very similar singing 'Happy birthday, Mister President'.
It is Claudia Schiffer in a sliver of lame Versace, strategically covered
but in obvious and imminent danger of becoming, with one shrug, uncovered.
Drop-dead glamour, you might think, is distant, unattainable, on a pedestal
 -the refined glamour of Armani as opposed to Versace. But, others may say,
it is drop dead because that's the attitude it demands of the wearer, who
stokes up men's most fevered dreams, seemingly to gratify them, but tells
them to drop dead instead.
Versace is the standard-bearer for one sort of glamour. Armani leads the
opposite faction. It is an old battle. The tension between a richly
decorated, flamboyant, look-at-me style of dress and its modest opposite is
the allegory in cloth for the story of the flesh versus the spirit, power
versus piety, sensuality versus sensibility that has prevailed in most
cultures throughout history.
Cleopatra, Jezebel, Delilah, Mme de Pompadour, Jean Harlow, Christian Dior,
Jane Russell, Lana Turner, Gina Lollobrigida, Marilyn Monroe, Brigitte
Bardot, Claudia Cardinale, Cher, were all Versace girls, glitter queens to a
woman.
In the other camp, refined and Armani-esque, were heroines such as the
dignified Portia, Esther, Julian of Norwich, Catherine of Aragon, Queen
Mary, Mme de Maintenon, Madeleine Vionnet, Coco Chanel, Jean Muir, Rosa
Luxemburg, Wallis Simpson, Diana Vreeland, Greta Garbo, Marlene Dietrich,
Lauren Bacall, Bette Midler, Princess Grace and Jacqueline Onassis.
Although the Versace army (and its uniform) may be in the ascendant, the
style wars continue.
Both sides have their great generals, their hierarchical lines of command,
their cannon-fodder foot-soldiers, their temporary alliances and fifth
columns. Their two field marshals, however, are both Italian and it is their
stated antipathy to each other's styles which has drawn up the battle lines
for the current round in a war as old as human dress.
You could, to be mischievous, sum up the style of Giorgio Armani as one in
which taste is everything and that of his opponent, Gianni Versace, as one
in which taste is of no account whatsoever.
You could define Armani's conception of female sensuality as a thing of
intellect, subtlety, and harmony, the product of a cultivated, civilised
sensibility. Versace would call it a characterless, bloodless celebration of
beige.
You might describe Versace's perception of woman's sexuality as an
uninhibited celebration of the archetypal female principle, the primitive
fertility symbol alive and predatory. Armani would dismiss it as vulgar,
crude, an insulting parody.
The two men have been stars of international fashion for two decades. It was
Armani, now 60, who, along with the knitwear specialists, Missoni, first
pushed Italian ready-to-wear into prominence in the 1970s. Around them grew
up a group of designers, including Versace, who showed their collections in
Milan - a city built on commerce and modernity.
It was Armani who added something new to the modern wardrobe by
deconstructing the masculine jacket. He softened it, relaxed it, and made it
the key item of clothing for women.
The laid-back, so-cool look of the modern executive woman, sleeves pushed
up, hands in pockets, was invented by Armani. He rightly demurs when you
call him a minimalist but his approach is certainly about rationalising,
paring down, permitting beautiful fabric cut in simple shapes to speak for
itself.
There is no anxiety to impress in Armani's style; there is, instead, a quiet
assumption of being perfectly, appropriately dressed. It is a style favoured
by the Duchess of Kent and her daughter, Lady Helen Taylor, by Michelle
Pfeiffer, Julia Roberts, Anjelica Huston.
The career of Versace, more than a decade younger, was launched on the back
of this new sophisticatedly understated Italian style. His own instincts,
however, tend more towards bravura overstatement. He may once have produced
those early-1980s Italian easy tweeds but he teamed them with slick, glossy,
body-hugging leather and, as he grew in stature and confidence, the tweeds
and the easy gave way to the leather, the satin and the lame, the
body-hugging and figure-flaunting.
Versace's favourite story, told with a sweetly innocent sincerity as if he
himself does not realise the implications of what he is saying, is about
how, when accompanying his mama to church in his home-town of Reggio
Calabria, they would pass the local brothel. Despite maternal injunctions to
cover his eyes, he would peek. He found the prostitutes beautiful. The
experience made him want to make all women beautiful.
From Armani you get no such charming autobiographical clues. He may reveal
that, destined for a career in medicine, he grew faint at the sight of blood
and so sought alternative employment but, when he talks about his work, he
resorts to the cerebral explanation rather than the anecdotal.
'Self-restraint, unaffectedness and a need for refinement are part of both
my lifestyle and the Armani style,' he says. Vulgarity in life and in
fashion offends me. An over-emphasis on decoration has no place either in my
personal style or as creative inspiration.'
Armani is ascetic in appearance, sober of demeanour, a watchful-eyed,
intimidating presence. He was once renowned for his irascibilty, his
impatience, his reluctance to be diverted from his work. He is still a
workaholic but, he confesses, he laughs more nowadays. He may not be as
bad-tempered as he once was but he is more outspoken. In the field marshals'
propaganda war, his arguments are more cogent, more politically correct and
more likely to win hearts and minds.
He flatters the foot-soldiers. 'In the past 20 years women have learned to
be people not objects. They judge themselves. Nowadays a woman chooses
clothes without mindlessly following fashion. She filters suggestions,
adapts them to her own personality. She does not need disguises.'
He savages the enemy. Interviewed last year in L'Espresso, Armani
passionately criticised the unnamed but easily identified designers who, he
insisted, are turning fashion into a 'porno show', whose collections present
'the image of woman as a receptacle for men, the incarnation of low-level
sexual fantasies, the nightclub where striptease is for provincial wolves'.
It is, of course, no accident that his disdainful use of the adjective
'provincial' is elitist. He has said: 'I believe that good taste and class
are innate.' They may not be innate, but they are linked.
Taste, to paraphrase brutally the French sociologist, Pierre Bourdieu, is a
device invented by the rich and unproductive to identify and exclude the
upwardly mobile conspicuous consumer and fashion victim. Bad taste is
described as vulgar. Vulgar, of course, is an adjective which originally
merely meant of the masses, the common people.
I recently asked an old acquaintance who works the street markets what
commodity had replaced, in the hearts of free-spending young women, the
knock-off Chanel, chain-hung, quilted-leather handbag now that the market
was saturated. The answer was the medallion-tinkling Versace drawstring bag.
That, he said, was the ultimate object of desire among fashion-hungry
checkout girls, receptionists and secretaries.
Versace is the designer by appointment to the rock star and 'loadsamoney'
sets. Joan Collins, Elton John, Trudi Styler, Madonna, Ivana Trump, Bruce
Springsteen, Prince, David Bowie, Elizabeth Taylor and, of course, Elizabeth
Hurley all wear Versace. The clothes for both men and women are about
raunchy, up-front, cleavage-popping, pelvis-grinding sex.
According to Versace - a charming, diffident (though not as shy as he once
was) man - these clothes 'liberate women'. To choose to wear Versace, he
says, is to prove you are modern, free-thinking, fearless, uncowed by
convention.
The designer says: 'I don't believe in good taste. I don't believe in bad
taste. I believe in quality and fun, in things that make our lives happier.'
Beyond tight and revealing, the Versace style is also highly decorated. A
southern Italian, he absorbed his Greco-Roman aesthetic heritage with his
mother's milk. He was later to become enraptured by the Renaissance's
elaborations on it. His prints, the scarves and scarf-print shirts, and
porcelain collections are lushly coloured homages to archaeology and art
history. They are so beautiful that taste does not enter into the equation.
There is also the matter of skill. Lisa Armstrong of Vogue has argued that
it may be sleazy but at least he does it superlatively. And, she adds, his
simple clothes, the little black dress, the tailored cashmere jacket, are
more flattering than anyone else's. But in the style wars, that does not
count much.
Fashion plays fortune's favourites so, throughout history, a personality, an
idea (be it Christianity, capitalism, female emancipation or rock rhythm) or
a universal mood swing has been able to shift style its way. But its
opposite has always been there, its inseparable, warring twin, without which
there is no tension, no internal critique and no fun-in-disapproval.
Brenda Polan is fashion director of You Magazine, The Mail on Sunday.
