FT  28 APR 94 / Guns dispute may delay tunnel further
Full passenger services on the Channel tunnel could face further delays
because of a continuing dispute between Britain and France over armed
police.
Home Office and French Ministry of the Interior officials have failed to
reach agreement over whether French police will be allowed to carry their
guns without restrictions throughout the tunnel link.
The cross-border powers of British and French police are part of a long
protocol agreement initialled by the governments at Sangatte in November
1991. Technically, it became legal last year.
The protocol gives extra-territorial powers of investigation, search and
arrest to police officers of both sides in 'control' zones at the
international terminals in London and Paris and in the shuttle terminals at
Cheriton and Coquelles.
The British agreed that French police may carry weapons when stationed at
the fixed control zones at Cheriton. But they are resisting demands that
these powers be extended to officers moving between tourist and freight
terminals at Cheriton, as well as on the passenger through-trains arriving
and departing at Waterloo.
Under a draft operational plan drawn up by Home Office officials, French
police officers would deposit their guns in containers and travel unarmed
with their UK counterparts.
British officials fear the unrestricted movement of armed French police
could lead to situations in which weapons are used, with potential for
complex legal wrangles.
British police sources say there is also concern that to give way would fuel
demands by some members of the British police that they too be permanently
armed.
The French argue that because of tradition and training their police should
be allowed to be armed. The British plan is seen as against the spirit of
the protocol.
An aide to Mr Charles Pasqua, the French interior minister, yesterday played
down British reservations about accepting armed French police controlling
trains on UK soil as 'essentially a cultural problem', David Buchan in Paris
writes.
But he was sure the police forces of both countries would find 'a practical
solution'. He noted that Mr Michael Howard, home secretary, had not raised
the issue when he met Mr Pasqua in Paris last month.
