FT  12 MAR 94 / Call sign: India Romeo Alpha: Why London's main airport can
never be terrorist-proof
While the authorities at London's Heathrow Airport, together with the police
and the army, yesterday discussed ways of increasing security in the wake of
a second IRA mortar attack, there was acceptance that there were limits to
how much could be done to protect the public in such a large,
frequently-used and exposed area.
BAA, which owns Heathrow, said the police presence at the airport would be
stepped up. But it added: 'There is always going to be a balance between
allowing the airport to run and offering the highest possible security.'
Heathrow covers 2,958 acres. Its perimeter road is 9.5 miles long. More than
42m passengers pass through the airport every year and it has a workforce of
55,000 people. There are more than 20 hotels in the immediate vicinity, not
to mention Underground stations and many acres of car parks.
One civil aviation expert, speaking last night, said: 'To ensure 24-hour
protection against a mortar being mounted and fired somewhere within this
area within minutes is virtually impossible and impractical.'
In Northern Ireland, Belfast's City airport has managed to ensure a high
level of security, making it one of the few areas of the city relatively
well-protected from terrorist attack.
Tight security measures - involving permanent road blocks manned by armed
police backed by armed patrols - have been operational at the airport for
years. Its small size, however, makes such security measures more practical
than they would be at Heathrow - which is one of the busiest airports in the
world. Belfast's City airport, in comparison, handles only 842,000
passengers a year and employs just 250 staff.
Major John Wyatt, an anti-terrorist expert, said yesterday that areas at
Heathrow vulnerable to mortar attack could be identified using computer
calculations of potential trajectories. How-ever, he conceded that even this
system, used by some defence companies, was no guarantee against terrorist
attack.
Heathrow says that it has increased security substantially in recent years.
Spending on security is Pounds 54.4m a year, and involves a total of 1,400
staff.
In 1990 new legislation gave the transport secretary powers to detain
aircraft and close airports and freight operations if a serious security
lapse occurred.
In Spain, another European Union country facing a terrorist campaign, only
armed police have responsibility for security in airports. In Heathrow,
since BAA was privatised, security companies have been put in charge within
the airport, although armed police offer a back-up deterrent force.
