FT  31 AUG 94 / Reynolds declares Ulster is poised for peace
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, declared last night that
Northern Ireland was 'poised for peace' as the province prepared for an IRA
ceasefire that might signal the end of its 25-year campaign against the
presence of British troops.
With expectations mounting of an imminent - and possibly historic - IRA
announcement, Mr Reynolds said people would be able to make 'an entirely new
beginning on this island' in 'a very short time'.
'A complete cessation of violence' - as demanded by the British and Irish
governments - 'and the principles of the Downing Street declaration are our
new starting point', Mr Reynolds said after a meeting of the Irish cabinet.
He later had his second telephone conversation in just over 24 hours with Mr
John Major, the UK prime minister. Downing Street said it was 'a matter of
keeping in touch'.
Mr Reynolds's comments came as the British government moved to counter
Unionist suspicions that it had offered secret concessions to republican
leaders to secure a ceasefire. Downing Street said no concessions had been
made to anyone.
In the US White House officials were said to be 'at fever pitch' over the
improving prospects of peace. The Clinton administration is understood to be
preparing to offer a large increase in financial aid to Ulster.
The US already gives Dollars 20m (Pounds 12.9m) a year to the International
Fund for Ireland, which is jointly administered by the UK and the Irish
Republic.
A permanent cessation of IRA violence would open the way for exploratory
talks between Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing, and the British
government within three months. The talks would explore the basis for Sinn
Fein's admittance into talks on the province's future and examine the
practical consequences of the ending of violence.
Mr John Hume, leader of the mainly Roman Catholic Social Democratic and
Labour party, last night called for talks with Sinn Fein to begin 'a lot
sooner than three months'.
Yesterday's developments followed the first public acknowledgement by Mr
Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein president, that he had advised IRA leaders to
consider halting their armed campaign.
Later on Irish television he urged unionists to set aside their suspicions
in the interests of peace. He said: 'If we are prepared to say let's put the
last 25 years behind us . . . surely the unionists have within their ranks
men and women of courage prepared to take the same risks as some of us have
taken.'
Senior Ulster Unionists appeared last night to have accepted London's
assurances , with Mr James Molyneaux, the UUP leader, expressing confidence
the government had no plans to change Ulster's constitutional position.
But the Rev Ian Paisley, leader of the hardline Democratic Unionist party,
warned angrily that a ceasefire achieved through the surrender of the
British government could be 'a recipe for civil war'. Both men to meet Mr
Major within the next few days.
Early indications suggested loyalist paramilitaries were determined to
continue their armed campaign.
A huge 550 lb booby-trap bomb was defused by security forces in Co Tyrone
last night. Another bomb exploded at the Fort Whiterock Army base in the
republican Turf Lodge area of Belfast. No injuries were reported.
Ceasefire will bring political challenges, Page 8
