FT  31 MAR 94 / Arms For Iraq - The Scott Inquiry: The probe's progress
November 9 1992 Government faces demands for inquiry into arms-for-Iraq
policy after Matrix Churchill trial collapses.
November 11 John Major announces the setting up of an independent judicial
inquiry. 'There have been some extraordinary stories about this matter . . .
they must be clarified beyond any measure of doubt.'
March 31 1993 Lord Justice Scott says he will hear evidence in public unless
there is an 'overriding national-interest reason' not to.
May 4 Public Hearings Day One: The first witness, Mr Richard Luce, Foreign
Office minister 1983-85, tells the judge: 'I do not think there is anything
very sinister in all this.' The judge asks senior Foreign Office official Mr
Stephen Day: 'Would you not say that the British public and parliament were
entitled to know about these important matters?'
May 11 Ministry of Defence official Lt-Col Richard Glazebrook says Whitehall
ignored his warnings about Iraq's military build-up: 'I realised this was a
can of worms and that there really was a lot happening.'
May 12-15 Anonymous MI5 and MI6 officials give evidence in secret. 'The
public interest in an open hearing is outweighed by the public interest in
protecting from disclosure in public the information,' the judge says.
May 17 Miss Presiley Baxendale QC, counsel to the inquiry, tells Sir Adam
Butler, defence minister between 1984-85: 'Papers we have seen show there
was government knowledge that Jordan was being used as a diversionary route
for military equipment to Iraq.' In 1985 the government signed a Pounds 270m
defence package with Jordan.
May 28 Sir Patrick Mayhew, former attorney-general, denies attempting to
suppress evidence in the Supergun affair as earlier alleged by former Tory
MP Sir Hal Miller.
June 11 Inquiry hears how IMS, a government-owned defence company, equipped
an Iraqi military complex which could have been used for testing missiles.
Mr Norman Lamont, when defence minister in February 1986, tells then foreign
minister Mr Timothy Renton: 'IMS work cannot be interpreted as a real
enhancement of Iraqi war effort.'
June 28 Mr William Patey, Foreign Office official, says advice by civil
servants to ministers on the export of machine tools was 'deficient - the
advice could have been clearer . . . It could have been better put'.
July 15 Mr Mark Higson, Foreign Office official, says that ministers misled
parliament about the government's policy on arms-for-Iraq. 'It wasn't
telling the truth . . . I can't say I always liked it. It was a sham and a
contributory reason as to why I left the Foreign Office.'
July 30 In his first interview, Lord Justice Scott tells the FT - against a
background of a Whitehall whispering campaign against him - 'If you are
going to have an inquiry, you had better have a thorough one and put up with
the price that has to be paid for that thoroughness.'
September 13 Mr David Gore-Booth, Britain's ambassador to Saudi Arabia,
says: 'Intelligence is an imprecise art', and adds that half an answer to
parliament can be truthful. 'The extent to which a parliamentary answer
should be full, half full or empty is very much up to the minister.'
September 20 Mr Tim Renton, former Foreign Office minister, says the
government approved the export of potentially lethal chemical products to
Egypt in spite of intelligence that Egypt was a diversionary route for Iraq.
September 22 Mr William Waldegrave, former Foreign Office minister, tells
the inquiry: 'I don't remember thinking for a moment we had a frightfully
secretive policy of changing the guidelines. It would have been suicidal if
we had.'
October 12 Mr Waldegrave retracts his statement that 'no dual-use exports to
Iraq were allowed if it was believed they were to be used to produce
weapons.'
December 8 Baroness Thatcher says that as prime minister she had no
knowledge of much of the detail behind the decisions taken by officials and
ministers. She tells the judge to look carefully at intelligence failings:
'Either the machinery was there and was not effective . . . or else the
machinery itself was defective.'
December 17 Mr Eric Beston, a DTI official, admits he misled the jury in the
Matrix Churchill trial.
January 12 1994 Lord Howe lashes out at the conduct of the inquiry, saying
that Lord Justice Scott is acting as 'detective, inquisitor, advocate, and
judge'.
January 26 Senior DTI official Mr Michael Petter talks of his department's
pressure on Customs and Excise over the Matrix Churchill affair. He says: 'I
don't think I appreciated as I ought to have done the constitutional point
about the independence of Customs.'
February 3 Mr Anthony Steadman, a senior official at the Department of Trade
and Industry, says he wrote inaccurate draft witness statements before the
Matrix Churchill trial under advice from government lawyers.
February 9 Sir Robin Butler, head of the civil service, accuses the media of
making wild allegations and prejudging the issues. The judge tells him:
'Think critically about the established practices and convention of
Whitehall.'
February 10 Sir Robin concedes that the prosecution against the Matrix
Churchill three went ahead even though an important argument in their
defence had been accepted by senior officials at Whitehall.
February 17 The government took a 'generous view' as to what documents
should be suppressed in a criminal trial, government lawyer Mr Andrew
Liethead tells inquiry.
February 28 Mr Michael Heseltine says attorney-general Sir Nicholas Lyell
gave him contradictory advice on PII certificates.
March 2 Mr Gerald Hosker QC, Whitehall's most senior lawyer, backs reform of
PII system and questions whether Matrix Churchill trial should have taken
place.
