FT  03 JUN 94 / Blair scorns talk of uncontested anointment
Mr Tony Blair yesterday moved to defuse shadow cabinet tension over the
Labour leadership by rejecting any suggestion that other candidates should
drop out of the race to succeed John Smith.
Those potential contenders reserved their position until after the June 9
European elections. However, last night Mr John Prescott, shadow employment
secretary, said he thought there should be a contest. Speaking on BBC
television he said an election was 'an essential part of the democratic
process'.
It is understood that Mr Blair, who last night combined a blistering attack
on the record of the Conservative government with a strong re-affirmation of
his own political philosophy, would welcome such a move. Mr Blair's
supporters believe he is now assured of the leadership  - but the shadow
home secretary thinks a contest would bring benefit for the party and his
own position.
Friends insisted the decision by Mr Gordon Brown, shadow chancellor, to
stand aside from the race had not been calculated by the two political
allies to lead to Mr Blair's 'anointment' as leader. Instead Mr Blair was
keen that one or more of the other contenders should stand to ensure the
widest possible debate about the direction of the party.
A contest would allow Mr Blair to spell out in detail the central policy
platforms on which he would like Labour to fight the next general election
and would allow him to establish a clearer identity with the electorate.
Mr Blair's assurance came as leading figures on the left of the party
reacted angrily to suggestions from some union leaders that there was no
point in a formal contest. They insisted that, if the main contenders
dropped out, a backbencher - probably Mr Ken Livingstone, MP for Brent East
 -would win enough support to force at least a token contest.
Friends of Mr Prescott and Mr Cook said the two men were annoyed by the
timing of Mr Brown's announcement. There was also irritation at suggestions
that the shadow chancellor had been offered overall control of Labour's
economic and social policy. Mr Blair, however, made clear that other shadow
cabinet members would not be frozen out of policy debate in those areas.
Mr Blair used a speech on the campaign trail in Eastleigh, Hampshire, to
attack the Conservatives for 15 years of failure. He said the Britain
created by the Tories was one 'weakened by recession, corroded by crime,
scarred by urban squalor'. He added: 'The evidence of social disintegration
lies all around us.' He said Labour had become the party of government in
many southern councils and made clear that he aimed to widen the party's
appeal beyond the north and its inner-city strongholds.
While appealing to the political centre with his claim that Labour was the
party of 'one nation', he also underlined Labour's commitment to its
principles and the values of the public sector. He said privatisation of the
railways would enable only a few to make a profit at the expense of many.
Mr Blair significantly declined to mention the Liberal Democrats, who are
widely expected to win the Eastleigh by-election next week.
