FT  03 DEC 94 / FT Christmas Books: From Nietzsche to Fred Ott - This year,
children's non-fiction books really tested the ingenuity of publishers
This Christmas you can furnish your child with a pyramid, a dinosaur and a
glimpse inside a mummy case and all without venturing on to the information
superhighway.
This is the result of publishers' ingenuity in tackling the brave new word
of computer graphics and virtual reality in an attempt to make children's
non-fiction more interesting.
Start with The Secrets of Sculpture (Kingfisher, Pounds 12.99), a collection
of facts, figures, pictures and graphics, ringbound and printed on glossy
laminated paper, exploring sculpture in all its forms from the
24,000-year-old ivory head found in France to Jean Tinguely's contemporary
mechanised sculptures made from junk.
The exuberance of this book - it pulls out, folds up and can be torn apart -
will go a long way to persuade children that books are just as much fun as
computers.
Additional sweeteners include an index - a rare commodity in children's
hooks - a few organic odds and ends attached to the pages and a folder of
stickers at the back. Highly recommended for all ages.
In the same series, Kingfisher also does The Living Forests and From the Big
Bang to Electricity.
Interactive seems to be the festive season's buzzword. Dorling Kindersley's
Action Pack Pyramid (Pounds 12.99) takes the idea even further.
This is a book in a box which includes a model pyramid you can make, a
poster of Ancient Egypt, the Great Tomb Robbery board game, a hieroglyph
decoder and a gruesome mummified corpse.
This series also includes Night Sky and Dinosaur, which comes with a
press-out scale model of a pleasant-looking stegosaurus.
Dorling Kindersley's Incredible Cross Sections series continues with Castle
(Pounds 12.99) by Richard Platt and Stephen Biesty, a detailed look at the
inside of a 14th century fortress.
Biesty's illustrations are teeming with medieval life - old ladies
quarrelling over bags of grain, a young nobleman being knighted, someone
being tortured, a chilly looking guard who has lost all his clothes in a
game of dice - and are accompanied by plenty of facts and figures (did you
know that owners of battlemented houses had to have a licence to
crenellate?) and a 'Where's Wally'-like competition to find an enemy spy.
Maintaining a dignified reserve when it comes to fold-ups and pull-outs,
Oxford expands its children's reference series this winter with the
Children's Book of Famous People (Pounds 20).
If your child is old enough to read this book, he would probably prefer to
be given Pounds 20 worth of Power Rangers. But for parents this will be your
offspring's ideal Christmas present - a thick book full of school-quiz
answers.
Interesting snippets of information about the likes of Charlemagne, WG
Grace, stout Cortes, Nietzsche and Isaac Newton (even some women creep in:
Martha Graham, dance queen; Madonna and, rather bizarrely, Margaret Mahy,
the New Zealand writer). The whole thing is beautifully produced and stuffed
with colour illustrations.
If you have spawned an embryonic film buff, search out Robin Cross's Movie
Magic (Simon &amp; Schuster, Pounds 10.99), a fast-talking, richly illustrated
guide to everything to do with movies.
Starting with the first film ever made, the explosive Fred Ott's Sneeze, in
which Thomas Edison filmed one of his assistants harrumphing into his
hankie, Cross tracks across movie history up to the 1990s, when movie moguls
make their money out of post-production spin-offs.
What today's marketing men would have made of Fred Ott's legendary sneeze is
too horrible to contemplate.
