FT  09 DEC 94 / UK Company News: Greycoat makes Pounds 3.5m and focuses on
offices
Greycoat, the property developer which raised Pounds 47m from a rights issue
in June, has returned to the black with interim pre-tax profits of Pounds
3.5m, against a Pounds 43.5m loss previously.
The company, which was rescued from the brink of collapse a year ago and has
since restructured its board of directors, also said that it planned to
concentrate on developing offices in central London.
Mr Peter Thornton, managing director, said office buildings were likely to
outperform retail or industrial premises in a relatively low growth, low
inflation environment.
In central London, demand for modern space far outstripped potential supply,
the company said. It expects its investment to deliver an annual total
return of about 11 per cent until the end of the decade.
Greycoat has an interest in three large central London development sites:
Paternoster Square, next to St Paul's Cathedral, where planning permission
has been granted for 750,000 sq ft of offices. The company is attempting to
arrange funding with institutional investors for the Pounds 375m development
and hopes to start work by the middle of next year.
Moor House in the City, which will not be considered for redevelopment until
1997, when break clauses in existing leases come into effect.
Victoria Interchange, adjacent to Victoria Station, where Greycoat will next
year submit a planning application for 275,000 sq ft of offices. However,
rents have to rise significantly before development is worthwhile.
Mr Thornton said Greycoat was in talks which could lead to the acquisition
of an interest in two or three additional development sites.
In the six months to September 30, gross rental income fell from Pounds
20.1m to Pounds 16.7m, although last year's figure included Pounds 4.9m rent
from Britannic House in the City, which has since been sold.
Included in this year's figure is Pounds 2.1m rental income from 123/151
Buckingham Palace Road, where Greycoat took full control in August. In a
full year, rental income from the building should be Pounds 13.3m.
Administrative costs were unchanged at Pounds 1.7m. Last year's interim loss
included Pounds 5.7m expenses relating to the rescue package.
Mr Michael Beckett, who took over as non-executive chairman in September,
said the company was committed to keeping administration costs steady in
real terms.
Profits from the sale of two investment properties in London and Newcastle
contributed Pounds 2.8m, against a loss on disposal of Pounds 25.2m in the
first half last year. Finance costs fell to Pounds 12m (Pounds 21.2m).
Earnings were 3p, against a loss of 228.7p, adjusted for the rights issue.
The company is not paying an interim dividend, but expects to declare a
final dividend of 0.6p.
