FT  03 DEC 94 / Government 'set to reduce road building'
The government is expected shortly to announce a significant scaling down of
its road building programme and an end to the construction of motorways with
more than eight lanes, the British Road Federation said yesterday.
Plans to widen some motorways to up to 14 lanes by the construction of roads
running alongside the main carriageway are expected to be dropped, said the
federation, which represents business road users and private motorists.
This reversal would be the result of cuts in the Department of Transport's
roads budget announced by Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, in the Budget
on Tuesday. Roads spending was cut by Pounds 200m over each of the next two
years.
It would also reflect the growing environmental pressures which led to the
government scrapping nearly a third of the road building programme last
March.
Further cuts in the roads programme would help establish the 'green'
credentials of Mr Brian Mawhinney, the transport secretary.
The Department of Transport said last night it could not comment on the
federation's claims. It added: 'The secretary of state has asked for
information on a number of schemes but no decisions have been taken on any
changes.'
Road widening schemes which would be dropped if the department does limit
motorways to eight lanes would include three of the most controversial
proposals, the federation said. They are the south-west quadrant of the M25,
which has provoked fierce opposition from local Conservative MPs as well as
from environmental groups, the M4 west of London, and the M62 north-west of
Manchester.
The federation said: 'These schemes were not introduced in response to
pressure from business and industry. They have attracted huge opposition and
are likely to be dropped.'
Proposals to widen the M42 around Birmingham from six lanes to 10 also
appear likely to be cut to eight lanes. This emerged from new traffic
evidence submitted by the Department of Transport to a public inquiry under
way into the Birmingham Northern Relief Road.
Eight new motorway schemes which are at an advanced stage will probably
still go ahead, as will three proposals to widen dual carriageways to
motorway standard, the federation said.
The new motorway schemes are the M66 Denton to Middleton, the M65 Blackburn
southern by-pass, and the approach roads to the second Severn Bridge, all of
which are under construction. Two privately financed projects, the A1-M1
link in the north and the Birmingham Northern Relief Road, are also expected
to be continued, as are three roads now in the planning process: the
Birmingham Western Orbital, the Stockport by-pass and the A556(M).
The dual carriageway widening schemes which are expected to be continued are
the A1 between London and Newcastle upon Tyne, the A14 between Cambridge and
Peterborough and the A74 from the M6 to the Scottish border.
