FT  28 SEP 94 / Business and the Environment: If you go down to the woods
today - Deborah Hargreaves visits Eskdalemuir forest, where wildlife thrives
alongside a valuable timber resource
Ronnie Rose stands in a forest glade pointing to the bank where roe deer can
slip down under cover of willow trees to drink at the stream. As senior
wildlife manager at Eskdalemuir forest in Scotland, Rose has designed the
woodland planting to provide clearings where deer can gather and feed.
But Rose's efforts to provide a suitable habitat for the deer are not
motivated purely by conservation. 'I am here to make sure this investment
reaches the marketplace in the best condition possible,' he says.
Around 60 per cent of Britain's forests are privately-owned as a long-term
investment for individuals and pension funds. Conifers take at least 30
years to mature and if the trees are damaged by animals before felling,
their market value can be cut by up to a third.
Eskdalemuir is Britain's largest privately-owned forest covering 11,000
hectares. Rose and his team of 10 wildlife specialists pursue a policy of
active conservation to control animal numbers on behalf of 45 separate
owners.
Commercial forests planted in the past 30 years tend to be dominated by the
sitka spruce, a species of North American conifer which adapts well to the
UK climate, grows fast and straight and is much in demand from industrial
timber users.
But as Len Yull, marketing director at Tilhill Economic Forestry, part of
the Booker agribusiness group, which manages the Eskdalemuir forest,
explains: 'When we introduced these North American trees we did not bring
the wildlife with them, so we have to build routes for British birds and
animals into the American forest.'
The routes involve planting deciduous trees such as oak, alder, hazel and
willow in clumps to attract native birds and animals. Biodiversity not only
looks better, but also helps to protect the trees. Short-eared owls, for
example, prey on voles, which strip the bark from young trunks.
Where there are few natural predators, Rose must take their place. He has to
shoot up to 1,000 deer each year out of a population of 3,000 to keep
numbers down and prevent damage. By designing meadows and open spaces within
the conifer plantations, he can monitor the deer numbers and cull the old,
sick or wounded. Rose says that he also has to play 'referee' for three
species which, if left alone would destroy many animals that benefit the
forest. For this reason he kills mink, foxes and carrion crows which eat the
eggs of the ground-nesting, short-eared owls.
In order to monitor animal populations, Rose must be aware of their habits
and movements. For example, sika deer which strip the bark from trees only
move into a forest when the trees are 15 years old.
Rose has created meadows in the forest to help bring the sika deer into the
open. 'To manage the deer population, you have to see them,' he explains.
The trade-off is a 7 per cent loss of space for conifer planting, but it
helps ensure that the trees survive until maturity. It means 'your
investment gets to market in year 30'.
Red deer must be watched when the trees are mature because they can damage
the timber just days before it is chopped down, while roe deer prefer eating
trees younger than two years.
In spite of the damage that some animals can do, Rose resists the idea of a
'dead' forest where trees are planted so tightly that there is little room
for other vegetation or animals - the type of forestry sharply criticised by
environmentalists. He has also established ponds and lakes that act as fire
barriers, and which support fish, dragonflies and other insects as well as
reeds and wild flowers. The tops of the mountains, unsuitable for planting
trees, are kept as grouse moors.
Eskdale is a showpiece forest for Tilhill, which manages 12 per cent of
Britain's private woodlands. 'It is a unique forest because it is on a scale
to allow for this sort of wildlife management,' said Martin Wilkinson,
forestry operations director.
'It really brings the benefits of crop protection, good land use and
wildlife diversity at a pretty modest cost,' Wilkinson says. He reckons that
the extra cost of Rose's active conservation policy is not more than Pounds
5 per hectare and often Pounds 2 to Pounds 3 out of an annual running cost
of up to Pounds 30 per hectare.
Britain's forestry industry has been criticised by many environmental groups
for its lack of sensitivity to wildlife and the landscape. But Wilkinson
says the days of planting unbroken ranks of conifers across miles of
hillside are gone - new forests must meet a stringent set of environmental
guidelines to qualify for grants. Today, conifer forests generally include
20 per cent of open space, 10 per cent broad-leaved trees along streams and
boundaries, with 10 per cent of conifers other than sitka spruce.
Wilkinson says: 'Fifteen years ago we were encouraged to make maximum
productive use of the land, but today people want more visual diversity.'
The government still has plans to encourage more forestry planting in the UK
where production meets only 12 per cent of current need. It has just
introduced a new direct grant scheme to encourage private landowners to
plant more trees.
The grants of Pounds 700 per hectare for planting conifers cover 70 per cent
of the costs of starting a forest, but Wilkinson reckons it is not enough to
encourage the level of start-up the government wants to see. Government
targets for new plantings of 33,000ha a year have never been met since they
were set in 1987. New tree planting is currently running at about 18,000ha a
year.
Foresters say trees cannot compete with the high price of agricultural land
which is supported by European Union subsidies. The UK government introduced
a farm woodland grant scheme to try to persuade farmers to plant more trees,
but this has so far attracted only 4,000 to 5,000ha a year of new planting.
Wilkinson maintains that forestry provides many ecological benefits and
supports a greater diversity of species than the upland sheep farms it often
replaces. Tilhill reports that 127 different breeds of bird and 17 species
of animal can be found in the Eskdalemuir forest. 'We are providing a
different micro-climate for wildlife and also a valuable resource which is
much in demand.'
