FT  27 MAY 94 / Kozyrev cool to European stability pact
Europe's latest exercise in preventative diplomacy, a French-inspired
stability pact designed to defuse ethnic and territorial disputes among
aspiring members of the European Union, received a cool response from Russia
at its conference launch yesterday.
Mr Andrei Kozyrev, the Russian foreign minister, welcomed what he called
'yet another attempt' to come to grips with 'signs of aggressive
nationalism, xenophobia and ethnic and religious intolerance.' But he then
underlined that 'the decisive role' in constructing a new Europe with
Russian participation should be played by the 52-Nation Conference on
Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) and Nato's 'Partnership for Peace
(PFP)'.
In a speech which reinforced the call for a new European security order by
General Pavel Grachev, the Russian defence minister at this week's Nato
meeting in Brussels, Mr Kozyrev said: 'Enhancing the effectiveness of the
CSCE, making it the supreme political organisation on the continent, is the
key element in our proposed concept of European partnership.'
The three former Soviet Baltic states were looking for a clear Russian
commitment to the withdrawal of the remaining Russian troops and equipment
from Estonia and Latvia. But Mr Kozyrev merely left open the possibility of
Russian participation in the proposed Baltic 'round table'. This is designed
as a forum to facilitate an equitable solution to the protection of the
rights of Russian and other minorities in the Baltic states and the total
withdrawal of Russian forces.
The Russian minister described the stability conference as a 'unique'
process but noted that it involved the 12 current and nine aspiring members
of the EU but did 'not create additional obligations for states which are
not directly involved in it.' Russia, which this week agreed to join the
Partnership for Peace, is not an applicant for EU membership.
For Russia to participate in the round table's work he made clear that it
should not dwell on the military aspects but 'concentrate on specific steps
to improve inter-ethnic relations and to ensure the rights of national
minorities .. especially in Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.'
The military and political dimensions of Europe's security, he said 'should
find its place within a framework of broader efforts' than the EU-sponsored
security pact conference. 'We attach serious significance to the forthcoming
Istanbul ministerial meeting of the North Atlantic Co-operation Council
(NACC),' he added.
The main focus of the proposed security pact, as outlined by Mr Edouard
Balladur, the French prime minister, in his opening statement is to resolve
contentious ethnic and border issues and prevent future Yugoslav-style
eruptions. But the foreign ministers of Poland, the Czech republic and other
central European and Baltic participants rejected suggestions that eastern
European countries that want to join the EU be subjected to special
treatment with regard to minority rights but be subject to what Mr Andrzej
Olechowski, Poland's foreign minister, described as 'accepted pan-European
standards.'
