FT  04 OCT 94 / IMF/World Bank in Madrid: Russia fails to achieve its
mission - Moscow faces the unknown as opposition grows to its loan
requirements
Russia has failed to achieve a significant part of what it hoped to get from
the International Monetary Fund in Madrid - but the biggest disappointments
may still lie ahead.
In making an argument for substantially increasing both IMF borrowing and
postponing debt payments, Russia has run up against both the resentment of
the third world countries - which have seen Russia being made a special case
by the IMF and the World Bank while they languish - and the scepticism of
powerful members of the Group of Seven.
The G7 now insists on greater commitment to, and evidence of, radical reform
on Russia's part before it approves extra expenditure.
Russia had wanted an increase in its ability to borrow; a standby facility
enlarged from Dollars 4bn (Pounds 2.5bn) to more than Dollars 5bn, and
access to a third tranche of the systemic transformation facility, under
which it has already borrowed Dollars 3bn in two equal parts.
It has been rebuffed on the second of these - as it seems to have been on an
as yet unpublicised plan put forward by Mr Alexander Shokhin, the deputy
prime minister for the economy, to 're-adjust' the Dollars 80bn debt burden
which will be due for discussion after the detailed negotiations with the
IMF later this month.
The push for extra funds already appears to have claimed a victim. According
to Russian media reports, Mr Konstantin Kagalovsky, the Russian executive
director of the IMF, has resigned (effective January 1 next year) - possibly
to be replaced by Mr Dmitri Tulin, presently a vice-chairman of the Russian
central bank.
Mr Kagalovsky, whose tenure at the bank has been under attack from within
the Russian government for some time, was the strongest advocate of an
expanded lending programme. He appears to have paid the price for its not
coming through. However, Russia's biggest test is yet to come. The debate in
Madrid is about how much could be on offer: negotiations between Russian and
IMF officials later this month will determine how much will be on offer.
Just as the IMF delegates were gathering in Madrid, Russian reform was
fraying. The rouble plunged; and at the same time it became clear - in part
because Mr Yegor Gaidar, the former prime minister, clarified it - that the
government had for the past six months been much more lax in issuing credits
than they had wished to be known. In July and August, for example, they had
issued some Rbs13,00bn of credits to cope with the expenses of the harvest
and the provisioning of the northern territories.
This laxity is coming home to roost. Already September's inflation is
reckoned to have come out at around 8 per cent, double that of August's (the
year's lowest). If the rouble continues to fall (it dropped a further 10
points yesterday) it will put more pressure on the inflation rate and the
Russian central bank would be unable to stop it without wasting its slender
reserves (of around Dollars 4.5bn).
In recent talks, the IMF has been pressing the Russian government to attempt
to reach an inflation rate of 1 per cent a month by the end of next year or
the beginning of 1996, while Russian ministers and officials have been
arguing for what is in their view a more realistic 3 per cent.
Further, the IMF will certainly insist on a more interventionist role in the
budget in return for a standby facility of Dollars 4-Dollars 5bn  -
specifying, for example, cuts in particular subsidies such as those to the
coal industry or to agriculture, rather than acquiescing in simple
across-the-board sequestrations which have left millions of workers without
pay and cut down haphazardly on investment; the useful and the useless
alike.
For the past year, Russia has had a reform which if not pain-free, has
certainly been less painful than expected. Official unemployment has
remained low: the real standard of living has, on most figures, gone up and
inflation has steadily come down - even as the budget deficit was seen to
stay within the IMF limits of under 10 per cent of GNP.
Now, that miraculous time appears to be over - and the rouble exchange rate
is the most vivid outward sign of it.
Either real cuts are made in the structure of subsidies and industrial
production is reshaped - or, say IMF officials, new borrowing will be at
risk. Mr Ernesto Hernandez-Cata, deputy head of the Europe II department
which deals with the former communist states and who is the most experienced
negotiator with the Russian government, said in Madrid over the weekend: 'We
consider a more radical approach deserves the maximum consideration on our
part.'
This means that a less radical approach will attract minimum consideration -
perhaps none.
The message from Madrid is that the world cares less about Russia and is
less well disposed towards it than many in its government had thought. Is it
ready to heed that message and tighten the belt again? Or can it no longer
do so?
