FT  15 FEB 94 / NHS told heart drugs could free up Pounds 50m
The National Health Service could improve the efficiency of its treatment of
heart failure by almost 20 per cent - the equivalent of Pounds 50m - if it
prescribed more drugs instead of hospitalising patients, say studies
published yesterday.
The research was partly funded by Merck, the world's biggest drugs company,
but the papers were independently reviewed before publication.
It bolsters the case of the pharmaceuticals industry that government efforts
to cut the drugs bill do not save money.
In the studies, two economists and a cardiologist say that treating heart
failure costs the NHS Pounds 360m a year. Most of that arises from hospital
admissions, which could be reduced if a new class of drugs, the ACE
inhibitors, were prescribed more widely.
Merck is a large supplier of ACE inhibitors. Other companies which are big
suppliers of ACE inhibitors are Bristol Myers Squibb of the US and the UK's
Zeneca.
The report says that almost 30,000 hospitalisations could be eliminated at a
nominal saving of Pounds 51.2m. In practice, the beds would be filled by
other patients and the benefit seen in a greater number of patients treated
for a given budget.
ACE inhibitors are already one of the fastest growing groups of
pharmaceuticals. Zeneca saw annual sales of its product Zestril grow 44 per
cent (excluding currency benefits) to more than Pounds 208m in the first
half of 1993.
The reports looked at the cost benefit of the use of Merck's ACE inhibitor,
enalapril. It used data from previous trials of the effects of enalapril to
argue that there could be 50 fewer deaths and 350 fewer hospital admissions
for every 1,000 patients treated for three years.
The claims follow others from the pharmaceutical industry that government
efforts to control healthcare spending by cutting drugs budgets raised costs
elsewhere.
But Dr John McMurray, the cardiologist who contributed to the studies
published yesterday, said that it was 'naive' to assume that less money
would be spent if more ACE inhibitors were prescribed.
He said that patients would be better off, but that previous experience
with, for example, the use of ulcer drugs which replaced operations showed
that the total spent on treating ulcers did not fall.
An Evaluation of the Cost of Heart Failure to the NHS in the UK, and The
cost-effectiveness of enalapril ACE inhibition in the treatment of chronic
heart failure. The British Journal of Medical Economics. Orchard House,
Brookwood, Surrey GU24 0AT.
