FT  11 NOV 94 / A cut for everyone: The debate over the cost of capital in
the UK
In the UK, a well-oiled system helps companies raise new equity capital by
selling shares to their existing shareholders.
There is growing concern, however, among regulators, companies and some
investment bankers that the system is too expensive. Alternative ways of
raising capital used in other countries are cheaper and just as good, they
suggest.
'The cost of capital in this country is too high because of our arcane
practices,' says Mr Amir Eilon, director of corporate finance at Barclays de
Zoete Wedd, the investment bank.
The Office of Fair Trading is reviewing the system that requires companies
raising new capital to pay fixed commission charges, regardless of the
attractiveness of the shares or market conditions at the time they are sold.
An unpublished study by Professor Paul Marsh of the London Business School
for the OFT has concluded that institutional investors which help launch new
share offerings have earned what he describes as 'excess returns' of about
Pounds 240m between 1986 and 1993.
The UK system works like this: a company that wants to raise capital by
issuing shares finds an investment banking adviser to structure the deal and
underwrite it, that is promise to buy all the shares at the agreed price. To
spread the risk, the investment bank finds institutions among existing
shareholders that agree to sub-underwrite the offering. They promise to buy
a parcel of the new shares at the agreed price, even if there is a lower
market price on the final day of the offer.
Under the UK system of pre-emption rights, the new shares must be offered to
existing shareholders, normally at a discount to the current market price of
typically around 13 to 15 per cent (although discounts vary). These rights
give them the opportunity to buy new shares in equal proportion to their
current stake so that they can maintain their proportion of the share
capital.
In addition to the discounted new shares - which typically earn the same
dividends as the existing shares - sub-underwriters receive a standard fee
of 1.25 per cent of the total raised. The broker receives a standard 0.25
per cent commission and the adviser a 0.50 per cent commission. The cost of
issuing the new shares is therefore 2 per cent of the capital raised, plus -
arguably - the discount on the shares sold to existing shareholders.
'Underwriters and sub-underwriters perform a useful service for companies by
assuming the risks of a failed issue. Historically, however, at least for
equity rights issues, the evidence indicates that the fees they charge for
the assumption of this risk significantly exceed the value of the insurance
they provide,' the LBS report says.
London's traditional merchant banks, for which the rights issue system is an
important part of their business, defend their corner, however. Commissions
are fixed, they argue, because it would be impractical to negotiate the fee
with hundreds of institutions which must make snap judgments about whether
to sub-underwrite at the offer price.
And while the commission is the same for all issues, the more attractive
shares can be offered at a smaller discount than less attractive issues.
Finance directors privately argue that a system which forces them to issue
new shares at a discount raises the cost of capital. More shares have to be
issued to raise the same amount of capital and a dividend paid on each one.
'That means the pay-back from the new capital will have to be significantly
higher,' according to the finance director at one FTSE-100 company. 'It then
defines the sorts of investment that a company can make.'
But Mr Anthony Beevor, head of corporate finance at Hambros Bank, says the
arguments about the discount are irrelevant because the true owners of a
public company are its shareholders. 'You are giving the shares more cheaply
to yourself,' he says.
But privately, even the institutional shareholders which publicly defend
pre-emption rights and which benefit most from fixed commissions question
whether the system is in companies' best interests.
An alternative advocated by some of the larger investment banks is US-style
'global book-building'. With book-building, the shares are heavily marketed
by the investment bank handling the issue. The price of the new shares is
set at a level that reflects market demand, rather than at an automatic
discount to the market price as in most UK rights offerings.
However, book-building is difficult to reconcile with UK shareholders'
pre-emption rights, which require that the new shares are marketed only to
existing investors. There may be ways round pre-emption rights, but they can
be applied only in limited circumstances.
And regulators fear that book-building is less attractive for secondary
offerings, where a stakeholder sells a large block of shares and pre-emption
rights do not apply, because of the absence of Stock Exchange rules on
short-selling. In the run-up to a bookbuilding exercise, shareholders can
sell shares they do not own and drive down the price of a company's shares,
to reduce the cost of the new shares.
In October, the London Stock Exchange launched a review of rules on
short-selling, asking whether there ought to be greater disclosure of short
positions. Both the Stock Exchange review and the OFT enquiry are understood
to have the blessing of the UK Treasury which is concerned partly because it
fears London may lose its edge as the centre for international share trading
because of higher costs.
However, London's traditionalists say that the current system makes capital
raising in the UK cheaper than elsewhere because fees are lower.
If fees are the only cost of capital, the data suggests there is merit in
this argument. According to Securities Data Corporation, a New Jersey-based
research firm, the average fee in 1993 for an under-written offering of
dollars 100m or more in the US was 5.048 per cent. Fees ranged from 2.25
percent to 7 per cent.
Mr Beevor argues that by comparison, the 2.0 per cent fixed fee in the UK is
cheap. Even critics of the current system agree that for all its
short-comings, it has been effective in guaranteeing UK corporations access
to equity capital through good times and bad, and that alone may be good
reason not to tinker with it.
