FT  19 JUL 94 / UK Company News: The world is its jigsaw - A look at
Medeva's strategy of adding value to acquisitions
When Medeva's share price halved after a profits warning a year ago today,
Mr Bernard Taylor, the acquisitive pharmaceuticals group's chairman, said it
would take time to rebuild investor confidence. He was dead right.
Although the shares have regained some of the lost ground relative to the
market, they have recovered by less than 10 per cent. Yet Medeva has done
much to calm investors' concerns.
Following the warning it put its acquisition plans on hold and used the
pause to strengthen its management and controls. Its 1993 figures emerged
comfortably above the City's (lowered) expectations, showing strong
underlying growth, and its founder, Mr Ian Gowrie-Smith, stepped down as
managing director, a move welcomed by some in the City.
But still the share price failed to respond, suggesting there may be more
fundamental concerns.
One is the general nervousness about the pharmaceuticals sector as a whole
caused by pressure on prices around the world and in particular healthcare
reforms in the US.
Relative to the depressed sector, Medeva's shares have performed rather
better, perhaps reflecting the company's claim that it will be less hurt by
the reforms than many of its rivals.
This is partly because many of its products are low-cost rivals to branded
market leaders, and may benefit from switching by purchasers. In addition,
Mr Bill Bogie, chief executive, believes that structural changes in the
industry will throw up more opportunities for Medeva.
'The majors have to cut costs and are looking hard at their product lines
and sales forces in order to concentrate on their strengths.'
Mr Bogie predicts that they will sell on more of their smaller products, or
at least put them through other companies' specialist sales forces.
When it comes to buying other people's established products, even the
sceptics cannot knock Medeva's record. In almost all cases the deals have
been successful, in some cases, spectacularly so.
In May 1991, Medeva spent Dollars 77m on MD Pharmaceuticals, a manufacturer
of specialised generic drugs which has grown so fast it has virtually paid
for itself already.
This has been the most successful aspect of the strategy developed by Mr
Gowrie-Smith and Mr Taylor. The idea was to build a pharmaceuticals company
that could generate growth without heavy investment in research and
development by acquiring products which were already established or in the
final stages of development.
Medeva would add value partly by building an international sales force that
could push products which were only established in local markets.
Pursuing this plan, it has built up a number of specialist sales forces
around the world, notably in the US respiratory market. Now 220-strong, this
is now picking up some promising products under licence, most recently a new
hay fever treatment from Wellcome.
But there are clear gaps in its network. One close observer of the company
says: 'The profit warning caught Medeva in the middle of constructing its
jigsaw and left it with some large holes. In some areas it has products but
no sales force and in others a sales force but no products.'
The slump in the share price makes further acquisitions much more difficult,
and though it has a reasonably strong balance sheet, without a recovery in
its rating its options are much more limited.
It has been suggested that Medeva is interested in Boots' pharmaceuticals
division, but given that Medeva's market value of Pounds 375m is about half
the likely price tag of the Boots business, buying all or a large part of it
would be a very big step.
Mr Bogie admits that further geographical expansion is on hold for now and
that the focus is on building up the product portfolio. Although the group's
sales are showing strong growth, most of its products have a limited life
given their lack of patent protection. So the medicine cabinet will need
some new blood before long.
Yet a key part of the Medeva strategy, buying products in late stage
development, has yet to bring any results. Most disappointing has been the
year's delay on the expected filing of the Hepatitis B vaccine acquired two
years ago.
Although many City analysts are now positive about Medeva, some remain
sceptical about the prospects for a small company in an industry where size
and vertical integration are seen as increasingly vital.
One City observer says: 'Medeva has still got a lot to prove. Maybe the
strategy is sound and it will be possible to construct a significant
pharmaceuticals group along these lines. But maybe there was a window of
opportunity which Medeva is in danger of missing because of the share price
slump.'
Medeva has a number of attractive businesses, particularly in respiratory
products and vaccines, but some analysts question whether the whole should
be valued at more than the sum of the parts. If not, perhaps more value
would be generated by selling them off.
