FT  16 JUL 94 / Work disabled quota faces axe
The government is considering abolishing the compulsory quota on employers
to provide jobs for the disabled, replacing it with a framework of
legislation that would offer protection from unfair dismissal.
The move, which could be enacted next year, is one of a number of government
proposals that aim to strengthen the rights of the disabled minority.
The proposals were published yesterday in a consultative document by the
Department of Social Security and follow attempts by Labour and Tory MPs to
introduce an over-arching civil rights bill for the disabled.
However, while ministers said they were prepared to introduce piecemeal
measures next year, the consultative document underlined the government's
determination not to introduce comprehensive civil rights for the disabled.
Mr Nicholas Scott, minister for the disabled, told the Commons that a recent
private member's bill to create such civil rights would have a compliance
cost for industry running to at least Pounds 17bn.
Labour MPs accused Mr Scott of having belatedly responded to their attempts
to amend the law. Mr Barry Sheerman, Labour's disablement spokesman, said
the document was 'piecemeal, partial, pathetic, grudging, belated,
inadequate - and disabled people will not accept it'.
Ministers said yesterday that the measures in the consultation paper could
be introduced by individual Whitehall departments next year. These include a
statutory requirement on housebuilders to provide facilities for the
disabled in new houses and the creation of an advisory body, the National
Disability Council, to monitor the minority's rights.
Abolition of the disabled quota, which has been in operation since 1944 but
is now considered unworkable, would be at the heart of the changes. At
present, companies with more than 20 staff must employ at least 3 per cent
of registered disabled people. Ministers are looking at ways to replace this
with limited disabled rights through statutory legislation and industrial
tribunals.
