FT  03 DEC 94 / Arts: Complicite plummets
The latest offering by Theatre de Complicite - Out of a house walked a man .
. ., a co-production with the National Theatre - is less bleak, less long,
and less hopeless than life actually was in Stalinist Russia; and reflecting
on this fact may be one of the better ways to get through this dreary show.
All the same, as in Stalinist Russia, you are likely to wish you were
elsewhere. I cannot be fair to it, or do it justice; leaving the auditorium
when it is over is like being released from the Bastille. And the worst of
it is that it makes you wonder how good Complicite ever really was, and
resent those people who think that Complicite is the best thing in British
theatre today.
Out of a house . . . has been adapted by Jozef Houbven, Simon McBurney, and
Mark Wheatley from the writings of Danil Kharms (1905-42) - whose work all
of you, unlike me, will know well. 'Oh good,' I thought in advance, 'A new
author, a new world.' But no. Everything onstage reminded me of such
Complicite shows as The Visit, Street of Crocodiles, and The Three Lives of
Lucie Cabrol; and the fact that those works were greatly superior is no
help. Here, again, the oppressive Kafkaesque atmosphere; here is the
indestructible crone; here the inhibited man who has problems with getting
it together with the girl he has met only fleetingly; here the effort of
turning life into art; here the nightmare interior life as opposed to the
bizarre but mundane exterior life; and so on.
And here, again, are all the Complicite tricks and tricksters. The
Complicite house style is a striking and strenuous mix of vaudeville, mime,
and expressionism. One favourite device is the wedge-shaped phalanx of
bogeypersons which materialises in dark corners to confront the protagonist.
Though this has worked well in the past, after Out of a house . . . I hope I
never see it again. It is peculiar how often the actors turn their heads out
front to deliver their words (a technique to which I am generally allergic
anyway), how often the diction is slow and emphatic, and how often the eyes
are glaringly rounded. But have Complicite lines ever before been so often
repeated, so shouted, or so banal?
The indestructible old crone is, of course, Kathryn Hunter: it is, I think,
her metier. Alas, I have watched Hunter three times this year and I have had
enough of the hoarse chestiness of that Exorcist voice, that wizened
tortoise-like face turned up to the light, the watery dark eyes staring
imperturbably beneath their slowly batting lids, the trembling of the
massive lower lip. Just as I was thinking that in Hell we will get to see
her play Juliet, they gave her one of those awful scenes you see in most
ballet versions of the Romeo tomb scene, where the hero does a pas de deux
with her 'corpse'. Hunter plays this like a succubus from beyond the grave.
If you know any necrophiliacs, send them to watch this episode. It should
give them pause.
The finest image is that of the cripple who lividly zoom-drags himself
across the stage at top speed. The best contributions are the fragments of
Shostakovichian musical modernism by Gerard McBurney. The worst contribution
is Marcello Magni's; the way he laboriously and cutely repeats 'Why has she
died in my room?' ranks him as one of the crudest actors in Britain. The
shows lasts two hours; no interval.
Stuck underneath all this farrago is a tale of innocent complicity (yes)
such as Patricia Highsmith tells so brilliantly in The Blunderer. But
Highsmith has suspense, wit, lightness of touch, so that the way she
involves you in apparent or actual guilt is brilliant in its very cool. Out
of a house . . . by contrast, is overwrought, ponderous, and torpid.
In repertory at the Lyttelton Theatre, South Bank, SE1
