FT  01 JUL 94 / French save hundreds of badly wounded Tutsi: Survivors tell
of man-hunts by day and night
Hundreds of famished and badly wounded Tutsi were yesterday saved from
ethnic slaughter when the French intervention force in west Rwanda moved
into the hills above Gishyita to protect them.
For almost three months the Tutsi of this region have been hiding in the
forest by day and scavenging for food at night as the army and militia of
the majority Hutu tribe have hunted them down.
Less than four miles from the French army base at Gishyita, on the shores of
Lake Kivu, a mountain road lay strewn with corpses. Survivors of the
massacre said Hutu government soldiers and militia had launched daily raids
to exterminate Tutsi hiding in the woods. The last search-and-destroy
mission took place on Wednesday.
The 350 survivors who gathered on a windswept mountain top yesterday, under
the protection of French troops, bore the wounds and scars of Hutu attacks.
One elderly Tutsi had had his eyes gouged out because he had been a 'man of
learning'. Many had been hacked with machetes and knives. Others bore
festering gunshot wounds.
There were few women and children. 'They couldn't flee as fast as we did, so
they were the first to be killed,' explained Mr Eric Nzabihimana, a village
schoolteacher who has been in hiding since April 13, a week after the death
of President Juvenal Habyarimana in an air crash which unleashed the wave of
slaughter against the minority Tutsi tribe. The Hutu government blames Tutsi
guerrillas for shooting down the president's aircraft.
Mr Nzabihimana believes that of the 10,000 Tutsi who lived in the hills,
less than 1,000 survived a campaign of genocide spearheaded by Hutu
extremists. 'The soldiers, the militias and the local Hutu population have
chased us day and night to kill us,' he said. Of his numerous family, only a
sister survived.
On the mountain top the Tutsi are dressed in discoloured rags; their sunken
cheeks and skeletal ribs bear the signs of advanced malnutrition. 'If the
French had not come we would have begun to die of hunger soon,' Mr
Nzabihimana said.
The emaciated survivors cheer and clap when French reinforcements arrive.
From another hill, Hutu militia sullenly watch the Tutsi gathering. The
French soldiers aim their assault rifles at the hostile force. 'If we were
to leave them now, these Tutsi would all be dead by tonight,' explained
Adjutant Prungnaud of the French Special Forces.
One week after France launched its humanitarian mission in Rwanda, the
troops on the ground are just beginning to uncover the scale of the problem
they have come to solve. Rather than a mission to save civilians trapped in
Rwanda's civil war, be they Hutu or Tutsi, the French troops find themselves
drawn into the need to protect the Tutsi ethnic group, virtually
exterminated by systematic genocide.
It will be difficult for the French to maintain their avowed neutrality for
long. Because they were the main military and financial backers of President
Habyarimana's government, the French were welcomed by the Hutu community.
The goodwill may not last if France's main task comes to be seen as
protecting Tutsi from further massacres.
As 40 French soldiers prepared to guard the Tutsi survivors last night,
pick-up trucks with Rwandan soldiers drove by. The Tutsi shouted: 'They are
the ones who have been killing us.' The French do not have the mandate to
stop the army convoys. The Rwandan soldiers give the thumbs-up to the French
as they pass.
