FT  22 OCT 94 / Inquiry told of Westminster's elector targets
Senior Westminster councillors and officials set specific targets for the
numbers of new 'electors' required in each of eight marginal wards, the
public inquiry into gerrymandering allegations heard yesterday.
A fax was sent from the office of Dame Shirley Porter, the then council
leader, to Mr Graham England, the housing director, on March 1987 demanding
to know 'how does he propose to achieve the target voter figures in the
eight relevant wards by 1990?'
Both of them, along with eight other Tory councillors and officials, were
named in the district auditor's provisional report which found, after a
four-year investigation, that they had been selling homes to bring likely
Conservative voters into marginal wards before the 1990 local elections.
The inquiry heard that another of the respondents - Mr Robert Lewis, the
council's deputy chief solicitor between 1986 and 1988 - said the secret
plan for the marginal wards - known as 'key wards' - was well known
throughout the senior ranks of the council.
He had told Mr John Magill, the district auditor, in an interview that it
was like 'the love that dared not speak its name'.
Mr Andrew Arden, the QC for the group of Labour councillors and residents
who levelled the gerrymandering allegations, said council officials were
instructed by Tory councillors to compile detailed profiles of the
populations in each of the marginal wards.
He said these profiles were used to calculate the number of new residents -
described in confidential documents as 'new electors' - required to secure
victory at the local elections.
Mr Arden said the targets ranged from 450 in Millbank ward to 150 in
Victoria ward totalling 2,200 in all.
Another fax was sent on March 24 1987 from Dame Shirley's office to Mr
Matthew Ives, the council's chief solicitor. It asked whether the council
could sell off all the homes which became vacant in the marginal wards,
without affecting its statutory duties to house the homeless. Mr Ives warned
her 'anything which smacks of political machinations will be viewed with
great suspicion by the courts'.
Mr England had answered the same question by saying that the chance of being
surcharged by the district auditor was 'fairly tenuous'.
