FT  21 NOV 94 / Survey of Germany (4): Democrat of the left / Profile of
Gregor Gysi of the PDS
He charms the elderly, he listens to the unemployed and he tries to capture
the imagination of the youth. He is witty, twists difficult questions to his
advantage, and convincingly states the case for the east Germans. 'He seems
all things to all people, but what does he really stand for?' asks a
supporter of Mr Gregor Gysi, the 46 year-old parliamentary leader of the
Party of Democratic Socialism, the successor to the east German communist
party.
Mr Gysi, a former civil rights lawyer and son of a former east German
minister of Culture, has few illusions about what he wants to achieve over
the next four years. He wants to make the PDS the main left-wing party in
east Germany and even to get the party rooted in west Germany as well, where
the left wing is dominated by the Social Democratic Party (SPD).
So far, the dapper, small man who alternates his smart suit with black
denims and shirt, seems to be succeeding, at least in the east. The PDS won
nearly 18 per cent of the vote in east Germany during the recent federal
elections, and nation-wide it captured 4.4 per cent. Not bad for a party
whose membership is stigmatised for its communist past and pilloried by the
west German media and established political parties for being 'fascists
painted red'. All this is grist to Mr Gysi's mill. 'It means the
establishment is taking us seriously,' he says.
But the next few months are crucial for Mr Gysi and the PDS. For one thing,
he has to shake off allegations of having had unofficial contacts with the
Stasi, the former east German secret police. If documents can be found to
discredit him, then the PDS will almost certainly lose the one politician
who can make it into a modern social democratic party.
To achieve his goal Mr Gysi will have to isolate the Communist Platform, a
hard-line Leninist wing which believes in the centralised state and economy.
He and Mr Andre Brie, his campaign organiser and 'ideologist' of the party,
want to address this issue at next January's PDS conference.
He also wants to make certain that the PDS moves away from being a 'protest
party', which attracts the unemployed and those disappointed with
unification, to one which can interest the younger generation. 'The PDS
could become a short-lived phenomenon if the economy picks up and if the SPD
really establishes itself in east Germany,' said Mr Brie. Above all, Mr Gysi
wants to give the party respectability. The fact that the PDS now supports
the minority coalition government of the Social Democrats and the Greens in
the eastern state of Saxony-Anhalt, suggests that it wants to learn what
power with responsibility means.
However, he knows that time is not on his side. He faces elections in Berlin
next year, where the SPD is desperate to dislodge Chancellor Helmut Kohl's
governing Christian Democrats from the Rathaus, or mayor's office. If the
PDS, which won four seats in Berlin at the federal elections, fares badly in
1995, it will be Mr Gysi who will have to carry the can.
