FT  08 JUL 94 / Forces volunteers to serve abroad
The Ministry of Defence is to clear the way for part-time volunteers to
serve alongside regular forces overseas as part of its current restructuring
of the British armed forces.
With less than a week to go before the publication of a major package of
defence cuts, it emerged at Westminster yesterday that ministers are
planning to make more flexible use of reservists in frontline operations.
Fears grew last night that the cuts would include the closure of the naval
dockyard at Rosyth in Scotland. Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor -
whose Dunfermline East constituency includes Rosyth - said any closure
'after promise after promise' would be a betrayal of the workforce.
Following a meeting of the cabinet sub-committee on defence, it was revealed
that the cabinet would take a final decision on the package next Thursday.
However, some Tory backbenchers were surprised that this ratification would
be made just hours before the package is due to be revealed to the Commons.
'They are leaving it extremely tight,' said one MP.
There was lingering uncertainty over whether the MoD had managed to persuade
the Treasury that it should be allowed to keep all of the savings over the
Pounds 750m which it is required to make in its 1994-95 budget.
But Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the defence secretary, is understood to be confident
that he will be able to announce spending cuts well in excess of those
required by the Treasury without further reducing the armed forces' fighting
strength.
This should help him to deflect criticism from the main opposition parties
that the effect of the cuts have not been thought through strategically and
are Treasury-led.
It was also understood that the Treasury could still be trying to persuade
the MoD that it must provide redundancy payments for the 25,000 servicemen
and women who are due to lose their jobs in the review.
At the same time, defence officials are anxious to get a Treasury assurance
that it will not raise the possibility of more cuts in the forthcoming
Public Expenditure Survey.
The move to allow part-time volunteers will require legislation. It aims to
bolster front-line capability at a time when Tory backbenchers are concerned
about the impact of a severe fall in defence expenditure.
Under the Reserve Forces Act, it is all but impossible for the government to
send reservists overseas in peacetime.
