FT  05 APR 94 / International Company News: Lufthansa likely to break even
this year
Lufthansa, the German flag carrier which launched a large restructuring
programme two years ago, is heading for break-even this year after making a
pre-tax loss of DM50m (Dollars 29.4m) last year, Mr Jurgen Weber, the
airline's chairman, said during a visit in London.
'We have had to carry through some painful measures to restore our
competitiveness. However, promising results are now beginning to show,' he
added.
The DM50m pre-tax loss last year follows a much heavier pre-tax deficit of
DM297m in 1992. Lufthansa's after-tax losses are expected to decline to
about DM110m last year from DM373m in 1992.
Mr Weber indicated that Lufthansa would consider in the longer term
investing in an equity stake in United Airlines, one of the biggest US
carriers which has forged a strategic commercial alliance with the German
carrier. 'We feel we must first start in strategic alliances with marketing
agreements to save costs.'
He emphasised that any cross equity deal with United would come much later
and would depend on the results of the ticket code-sharing agreement
recently finalised between the two airlines.
Mr Weber confirmed that Lufthansa, in which the German government holds a
majority 51 per cent stake, was keen to be fully privatised.
However, the airline's privatisation hinged on negotiations between
Lufthansa and the government over the future of the government pension
scheme for the airline's staff, Mr Weber stressed.
The pension scheme 'still blocks the road to our full privatisation', he
said. 'The German government has it very high on its agenda, and Lufthansa
management is strongly in favour of privatisation.'
If privatised under the current pension law, all Lufthansa pensioners and
staff would lose their complete pension benefits. 'The social implications
would be unacceptable,' Mr Weber said.
'Since its establishment as a company Lufthansa and its employees were
legally bound to pay into the government pension scheme which is not funded.
The scheme becomes automatically invalid if public ownership drops below the
magic line of 50 per cent,' he explained. 'That needs to be changed urgently
and we hope our government will find appropriate solutions soon.'
Mr Weber attacked state subsidies for European national carriers during an
address to the Aviation Club of Great Britain. 'We'll have to make hell in
Brussels,' he said, if approval was granted to Air France for a FFr20bn
(Dollars 3.4bn) injection of funds without strict conditions.
