FT  08 JUL 94 / Neukirchen sets seal on power at Metallgesellschaft
Mr Kajo Neukirchen, chief executive of Metallgesellschaft, yesterday
announced a boardroom clean-out which seals his takeover at the troubled
Frankfurt-based metals and trading group seven months after it almost
collapsed.
Mr Neukirchen, who was drafted in last December to re-launch the group, said
the management board would be scaled down to five people from seven.
A new holding company, which would oversee the group's divisions, meant a
seven-man management board was now superfluous, the company said.
Mr Ulrich Wohr, the chief executive of the car parts supplier VDO Adolf
Schindling, will join the board as finance director on August 1, while Mr
Hans-Ulrich Plaul, the chief executive of Buderus, until recently a
Metallgesellschaft engineering subsidiary, will step down. Mr Neukirchen
will take over the personnel division on top of existing duties.
Metallgesellschaft almost collapsed earlier this year when it lost DM2.3bn
(Pounds 920m) through trading in oil futures.
The boardroom changeover comes days after a new chief executive assumed the
reins at MG Corp, the US subsidiary which is still tied up in loss-making
oil contracts with Castle Energy, a refinery 40 per cent owned by MG Corp.
The New York-based company, which Mr Neukirchen recently described as a
'machine for losing money', has been trimmed since the beginning of the year
and will now focus on delivering oil, petrol and other products to US
customers. Mr Karl von der Heyden, the outgoing chief executive, said the
company's debt would be halved by the end of September but it remains
unclear how it will extract itself from the Castle contracts.
In an effort to reduce debts which in March totalled DM9.2bn the group last
month announced it would sell its prestigious headquarters in the centre of
Frankfurt which it said could raise DM750m. However, the group will not
receive all the proceeds as the site is jointly owned by Dresdner Bank.
A week earlier Metallgesellschaft had raised DM1.2bn through the sale of
Buderus, its high-profile engineering unit.
Mr Heinrich Gotz, 63, left the supervisory board two years ago but was
recalled last December to oversee the personnel division and become Mr
Neukirchen's deputy during the group's overhaul.
Mr Gotz and Mr Jens-Peter Schaefer, who headed Lurgi, the energy-based
subsidiary, will step down.
