FT  18 AUG 94 / Lloyd's looks at liability reform
Lloyd's is considering a scheme which would make it easier for all its
individual Names to trade on a limited liability basis.
The plan, outlined in the latest issue of World Insurance Report, a
Financial Times newsletter, would allow Names to form individually owned
insurance companies. It has been devised by Citibank in collaboration with a
group of members' agents, and by Neville Russell, a firm of chartered
accountants.
It is part of a series of measures designed to shore up the market's capital
base in the wake of some Pounds 7bn of losses in recent years.
Under the scheme, Names could transfer existing liabilities underwritten on
an unlimited liability basis into the new vehicles and continue underwriting
new business on a limited liability basis, possibly from the beginning of
1995.
Last year the market successfully attracted more than Pounds 800m in
corporate capital, allowing new institutional investors, insurance companies
and individuals to trade at Lloyd's with limited liability.
At present however, existing individual Names would have to resign and then
rejoin the market if they wished to limit their liabilities. In addition
corporate members must deposit a minimum of Pounds 1.5m with Lloyd's, much
more than is typically required from Names with unlimited liability.
The new companies would be managed by the agents who handle the affairs of
Names and would be capitalised with money drawn from the funds deposited by
Names with Lloyd's. The proposals are unlikely to offer much help for Names
unable to pay past losses.
According to World Insurance Report the scheme originally envisaged that the
new vehicles would be established in Bermuda, where the reinsurance industry
has grown rapidly in recent years.
However legal advisers are understood to have found a cheap means to
register the companies in the UK. It is unclear how much capital the new
companies will need and how much business they will be allowed to
underwrite.
Lloyd's, which has been hard hit by losses from catastrophes and US legal
awards, announced losses of Pounds 2bn when reporting its 1991 results in
May, in line with its three-year accounting system.
Separately, the market is continuing work on proposals which could allow
Names to sell or transfer their participations at the market. Lloyd's
announced details in May following a report by the Value Group, a team of
market professionals.
