FT  26 OCT 94 / Survey of Technology in the Office (17): EDI traffic
increases - The electronic marketplace is on its way
The growth of paperless trading using electronic data interchange (EDI) and
electronic mail is having a profound effect on the way some businesses
operate.
EDI involves the exchange of structured business documents, such as orders
and invoices, directly between computers. It is used mainly for
inter-company communications, where cutting out paper can significantly
speed up the processing and transmission of information.
But 'the most significant application of EDI worldwide is to make reductions
in inventory,' says Brian Dearing, a Europe-based vice-president at US EDI
supplier Sterling Software.
'For example,' says Mr Dearing 'clothes retailers are trying to improve
profitability by cutting down on inventory. Ideally, they only want to
re-order the stuff that sells otherwise they have to make huge markdowns at
the end of the season.
'But each time a garment is re-ordered that's an administrative task. So
unless the process is automated, it isn't practical to keep really low
levels of stock. One solution is to generate an EDI order every time an item
is scanned at the checkout till.'
In addition to improving profitability, a low inventory policy means that no
stockroom is required. Examples are S&amp;K Menswear in the US, which orders
goods in the minimum quantity and then re-orders what has just sold. And
Victoria's Secret, the US lingerie company, which also requires no stockroom
after implementing a low-inventory policy.
Mr Dearing believes that using EDI to improve asset management will
contribute far more to a company's profitability than simply using it to cut
costs in the accounts department.
For those who are planning to use EDI, there are a number of third-party
value-added network services (Vans) to choose from. In essence, these take
computer-generated orders or invoices and send them to trading partners
electronically.
EDI service providers include General Electric Information Services (Geis),
IBM, INS (now wholly-owned by Geis), BT, AT&amp;T and, most recently, Sterling
which has made its US EDI service available in Europe as Commerce: Network.
Some EDI Vans also offer electronic mail and, conversely, some email
suppliers offer EDI-like applications. Mr Dearing says: 'We've seen email
used in EDI communities where a retailer or manufacturer has a number of
suppliers and wants to tell them it has a new purchasing manager, or that
it's going to shut down for a few days.
'It's clear that greater use of email for electronic trading is going to
come, but a lot of the things customers want to do really lend themselves
more to electronic bulletin boards.' These allow information to be 'posted'
in an area of the EDI network where anyone can look at them.
The research consultancy Ovum* predicts that European EDI network service
revenue (including software and support for customer-premises equipment)
will grow at 25 per cent a year from Ecu260m (Dollars 322m) in 1993 to
Ecu588m in 1997.
By then, it expects 90 per cent of European EDI traffic to be based on the
international Edifact standard, as compared with less than 50 per cent last
year.
Ovum also predicts strong growth for electronic mail services, such as the
Internet. It forecasts that total European email revenues will grow at 53
per cent a year from Ecu223m in 1993 to Ecu1,453m in 1997.
A big part of this growth will come from new users signing up to use the
Internet system. Extensively used by the research and academic community on
a not-for-profit basis, the Internet now has at least 15m users around the
world, according to Ovum's estimate, and at most between 25m and 30m.
The sheer size of its user base is attracting commercial interest in spite
of the Internet's uncommercial image. Information provider Pipex points out
that for only a few pounds, a company can put an article on the Internet
system which can reach a potentially large audience.
In addition to email, the Internet provides databases, news discussion
groups (such as those on electronic bulletin boards), long-distance
computing and the ability to transfer data or software programs.
Rose Lockwood of Ovum says: 'Recent reports estimate that over half of
Internet's users are now commercial bodies, yet there are still many
barriers to, and much debate concerning, the commercial use of the
Internet.'
For example, the National Science Foundation Network Internet backbone (the
NFSNet) deems for-profit activities to be unacceptable. But commercial
suppliers are forming groups which can interconnect without such
restrictions.
As a result an increasing number of fee-charging services are appearing.
These include Clarinet - an electronic publishing service, providing news
and information, plus live news from the UPI wire service.
Many major online databases, such as Dialog and Lexis can also be accessed
via the Internet.
The Internet is often mentioned as an early example of the information
highway. As conceived by US president Bill Clinton and vice-president Al
Gore, information highways - national information networks - will carry
information, entertainment, interactive games, and services such as home
banking and shopping into homes and businesses.
The plan is that users will plug into these highways using multimedia
terminals (which combine television, images, sound and computing power) in
the home or office. Alternatively, they will link up via 'smart' boxes used
with their television sets.
But as well as representing a huge business opportunity for all manner of
industries - such as entertainment, publishing, financial services,
telecoms, computers and consumer electronics - information highways also
present a threat to established ways of offering services.
For example, Mel Simon, IBM venture manager for the information
super-highway, points out that the presence of a national information
infrastructure would make it relatively cheap for new direct suppliers (such
as the telephone-based bank First Direct and Directline insurers) to enter
the market and compete for business.
But until computer networks, such as the Internet, become easier for
ordinary mortals to use, both the threats and the commercial opportunities
will be more imagined than real.
*Desktop messaging: strategies for the corporate market is available from
Ovum. Tel: +44 71 255 2670
