FT  23 MAY 94 / Sport: Blessed break for the game
Football has not gone away, it has merely gone to America. Yet for England
the season is over. Am I the only person to think that this is not a
tragedy, not an injustice, but a blessing? What English football needs now
is a rest: reculer pour mieux sauter.
England did not deserve to qualify for the World Cup. They had the ability
to do so and they squandered it. Under Terry Venables they have given three
performances vastly superior to those under Graham Taylor, in that the team
now seems to be playing football rather than wasting time in between set
pieces. But this fragile, if promising, renaissance hardly justifies the
feeling that England have been done out of their rights and that it is,
somehow, somebody else's fault that they are stuck at home this summer.
Alright, England didn't get asked to the party of the year and then, after
the invitations were sent out, they metamorphosed from physically repellent
collectors of Dr Who memorabilia into Debs' Delight. But at a time when the
team is rebuilding itself it is better, far better, to be cool, to be
absent, to hint at what might have been but probably would not have been, to
watch poor old Ireland huff and puff against the runny, ice cream-fluidity
of the Italians and to be spared the powerful embarrassment of singing a
World Cup song.
The season's song was sung, instead, by Manchester United who, in a strange
way, became the object of the focus that is normally concentrated upon a
national team. Romantics loved them and curmudgeons hated them for their
careless, sporadic superiority. They aroused strong, unifying emotions, even
in people who supported neither them nor their rivals. Almost every event of
the season was viewed in relation to this one team: Aston Villa did not win
the Coca Cola Cup, they stopped Manchester United winning it. Blackburn did
not nearly win the League, they nearly stopped Manchester United winning it.
Respect for the team was often grudging but always great; when they achieved
the double with an FA Cup winning performance as cheerless as the sky above
it, the complaints were not borne of mere churlishness but of a child-like
disappointment that, on their glory day, the glory boys had played no
differently to any other team.
Still, they have had their effect upon English football. The feeling that
England deserves to be in the World Cup finals is not unconnected to the
sense of pride, of style, of a story worth following, that has been
instilled in football by United. For too long the sport has lacked a team
like them: a team that transcends the necessary, but limiting, traditional
allegiances. That is what the national team should do. Manchester United may
have helped them to do it.
Of course, the glamour players of United are the foreigners. Of course much
of English football is still symbolised by Arsenal's Cup Winners Cup
performance against Parma: a game in which one counted down the minutes
instead of living through them, and watched traffic policemen bar the way of
Ferraris. But Arsenal still won, didn't they? Manchester United still need
the stalwart services of Bruce and Pallister and Ince, don't they?
It is typical of the English that they should blame somebody else for
keeping them from the World Cup finals. It is also typical that this
aggressive self-aggrandisement should conceal a defensive self-doubt and
that, deep down, they should feel that 'somebody else' is in fact better
than they are. Certainly English bombast about its football exists alongside
a cringing obsession with foreign flair. Yet the truth is that English
football has qualities of strength and bravery that are just as important as
the more exotic, quicksilver skills.
Last season showed a willingness, on the part of enlightened managers, such
as Terry Venables and Alex Ferguson, to advance their game by allowing the
traditions of grit and flair to draw upon one another for sustenance. This
augurs well for next season, though we should remember that greatness was
promised four years ago when the English team returned from the World Cup,
and that it took less than a year for the usual misery to start up again. We
should remember, too, that the season ended not just with the hopeful images
of Manchester United and England, but with Millwall fans overflowing like
sewage onto the scene of their defeat.
This is the reality which confounds the fantasy football managers who spent
last season constructing a perfect future for their sport. The beautiful
game is still, perhaps, a long way away.
