FT  14 JUL 94 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): A most subtle
prescription - Drugs companies are using indirect methods
US pharmaceutical companies are bombarding consumers with public health
information in a subtle n effort to market their products. indirectly. The
theory is that the more people know about their health, the more likely they
are to seek help, and the more prescription medicines drug manufacturers
will sell.
Genentech, for example, helped finance a print campaign on how to recognise
the early signs of a heart attack, indirectly promoting its angina drug,
Activase. Merck backed an information campaign on enlarged prostates to
market its Proscar product. Upjohn and Solvay are launching a public
awareness campaign on obsessive compulsive disorder to boost sales of their
new drug, Luvox, a relative of Prozac.
Once, the pharmaceutical industry promoted prescription drugs only to
physicians. Today, drug companies find direct marketing to consumers more
effective. 'We try to empower people with information about their health,'
says
Wyeth-Ayerst. 'Earlier, people didn't really participate in their
treatments. They just took what the doctor gave them. But now, patients are
much more involved.'
Drug companies have been traditionally wary of directly promoting
prescription drugs, because of strict Food &amp; Drug Administration rules. The
FDA requires that all advertising of prescription medicines reveal potential
side-effects and provide a balanced view of the benefits and disadvantages
of the product.
Pharmaceutical manufacturers often provide money for the awareness campaigns
to public health organisations, which then put out information in the form
of brochures, print and television advertisements.
'We're seeing more of this (contributions for public awareness campaigns by
drug companies) as opposed to traditional contributions over the last
several years,' says Steven Erickson, a spokesman for the Arthritis
Foundation. 'There's more of a marketing element involved.'
Yet public health organisations say they welcome the trend. 'It's a win-win
situation,' says Brigid Sanner, vice president of communications for the
National Heart Association. 'We get the information out, patients get a
chance to live healthier lives and the drug manufacturers get their message
out.'
Many health associations have established 'corporate' offices to work
together with companies on the advertisements, which the associations then
vet for accuracy and balance.
The advertisements must contain more than just information about the disease
to be effective, though, says Nancy Glick, a senior vice president with the
public relations firm Hill and Knowlton. 'You need to provide basic
information, but you also need to tell consumers what they can do about it:
either 'call this 800 number for more information', 'write for a brochure
on' or 'ask your doctor about'.'
Sometimes, the public awareness messages are followed up by direct
marketing. Drug companies are becoming less leery about advertising
prescription medicines. Merck, for instance, began a campaign for its drug
Proscar with general health messages detailing 'what every man should know
about his prostate'. More recently, however, the company has switched to
advertisements which declare 'Only one medicine can shrink the prostate:
Proscar.'
The public awareness campaigns as a marketing tool have proved so effective
that other sectors are beginning to jump on the bandwagon. Makers of calcium
supplements, for instance, have sponsored commercials on osteoporosis, and
one sunscreen manufacturer is expected to launch a campaign this summer on
skin cancer and the dangers of exposure to the sun.
