FT  18 MAR 94 / Survey of Poland (1): Cleared for take-off - The agreement
with its London Club creditors signed last week, re-opens access to
international capital markets for central Europe's biggest economy and most
strategically-placed country. Anthony Robinson and Christopher Bobinski look
at future prospects
The biggest potential obstacle to Poland's future prosperity was removed
last week when Warsaw and its London Club bank creditors signed a debt
reduction and rescheduling agreement. The deal gives Poland an overall 42.5
per cent reduction on its Dollars 13.2bn commercial bank debt, stretches
repayment over 30 years, and, most important of all, re-opens access to
international capital markets for central Europe's biggest economy and most
strategically-placed country.
The London Club deal closely followed approval by the Polish parliament of
another tight budget for 1994. This won approval from the International
Monetary Fund, thus paving the way for implementation of the second and
final stage of a 50 per cent cut in Poland's Dollars 33bn debt to the Paris
Club of official government creditors agreed in April 1991.
While Poland was in default many potential investors, including foreign
banks, preferred to wait on the sidelines. It had to pay a premium for its
foreign borrowing while equity investment favoured Hungary or the Czech
Republic, even though Poland's strong economic growth and 39m-strong
domestic market were seen as increasingly powerful attractions. Now the
decks have been cleared for the least bureaucratic and most productive kind
of investment - equity investment by foreign companies bringing with them
managerial and technological know-how, new products and access to global
markets.
This is the kind of capital needed to underpin future export-led growth, as
has already been demonstrated by those companies such as Fiat and ABB who
looked beyond Poland's short-term problems and took a strategic view of
Poland's long-term future five years ago.
Fiat is in the midst of a Dollars 2bn investment programme and already
exports the bulk of its Polish-produced Cinquecento model to Europe-wide
markets. With a much more modest investment ABB has bought or set up a dozen
companies employing more than 8,000 people. It is exporting heavily and
using its re-trained Polish personnel to spearhead ambitious expansion plans
in Russia and Ukraine.
The list of international companies investing in Poland was growing fast
even before the London Club agreement. But the bulk of them were
consumer-orientated, ranging from Cadbury-Schweppes and McDonald's to
Unilever and Procter and Gamble.
The beauty of the Paris and London Club agreements taken together is the
prospect they provide of Poland being able to attract the medium- to
long-term capital needed to help finance the infrastructure development
required to underpin sustainable economic growth.
Poland, is preparing to build a network of east-west and north-south toll
motorways, to modernise the main east-west rail links through Poland between
Berlin and Moscow and transform its outdated telecommunications.
Lot, the Polish airline which has just survived a bruising encounter with
traffic-hungry British Airways, has already re-equipped itelf with western
aircraft.
Even taken singly these projects are beyond the financing capacity of both
the Polish banks, themselves in the process of re-capitalisation and
consolidation, and the cash-strapped Polish state. And the list is not
exhaustive. Heavy investment is required to modernise the coal, steel and
other heavy industries, both to reduce pollution and to complete the
adjustment to a rational market economy from the distorted, command economy
inherited from the communist past.
An estimated Dollars 3.5bn alone will be needed to finance the construction
of the 700km-long Polish section of the projected new high- capacity gas
pipeline from northern Russia's Yamal peninsula to Germany and other EU
markets.
Orders for all these projects are likely to favour those companies which
have invested in the appropriate production facilities in Poland.
The government has already specifically tied foreign participation in
telecommunications modernisation to investment in Polish production
facilities.
Even before the expected investment boom begins, the Polish economy has been
showing signs of remarkable dynamism. The economy grew by 4 per cent last
year and GDP is expected to rise by a further 5 per cent in 1994. Poland was
the first to introduce traumatic market-orientated reforms in January 1990
and has become the first post-communist economy to emerge from the initial
collapse of unwanted and uneconomic output.
The economy has already been transformed by the phasing out of subsidies,
the transformation of the zloty into an internally convertible currency, and
the unforeseen decline in trade with the east which followed the death of
Comecon, the old communist trading organisation.
Such a transformation in such a short time was bound to be traumatic. The
winners are easy to see. For bright, energetic youngsters, and entrepreneurs
of all stripes, including many from the former communist nomenklatura, who
were frustrated under the old system, this is a great time to be alive.
City streets are full of new cars, banks, shops, hotels, restaurants.
Millions of Poles are sitting on paper profits from one of the most
spectacular stock market surges. Up to 9m Poles are expected to pay a
nominal sum for shares in the partly foreign-managed National Investment
Funds which will be set up this year to manage up to 600 state companies to
be privatised under the mass privatisation programme.
But nearly 3m are officially unemployed, the streets are almost as full of
beggars as those in London or New York. Drug addiction, prostitution, theft
and violent crime are all sharply higher, and more visible. The strain shows
in a rising death rate, lower life expectancy and a steep fall in the birth
rate.
The housing shortage remains acute, the health service is starved of funds,
the education system likewise. The former heroes of socialist labour, the
steel workers, miners and railwaymen, and much of the intelligentsia, have
seen their industries, professions and status downgraded. Income
differentials have widened dramatically. Farm incomes alone have halved over
the past five years as domestic subsidies were cut and EU-subsidized food
imports flooded in.
All these people have votes. Last September the peasant farmers and workers
who once supported Solidarity rejected the amateur politicians who replaced
the communists in 1989. They voted back into power two parties with roots in
the communist past, the Peasants party (PSL) whose leader, 34-year-old
Waldemar Pawlak, is the prime minister, and the Democratic Left Alliance
(SLD) led by Mr Alexander Kwasniewski.
The coalition controls morethan 60 per cent of the seats in parliament. It
has the power to rewrite the constitution and can re-define and reduce the
role of President Lech Walesa who comes up for re-election next year.
The government has a strong majority and faces a weak and divided
opposition. In theory it could last the full four-year life of parliament.
This is unlikely. The coalition partners do not like or trust each other and
the unpredictable Mr Walesa is busy manoeuvering for position behind the
scenes. There could well be a government crisis at any time followed by
early elections, possibly to coincide with the presidential vote.
The important thing is that economic and other reforms are now irreversible
while the govrning parties, and particularly the SLD leadership, share the
consensus view that market reforms must continue. Poles only have to look
east to Russia, and even more so to Ukraine, to compare the benefits of
sticking with painful reform with the misery of prolonging the process
indefinitely by half measures and backward steps.
