FT  09 SEP 94 / BBL backs Rudloff's new bank
Mr Hans-Jorg Rudloff, who pioneered the Euromarkets as head of Credit Suisse
First Boston in London, is to return to investment banking with the backing
of Belgium's Banque Bruxelles Lambert.
BBL announced yesterday that it was taking a 29 per cent stake in the new
venture, which has paid-in capital of Dollars 75m (Pounds 48m).
Mr Rudloff and his partner Mr Peter Ogden are the main shareholders and will
manage the business. Mr Ogden was a managing director at Morgan Stanley.
Other investors were not named, nor was the investment bank itself, which Mr
Rudloff said yesterday went internally under the name of 'The Institution.'
The shareholders plan to register the company by November with the intention
of beginning operations by January.
Mr Rudloff said his latest undertaking would offer advice on innovative
financing, mergers and acquisitions, and provide other traditional
investment banking services.
The Institution would focus on western Europe where Mr Rudloff believes he
has many relationships as governments and banks withdraw from companies
across the region.
Other favourites of the former CSFB head are the emerging markets of the
Czech Republic, Poland and Hungary.
'I know the area very well,' said Mr Rudloff, who masterminded CSFB's
controversial but ultimately successful drive into eastern Europe. Mr
Rudloff's background has focused much attention on his next move and he was
anxious to deflate expectations of the scope of his project.
'I am a little bit worried that people expect us to act right away like a
big firm, and that is not the case,' he said. 'There is no comparison with
the bulge bracket firms (one of the dominant US investment houses).'
Mr Rudloff headed CSFB in London for over a decade before being moved in
1993 amid internal disputes to the executive board of CS Holding, the
Swiss-based holding company of the Credit Suisse group.
Observers never thought him suited to the role of strategic planner to which
he was moved, and he left CS Holding in February this year.
