FT  05 NOV 94 / Hurd attacks media 'culture of criticism'
Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, yesterday launched an outspoken
attack on declining standards in the media as the government sought to fight
back against allegations of impropriety swirling around Conservative MPs.
Mr Hurd, the cabinet's elder statesman, threw his weight solidly behind Mr
Jonathan Aitken, the embattled chief secretary to the Treasury, warning that
media standards were slipping fast.
His comments coincided with a tough statement from the Association of
British Editors complaining of 'threats and increasingly intemperate
attacks' by ministers.
The association, which represents national and regional newspapers and
magazines, called on editors to continue to throw more light on the workings
of the government.
Speaking to Conservatives in Perth, Mr Hurd accused journalists of hunting
in packs and developing a 'culture of criticism' in which achievements were
unsung or distorted.
Arguing that the media was the British institution that had 'deteriorated
fastest' in recent years, he said there was 'too little independent
judgment, too little objective description'.
In a direct reference to the methods used by The Guardian to uncover details
of Mr Aitken's stay at the Ritz hotel in Paris, owned by Mr Mohamad Fayed,
he asked: 'Is it a brave defence of our liberties for an editor to authorise
the faking of a House of Commons crest through a fax machine? Is it a
fearless blow for truth when a journalist forges the signature of a civil
servant to get what he wants?'
Mr Hurd's robust condemnation of media standards underlines concern among
senior ministers about the impact of the stream of sleaze allegations on the
government's standing.
Mr Hurd warned MPs to remain 'above approach,' and conceded that the
government would have to join the debate initiated by the Nolan committee on
standards of behaviour in public life.
'Personally I have no difficulty with the idea that MPs should be part-time
farmers, lawyers or businessmen. It enriches the contribution which the MP
makes,' he said.
'But his prime responsbility must be to represent his own convictions in the
interests of his constituents, not to act on the interests of those who pay
him an additional, extra-Parliamentary, salary. We in public life must be,
and be seen to be, above reproach.'
