FT  13 DEC 94 / Technology: Cancer risks from radiation exposure
Radiation is responsible for about 3 per cent of cancer deaths. The vast
majority result from natural sources: radon gas in the air; radioactive
minerals in rocks and soil; cosmic rays from outer space; and ultraviolet
radiation from the sun.
Exposure to man-made radiation has fallen substantially over the past 30
years - mainly because regulatory authorities have responded to scientists
such as Alice Stewart of Birmingham University, who showed that the risks of
low-level radiation were greater than anyone realised during the golden dawn
of the nuclear age in the 1940s and 1950s.
Medical X-rays deliver far smaller doses than they used to, and the nuclear
industry has cut the radiation exposure of its own workforce and of the
general public through discharges into the environment.
Now, natural radiation is becoming increasingly controversial. The most
significant natural source is a radon, a radioactive gas that occurs at
elevated levels in some parts of the world (such as Devon and Cornwall in
England and the Appalachian Mountains in the US).
On the basis of studies of uranium miners exposed to very high radon levels,
the US Environmental Protection Agency and UK National Radiological
Protection Board have estimated that indoor radon is responsible for about
14,000 lung cancer deaths a year in the US and 2,000 in the UK - making
radon the main cause of lung cancer after smoking. They are therefore
running expensive campaigns to identify houses with highest radon levels and
alter their foundations and floors to keep the gas out. But some critics
dispute the evidence that domestic radon is causing so much cancer.
The ultraviolet rays that beat down on us from the sun have a quite
different effect on the body. Whereas the 'ionising radiation' from
radioactive materials causes internal cancers, the sun's impact is on the
skin. Cases of melanoma, the most serious form of skin cancer, are currently
increasing by about 4 per cent a year in Europe and north America - a direct
consequence of the growing popularity of sunbathing and outdoor pursuits.
