FT  10 FEB 94 / Markets Report: Sterling under pressure
Sterling continued its downward path yesterday as market sentiment soured
following Tuesday's 25 basis-point cut in interest rates, writes Philip
Gawith.
The pound finished in London yesterday at DM2.5708, four pfennigs lower than
its level before the rate reduction was announced and 2 1/2 pfennigs down on
the day. It closed nearly a cent lower against the dollar at Dollars 1.4605.
The trigger for further selling was the release of the Bank of England's
quarterly inflation report, which concluded that there was a risk of
underlying inflation rising. The market took the view that this could not be
reconciled with a decision to cut rates.
Coming against the backdrop of ongoing political difficulties for the
government, heightened by the death of Tory MP Mr Stephen Milligan, the
market sensed a whiff of political expediency in the air and this is always
very negative for sterling.
Analysts were harsh in their assessment of the Bank's rate cut, which was
widely branded a failure, both in presentational terms and in terms of the
worsening inflation outlook, reflected in the fall in bond prices.
Mr Steve Hannah, head of research at IBJ International, described sterling's
weakness as 'a classic chartist move'. Although the drop was triggered by
fundamental factors, the extent of the fall was likely to be determined by
technical considerations.
He said the pound was effectively retracing the sharp upward move of the
last four months which had seen it rise fairly sharply from DM2.43 in
October - before the Bundesbank started cutting rates - to a high in January
of DM2.63. Dealers said sterling should attract a fair degree of support at
the DM2.53-2.55 level.
Mr Hannah added that he did not expect sterling's weakness against the
D-Mark to continue for more than a few weeks. On the one hand, following the
poor reception of Tuesday's rate cut, there is probably not much more
downside for British rates.
In Germany, by contrast, figures released on Tuesday show unemployment is
still rising and analysts believe there is still room for a 100 basis-point
fall in interest rates. 'The interest rate argument will swing back in the
UK's favour,' said Mr Hannah.
Less rosy is the outlook for 'cable' - the sterling/dollar rate - which
technical analysts predict is heading for 'very big' trouble. They said if
it falls through Dollars 1.4550, then it could easily drop to Dollars
1.41-1.42.
The yen traded nervously again yesterday as the uneasy state of relations
between the US and Japan remained to the fore. Having fallen a yen in Asian
trade, sinking beneath Y108, the dollar traded below that level in London
and closed at Y107.8450. However, it improved in New York to end at Y108.35.
The dollar has weakened from a high of Y113.60 last month on fears that the
US may press for a higher yen as a means of cutting Japan's trade surplus
with the US should trade talks fail.
The hasty dispatch by Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa of his
foreign minister Mr Tsutomu Hata to Washington for urgent talks did nothing
to alleviate these fears.
Indeed, it was taken as confirmation that the two countries remain miles
apart in terms of tackling the surplus ahead of Friday's planned trade
summit between President Clinton and Mr Hosokawa. Mr Hata said: 'It is a
very difficult problem. The two sides are insisting on their own views. The
two views clash, but in order to have better relations with the US it was
hastily decided that I would visit the US for frank talks with my
counterparts.'
Japanese dealers were reported as saying that the Bank of Japan had
intervened during Asian trading hours in a bid to stem a further sharp
appreciation of the yen against the dollar. The BOJ was said to have bought
small amounts of dollars for yen when the US currency was falling towards
Y108 and below.
The D-Mark firmed slightly against other EMS currencies, but dealers said
the EMS was pretty much sidelined, with the dollar/yen and pound in the
headlines. The broad sideways movement within the EMS grid was expected to
continue ahead of next week's Bundesbank meeting.
Comments yesterday by Mr Gunter Rexrodt, the German economics minister, that
bringing down unemployment was the government's highest priority indicated
the pressure the government is under for a more expansionary policy. Some
analysts said this might make D-Mark assets less attractive and put downward
pressure on the currency.
The Bank of England provided the UK money market with around Pounds 270m of
late, unspecified assistance, bringing total help for the day to Pounds
601m. This compared with its latest forecast of a Pounds 900m liquidity
shortage.
The Bank also announced that it would provide a total of Pounds 3.667bn
through its repo and secured loan facility on February 10. The Bank said it
would allocate Pounds 2.484bn in its two-week repo expiring on February 24
and Pounds 1.183bn in the four-week repo maturing on March 10. The interest
rate of 5 5/32 per cent being offered on both facilities is in line with the
levels at which it provides repo assistance in its normal money market
operations.
 ----------------------------------
Pound in New York
 ----------------------------------
Feb 9          Close    Prev. close
 ----------------------------------
Pound spot    1.4605         1.4668
1 mth         1.4584         1.4646
3 mth         1.4544         1.4608
1 yr          1.4444         1.4505
 ----------------------------------
