FT  30 JUL 94 / Finance and the Family: Week ahead
First half results from British Petroleum, due on Tuesday, are expected to
show that the company remains on track to improve profitability and reduce
debt. Second quarter earnings on a replacement cost basis are predicted to
be in a range of Pounds 230m-Pounds 300m. BP should also benefit from the
recovery in crude oil prices, which have risen from a low last February of
around Dollars 12 a barrel for the benchmark Brent Blend to the present
level of more than Dollars 18.
Improvements in contract hire and coach distribution at T Cowie are expected
to lift interim pre-tax profits at the vehicle leasing and motor trading
group by about 27 per cent, due on Tuesday. The rise to nearly Pounds 20m is
likely to be fuelled mainly by the finance division, dominated by Cowie
Interleasing.
Opinions are divided on Harrisons &amp; Crosfield, the conglomerate which
reports interims on Wednesday. The split follows the mixed trading statement
in May, which stressed a continuing malaise in the pig industry but a good
performance from UK timber. Forecasts range from Pounds 45m to Pounds 55m,
against Pounds 48.4m last time.
Wickes, DIY retailer, is forecast to announce a doubling of interim profits
on Wednesday from Pounds 4.1m to between Pounds 8m and Pounds 9m before tax.
TI Group, the specialist engineering company, is expected to report interim
pre-tax profits of up to Pounds 70m, against Pounds 62.8m, on Thursday. The
increase is likely to be dominated by Bundy, the automotive and
refrigeration tubing business.
On Monday Abbey National, the home loans and banking group, announces its
interim results. Analysts' forecasts for pre-tax profits range from Pounds
400m to Pounds 440m, well ahead of the Pounds 301m announced last year.
There is more disagreement about the interim dividend, with forecasts
varying from 4.6p to 5.6p, against 4.15p.
On Tuesday, National Westminster Bank is expected to report first-half
pre-tax profits of Pounds 600m-Pounds 727m. The lowest estimate for the
interim dividend puts it at 6.4p per share - the same as last year - the
highest is for 7.5p.
