FT  15 JUL 94 / Elderly give Singapore's leaders grey hairs: 'Sue Your Son'
bill passing through republic's parliament aims to make adults responsible
for needy parents
Like many countries, Singapore will in future have fewer people of working
age supporting an expanding pool of elderly. 'I worry that in 30 years' time
our economy may lose some of its drive, vigour and competitiveness,' says Mr
Goh Chok Tong, Singapore's prime minister.
According to government projections, about 30 per cent of Singapore's
population will be over 60 in the year 2030, compared with today's figure of
9 per cent.
Radical solutions are being proposed.
The Maintenance of Parents Bill, now going through parliament, would compel
adult offspring to give financial support to needy parents. Under the terms
of the privately sponsored but government supported bill, children who
failed to comply would be liable to fines and jail.
The 'Sue Your Son' bill tackles a number of government obsessions. Singapore
is one of the most economically successful countries in Asia; a country of
fewer than 3m people, it has foreign exchange reserves of more than
USDollars 40bn (Pounds 26.3bn). Average annual per capita income, at more
than SDollars 25,000 (Pounds 10,600), is exceeded in Asia only by Japan. The
economy grew by 9.9 per cent last year.
Yet economic success has not brought any comprehensive welfare system.
Welfare, according to the government, is part of the 'democratic distemper'
which has caused western economies to become sluggish and lose their
competitive edge.
Instead, a central provident fund (CPF), a compulsory savings scheme to
which both workers and employers contribute, is supposed to cover the needs
of old age. CPF savings can be withdrawn only when workers reach 55,
although they can be used to raise mortgages and recently the government has
allowed a portion of CPF funds to be used for share purchases.
It would be a disaster, says Mr Goh, if companies and young workers had to
be taxed heavily to support a large number of elderly Singaporeans. 'I worry
that what is happening to the developed countries can also happen to
Singapore,' he says. 'If we lose our competitiveness. . . our growth will
falter and Singaporeans will become unemployed.'
Singapore watchers see other reasons behind the government's support for the
parents bill.
According to the government, the family - with its emphasis on filial piety,
obedience and discipline - is the core of an Asian value system, responsible
for political and social stability as well as encouraging traits that lead
to economic success. In this ideal, Confucianist world, the family also acts
as a bulwark against what are seen as corrosive western influences.
In the early 1980s Mr Lee Kuan Yew, the then prime minister, visited a new
housing development. He was dismayed to find it had two homes for the
elderly.
'It is not something to be proud of,' said Mr Lee. 'It must not be
encouraged. . . it is unsound for a government to take over family
responsibilities for we shall damage the basic unit of society, the family,
the building bricks of our society.'
Recently Mr Lee, now senior minister in Mr Goh's government, suggested that
parents aged between 35 and 60 be given a double vote. According to Mr Lee
this would give those who contribute most to society a greater say. Once
past 60 Singaporeans would revert to a single vote - otherwise, said Mr Lee,
the elderly could have a disproportionate influence and pressure the
government for more welfare.
Critics say the government, by supporting the parents bill and constantly
emphasising the family unit, is ignoring social trends.
As in many western countries, divorce rates in Singapore are rising - almost
doubling in the last 10 years. Birth rates, particularly among Singapore's
more affluent and educated, are falling. This has long-term economic
implications.
Already Singapore has chronic labour shortages and imports about 300,000
workers from neighbouring countries to make up the shortfall. Up until the
mid-1980s the government promoted birth control with a 'two is enough'
slogan. Now it exhorts couples to have 'three or more'.
However, procreation must take place within the family unit. The government
frowns on those merely living together. Unmarried couples cannot combine
their CPF funds to buy public housing and also face restrictions in the
private sector. With property prices rising rapidly, such rules are hurting.
Many say the government's policies avoid not only social realities but
economic circumstances. They point out that even in affluent Singapore there
are many who need state help and welfare. Some families will not necessarily
be able to support ageing parents.
In future years Singapore's elderly population is likely to cause a few grey
hairs among the island republic's leadership.
An article on a proposed state pension scheme for Hong Kong appeared in the
Financial Times yesterday.
