FT  07 MAY 94 / Mandela creates cabinet for unity: Thabo Mbeki chosen as
first deputy but finance ministry left unchanged as ANC fails to win
two-thirds majority
Mr Nelson Mandela yesterday appointed South Africa's first government of
national unity within hours of final figures confirming that his African
National Congress had won 62.65 per cent of votes cast in last week's
general election.
Mr Thabo Mbeki, widely admired as a pragmatic politician and an experienced
diplomat, was chosen as the country's first deputy president, making him the
likely successor to the 75-year-old Mr Mandela. Mr F W de Klerk, the
National party president, will be the second deputy president.
And in a powerful message to the business community and to foreign
investors, Mr Mandela said he would retain Mr Derek Keys, a member of the
National party, in his post as finance minister, despite opposition from
within the ANC.
Speaking in Cape Town, a conciliatory Mr Mandela who will be installed as
South Africa's first black president on Tuesday, acknowledged the need to
reassure both business and the white community. 'We realise the importance
of leaving the portfolio of finance as it is - without interference,' he
said.
The ANC emerged as overwhelming victor in the national vote, but fell short
of the two-thirds of the popular vote it needed to write a constitution
without the agreement of other parties.
It also failed to win in KwaZulu Natal province, where the Inkatha Freedom
party gained 50.32 per cent of the vote, and a one-seat majority in the
81-member provincial assembly.
Inkatha's victory in Natal, which local ANC officials have blamed on fraud,
will help counterbalance the ANC's power at national level.
The ANC's victory was also tempered by failure to emerge as the largest
party in the Western Cape, where the National party was the winner.
However, Mr Mandela said he was relieved that his party's runaway win
stopped short of the two-thirds majority 'because already tensions were
building up that we were now going to write our own constitution.'
The election was certified free and fair by the body charged with conducting
the poll, the Independent Electoral Commission, despite widespread evidence
of irregularities. Judge Johann Kriegler, IEC chairman, said the election
had been 'flawed' but added: 'The heart of the matter is that we were able
to establish the expressed will of the people with reasonable accuracy'.
Nationally, the National party won 20.39 per cent of the vote, lower than
expected but above the psychological threshold of 20 per cent needed to
establish the party as a substantial force in the government. It is likely
to have six ministers in the 27-member cabinet. Inkatha will have three.
However, the crucial question of which cabinet portfolio would be allocated
to Inkatha leader, Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, remained unanswered last
night.
Most of the remaining cabinet posts are expected to be filled by members of
the ANC although last week Mr Mandela hinted that he would include
representatives of the radical Pan Africanist Congress, and the liberal,
mainly white Democratic party which won 1.25 per cent and 1.73 per cent of
the vote respectively.
The choice of Mr Mbeki as first deputy president came after Mr Cyril
Ramaphosa, the former trade union leader who played a vital role in last
year's constitutional talks, declined a cabinet post. He had been tipped for
the post but opted to work to strengthen the ANC as party general secretary.
Spirit of reconciliation sweeps aside letter of vote, Page 3
Man in the news, Page 8
