FT  30 JUL 94 / Lloyd's changes tack on three-year accounting
Lloyd's of London yesterday signalled the probable end of the archaic
requirement for underwriting syndicates to report their results over a
three-year period.
The corporation said it was considering removing the financial practice
which is linked to nautical traditions as old as the 300-year-old insurance
market itself.
The move is partly a symbolic modernisation but is also likely to have
widespread implications in releasing profits more quickly to both corporate
capital and Names, the individuals whose assets have traditionally supported
the market.
The practice of using three-year accounting periods for syndicates is rooted
in the origins of Lloyd's, which derived its business from insuring trading
ships on their voyages around the world.
Three years was the time it took before ocean-going vessels returned to dock
in England, at the end of which underwriters would know for certain the size
of any claims on which they were expected to pay.
Since then the range of insurance activities underwritten at Lloyd's has
diversified and the reasons for the practice have been lost in history.
Lloyd's said yesterday: 'A three-year return voyage to the Spice Islands
can't really be equated with an aircraft crash or the sales rep driving
around the M25 in a car.'
The Lloyd's market and regulatory boards have both in principle agreed to
allow syndicates to reduce the three-year accounting period to two years.
A further progression to one-year accounts - in line with the practice of
most companies and other organisations which issue financial statements - is
likely to follow.
The modification still requires the approval of the Lloyd's Council, which
meets next Wednesday, and further details are likely to be released by
October.
Under the changes - which will be voluntary - an interim payment from the
1993 underwriting year could be paid during 1995.
The first two-year accounting cycle would start with the 1994 year, allowing
it to close at the end of 1995 with profits distributed during 1996.
The result would be that loss-making Names would be able to offset their
outstanding losses more quickly against profits generated by the syndicates
of which they are members.
Some predictions suggest that across the market there will be modest losses
in 1992 but that 1993 is likely to be profitable after several years of
heavy losses.
