FT  24 JUN 94 / Government Bonds: Cautious buying extends recovery in
European prices
European government bonds extended Wednesday's recovery yesterday, helped by
cautious buying from investors who had been sidelined for weeks.
Some participants said the markets may be bottoming after months of sharp
declines. 'We are close to the bottom,' said Mr Nigel Richardson at Yamaichi
International. 'We are approaching a level where investors are ready to come
back to the market.'
However, others said it may take a while before bonds can stage a
sustainable recovery.
'If a bullish turnround is actually beginning, a re-test of the lows will be
needed to strengthen the base from which to build a sustainable uptrend,'
argued Mr Karl Haeling, of Deutsche Bank.
'I see this as a much-needed bear-market correction,' commented Mr Graham
McDevitt of market analysts IDEA. He expects the recovery to continue
near-term, underpinned by chart-technical factors, but warned that bonds
might succumb to some profit-taking before the weekend.
German bonds ended a volatile session firmer, with the longer maturities
outperforming the short end. The Bundesbank council's decision to leave
official interest rates unchanged prompted some slippage after early rumours
of rate cuts.
Cautionary comments from council member Mr Otmar Issing, who said markets
should not conclude that the recent pattern of regular five basis point cuts
in the securities repurchase rate would automatically continue, further
damped interest rate optimism.
Some traders have been speculating that the Bundesbank may set fixed-rate
repos through the summer period, possibly at a rate below the current 5 per
cent.
In late trading, the September bund future on Liffe was about 0.47 points
higher at 92.37.
UK gilts gained slightly in thin and nervous trading that saw sharp rises
and falls throughout the day.
But analysts remained sceptical about how long the recent improved sentiment
 -due largely to the halt in the dollar's slide and the perception that a US
interest rate increase is not imminent - will last. Most activity continued
to take place in the futures market, with few cash transactions.
'The fundamental problems still remain - to do with funding, economic
recovery and the strength of inflationary pressures,' said Mr Simon Briscoe,
of S. G. Warburg Securities. 'The market will continue to look for reasons
to fall back again,' said one trader.
Analysts confirmed rumours that the Bank of England supplied a modest amount
of bonds yesterday to market-makers which have suffered from recent bond
volatility.
The Bank announced that a Pounds 150m tranche of 4 3/8 per cent index-linked
gilt due 2004 was exhausted in late afternoon trading.
The long gilt future was up  11/32 points at 100 1/8 in late trading, off
the day's high of 100 31/32 reached after an early technical squeeze but
above the low for the day of 99 23/32 .
French bonds ended a volatile day sharply higher, lifted by early buying in
the futures market and follow-through cash buying in the afternoon. The
September notional bond future on Matif rose 1.26 points to 114.70.
US Treasury bonds were mixed yesterday amid conflicting economic signals and
further improvement in the dollar.
Late in the session, the benchmark 30-year government bond was  1/16 lower
at 86 1/4 , yielding 7.40 per cent. The two-year note was  1/16 better at
100 3/32 , to yield 5.933 per cent.
Perhaps the two most crucial pieces of economic news of the week were
released yesterday morning, but neither of them was particularly conclusive.
The Commerce Department said that new orders of factory goods last month had
risen 0.9 per cent, substantially higher than the consensus forecast of 0.4
per cent.
However, the inflationary implications of the gain were mitigated by a 2.5
per cent decline in orders of non-defence capital goods, excluding aircraft.
Treasury prices dipped on the announcement but heavy selling pressure failed
to materialise in early trading.
Later in the morning, the Labor Department had some unqualified good news
for the fixed-rate investors looking for signs of moderating economic
growth. Initial claims for unemployment benefit last week climbed by 3,000,
against expectations of a 3,000 decline.
In the foreign exchange markets, developments were mildly positive, as the
dollar moved above the Y101 mark on unfounded speculation that central banks
were poised to intervene on the US currency's behalf.
Commodity prices, excluding gold and oil, were softer, in keeping with a
week-long trend.
As a result, Treasuries turned around and nudged in to positive territory by
mid-morning.
However, prices soon began to erode again as traders remained tentative
pending any convincing developments, either in terms of economic news or
movements in the commodity or foreign exchange markets.
