FT  14 FEB 94 / UK move to open US telecoms market
Opening the US telecommunications market to British operators will test US
regulatory authorities in the coming weeks, and the outcome is likely to
have significant implications for access to the US market by other overseas
operators.
Cable &amp; Wireless, the UK telecommunications group, is seeking a waiver from
a restriction on foreign operators owning more than 25 per cent of a company
holding a radio-based licence in the US.
The waiver application, to the Federal Communications Commission, the US
telecoms regulator, is prompted by the prospect of licences being granted
nationwide for personal communications services (PCS), a new cellular mobile
technology.
More than 400 licences will be granted for franchise areas across the US.
The contest for licences will be fought fiercely among US telecoms
operators: more than Dollars 10bn (Pounds 6.8bn) is expected to be raised by
the government in fees.
The FCC has discretion to issue a waiver and will judge the C&amp;W application
on its merits. The terms of its ruling are that the UK has placed no bar on
foreign ownership of licences for personal communications networks, the UK
equivalent of PCS. One network was launched last year, in which US West, US
regional Bell company, has a 50 per cent stake, with C&amp;W its partner.
A second PCN network is set to be launched in the UK in April by Hutchison
Whampoa, the Hong Kong conglomerate.
Mr Keith Bernard, C&amp;W's director of regulatory affairs in Washington, said:
'We want the freedom to do what US companies are allowed to do in the UK, so
that we can integrate PCS into our existing networks in the US.'
The 25 per cent ceiling dates back to the first world war. It was imposed
for security reasons, but is now generally viewed as a protectionist device.
The FCC is likely to be guided by political considerations. Although some on
Capitol Hill have a record of hostility to overseas operators entering the
US, analysts believe the evidence of openness in the UK could lead to a
change of policy with regard to the UK.
The decision has wider ramifications. British Telecommunications is
currently seeking a licence to operate in the US in its own right, as is
AT&amp;T in the UK.
US regulators also have soon to decide whether to allow UK operators to
offer 'international simple resale' services to the UK, which would allow
companies to resell lines switched into the public network on both sides of
the Atlantic.
