FT  25 MAY 94 / Japan offers limited sanctuary for whales: Compromise aimed
at averting Antarctic ban
Japan, faced with a possible ban on whaling in its traditional South Sea
hunting grounds, has countered with a compromise proposal to establish a
whale sanctuary in part of the Antarctic Ocean, Reuter reports from Puerto
Vallarta.
Japan presented its plan to the International Whaling Commission's annual
conference held in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, as an alternative to a French
proposal to create a no-hunting zone covering all of Antarctica and
stretching halfway to the equator.
The French proposal needs the support of three-quarters of the approximately
40 commission member nations attending the five-day meeting if it is to be
adopted.
Delegates and observers predicted the vote, expected later in the week,
would be close.
The Japanese plan would eventually allow whalers to capture up to 4,000
minke whales in the seas outside the sanctuary once the commission
establishes a scheme to regulate and monitor the hunt.
Minke whales have survived in greater numbers than other whales because,
although they are larger than elephants, they are smaller than the great
whales and were consequently hunted less in previous decades.
The whaling commission estimates there are 760,000 minke whales, but it has
imposed a moratorium on commercial whaling for the past eight years pending
the passage of the so-called Revised Management Plan.
Despite the ban, Japanese whalers are permitted by the commission to capture
up to 330 minke whales in the Antarctic under a 12-year research programme.
The whale meat eventually ends up in Japanese markets, where it fetches
Dollars 50 a pound.
Norway, which protested against the moratorium, resumed commercial whaling
last year and killed more than 200 whales.
The current situation frustrates environmental groups and other opponents of
the whale hunt as well as whalers, who accuse the whaling commission of
taking up animal rights and neglecting its original mandate to regulate
whaling.
'Our proposal provides a scientific basis for a sanctuary,' said Mr Kazuo
Shima, head of Japan's delegation to the commission.
Supporters of the French plan to create a giant whale sanctuary in the
Antarctic said on Monday that they had lined up nearly all the votes they
needed.
'We're pretty sure of 18 or 19 votes, and another four or five look good,'
said Ms Cassandra Phillips, an Antarctic specialist with the environmental
organisation, WWF World Wide Fund for Nature. 'On the whole, we're pretty
optimistic.'
Ms Phillips said around 21 votes would be needed to overcome the votes of
seven IWC members expected to oppose the proposal.
Environmental groups accuse Japan of buying the votes of its whaling
commission allies, mostly poor Caribbean and South Pacific states with no
whaling industries, with aid.
