FT  12 JUL 94 / Survey of France (11): Goliath gives way - David Buchan
looks at monopoly deregulations
Euroteleport is smaller and less grandiose than its name. With just 10 full
time staff, it sees itself as David to the Goliath that is France Telecom,
with 156,000 employees. But from its base of Roubaix, Euroteleport is
prising loose France Telecom's lock-hold on telecommunications in the
country.
It set itself up last year as a kind of airport (hence its name) to direct
communications traffic for companies which, since 1990, have been allowed to
go outside France Telecom in creating internal networks between their own
factories, subsidiaries or industrial partners.
Since 1990 France's PTT has granted some 200 licences for such independent
networks. Some have gone to organisations with obvious means as well as
needs, such as the SNCF railway system and Electricite de France (EdF), the
electricity utility, whose tracks and cables can accommodate parallel
telephone lines. But several private companies without these terrestrial
advantages have gone for help to Euroteleport.
Mr Jean-Pierre Machart, Euroteleport's managing director, claims that
dissatisfaction with France Telecom prices turned two other customers
towards Euroteleport. The local textile group of de Wavrin decided that
France Telecom was providing too expensive a link between its Scottish,
Italian and Dutch branches, and is now following Euroteleport's advice in
using US Sprint, although the fact that the latter has just linked up with
France Telecom may jeopardise Euroteleport's relationship with Sprint in the
long term.
Auchan, the supermarket chain, was paying France Telecom FFr14.5m a year to
link its 52 supermarkets in France for a service that Mr Machart claims to
be able to provide for FFr4.5m a year.
In fact, France Telecom has entered far more into the spirit of competition
than other French utilities, pushed partly by the European Commission and
partly by new technology which is steadily reducing the barriers to entry
into its market. 'We are no longer a monopoly,' says Mr Gerard Moine of
France Telecom.
The red letter date in the European telecoms calendar is January 1 1998,
when ordinary voice telephony is to be opened to competition. It is hard to
see France Telecom losing its national hold over this.
Even Euroteleport's ambition is purely regional. 'We would like to be the
telecom operator for everyone in the Nord-Pas de Calais region,' says Mr
Machart. 'But we are too small to try to link up the whole of France. We
could have satellite clients across the country, charging for instance
FFr1.50 a minute to call the US compared to today's cost of FFr6. But France
Telecom could always react by lowering international call costs, because it
has such a large domestic business on which tariffs could be commensurately
raised.'
Indeed, further reductions in its international tariffs are an important
part of France Telecom's preparation for 1998. But Mr Moine admits that it
may not be easy, given that it has already cut trans-Atlantic charges by 60
per cent over the past five years, and the French utility's debt servicing,
at 8 per cent of turnover, is much heavier than, say, British Telecom's at 3
per cent.
France's two other Goliaths, EdF and Gaz de France, are showing far more
determination to keep potential Davids at bay. In contrast to telecoms,
where it has accepted European liberalisation with a more or less good
grace, France is still stoutly contesting the European Commission's attempts
to end its energy monopolies.
It believes that Brussels is behaving like a lawyer rather than an economist
in refusing to acknowledge both the huge energy investments that only
monopolies or near-monopolies can make, and the huge advantages that these
investments can produce. With assets of FFr 600bn, a debt of FFr170bn and a
cash flow of FFr60bn a year, EdF has become the world's largest producer of
electricity (generated 75 per cent by its 54 nuclear power plants). With the
exception of some Dutch and UK rates, it is the cheapest in Europe.
The Commission has said it will take France and several other EU states to
court for refusing to end monopolies on importing (as well as the slightly
less sensitive matter of exporting) energy, but it has not yet done so. The
stakes are less high for EdF (which exports some 12 per cent of its output
now) than for GdF, which already imports 90 per cent of its gas.
'The government is worried that breaking up GdF's import monopoly would
fragment and weaken France's bargaining power when it comes to buying as gas
from supplier monopolies in Russia, Norway or Algeria,' says a senior
industry ministry official.
But the government seems ready to accept its recent Mandil committee report
that certain industrial users of gas could contract to import gas directly,
but only 'in co-operation with the network' - in other words, GdF.
In addition, without privatising the utility, the government is ready to
open GdF's capital to oil or gas producers - a possibility enhanced by the
fact that GdF's new president, Mr Loik Le Floch Prigent, used to head
Elf-Aquitaine.
The Commission has made further liberalisation proposals, to win approval
from other EU institutions. They have drawn a mixed reaction from France:
France is ready to allow outsiders to bid competitively to supply additional
electricity generation to EdF which, however, would remain the sole
distributor of power in the country. This would end EdF's production
monopoly, as the Commission desires.
France is flatly opposed to allowing 'third party access' requiring EdF/GdF
to carry other people's electricity or gas to any French consumer who wants
it.
Paris objects on grounds of equity and efficiency. It would undermine
uniformity of price - considered an overriding social objective in France -
because French companies would be bypassing EdF/GdF to get a cheaper price.
It would also undermine the certainty needed for investment. 'No one would
build nuclear plants any more,' says Mr Pierre Lederer, chief EdF economist.
'It would have an accordion-like effect on the market,' comments Mr
Dominique Maillard of the industry ministry, because falls in investment
would lead to eventual shortages and price rises themselves stimulating
over-investment and over-capacity.
France is against a free energy market for itself, but sees some
self-interest in others making the experiment. EdF has become the world's
biggest electricity exporter, partly because the break-up of monopolies in,
for example, the UK, have given it a market.
Monopoly at home, free market abroad? Who could ask for more?
