FT  14 OCT 94 / The Conservatives in Bournemouth: Vouchers plan for nursery
education - Major to guarantee schooling for four-year-olds
Mr John Major is expected to say today that his government will introduce a
voucher system for nursery education - guaranteeing schooling to every child
at the age of four.
Following strong pressure from parents, educationalists and teachers the
prime minister is due to announce in today's speech to the Conservative
conference that the parents of every four-year-old will be given a voucher
to fund a place at a nursery or at a reception class in a primary school.
The reform, which will affect 600,000 children, is expected to cost the
government well over half a billion pounds.
It is understood that in spite of the stringency of this year's public
spending round the Treasury has approved Department for Education plans to
introduce such a scheme within the next two years.
There was speculation last night, however, that there would be no provision
for three-year-old children, as has been promised by the Labour party.
The pressure to extend nursery education built up amid signs that the UK was
trailing behind France, Belgium and the Netherlands in providing schooling
to three and four-year-olds. However, the UK's provision is slightly ahead
of the US and Japan.
Britain's public-sector nurseries provide places for 38 per cent of
three-year-olds and 56 per cent of four-year-olds.
Late last year the prime minister called for nursery education to be
provided for all children, but acknowledged that there was a short-term
funding barrier.
On primary and secondary education, Mrs Gillian Shephard, the education
secretary, yesterday announced tougher standards for teaching English in
England and Wales.
Mrs Shephard told Tory representatives at Bournemouth that a tougher
curriculum for English language teaching would be introduced next year, amid
widespread concern that standards of literacy have slipped sharply in recent
years.
She also launched an initiative to raise public consciousness about the need
for good communication skills, inviting leaders of business and industry to
tell the government about their experience in this area.
She said: 'I want to put together a national campaign, inviting politicians,
industry, the media and business to raise awareness about the need for clear
communication. It is very important that people in business understand the
importance of communicating clearly with the customer.'
Mrs Shephard assured representatives that the government would impose a
period of stability in primary and secondary education in the next few years
to allow its recent reforms to take root.
She made clear that the workload on teachers imposed by the national
curriculum would be sharply reduced following the implementation of a report
by Sir Ron Dearing, the chief curriculum adviser.
Announcing that she would accept Sir Ron's report in full, Mrs Shephard told
journalists that 20 per cent of the timetable for primary school teachers
would be flexible and 40 per cent for secondary schools.
