FT  12 JAN 94 / Baker 'was unaware' of intelligence connection: Judge
presses former home secretary in arms-for-Iraq probe
The minister who attempted to suppress evidence crucial to the defence of a
businessman charged with exporting arms to Iraq was unaware that the
businessman was supplying the intelligence services with information on
Iraq's military enhancement.
At the Scott inquiry yesterday, Mr Kenneth Baker, former home secretary,
said he was never told about the intelligence role of Mr Paul Henderson, one
of the defendants in the Matrix-Churchill trial, before he signed a public
interest immunity certificate. It authorised the withholding of Whitehall
documents in November 1991.
The justification for Mr Baker's decision was questioned repeatedly by Lord
Justice Scott and his counsel Miss Presiley Baxendale QC. The judge told Mr
Baker at one point in the public hearing: 'It is the absence of any
questioning I am finding a little difficult to understand. There was a
pretty shrewd notion in government circles what the defence would be.'
The judge said the question he was asking himself was whether there should
be greater limitations put on the use of such certificates in the future.
Mr Baker said he had signed the certificate when the case was at its
committal stage following a request from Customs and Excise, which was
prosecuting the Matrix-Churchill case. At that stage Mr Baker was minister
responsible for the intelligence services. He acted on the advice of
government law officers and with the attorney-general's approval.
Mr Baker said: 'It was the role of the home secretary to protect the
operation of the security services, to protect the knowledge of agents,
methods of operations, and technical matters.' Mr Baker was told in broad
terms by his legal advisers that intelligence knew about Matrix-Churchill's
involvement with Iraq, and that it was proposed that an unnamed intelligence
witness would be giving evidence in the trial for the prosecution.
Mr Baker said it would not have been 'appropriate' for him as home secretary
to establish what the defence case would be, nor whether the intelligence
information was relevant to their case. The prosecution, he said, had
advised him that intelligence was only of 'marginal relevance' to the
defence.
The public hearing continues today with evidence from Lord Howe, the former
foreign secretary.
