FT  27 AUG 94 / Shortage of PVC to raise cost of building products
Makers of building products are facing shortages and steep price rises in
one of their main raw materials, polyvinyl chloride.
In the UK, manufacturers of plastic pipes, cabling and other products are
poised to raise prices for the second time this year following an increase
of more than a third in world PVC prices.
Heavy demand, especially from construction work in east Asia, and technical
problems at petrochemical plants in the US and Italy have meant that PVC
producers have struggled to supply customers.
Mr David Trapnell, chief executive of Marley, the UK building products
group, said his company had already increased prices of plastic products by
5 per cent and planned a further rise of up to 9 per cent next month PVC
accounted for about half of raw material costs.
Mr Terry Reddick, manufacturing director of Hepworth Building Products,
makers of plastic pipes, which has announced similar price increases, said:
'There are shortages. Supplies are difficult to get but not impossible.'
Construction is the biggest market for PVC, taking 57 per cent of European
capacity. The second biggest market is packaging with 15 per cent, according
to specialist chemicals consultancy Chem Systems.
Price rises have been led by north America and east Asia. US demand rose 8
per cent in the first quarter compared with the same period last year.
Prices rose from about Dollars 620 (Pounds 400) a tonne to Dollars 800 a
tonne between January and June this year.
South Korean demand increased 15 per cent in the 12 months to March and
prices rose from Dollars 640 a tonne in January to Dollars 860 in June.
European spot prices in the past year have risen from Pounds 400 a tonne to
Pounds 600, said Hepworth.
The increased demand from east Asian and US construction industries has been
followed to a lesser extent in Europe where German housebuilding and
renovation have risen sharply and where a slow recovery is under way in the
UK housing market. European plants are operating close to capacity.
There have also been technical problems with plants making ethylene, one of
the main raw materials for PVC. Two plants in the US and one in Italy have
been hit by production problems, and capacity overall has been cut by
closures such as the one at BP's plant at Baglan Bay in South Wales earlier
this year.
The price rise increases the chances of a flotation of EVC, ICI's joint
venture with Italy's Enichem and Europe's largest producer of PVC.
