FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of Slovakia (4): Never mind the politics - A second
round of privatisation is about to start
Differences over the policy and implementation of privatisation have been a
battleground between Mr Vladimir Meciar and his political opponents
throughout the brief life of the Slovak republic.
Whatever their political allegiances, however, more than 3.2m Slovaks,
roughly 60 per cent of the population, have shown their hand by buying the
books of coupons which they can exchange for shares in state companies.
Popular support for private ownership did not translate into political
support for the outgoing government as happened in the Czech republic two
years ago. But the voucher method chosen for Slovakia's second round of mass
privatisation is based on that pioneered by the former Czechoslovakia and
put into operation in both halves of the then federal state.
Though the outgoing government's original plan to privatise up to SKK80bn
worth of state companies through vouchers is likely to be diluted by the new
administration, investment fund managers remain confident that it will give
a substantial boost to the country's capital markets and further increase
the role of the private sector in the Slovak economy.
Ladislav Vaskovic, chairman of VUB Invest which manages Slovakia's biggest
investment fund, VUB Kupon, describes the response to the voucher
privatisation programme as 'the biggest mandate of all'. It is a clear sign
that Slovaks are in favour of voucher privatisation, he says, and should
send a message to the incoming administration of Vladimir Meciar not to
tamper with it, as he has threatened.
If even a watered-down version of voucher privatisation is completed it will
give a substantial boost to Slovakia's capital markets. Investment fund
managers say the final size of the voucher privatisation programme should be
SKK60bn.
This is lower than the Moravcik government's target because the original
proposals included the profitable gas transmission and electricity
generation and transmission companies. Now, Sergei Kozlik, Mr Meciar's chief
economic adviser, says the energy sector has been designated a 'strategic
industry' in which the state will retain a majority shareholding.
There are already more than 500 companies quoted on the Bratislava stock
exchange as a result of the first wave of voucher privatisation which took
place when Slovakia was part of federal Czechoslovakia. Only 13 companies
are fully listed, but they include such key companies as Biotika, a
pharmaceutical group, Slovnaft, the refining and petrochemical giant, Nafta,
a gas supplier, and Vseobecna Uverova Banka (the General Credit Bank),
Slovakia's dominant commercial bank.
Stockbrokers say the bulk of trading activity is concentrated on about 50
stocks, which are liquid enough to allow for a true market in their shares.
Over 90 per cent of all trading is done outside the three official trading
systems, the stock exchange, the options exchange, and the RM-S, a computer
trading system that depends for its viability on dispersed shareholdings
resulting from voucher privatisation.
Trading is dominated by the big investment fund managers, which include
Harvard Capital and Consulting, CassoviaInvest and Creditanstalt as well as
VUB.
Share prices are currently in the doldrums, with the SAX index of
most-traded shares hovering around the 200 points level, compared to its
peak of 401 points last March. That rally was driven mainly by foreign
investment at a time when the Prague stock market was also booming, but a
subsequent pull-out by overseas investors caused both markets to collapse.
The Bratislava market's biggest problem is its chronic lack of liquidity.
Ironically, one of the causes of illiquidity is voucher privatisation, which
leaves investment funds with large portfolios of shares and little or no
cash.
Fund managers lament the lack of fixed interest stocks in the market, with
just four large bond issues quoted so far.
In common with other emerging markets, Slovakia's capital markets are also
beset with problems of transparency and lack of regulation. The outgoing
government has almost completed a major plan to supervise the banking and
financial sector, and there is a proposal to establish a regulatory body
along the lines of the US Securities and Exchange Commission to set rules
and ensure they are implemented.
Brigita Schmognerova, outgoing deputy prime minister in charge of the
economy, says the new body will be charged with supervising the banking,
pension fund and investment fund industries as well as the stock exchange.
The authorities' main aim is to prevent a banking collapse on the scale of
that of Banka Bohemia, a Czech bank that was shut down earlier this year
after it issued Dollars 1bn worth of fake securities abroad.
'We have not had any big problems so far but it is only a matter of time,'
Ms Schmognerova says. 'I hope the new government understands the necessity
of building such an institution.'
The outgoing government's plan also calls for the concentration of share
trading in a single market. Bratislava's three stock markets are an
expensive anachronism in such an underdeveloped market, and a fierce battle
for survival is currently being waged between the stock exchange, which is
owned by Slovakia's major banks, and the options exchange, which functions
as a spot market. Thomas Grey, principal investment officer at Slovak
International, an investment advisory group, says the stock market is 50
years behind the times.
Volume on the official markets rarely exceeds Dollars 150,000 daily, which
is less than 10 per cent of total trading. The rest is done directly among
brokers and market makers who bypass official channels because it is cheaper
and faster. Brokers favour the options exchange, where a one-day forward
contract helps set price levels in the over-the-counter market.
Juraj Siroky, president of Harvard Capital and Consulting (closely related
to the company of the same name in Prague), says the options exchange is
more tuned in to market trends and could already be the main trading
mechanism if it had not been refused a stock market licence by the finance
ministry. But the latter currently favours the existing stock exchange as
the centre of future trading.
