FT  18 JUL 94 / The Markets: Gas from greenhouses - Economic Eye
Labour standards, discussed here two weeks ago, are not the only contentious
issue foisted on the World Trade Organisation by pressure from industrial
countries, principally the US. The greening of trade is already on the
agenda, following the ministerial meeting in April.
The introduction of environmentalism into the trading system is a serious
worry: trade measures, however convenient, are never the first-best
instrument for achieving environmental objectives; the environmental cause
is exposed to capture by protectionist interests; and an escalation of trade
disputes in this area could undermine the multilateral trading system.
As explained by Daniel Esty of the Institute for International Economics in
Washington, in an admirably balanced book, the environmentalist agenda for
trade is based on four concerns: that trade liberalisation causes economic
growth, which harms the environment; that countries with lax environmental
standards enjoy an unfair competitive advantage; that trade rules may
undermine, or override, domestic environmental regulations; and that GATT
limits the use of trade restrictions as a form of leverage upon the
recalcitrant. *
Where the production of goods - such as clean air - or of bads  - such as
species extinction - carries no price, growth may be harmful. Yet this has
little to do with trade as such. Economic growth is also often good for the
environment. The most important cause of deforestation is felling for
firewood, which occurs when people cannot afford commercial energy.
Similarly, the quality of water and urban air improves as countries become
richer. To the extent that higher incomes are environmentally damaging, the
advanced industrial countries pose the main problem. The chart shows that US
residents emit 16 times more carbon dioxide (the leading cause of the
greenhouse effect) per person than their counterparts in low-income
countries.
It is also wrong to assume that trade liberalisation damages the
environment. By pricing energy well below world prices, the rate at which
China emits carbon dioxide per unit of gross domestic product is 16 times
higher than Japan's. Kym Anderson, the Australian international economist,
points out that, in the case of agriculture, 'countries with relatively low
producer prices, such as Argentina, Australia and Thailand use less than one
twentieth the amounts of chemical fertiliser per cropped hectare that high
price countries such as Switzerland use.' **
Equally misplaced is worry about eco-dumping. There is no difference between
the competitive implications of divergent environmental standards and the
consequences of other legitimate policy differences between countries.
Drawing on a study of seven advanced economies, Piritta Sorsa of the World
Bank also argues that the industries that spent most on pollution control
maintained their international competitiveness between 1970 and 1990. ***
Since rich countries have a comparative advantage in capital-intensive
process industries, this is unsurprising.
Optimal environmental regulations depend on resources, geography, wealth and
tastes, all of which diverge among countries. Moreover, a country as a whole
cannot be put at a competitive disadvantage, only specific industries.
Environmentalists presumably wish to see these polluting domestic industries
shrink. They also argue that opposition to higher standards, induced by fear
of foreign competition, is a political obstacle to the domestic regulations
they desire. Why must Mexico adopt standards it does not want, merely to
make it easier for environmentalists to obtain the acquiescence of US
industrialists?
The argument that trade rules and trade liberalisation may undermine
domestic environmental regulations is almost equally misplaced. Where an
international objective, such as preservation of the ozone layer, is
desired, the best course is global agreement. It is also questionable
whether countries should be allowed to restrict imports merely because they
are produced in ways deemed unacceptable. It is difficult to think of a way
to contain the cross-border assertion of divergent priorities. Dolphins are
valued in the US. How would the US feel if India were to argue for respect
for cows?
GATT does restrict use of trade restrictions as a lever. Where there is no
international environmental overspill, the issue is dumping. Where there is
such overspill, it is whether trade policy is the best instrument to bring
about change. It will not work with big and powerful countries. Trade
restrictions also impose costs on those who use them and risk cycles of
retaliation. The right policy must be compensation. At present, for example,
countries with forests are exporting the service of carbon dioxide
reduction. Because they are not recompensed, there is inadequate incentive
to continue.
Rich countries are telling people in poor countries to stop cutting down the
trees that absorb carbon dioxide they emit; to protect animals they think
valuable; and to stop production they condemn as polluting. People living in
greenhouses should stop emitting hypocritical gas.
* Daniel C Esty, Greening the Gatt: Trade, Environment and the Future
(Washington DC: Institute for International Economics, 1994); ** Kym
Anderson, 'Economic Growth, Environmental Issues and Trade, Discussion Paper
No 830 (London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, 1993); *** Piritta
Sorsa, Competitiveness and Environmental Standards, Working Paper 1249,
International Economics Department, World Bank.
