FT  17 SEP 94 / Cuba to follow up immigration accord with US: Havana sees
crack in sanctions
Cuba is quietly intensifying diplomatic efforts to widen what it perceives
as a crack in US sanctions following an immigration accord reached a week
ago with Washington.
'The accord in itself is a blow to the US policy of blockade,' Cuba's chief
negotiator at the immigration talks, Mr Ricardo Alarcon, said on Cuban
television on Thursday night.
Mr Alarcon, president of the island's National Assembly, said the September
9 immigration agreement, which aimed to halt an exodus of illegal refugees
fleeing Cuba by sea to the US, showed the US and Cuba could develop a normal
relationship in at least one area: immigration.
Mr Alarcon said the US had encouraged illegal immigration by Cubans in the
past to try to destabilise President Fidel Castro's government, but had now
agreed to work with Cuba to stop illegal departures, including air and sea
hijacks.
Outlining what else the Cuban government felt it had gained from the talks,
Mr Alarcon said they had generated a groundswell of opinion in the US
calling for a re-think of US policy towards Cuba and renewed dialogue.
He cited editorials to this effect published by leading US newspapers and
public comments by senior congressmen such as Lee Hamilton, President of the
foreign relations committee of the House of Representatives.
Senior US administration officials, however, had repeatedly stressed the
talks would deal with the immigration problem and nothing else. But the
Cuban government, which says its conflict with the US cannot be solved if
the lifting of the US trade embargo is not discussed, is clearly hoping to
capitalise on the publicity generated by the talks to keep attention focused
on the embargo issue.
Mr Alarcon said a fundamental point of disagreement had been the US failure
to lift additional sanctions on Cuba imposed by US President Bill Clinton on
August 20. These placed restrictions on hard currency remittances sent by
Cuban-Americans in the US to relatives in Cuba, as well as reducing flights
between the two countries and visits by family members.
Mr Alarcon said these latest sanctions were intended to appease the
right-wing sector of the Cuban exile community in Miami, which strongly
opposed any direct dialogue. But the measures were hurting Cuban-Americans
in the US as much as Cubans on the island, he said.
Although the outcome of the immigration talks had been encouraging, Mr
Alarcon made clear he did not consider that an end to the US-Cuban dispute
was imminent.
He rejected US demands for Cuba to change its one-party political system,
improve human rights and reform its centrally-run economy.
'We are being generous enough in saying we are willing to discuss the
embargo. It should be lifted. Full stop,' he said.
He cited an existing UN General Assembly resolution condemning the US
embargo against Cuba and calling for it to be lifted.
Under the September 9 immigration accord, Washington said it would allow a
minimum of 20,000 Cubans to migrate legally to the US each year. In return,
Cuba moved to halt illegal departures by Cubans to the US following the
exodus of around 30,000 Cubans by sea over the last six weeks.
The progress of the accord will be reviewed at talks to be held no later
than 45 days after September 9.
