FT  30 JUL 94 / Dispatches: A journey to the heart of Zionism - Jerusalem
The highway from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem is a brief but significant route. It
is more than a road. It is a road heavily annotated, a road turned
scripture.
First you pass a Trappist monastery; then a British garrison fort, still
trim and intact; then, less pristine, a Crusader castle; and then, amid
eucalyptus trees planted on steep hillsides by Jewish settlers in the last
century, you see more recent wreckage: burnt-out tanks, rusted vehicles and
the skewed limbs of derelict artillery. These are not eyesores but studied
relics of Israeli and Arab claims to Jerusalem. You are headed for a dearly
disputed place.
The harbingers of Jerusalem seem half-designed to heighten your first visit.
And if you arrive with no more than a childhood, chapel-bred vision of it,
Jerusalem, at a distance, is entirely gratifying.
It is golden. Ronald Storrs, when appointed British military governor of the
city in 1917, must have had those hymns of heavenly Jerusalem echoing in his
mind when, like Bernard of Cluny, he indicated that he wanted a radiant
focus for contemplation.
He ordered that all planning permission oblige the use of local stone. And
it is a law that still prevails: there are new buildings rising wherever one
looks in Jerusalem. Even the most brutal high-rise hotel is clad with the
local pink-to-amber stone. The city glows.
I walked into old Jerusalem, as the pilgrims traditionally do, by the Jaffa
gate. Inside an hour I realised that the hymns in my life had not properly
prepared me. The topography of green hills and city walls is, not
surprisingly, all wrong.
But no Christian with a priming of aesthetic sensibility can fail to cringe
at the Gospel theme-park created here. It is largely 19th century work, now
invested with the fripperies of late 20th century tourism.
Having run the gauntlet of hawkers to reach the Holy Sepulchre, there is no
sanctuary; Calvary is a palace of gaudy altars, tombs, cisterns and
grottoes, in the precincts of which six separate Christian factions
sedulously compete for the pilgrim's custom. I suffered as two rival guides
bartered their prices for the Via Dolorosa, before making my own sad way to
Gethsemane.
Some dignity and loveliness are retained by the Mount of Olives. Yet the
verdict must be that Christian Jerusalem is not so much golden as brassy.
One progresses, at least architecturally, to the Dome of the Rock. The
Christian guidebooks admit that the Dome is an outstanding example of
Islamic design, and together with the nearby al-Aqsa Mosque offers a
marvellous panorama, up on the parapet of what used to be Herod's great
temple.
But the ambling, camcording hordes of the Gospel theme-park tend not to make
it up here. It is the third holiest site of Islam. Perhaps the most sensible
reaction of the non-Moslem is not to moralise on the impossibility of peace
here, but to do as Winston Churchill did in 1922. Having briskly set up the
principality of Transjordan, he went to the Rock and set up his easel.
With a recent call from Yasser Arafat for a jihad or holy war on Jerusalem
causing much chatter in Israel - in Israel, everyone is a member of the
chattering class - I was not alarmed to be thoroughly frisked before
approaching the Wailing Wall, which completes the religious Disneyland that
is the old city of Jerusalem.
Under the colossal blocks of the western side of Herod's temple, which the
Romans ruined 2,000 years ago, Jews - mostly black-clad and Orthodox:
black-clad because they are still mourning the temple's loss - muttered and
prayed.
Mount Zion itself is only a few minutes away. But I now understood why
Zionism, the movement which launched the concept of Israel about a century
ago, is essentially secular. Theodor Herzl, who convened the first Zionist
congress at Basle in 1897, toyed with both Argentina and Uganda as potential
homes for the Jews.
Jerusalem is a significant city only for fundamentalist Christians,
fundamentalist Moslems and fundamentalist Jews. Zionists prefer it to be
theirs, as they prefer Palestine to Argentina. But to become a convert to
Zionism, you must move on from Jerusalem.
Looking at a map, the state of Israel is really just as Balfour described
it: 'a small notch' surrounded by vast tracts of Arabia. When one discovers
how much of that small notch is desert, the geopolitical complaint that
animates so many Zionists - why do the Arabs begrudge us this tiny
territory, when they have so much? - is difficult to discard.
I travelled down to the northerly part of the Negev desert. Invited to
lecture at the newish Ben Gurion University at Beersheba, my only briefing
was not to bother with a jacket or tie for the occasion.
True, it was powerfully hot, even within this oasis. But the advice to leave
jacket and tie at home was not given solely out of solicitude for my
comfort. It was also a deferral to the shirt-sleeves, no-nonsense persona of
Ben Gurion - Labour leader of Israel, with one interruption, from 1948 to
1963 - and the pioneer ambience of this town.
I took it to be a model of Zionist aims. New inhabitants arrive on an almost
weekly basis. New houses, new roads, new schools are accordingly
constructed. The university specialises in research on water extraction. At
Beersheba, the desert is in retreat.
I slept on the sofa of an Auschwitz survivor: an impressively hedonistic
Transylvanian woman, whose compensation pension from the German government
helps keep her drinks cabinet stocked. She swept aside my suggestion that
life in this desert outpost might be dull.
'Nonsense,' she boomed. 'We have more concerts here than we can go to.
Didn't you know that every plane-load of Russian Jews brings us a new
orchestra?'
It is a familiar joke in Israel, that Russian Jewry - pouring into the
country at such a rate that supermarket milk cartons carry Cyrillic
instructions - are all professors and piano-tuners. And there was a genuine
sense of mystery, among the people I talked to, about the economics of this
sustained influx. There is no evident onset of unemployment, in spite of the
continued use of cheap Arab labour for most manual work.
Hebrew is taught by a patently successful intensive technique (in spite of
the milk cartons): voluble and abrasive as Israelis famously are, their
discordance is minimal. And they know it.
As befitted a visitor to Ben Gurion University, I was taken to a nearby
kibbutz. I had already learned to recognise a kibbutznik when I saw one: any
young person who looks as though he or she has drunk vinegar for breakfast.
The system breeds seriousness.
Many of those raised by kibbutz collectivism go on to hold high office in
Israel. The reason why many Israeli cabinet ministers carry the air of those
who know how to plough a field is that many Israeli cabinet ministers have
indeed ploughed fields in their time.
Since 1967 and the occupation of the West Bank, this kibbutz can no longer
be described as a border settlement; but the laager mentality of its workers
persists insofar as each takes a turn at guard duty, and immediately
adjacent to the school is a large concrete bunker.
My shirt-sleeved host and I inspected dozens of bright little kibbutz-reared
piglets, which brought more confirmation of the secular basis to Zionism.
'How could anyone regard these creatures as unclean?' we agreed. And, at a
communal supper, as we talked about the withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, the
fall-off in Russian arms supplies to Syria and the consequently predicted
evacuation of the Golan Heights, I gathered a further truth about Zionism.
Namely, that Zionism is not strictly a nationalistic movement. Patriotic,
yes; but not nationalistic. Zionists have sought a space for Jews in which
Jews can be Jewish without looking over their shoulders, a community in
which Jews are, at last, not a minority. To yield up the Golan Heights is
not a matter of national pride, but strategy. If it is safe to do so, it can
be done. What is important is that Israel - the notch - survives.
Clues to its survival can be gleaned at Masada, a natural fortress
monumentalised by one of the world's great megalomaniacs, occupied by
fanatics and besieged by history's most dedicated imperialists.
Few archaeological sites match Masada for dramatic scenery and storyline.
Looking down from the Herodian fastness from which Jewish zealots resisted
Roman rule, one is morbidly entranced by the relics of a terrible narrative.
Ringed by copybook Roman encampments - all visible from above - and
bombarded by siege engines, the zealots could do no more than watch the
Romans build an enormous earthen ramp up to their walls. On the eve of the
breach, they committed mass suicide.
Why the Romans expended such effort to trap less than 1,000 militants is a
question that still perplexes ancient historians. But modern Israelis see
the paradigm clearly enough: recruits to the Armour Corps are sworn in at
this site. The oath is hinged with implicit vengeance. 'Masada must never
happen again.'
Most Zionists would admit that the zealots of Masada were, like their
ultra-Orthodox counterparts today, the sort of Jews who would despise any
secular state. But that does not prevent Masada from serving both as an
emblem and as a cautionary metaphor for modern Israel.
Most Israelis know the site well, and they are easy to distinguish from
other visitors: as some people carry mobile phones, so Israelis carry
machine-guns. The very excavation of the site, 30 years ago, was an
operation that owed more to military logistics than archaeological
expertise. And one does not have to travel very far from Masada to join the
ambience of virtual combat: checkpoints and barbed wire replace mudpack
therapies as the litoral road along the Dead Sea gets closer to Palestinian
Jericho.
Other memorials in Israel may speed an impartial visitor more swiftly into
sympathy with the Zionist cause but Masada put the seal on my conversion.
Its strength as an epitome does not lie with the historical identity of
those who occupied it: fundamentalists, whether Jewish or Moslem, may yet
wreck the state of Israel. Nor can it be said to provide a precedent for a
Jewish state in this part of the world: 2,000 years ago, 'Judaea' was never
a nation in the modern sense, and neither, come to that, was Palestine.
What Masada stands for is the endurance of a culture. It is, in
archaeological form, a centre of gravity for whatever it is that defines
Judaism, whatever that is - an essence, a cement that unites people to fight
for themselves. Those without such bonds will come away from old Masada, and
new Israel, with some relief, but more envy.
