FT  11 APR 94 / Ex-Matrix chief in venture with Tory MP
Mr Paul Henderson, the businessman at the centre of the Matrix Churchill
case, has launched a business venture with a Tory MP who is a former
minister at the Department of Trade and Industry.
It is Mr Henderson's first venture since the collapse in November 1992 of
his trial for alleged breaches of export regulations.
Mr Henderson has teamed up with Mr John Butcher, MP for Coventry South West,
and Mr Peter Brasier, a merchant banker, to take an 88 per cent stake in
Production Systems International. The company, which had annual turnover of
Pounds 3.5m last year and was formerly called Ryefast, has interests in
welding machines and waterjet cutting equipment. The terms of the takeover,
completed last month, were not disclosed.
Mr Butcher's tie-up with Matrix's former managing director puts him at
apparent loggerheads with Lord Trefgarne, a former trade and defence
minister, who told the Scott inquiry into the Matrix Churchill affair on
March 30 that Mr Henderson had deceived him about the true purpose of
machine tools sold to Iraq. This was immediately denied by Mr Henderson's
solicitor.
Mr Butcher said he was delighted to be working with Mr Henderson. 'I knew
that Paul would re-emerge to run a company which would exemplify the best
practices of industrial management,' he said.
Mr Henderson disclosed yesterday that he had been contacted by Mr Butcher
within a day of the end of his trial, where he was found not guilty. The two
men have known each other for about 12 years.
Together with Mr Brasier, the two men have undertaken a year-long search for
the right opportunity in UK manufacturing industry. 'We looked at about four
or five companies, and went to the wire with one of them,' said Mr
Henderson.
Mr Butcher will be chairman of PSI, with Mr Henderson and Mr Brasier as
chief executive and corporate finance director respectively.
Mr Henderson said he had great hopes for the company, which owns Welding
Machines Automated, a loss-making welding specialist, and Cox &amp; Wright,
which makes materials cutting technology.
Overall, the company broke even last year, but Mr Henderson is confident
profits will rise as sales and marketing is improved. His target is annual
sales of Pounds 6m to Pounds 7m by the end of next year. Since taking over
the company last month the directors have introduced new working capital and
restructured the management.
Mr Henderson plans to raise profitability at Welding Machines Automated by
introducing some standardisation into the product range. He hopes Cox &amp;
Wright can benefit as a niche player in the market for waterjet cutting
machines, which cut everything from cakes to titanium using a high-pressure
band of water.
