FT  26 APR 94 / Nine groups bid to build Channel rail link
A last-minute scramble for alliances yesterday saw nine groups of companies
meet a Department of Transport deadline to qualify as bidders to build the
Pounds 2.7bn high-speed rail link from London to the Channel tunnel.
Intense negotiations saw the membership of some leading consortia shifting
right up until yesterday's noon deadline, with some companies unexpectedly
falling out of the running.
However, the two leading German contenders both qualified, with Hochtief
coming forward as the leader of a group made up of Costain of the UK,
Japan's Nishimatsu Construction, Germany's Siemens and Siemens Transport
Systems division, and Westinghouse Signals, owned by Australia's BTR Nylex
industrial group. Hambros Bank is the group's financial adviser.
Another large German group, Philipp Holzmann, qualified as a member of a
group calling itself Union Link, along with John Mowlem, Taylor Woodrow and
consultants WS Atkins of the UK, and Transurb Consult, a railway system
partly
owned by the Belgian state railway.
The contract to build and run the the 68-mile link from London's St Pancras
will combine private and public-sector finance under the government's
Private Finance Initiative and is expected to take seven years to complete.
The link will be capable of carrying at least six trains an hour each way at
speeds of up to 140mph.
The government will draw up a shortlist of about four bidders by June and
appoint a contractor early next year. It aims to put in place legislation
authorising the project in 1996, meaning that the high-speed link could open
in 2002.
The strongest UK-based contender for the contract is believed to be the
Eurorail consortium, made up of six equal shareholders - Trafalgar House,
BICC, General Electric, HSBC Holdings, National Westminster Bank and London
Electricity.
Another group to qualify yesterday was London and Continental Railways, made
up of Ove Arup, Halcrow, Blue Circle and National Express, all of the UK, as
well as Bechtel of the US, French consultants Sofrerail and Warburg.
The transport department yesterday indicated that some of the public-sector
contribution was expected to cover the Pounds 800m assets of the European
Passenger Service, which will run trains between London, Paris and Brussels
from this summer. These include the Waterloo terminal and Eurostar rolling
stock. The rail-link contractor is expected to have the right to EPS
revenue.
The government has offered to cover a third of the bid costs of failed
bidders, up to a maximum of Pounds 1.5m. In spite of this, a number of
companies yesterday surprised analysts by announcing they would not be
bidding, notably P&amp;O's Bovis construction unit.
