FT  15 MAR 94 / Rostenkowski forced to fight for his seat
Congressman Dan Rostenkowski, the powerful chairman of the House ways and
means committee, faces the political race of his life today when voters from
Chicago's mean westside streets and a scattering of suburban neighbourhoods
vote in a Democratic primary ahead of November's mid-term elections.
Encumbered by a federal investigation into misuse of House post office
funds, Mr Rostenkowski, after 35 years in Congress, is facing rare
opposition from Mr John Cullerton, a junior state senator who has shaken the
Democratic establishment by daring to mount a challenge. Mr Cullerton has
proved nearly as popular as the incumbent in recent polls.
With President Bill Clinton depending on Mr Rostenkowski's clout to
strongarm through a new national healthcare package, a defeat in today's
primary would be a blow to both the administration and the Democratic party.
Also at stake is the stream of pork barrel dollars that Mr Rostenkowski has
directed toward Chicago since 1958, when he arrived in Congress.
Mr Rostenkowski, 66, is the most skilful of Chicago's Democratic backroom
dealers, but has proved ill-prepared to deal with the year-long
investigation into his financial dealings. The federal probe has yielded
reams of bad press but no indictment, and has been difficult for the
Democratic machine to rebutt.
Mr Clinton broke the wall of silence last month, when he travelled to
Chicago against the wishes of Ms Janet Reno, the attorney-general, and
appeared with Mr Rostenkowski to boost his healthcare programme and the
Congressman's election prospects.
Since then a stream of Washington celebrities have been pounding Chicago's
podiums on Mr Rostenkowski's behalf, and millions of federal dollars, in the
form of a jobs training centre and a fire and rescue helicopter, have been
awarded to the city.
Even with these last-minute offerings, weekend polls showed Mr Rostenkowski
with only a slim lead, garnering 27 per cent of decided potential voters,
with Mr Cullerton on 24 per cent.
However, with voter registration in Chicago at its lowest in 60 years for an
off-year election, apathy may favour Mr Rostenkowski.
In the end it may be Chicago's old-fashioned system of Democratic ward
committeemen that comes through for Mr Rostenkowski.
Chicago's Mayor Richard Daley has stood firmly behind the congressman
throughout the campaign, and today is expected to bless the unpaid leave of
hundreds of city workers who will door-knock throughout the fifth district
to boost turnout for Mr Rostenkowski.
