FT  29 JAN 94 / Markets Report: Dollar lower
The dollar came under pressure yesterday as concern about US-Japan trade
talks and the likely deferral of a US rate increase combined to push the
currency lower, writes Philip Gawith.
The release of better than expected 4th quarter US GDP figures was offset by
a very low inflation number which caused the market to revise its view of
when the US Federal Reserve might tighten monetary policy.
Earlier, the US currency fell following comments by US commerce secretary Mr
Ron Brown that the US would explore options if trade talks with Japan were
inconclusive.
The dollar ended in London at Y109.120, down from Y109.145 on Thursday and
more than three yen down on the week. Preliminary figures released yesterday
showed that the US GDP had grown by 5.9 per cent in the 4th quarter of 1993,
the best figure in six years. Although the figures revealed very good
economic growth in US, they did not help the dollar because of the
exceptionally low deflator figure - regarded as a very reliable measure of
broad inflation - of 1.3 per cent compared to expectations of about 2.5 per
cent.
'This put back expectations of when the Fed will tighten policy, probably to
April rather than February,' said Mr Tony Norfield, UK Treasury economist at
ABN-AMRO Bank in London.
Reports of the large scale selling of the dollar for yen by Japanese
corporates also pushed the US currency lower.
Muddying the waters was a report that the next edition of Business Week
magazine says a number of Fed governors favour tightening policy at next
week's meeting of the policy-setting Federal Open Market Committee.
However, 'the market does not feel on balance at the moment that a Fed
tightening is imminent,' said Mr Steve Hannah, head of research at IBJ
International in London. The weaker dollar helped the D-Mark which closed
stronger in London at DM1.7273 compared to DM1.7441 on Thursday. The
currency was bolstered by positive comments about the German economy from
Bundesbank board member Mr Otmar Issing, at the World Economic Forum in
Davos, Switzerland. Mr Issing repeated his view that he expected German
inflation to fall below 3 per cent this year, and also downplayed fears
about high M3 money supply growth, implying that this was an aberration.
High money supply growth and the weakness of the D-Mark had been seen as the
main obstacles to an easing of monetary policy. Mr Issing's comments were
welcomed in the market as 'constructive and helpful'.
Mr Hannah said the markets interpreted Mr Issing's comments as indicating
that the Bundesbank saw no permanent obstacles to a policy easing and that
it was simply a matter of time.
The pound ended stronger against the weak dollar, ending in London at
Dollars 1.5036 compared to Thursday's close of Dollars 1.4925. It was lower,
however, against the D-Mark, finishing at DM2.5971 from DM2.6031 on
Thursday. Dealers said it was responding more to other events than moving
under its own momentum.
The Bank of England provided the money market with early assistance through
a repo operation totalling Pounds 1.95bn at an interest rate of 5 13/32 per
cent after forecasting a liquidity shortage of around Pounds 2.3bn. It later
provided a total of Pounds 800m at 5 3/8 per cent after revising the
shortage to Pounds 2.75bn.
On the futures market the short sterling contract for June rose by 6 points
to 94.93.
