FT  27 AUG 94 / Minding Your Own Business: A smarter breed of scarecrow -
Clive Fewins is told that only three things matter in business
It was a chance sighting of a fallen beech leaf moving in the wind that gave
Charles Tweedie the final thrust to produce what he calls the only range of
hardy all-weather scarecrows for commercial use available in this country.
He had been racking his brains on how to develop a silent bird scarer to
complement his range of range of noisy electronic bird deterrents.
'The electronic devices are all excellent deterrents, but I felt there was
potential in the bird scaring market, to compete with the noisy, and rather
unsatisfactory gas guns,' said Tweedie, managing director of Phoenix
Agritech of Little Hereford, Ludlow, Shropshire.
The results were Whirly Ozidge, Spinny Mawkin and Major Twirly Tatty-Bogle,
three 6ft 4in-high creations of strong pvc sheet stretched over a
lightweight aluminium and steel frame.
They have attracted a great deal of attention in the agricultural community
since their public debut at the Royal Show in July, but so far have earned
their creator very little money.
It is the constant movement - like a fallen leaf - that distinguishes
Tweedie's rather clinical-looking scarecrows from the army of disreputable
rogues that have become a rare sight in fields in recent years.
'Farmers have traditionally thought that gas guns - timed devices that look
like small cannon - would do the job, but my research suggests these devices
are ineffective after a few days because the birds grow accustomed to them,'
Tweedie said.
'Because my scarecrows are mounted on swivel bearings and the metal skeleton
has an aerofoil shape, they move in the slightest wind.
'The real breakthrough will be when we can convince the farmer that a return
to the good old-fashioned scarecrow will add to his anti-bird armoury.'
The Phoenix family of three wind-powered revolving scarecrows is also aimed
at fruit growers, fish farmers, vineyards, golf course proprietors, shoots,
and other sporting applications.
It is also possible to have a fourth 'fun' member of the family - a
personalised version with a photo of a face of the purchaser's choice
superimposed. All the models are predominantly white because it is
acknowledged as being the best colour for the job.
Phoenix Agritech started trading in August 1992 and also produces the
Phoenix Maxi-Wailer, which is battery powered and cheaper to run than gas
bangers, with the option of eight speakers which can function up to 100
yards away.
'At the beginning of the year, I thought the time had come to broaden my
product range,' said Tweedie.
Phoenix is so named because it rose from the ashes of a small Welsh
borderlands electronics company producing automatic calf-feeding machines
and pest control equipment.
Tweedie acquired a controlling interest in the company in 1986 after
spending two years trying to decide on his future following redundancy as
managing director of a large poultry subsidiary of the Vestey group.
'I had been with the Vestey group for 14 years and had controlled a company
with a Pounds 60m turnover, two factories and 1,150 employees,' said
Tweedie, 50, a former soldier and diplomat. 'When the end came in 1987 my
salary was just under Pounds 50,000 and included a string of company
benefits. In the following two years I earned Pounds 6,000 through
consultancy. It was a painful adjustment.'
Several opportunities passed by until eventually, in May 1989, with the
agreement of his wife Susie and three teenage children, Tweedie sank Pounds
30,000 of his redundancy money into the electronics company.
The venture failed - but not before Tweedie had invested further
'substantial sums' in the venture. 'I realised I had made the mistake of
investing in a company that had too much debt in its balance sheet,' he
said.
A further venture into a software company that failed lost him more money.
He estimates that his losses in the two companies totalled more than Pounds
100,000.
'At that stage I was at my lowest, but I still had funds,' he said. The
family had moved from a home in Derbyshire to a hamlet near Ludlow, an area
which they all loved. So despite the failure of the agricultural electronics
company in which he had staked so much, Tweedie decided not to move.
He had space in the stables at the back of the large Victorian brick house,
and good local contacts. He also had a wealth of financial and management
expertise and a good knowledge of agricultural pest control equipment.
He managed to find a company 15 miles away that could assemble the
electronics in what became the Phoenix Wailer bird deterrent, and with a
little more difficulty was able to get the heavy duty waterproof housings
for the product made in Italy.
Two other versions of the Wailer and the Phoenix 'ratsonic rodent deterrent'
were added to the product list. The Phoenix range now numbers 129 products
including accessories, and with the exception of the plastic housings all
the items are manufactured by seven companies within a 30-mile radius of
Tweedie's home.
Controlling his empire takes 60 hours a week but after years of turmoil
Tweedie finds himself happy and satisfied - particularly when driving the
three miles to the river Teme for an evening's fishing.
'Turnover in the first year was Pounds 59,000, and we are running at about
Pounds 75,000 in our second year. Profits are virtually nil but we are
surviving,' he said. 'We have made sales to Japan, Belgium, the Netherlands,
the Middle East, New Zealand, Canada, South Africa and Ireland. Our gross
margins are very healthy, and with our low overheads I am sure we can make
very good profits.'
The next task is to clear a Pounds 5,500 overdraft and achieve sales growth.
Tweedie continued: 'There are 40,000 arable farmers and 10,000
horticulturists in the UK and if they all were to buy three of our
scarecrows at Pounds 99 each plus VAT that would be excellent business.
'The strange thing is that if I was running a big business again the way I
am running Phoenix I should be making a fortune for my employers. It is only
since working for myself that I have realised that there are only three
things that really matter in business: margins, overheads and cash flow. I
honestly did not see that when running a multi-million pound company.'
Phoenix Agritech (UK) Ltd, Lower Upton, Little Hereford, Ludlow, Shropshire
SY8 4BB. Tel: 0584-711701.
