FT  07 MAR 94 / White House 'cover-up' fears: Gore concedes officials made
'mistakes' over Whitewater affair
President Bill Clinton's Whitewater problems hit dangerously close to home
yesterday as the focus shifted on to the role of his wife and whether the
White House has engaged in a classic 'cover-up'.
The complex and dimly understood Arkansas land and financial dealings in the
1980s claimed their first definitive victim over the weekend, with the
resignation, effective next month, of Mr Bernard Nussbaum, the president's
widely criticised legal counsel.
His resignation came just a day after the special counsel probing the
Whitewater property venture affair, Mr Robert Fiske, issued subpoenas to 10
White House and Treasury officials, including Mr Nussbaum and Mr Roger
Altman, the deputy Treasury Secretary.
Mr Fiske is seeking details of three meetings held in recent months between
the officials to discuss the status of regulatory investigations into the
failed Madison savings and loan institution at the heart of the Whitewater
affair.
Congressional Republicans have charged that the meetings were improper.
Yesterday, vice-president Al Gore put up a vigorous televised defence of the
president and First Lady, Hillary Clinton. He conceded that 'mistakes' had
been made by White House officials, but said new instructions from the
president created 'new fire walls' between the White House and other
government departments.
He promised the 'highest ethical standards' in the future, insisting that
'no credible allegations' of impropriety had been lodged against the
Clintons and that 'no one can now doubt the independence of Mr Fiske'.
Mr Gore also dismissed as 'a cartoon image' reports in the US press
yesterday that the White House was in a state of gloom and despair over the
latest developments, with one unnamed senior official quoted as saying that
this was 'a perilous time' for this presidency.
Mr Gore accused the Republican party of partisan exploitation of the issue.
This was not surprising, he said, because the president was doing so well on
issues such as the economy.
A flavour of the Republican attack was immediately provided in another TV
interview by Senator Phil Gramm, the Republican from Texas, who came close
to suggesting Mr Clinton could be forced from office - he denied he meant
impeachment - if he did not 'begin by levelling with the American public'.
The likelihood of a congres-sional investigation into Whitewater,
supplementary to Mr Fiske's, is also increasing, with some Democrats now
joining the Republican clamour for hearings.
Yesterday even Congressman Dan Rostenkowski, who is generally supportive of
Mr Clinton, refused to exclude looking into the role of the Treasury, over
which his ways and means committee has jurisdiction.
The implication of Mrs Clinton in the affair has less to do with her carving
out a new policy role in the White House than with her past associations as
a partner in the influential Rose Law Firm in Little Rock, through which
much Arkansas state business passed.
Two other former partners are much in the news. The circumstances of the
suicide last summer of Mr Vincent Foster, then Mr Nussbaum's deputy,
continue to attract interest.
Mr Webster Hubbell, now associate attorney general, is reportedly being
questioned by Rose itself over past billing practices.
The quality of the White House staff, many of them old friends of the
Clintons, is also under fire. Mr Nussbaum, a former Wall Street lawyer, had
seemed error-prone, especially in vetting candidates for senior
administration posts and allegedly interfering with judicial processes over
Whitewater and the Foster suicide.
Leading Democrat leaves Senate, Page 5
