FT  23 APR 94 / US seeks tougher Haiti sanctions: White House succumbs to
pressure on refugee repatriation
The US administration yesterday shifted its policy towards Haiti, succumbing
to a barrage of criticism from Mr Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the country's
exiled president, as well as from members of Congress and human rights
activists.
The White House said the US would press for tighter trade sanctions against
the military regime which ousted Mr Aristide in 1991, including a United
Nations embargo on everything except food and humanitarian aid. Although
sanctions have been imposed by the UN on fuel and arms, many countries,
including the US, continue to trade with Haiti.
At the same time the US Coast Guard took a boatload of 411 Haitian refugees
it had picked up from a sinking vessel in the Caribbean to Miami, in an
apparent reversal of the US policy of returning them to their country - a
practice which President Bill Clinton condemned during the 1992 presidential
election but which he continued once he took office.
Coast Guard officers said the order came from Washington, but White House
officials said that the decision was a special case, because the sinking
Haitian boat was so close to the US shore.
Criticism of Mr Clinton's policy towards Haiti has reached a new intensity
this week.
Mr Aristide himself denounced the US's approach as 'a cynical joke,'
complaining that Mr Clinton lacked the political will to carry out half of
what he promised.
Meanwhile, six members of Congress from Mr Clinton's own Democratic party,
including Congressman Kweisi Mfume, chairman of the congressional black
caucus, and Congressman Ron Dellums, chairman of the House of
Representatives armed services committee, were arrested after a sit-in in
front of the White House.
Other senior Democrats such as Congressman David Obey, chairman of the House
appropriations committee, have said they see little alternative to invasion
as a way of bringing Haiti back from chaos.
Although many senior administration officials are frustrated at the
difficulties of dealing with Mr Aristide, who is understandably nervous
about returning to Haiti, they acknowledge that they have no choice.
'He's the duly elected president of the country and we'll continue to work
with him,' said Ms Dee Dee Myers, the White House press secretary.
