FT  01 OCT 94 / UK Company News: Chairman of NFC to retire at end of year
Just 10 weeks after the surprise departure of its chief executive, NFC
Holdings, the transport group, has announced that its chairman, Mr James
Watson, is to retire at the end of the year.
Mr Watson had increased his executive duties at the end of August, following
the sudden resignation of Mr Peter Sherlock. However he said he would not
delay his departure if a chief executive could not be found before December
19.
Mr Watson is to be replaced by Sir Christopher Bland, who made an estimated
Pounds 9m from selling his share options in LWT, of which he was chairman,
after it was acquired by Granada in February.
Mr Watson will be 60 at the end of the year, and he told non-executive
directors of his plans to retire last March.
Mr Watson said he wanted his replacement to play a key role in choosing the
new chief executive, and was keen for Sir Christopher to start as soon as
possible. He will work three days a week.
NFC's shares rose 5p to 181p yesterday, as Sir Christopher was seen as
likely to improve the company's image in the City, which had been shaken by
a string of disappointing results, and concerns over strategic direction.
Mr Sherlock was the first outsider to be brought into NFC at top management
level. He instigated a strategic review, merging the two largest
subsidiaries, and focusing on the group's higher value added businesses.
However, investors were disappointed by the amount of time it was taking for
the improvements to be translated into profits.
Mr Watson was key to the appointment of Mr Sherlock, who fought off internal
support for the candidacy of Mr Robbie Burns, a hands-on manager and
director who had successfully expanded NFC's logistics operations.
Mr Burns resigned earlier this year, but he reversed his decision after Mr
Sherlock's announcement. Analysts suggested that Mr Watson's retirement
might smooth the way for the appointment of Mr Burns as chief executive.
Mr Watson has worked with NFC since 1968, presiding over a dramatic
transformation of the company from a paternalistic Government logistics
group, to a substantial listed company.
He said he planned to focus on other business interests, which include the
chairmanship of Watson &amp; Philip, the Scottish retailer, and directorships of
National Express, Henlys Group and Gartmore.
