FT  15 SEP 94 / Japan's trade surplus showsfall of 18.8%
Japan's summer heatwave produced an unexpectedly large 18.8 per cent fall in
the August trade surplus, the first year on year drop for three months.
A nearly 24 per cent rise in oil imports, caused by a surge in electricity
demand as the country turned up its air-conditioners, was the main feature
in a narrowing in the trade gap to Dollars 6.08bn (Pounds 4.05bn) last
month, from Dollars 7.49bn in August last year. This was a surprise for the
market, where forecasts had ranged from a slight decline to a moderate rise
in the trade gap.
Overall imports rose by 23.6 per cent to Dollars 25.18bn, also helped by a
gentle rise in underlying demand, while exports climbed less steeply, by
12.2 per cent to Dollars 31.26bn, the finance ministry reported yesterday.
The latest trade balance provides further evidence that the gap is near or
past its peak, ministry officials said. When measured in yen, the surplus
fell by 22.4 per cent.
However, the figures are unlikely to assuage US frustration as it struggles
to make a framework trade agreement with Japan before the end-of-the-month
deadline, after which Washington has threatened to open sanctions
proceedings.
Japan's surplus with the US actually widened in August, for the sixth month
running, up by 2 per cent to Dollars 3.49bn, more than half the total. The
yen accordingly strengthened in Tokyo yesterday, closing up Y0.14 to Y98.53
to the dollar.
However, the trade gap with other Asian countries was even wider than that
with the US, at Dollars 4.01bn, a 3 per cent rise on August last year. The
increase, for the third month running, shows strong exports of plant and
equipment to the growing number of Japanese production sites migrating to
south-east Asia to escape high Japanese costs.
Japan's trade surplus with the European Union continued to fall, for the
eighth month in a row, to Dollars 1.07bn, down 23.9 per cent on the same
month in 1993.
Evidence that corporate Japan is still struggling with problems left by the
recession emerged yesterday in the shape of a 13.6 per cent rise to
Y485.83bn in bankrupt companies' debts last month.
The number of bankruptcies fell by 4.1 per cent in August, to 1,143, said
Teikoku Databank, a credit research agency. It forecast that bankruptcies
would run at more than 1,000 per month for the rest of the year, because of
competition from cheap imports and a shortage of funds.
