FT  15 SEP 94 / High street prices bounce back up after summer sales
Record increases in the prices of clothing and household goods after the end
of the summer sales resulted in a slightly higher-than-expected rise in the
retail prices index for August, the Central Statistical Office said
yesterday.
The index - based on 100 in January 1987 - rose to 144.7 last month, up 0.5
per cent from July. Analysts expected a 0.3 per cent rise.
Underlying retail-price inflation, which excludes mortgage-interest
payments, was running at a year-on-year rate of 2.3 per cent in August, up
from 2.2 per cent in July.
The CSO said the index rose primarily because high-street retailers were
repricing stock after discounting heavily during the summer sales. It noted
there had been a sharper price rise this August than the previous August,
when the index rose 0.4 per cent.
CSO statisticians said Treasury ministers saw August's raw inflation data
last week, before Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, raised base rates on
Monday. They emphasised that the data were incomplete. City analysts said
they did not think one month's statistics motivated Mr Clarke's decision.
According to the CSO, the effect of the bounce-back from summer sales
usually comes in September, when clothing prices have generally risen an
average of 3.5 per cent to 4.0 per cent. Following a record fall in clothing
prices in July, clothing prices last month rose 2.2 per cent, the biggest
August rise since 1918.
Petrol prices also pushed up the overall monthly price change. They rose 6
per cent compared with August last year due to strikes in Nigeria and a fire
at Milford Haven refinery.
Household goods rose 1.6 per cent, the steepest August increase since 1956.
The rise was largely due to re-pricing of furniture and furnishings after
summer discounting, as well as price increases for pet foods, household
equipment and consumables.
Personal goods and services, which includes products such as handbags,
suitcases, watches and spectacles, rose 1.8 per cent, up 4.3 per cent from
August last year.
Food prices rose 0.3 per cent during the month. A rise in the price of
potatoes overshadowed price cuts in fresh vegetables and fruit.
