FT  12 APR 94 / Technology: Mainframe reborn - IBM is jumping on the
client/server bandwagon by adapting its existing technology
In the corporate computing world, the mainframe computer is the symbol of a
bygone era; a legacy of the days when the data processing department
strictly controlled access to computers housed in a big air-conditioned
glass room.
Networks of low-cost personal computers brought democracy to information
processing in the 1980s, putting computers at the command of individuals.
Yet, as many companies are finding out, managing that democracy is more
complicated and expensive than they expected.
Open 'client/server' computing has not achieved the nirvana of lower costs
and greater efficiencies that the computer industry promised. Instead,
companies face continuing problems with incompatibility between computers,
difficulty keeping track of corporate data and rising costs for training and
systems management.
Fully 80 per cent of total client/server computer costs occur after the
initial purchases of hardware and software, according to US-based Gartner
Group, a computer industry market research company. A single Dollars 3,000
(Pounds 2,054) personal computer linked to a client/server network costs
about Dollars 40,000 over its five-year life cycle when the costs of
training, administration, maintenance and other factors are tallied, the
researchers estimate.
Even die-hard networking advocates such as Sun Microsystems, the workstation
market leader, now recognise the need for some measure of centralised
control over distributed computing systems. 'You have to manage the network
like a mainframe,' says Curt Wozniak, Sun's marketing vice-president. He
encourages customers to 'pull data back into controlled areas'.
Stepping into this milieu with a new-found determination to establish itself
as a leader in the client/server market, International Business Machines has
seen opportunities to bring its mainframe-world expertise to bear on the
complex problems of enterprise-wide, client/server computing.
'Implementing client/server (computing) in a real live customer environment
has turned out to be rife with problems. And those problems open a very wide
door of opportunity for IBM,' says Lou Gerstner, IBM chairman and chief
executive.
Gerstner's remarks signal a significant change of heart at IBM, the
mainframe computer market leader. Rather than minimising the significance of
client/server computing, as it has in the past, IBM is finally jumping on
the bandwagon.
A critical element of IBM's strategy is to create links between the old
world of mainframes and the new world of client/server computing. Last week
it introduced a new generation of 'large-scale computers' (no longer called
mainframes) specifically designed to work as 'servers' on networks.
In a radical departure from traditional mainframe designs, the new IBM
systems are built on microprocessor chips manufactured using the same
semiconductor technology as those found in personal computers. These
powerful chips are linked to work in parallel on a computing task, like a
fleet of tugs pulling an ocean liner.
The advantages of parallel processing are twofold. Customers can increase
the power of a parallel processing system in small increments by adding a
few processors, rather than having to purchase expensive mainframe upgrades.
Also, because the new IBM parallel systems are based on microprocessor
chips, they can be expected to follow similar price decline and performance
improvement trends to those seen in the personal computer and workstation
segments of the market.
The most important new offerings from IBM are two parallel computing servers
built around chips that emulate the brains of the company's traditional
mainframe products. The S/390 parallel transaction server and the S/390
parallel query server can run the same software as IBM's traditional
mainframe computers, hiding the complexities of parallel processing from
users and software developers.
The transaction server is designed for applications such as credit card
processing, ticketing and banking. The query server elicits new information
from existing data. A company might, for example, mine its customer database
for clues to the potential of a product.
The new servers can be coupled to existing IBM mainframe computers so that
the new and old machines work together like a single computer, automatically
balancing the workload and sharing data.
This facility, which IBM calls the parallel sysplex, is 'as significant as
any technology we have announced since the introduction of the 360 (the
first IBM mainframe 30 years ago', says Ned Donofrio, IBM vice-president and
general manager of the large-scale computing division.
The parallel servers give the mainframe a new lease of life, he explains.
With the introduction of a new 10-processor mainframe last week, IBM's line
of conventional mainframes may have reached its peak. 'We are not sure if we
can go to 12 or 14, but we are sure that the way we are scaling (the
parallel systems) will enable us to move to almost limitless numbers of
microprocessors while preserving all of the programming, all of the skill
and the infrastructure that our mainframe customers have built,' says
Donofrio.
'These systems deliver what customers tell me they want: lower cost, more
power and protection of their existing Dollars 1 trillion investment in
software,' he adds.
Indeed, the high prices of mainframe hardware and software, along with the
need to link different types of computers in a seamless network, have
created a strong impetus behind the shift to client/server computing. By
reducing mainframe hardware and software prices IBM might aim to slow the
trend away from mainframe computers.
Yet IBM is no longer counting on client/server computing being a temporary
fad. Instead, it has designed its new parallel processors to link to
networks. The company last week announced a new version of its mainframe
computer operating system, MVS, with 'open' features that will enable
mainframes to run the Unix applications favoured in client/server systems.
IBM also introduced a Unix-based 'Powerparallel' system, based on the same
microprocessor technology that it uses in its latest workstations. The SP2
is an outgrowth of IBM's massively parallel supercomputer, introduced a year
ago. The new computer will run 'nearly all' of the 10,000 applications
programs available for AIX, IBM's version of Unix.
By applying the latest semiconductor and software technologies to
large-scale computers, IBM has created a new perspective on the benefits of
client/server computing. Rather than killing off mainframe computers,
client/server networks may increasingly incorporate mainframe-like features
and some mainframe computers.
