FT  19 MAR 94 / Leading Article: Difficult decisions
Through the fog that obscures economic statistics, global economic recovery
can now be discerned. The US recovery is already bathed in brightest
daylight. That in the UK is little more obscure. Even the German and French
recoveries are visible to the naked eye. In the case of Japan alone does the
optimist need a telescope.
In the US, the question now is how swiftly monetary policy will have to be
tightened. The usual mistake is to tighten too late. Mr Alan Greenspan's
slow-moving Federal Reserve is more likely to err in that direction than in
the opposite one.
Last month, the Federal Reserve raised short-term rates of interest from 3
to just 3 1/4 per cent. It could hardly have done less, although even that
was enough to create an earthquake in the bond markets. In recent weeks,
however, revised figures have shown the economy grew at an annual rate of
7.5 per cent in the last quarter of 1993, rather than the 5.9 per cent first
reported.
Data since January have also been uniformly stronger than expected. Retail
spending is robust, despite a temporary dip in construction activity.
Industrial production appears to be growing at an annual rate of 7-8 per
cent this quarter. The jobless rate, at 6.5 per cent, is already low.
All these statistics have fed Wall Street's rumour mill, as did Mr
Greenspan's surprise meeting with President Clinton yesterday. It is widely
supposed that another rise in short-term interest rates will come, maybe as
soon as next week's meeting of the Federal Reserve's open market committee.
So, indeed, it should. What Mr Greenspan meant by his talk of pursuing a
more 'neutral' monetary policy is obscure. But since short-term real
interest rates are barely positive even now, US monetary policy clearly
remains expansionary, which can hardly be justified.
Opposite position
If the US needs to tighten, France, Germany and Japan are in the opposite
position. Japan's economy remains in recession, but its promised fiscal
boost has fallen hostage to political strife. Meanwhile, the Bundesbank
failed to take further action on Thursday, though in Germany, too, lower
short-term interest rates would seem fully justified.
This is true even though evidence is emerging that France and Germany are
recovering more strongly than expected. Retail sales in western Germany were
2 per cent higher in January than in the same month last year, while sales
in the whole of Germany were up 3 per cent, 2 per cent higher than in
December.
The French National Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies (INSEE)
predicted growth of 0.7 per cent in the French economy in the first half of
1994, up from December's forecast of 0.5 per cent. Mr Edmond Alphandery, the
French economics minister, was buoyant. 'Everything is going in the right
direction,' he exulted. 'All our forecasts are being confirmed and, day
after day, statistics prove the government's scenario is realistic.' No less
realistic, unfortunately, is INSEE's forecast that unemployment will rise to
12.7 per cent.
On the turn
These economies are on the turn, but not fast enough to prevent further
increases in unemployment. It is easy to sympathise with complaints about
European monetary policy from American officials at the jobs summit of the
group of seven leading industrial countries in Detroit.
Just why the European recession has been so prolonged was explained by the
Bundesbank's president, Mr Hans Tietmeyer. He noted this week that west
German inflation was set to fall below 2 per cent. But while 2 per cent is
the Bundesbank's frequently stated target, it is also lower than it has
achieved over the past 35 years, except in the late 1960s and again between
1986 and 1988.
In the US, monetary policy should be tightened. In Europe and Japan, it
should be loosened. UK policymakers, by contrast, face genuinely difficult
dilemmas, for interest rates are approaching the floor.
Unemployment has fallen to 2 3/4 m, but remains 9.8 per cent of the labour
force. Producer prices are up only 2.4 per cent over the year, excluding
food, beverages, tobacco and petroleum, but the underlying annual increase
in average earnings has risen slightly, from 3 per cent last December to 3
1/4 per cent in January. Retail sales fell 0.5 per cent in February, but are
still 2.5 per cent up over the year. UK monetary policy may be eased
further, but the policymakers do have to be cautious.
In deciding what to do, all the monetary authorities must take account of
the global fall in bond prices, which continued this week in most markets.
Only a brave central bank will lower short rates when long rates are rising.
For all that, the rise in long rates does not seem driven by worrying
fundamentals. With luck, the world's monetary authorities will do what is
needed and the G7, as a whole, will quite soon enjoy good strong growth,
with low inflation.
