FT  19 APR 94 / International Company News: Accountants sued for L1,000bn
Montedison, the Italian industrial company, is claiming damages of more than
L1,000bn (Dollars 611m) from Price Waterhouse Italy, part of the
international accountancy group, alleging 'serious negligence'.
Sources at Montedison, which is the principal subsidiary of the Ferruzzi
Finanziaria holding company, confirmed yesterday that a writ had been served
on Price Waterhouse Italy.
Montedison's new management alleges that the company breached international
auditing and accounting standards between 1983 and 1992, when it was
Montedison's auditor.
The first hearing in the case should take place in Milan on May 24.
Price Waterhouse Italy said yesterday it would 'vigorously defend itself'
against the writ.
In a statement, the company said Montedison's claim was 'based on the
mistaken assumption that it is the auditors, not the previous management (of
Montedison), who were responsible for the deliberate and systematic fraud
now known to have been conducted at the highest levels of management'.
The writ had been expected since November last year, when shareholders in
Ferruzzi Finanziaria (Ferfin) voted to proceed with legal action against
Price Waterhouse Italy.
However, the scale of the Montedison claim was not known until yesterday's
leaks from the Milan court.
Nor was it known that the writ would relate to the period before 1987, when
Montedison was taken over by the Ferruzzi commodities group, then headed by
Mr Raul Gardini, who committed suicide last year.
Price Waterhouse Italy has already lodged counter-claims in the Milan court,
alleging that the former directors of Montedison are 'liable . . . for
deliberate fraudulent conduct intended to frustrate normal auditing
procedures' and claiming compensation for the damage to its reputation.
In August last year, Consob, the Milan-based companies and stock market
watchdog, refused to renew the firm's authorisation to audit Ferfin's books.
Part of the Montedison claim relates to the long-running 'Enimont affair',
relating to claims that bribes were paid to senior Italian politicians to
smooth the way for the abortive 1989 - 90 merger between the chemicals
interests of Eni, the state oil concern, and assets of Montedison.
