FT  01 MAR 94 / MCI invests Dollars 1.3bn in Nextel
MCI Communications, the US telecommunications company, is to enter the
wireless communications market with the acquisition of a 17 per cent stake
in Nextel for Dollars 1.3bn (Pounds 874m). MCI will jointly market digital
voice and data services with Nextel and Comcast, another Nextel shareholder.
The move is seen as MCI's response to AT&amp;T's planned acquisition of McCaw
Cellular Communications, the largest US cellular telephone company.
'MCI's investment in Nextel will accelerate the availability of advanced
wireless voice and data communications, bringing these services to customers
months or even years ahead of competing companies,' said Mr Bert Roberts,
MCI chief executive.
MCI also recently announced plans to expand its network to provide local
telephone services in addition to its established long-distance services.
The Nextel alliance will increase its involvement in local markets.
Last year British Telecom acquired a 20 per cent stake in MCI for Dollars
4.3bn in cash, funds that the US telecoms company is now using to finance
its expansion.
Nextel operates an extensive wireless radio network for dispatch of taxis
and fleet vehicles. Last year the company acquired mobile radio spectrum
rights from Motorola and announced plans to create a national network, using
new digital technology from Motorola that, in addition to dispatch services,
will provide mobile telephone, messaging and paging services.
Motorola received a 20 per cent stake in Nextel in exchange for its radio
licences. Other Nextel shareholders include Comcast, a cable televison and
cellular phone service company, which holds 17 per cent, Matsushita
Communications, which owns about 5 per cent, NTT, with 1 per cent, and
Northern Telecom.
MCI's initial purchase will consist of 22m shares of Nextel stock for about
Dollars 800m, or Dollars 36 per share. MCI will also buy 15m shares at an
average cost of Dollars 38 per share over the next three years, for a total
investment of more than Dollars 1.3bn.
MCI's investment in Nextel represents a change of strategy. The company had
previously been pursuing licences to operate a new type of wireless service
called 'personal communications service'.
