FT  08 FEB 94 / Gummer hits at rise of hypermarket 'sprawl'
The sprawl of new hypermarkets across the countryside was attacked last
night by Mr John Gummer, the environment secretary.
He urged local authorities to discourage huge shopping centres built on
greenfield sites outside towns. Instead, they should improve shops in town
centres where 'competing businesses are near enough for shoppers to compare
prices and benefit from competition'.
Speaking in a Commons debate on the policies needed to meet the 'green'
targets set at the Rio Earth Summit in June 1992, he said that town centres
'will be attractive to residents, shoppers and visitors, because they have
restaurants and cafes, culture and entertainment'.
Mr Gummer's attack on urban sprawl comes against a background of mounting
concern in some of the Conservative heartlands in southern England that new
roads and construction are eroding the countryside.
MPs believe these could be central issues in some regions ahead of local
government elections in May and European parliament elections in June.
Last month Mr John Major, the prime minister, launched four reports on the
UK's 'sustainable development' strategy, the subject of last night's debate.
He said that there was no need for improvements in environmental protection
to slow down economic growth.
But last night Mr Gummer stressed that industry should not be saddled with
crippling financial burdens or 'impossible demands'.
He gave a guarded welcome to the industry-led initiative announced earlier
in the day for recycling and recovering more than half of the UK's waste
packaging by the end of the century.
Mr Gummer said that 'businesses must decide whether to join it or face the
prospect of a much more bureaucratic scheme' imposed by a European Union
directive.
Mr Gummer accused Labour and Liberal Democrat MPs of dishonesty and
hypocrisy in opposing the imposition of value added tax on domestic fuel
without proposing other ways of meeting the Rio targets. He said that
parties committed to ending nuclear power would have to tax fuel 'more
heavily' than the government in order to meet the targets.
However, last night Mr Chris Smith, Labour environment spokesman, attacked
ministers for claiming that the imposition of VAT on fuel was 'some sort of
a green measure', he said. 'In reality, it is to raise money for the
exchequer.'
Mr Smith said that VAT on gas and electricity bills would not change the
behaviour of the overwhelming majority, who would carry on using the same
amount of energy as before.
