FT  15 OCT 94 / Truth of the Matter: Oxbridge arrogance
The changing-room chant of Magdalene College Rugby Club, traditionally a
generous supplier of university and international stars, will resound
painfully in the ears not only of their opponents, but also among the latest
Oxbridge-knockers.
To stagger out of dinner with Sir David Calcutt, the retiring Master of
Magdalene, and witness his benign indulgence of 15 beefy men in black tie
lined up to urinate on a herbaceous border, would horrify the
Oxbridge-knockers even more.
There are times when Oxbridge lays itself open to its detractors; it becomes
almost a parody of Brideshead and the world of wing collars, cavalry twill,
and sherry with the dons.
But anyone watching the arrival of freshers at Oxford and Cambridge this
week would be bound to conclude that while old buildings survive, precious
little survives of the mannered student lifestyle.
So far as external appearances go, these are the same young people who are
rolling up to universities and colleges all over the country.
If rugby is an index of typical background, then it ought to be pointed out
that the mainstays of recent Cambridge teams have come from a Swansea
comprehensive school.
Playing rugby with style and commitment might be called arrogance by some,
pride by others. But to perpetuate the mythology of some cabbalistic,
public-school, backward- looking Oxbridge is pure prejudice, and it is a
prejudice to which Walter Ellis (author of The Oxbridge Conspiracy) must
confess.
To chronicle the invasion of public life by Oxbridge graduates is nothing
new. So long as glaring exceptions (John Major, Richard Branson, et al) are
overlooked, it is more or less accurate: a predictable, gratifying state of
affairs.
Academically, it arises directly from the recruitment of students with the
best A-levels. Whether those students come from state schools or private
schools is, to an extent, beyond Oxbridge control. It is worth noting,
however, that King's, the Cambridge college which has done most to
discriminate positively in favour of state-educated students, is enjoying
conspicuously good finals results.
The fact that Oxbridge graduates dominate theatre, television and so on is
equally easy to explain. I taught for three years at a 'provincial'
university, and during those three years not a single theatrical production
was staged by the students there.
At Cambridge, by contrast, one can hardly move for the fly-posting of latest
attractions. And play is taken as seriously as work by so many at Oxbridge
that it is no wonder they go on to capitalise on the experience generated by
the self-driven engine of drama and other enthusiasms.
But Walter Ellis nurses more than envy. His contention is that Oxbridge
traditionalism is a 'narcoleptic' and that under its influence 'Britain has
been sleep-walking into Europe's second division'.
It is tempting to respond to this charge of institutional inertia with the
boasts we usually reserve for tourists - that Trinity College has given the
world more Nobel prize winners than the whole of France, that the shifting
of Oxbridge brains across the Atlantic is one of Britain's best export
achievements, etc.
But perhaps more prosaic data are in order. The quickest way of registering
just how technocratic Oxbridge is now would be to consult a list of
recently-completed doctoral dissertations: about 75 per cent of these are
highly technical scientific studies.
Norman Tebbit's 1983 pledge to take away public support for those wishing to
study tribal habits in the Upper Volta has been largely fulfilled. It is now
extremely difficult, at Oxbridge and elsewhere, to secure a government grant
for any doctoral research in the humanities.
The dynamics of the job market are utterly misunderstood by Oxbridge
knockers such as Ellis. Currently, many Cambridge graduates go on to take a
further degree: a measure of the global village requirement for highly
specialised skills.
Commercial and management consultancy work is the next most common
destination, with law and accountancy following. According to last year's
figures, the best degree you could do in terms of employment prospects was
manufacturing engineering; the worst, Anglo-Saxon, Norse and Celtic. But a
greater percentage of classicists secured jobs than chemical engineers.
Probably the most indicative statistics concern the physicists. Of the 100
or so graduates in 1993, more than half went on to further research. Fewer
than 10 per cent went into industry, and barely 1 per cent into teaching.
There may be something wrong for Britain in that pattern: but, if it is a
problem then it is beyond Oxbridge control.
Oxbridge-knockers in the past devised league tables to test efficiency.
Oxbridge responded by coming top, with Imperial College London joining the
'golden triangle' of lucratively high research ratings.
So long as success brings money, it is hard to see how Oxbridge will be
dislodged from the top.
In spite of this, there are problems looming: the present government's
hostility towards paying the college fee - a supplement which helps to fund
the supervision or tutorial systems at Oxbridge, both prodigal of time and
money - may yet destroy an educational method admired everywhere in the
world except Whitehall.
Some voices predict that the ultimate Oxbridge answer will be to follow the
Americans and go private: if Ellis wants to see real elitism, that is what
they will get - high-quality education for rich kids only.
We hope it never happens. There is no need for British self-denigration to
extend itself to Oxbridge. Arrogance, arrogance. We want not less, but more
arrogance.
Nigel Spivey is editor of The Cambridge Review
