FT  05 NOV 94 / US Mid-term Elections (November 8): Republicans ride the
Tennessee bandwagon - Incumbents are feeling the winds of change
Tennessee has been one of the US boom states of the last 15 years, a magnet
for Japanese investment and a centre for fast-growing healthcare companies.
The unemployment rate is 4.7 per cent and falling. But you would not know it
from the mood of many of the state's voters, who are threatening to take out
their annoyance on incumbent politicians in Tuesday's elections.
'Incumbents are just not getting the job done,' complains Mr Tom Brewer, a
Nashville bus driver.
'It's anti-incumbent, anti-Washington, anti-Clinton, anti-Hillary Clinton,
frankly. . . sort of an anti-mood, really,' says Mr Will Long, who chairs
the local Republican party in the Nashville area.
Anti-incumbency seems to be taking its toll at all levels of government. 'We
had one sheriff in for 12 years. When he came out he had three or four farms
and when he went in he didn't have a thing, so we don't need him any more,'
says Mr James Gwin, a barber in Camden, just west of the Tennessee river.
But the most prominent victim could be at the top of the ticket: Democratic
Senator Jim Sasser.
After 18 years in office, Mr Sasser chairs the Senate budget committee and
is widely expected to succeed retiring Senator George Mitchell as leader of
the Senate Democratic majority in the next Congress - if the Democrats hold
the majority and if he can win re-election against Mr Bill Frist, a heart
surgeon and political neophyte.
Both Tennessee's Senate seats are up for election this year, but everyone
expected the Republicans to concentrate their efforts and their strongest
candidates on the race to fill the remainder of the term arising from Mr Al
Gore's switch to vice-president.
Sure enough, Republican Fred Thompson appears to hold a lead over
Congressman Jim Cooper, the Democratic candidate. But Mr Frist has surprised
most by eating away at Mr Sasser's candidacy, and a Mason-Dixon poll
released this week showed him ahead for the first time, by the slender
margin of 44 per cent to 42 per cent.
Like many other states in the south, Tennessee has seen a revival of the
Republican party, which since the civil war had been frozen out of political
office.
But as the old style right-wing southern Democrat dies off, Republicans have
been making inroads, even in county courthouse elections.
'I don't think the label is going to hurt you that bad any more,' says Mr
Bennie Castleman, who believes he is only the second Republican commissioner
elected in the last 100 years in Weakley County, north-west Tennessee.
'The south one day will be Republican, there's no doubt in my mind. When it
will be, I don't know.'
Tennessee is not a purely southern state. Its eastern counties, and some
areas in the west of the state, joined the Union in the civil war and have
continued to vote Republican ever since. That offered the Republicans some
of their first advances in the south, and in the 1970s Governor Winfield
Dunn and both US senators were Republicans.
'Tennessee has been historically Democrat-controlled for so long that the
change didn't take, but people are ready for it now and they are organised
well,' says former Governor Dunn.
'We're a border state and neither party has a clear majority. They vote for
the person and that's the way it ought to be,' says Governor Ned McWherter,
the popular politician who defeated Mr Dunn in 1986 and who is retiring at
the end of this year.
Mr Sasser is fighting back with some old-fashioned politics, combining
virulent mockery of his opponent with unabashed pork barrel promises.
Warning farmers that next year is likely to see an overhaul of agricultural
laws, Mr Sasser jeers that 'the closest place Dr Frist ever got to a farm is
the 18th hole of the Bellevue country club'.
And he touts the advantages to the state of having the majority leader,
promising that, with his help, a Dollars 2.5bn (Pounds 1.5bn) wind tunnel
that the government plans to build will come to Tullahoma, near Chattanooga.
The mudslinging in the campaign has had its creative side. The Sasser
campaign's Hallowe'en party was enlivened by Mr Frist's admission that as a
medical student he had adopted cats from the local stray animals' home for
his experiments.
All the signs are that Mr Sasser, after a slow start, is now getting into
his stride. Heavy participation in early absentee voting - an estimated 12
per cent of registered voters have already cast their ballots in the
Nashville area, and in rural Benton county, just west of the Tennessee
river, the level is closer to 20 per cent - suggests turnout will be high.
'I think it'll be a big vote statewide, and a big vote means one thing -
advantage to the incumbent,' says Mr Jerry Phifer, former sheriff of Benton
County. But it may be too late to stop a bandwagon that seems likely to
carry a lot of southern Republicans into office.
