FT  16 SEP 94 / Government Bonds: US Treasuries improve on better inflation
data
US Treasury bonds improved yesterday on a regional economic report which
suggested the market may have over-reacted to August inflation data.
Late in the session, the benchmark 30-year government bond was  3/8 better
at 98 11/32 , with the yield slipping to 7.635 per cent. At the short end,
the two-year note was up  1/16 at 100 1/32 , to yield 6.248 per cent.
After trading slightly higher in the previous afternoon, bonds across the
board continued to show slow but steady progress yesterday.
The market appeared to be pulling out of the slump triggered at the end of
last week, when the Labor Department revealed a surprising upturn in
producer prices.
The latest news on inflation was decidedly different. The Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia, in its monthly survey of business conditions in the
area, revealed an unexpected drop in the index designed to gauge whether
manufacturers were paying higher or lower prices for raw materials. The
index measuring prices received for finished goods also tumbled.
The trend was especially welcome because such surveys are viewed as reliable
leading indicators, in contrast to the producer and consumer price indices,
which look back at the previous month's inflation levels.
The commodity markets provided more positive reinforcement, as prices for
many goods slumped during the morning.
Amid these favourable developments, the market was able to ignore the
marginally troublesome announcement that initial claims for unemployment
benefit had declined by 3,000 last week.
As the afternoon commenced, traders were beginning to turn their attention
to today's figures on industrial production and capacity utilisation. The
data should provide additional clues on the direction of the economy over
the coming month.
Activity was limited, with many traders sidelined in observance of Yom
Kippur, the Jewish day of atonement.
European government bond markets rallied late in the afternoon on the back
of stronger US Treasuries, which caused dealers to cover their short
positions. However, little genuine buying was detected.
German government bonds were supported by the widely-expected decision by
the Bundesbank to leave its discount and Lombard rates unchanged after its
regular meeting. It also decided to keep the repo rate fixed at 4.85 per
cent for the next two weeks. On Liffe, the December bund future rose 0.60
points to 89.24 while in the cash market, yields on 10-year bunds fell 11
basis points to 7 1/2 per cent.
'If the Bundesbank had cut rates the bund market would have collapsed
because it would not have made sense in domestic or international terms,'
said Mr Stephen Hannah, head of research at IBJ International.
In his view, bunds were still too optimistic about German rates next year
even after their recent fall. 'We are expecting rates to be 50 basis points
higher than the levels which have been priced into the market,' Mr Hannah
said.
Analysts said the tone of the market remained fragile and yields on 10-year
bunds could move up to 7 3/4 per cent if next week's spate of data was above
expectations. German M3 for August is due on Monday while regional cost of
living figures are expected to emerge during the course of next week.
The market is also gearing up to an auction of bunds by the Bundesbank next
week. The new paper is likely to have a 10-year maturity though there is an
outside chance that the Bundesbank will go for a 30-year term.
UK gilts moved ahead by almost a point, buoyed up by rises in overseas bond
markets and the removal of stock which had been hanging over the market.
Two tranches of conventional gilts were exhausted in the morning, which gave
the market confidence to move ahead, said Mr Robert Thomas at NatWest
Markets. He said that a near-term rally was likely because yields were now
near the 9 per cent level. 'In the past, this has enticed people back into
the market,' he said.
The market faces two important events today. In the morning the August PSBR
figures are due and a gilt auction announcement is expected in the
afternoon. Some analysts expect the Bank of England to create a new 10-year
benchmark gilt.
The market shrugged off a larger than expected 0.3 per cent fall in August
retail sales, and Mr Michael Pratten at Kidder Peabody put this reaction
down to the market's continued preoccupation with inflation and what it was
likely to do over the coming year.
The yield spread between gilts and bunds narrowed from around 150 basis
points on Wednesday to around 144 yesterday. On Liffe, the December long
gilt future was at 99 21/32 in late trading, up  13/16 on the day.
Stories of hedge fund buying added to the positive tone in the Italian
government bond market, where the auctions of three-year and five-year
Treasury notes were oversubscribed. On Liffe, the December Italian
government bond future rose 1.24 points to 97.93.
Spanish government bonds were lifted by news that the government might relax
the tax law for domestic bondholders. The yield on the 10-year government
bond fell 31 basis points to 11.14 per cent.
