FT  12 JUL 94 / Management (The Growing Business): Call for a repeat
performance - You must remain innovative but in doing so you could lose
everything. Richard Gourlay on a necessary risk
Producing a technological innovation that will create a market and launch a
company is difficult enough. Repeating the trick so that the competition
does not catch up and turn your innovation into a commodity product is
altogether a trickier proposition.
The result is that many companies that should have sold out after stage one
are unable to maintain the momentum into stage two and see their value fall.
One company that is trying to negotiate the tricky path of innovation is
Newport Technology Group, a maker of electrical components based in Newport
Pagnell, Buckinghamshire.
Four years ago the company developed a new way of making small DC-DC
converters - devices used by design engineers to produce the different
voltages required by small components and to isolate power sources.
The converters are an unlikely hybrid. Using skills originally developed in
the local lace-making industry, a small army of part-time outworkers 'sew'
the wire windings on to Newport Technology's miniature ferrite transformers.
This cottage industry is then brought together with the 20th century. The
windings are mounted on a ceramic substrate, or board, which disperses heat
more efficiently than the printed circuit board used by many DC-DC
converters. The result is that Newport Technology has consistently been able
to make its converters smaller than the competition's, saving valuable
space.
Not only has Newport Technology carved out a worthwhile slice of the niche
DC-DC converter market and built sales from Pounds 1m to nearly Pounds 8m in
four years. The improved margins have helped finance innovation in the
production process so that the 'sewing' ladies now share a factory with
robots that help assemble the converters.
The manner in which Newport Technology has innovated products and processes
is instructive. Since the first innovation, the company has moved relatively
cautiously. But the initial break with the company's worthy past required a
degree of entrepreneurial chutzpah.
John Cummings, the recently arrived managing director of Newport Components,
the main group subsidiary, says the team which backed the push into hybrid
DC-DC converters took a gamble.
'John Baxter (the technical director) was convinced there was a market but
there was no established market,' he says. The customers did not know they
wanted the product until they were told it could be made at the right cost.
He compares the process with the selling of televisions in the 1950s when
the existing market was still small.
John Laurie, who invested in Newport Technology in 1990 and is now group
managing director, says deciding whether to back innovation is tricky. There
must be a balance between getting ahead of what the customer wants but not
so far ahead that the customer is not interested. No one wants to suffer the
fate of Philips, the Dutch electronics group, which introduced the laser
disc before the market was ready. 'There is no point developing something if
no one wants it,' says Laurie. 'But it's a fine balance because if you are
creating a market you have to stick your neck out.'
Newport Technology believes this move led to the development of a converter
that electronic product designers say is now a standard part of their tool
kit.
The company took a similar risk when it replaced the manual placement of
components with a robot-controlled process. 'Initially it was a bit of a
punt going with robotics,' says Laurie. 'We were not sure the computer could
handle the accuracy of placement.' But with some modifications of the
software it has become a feature of its operation, leading to a better
quality, yield and reliability.
The innovation of the hybrid DC-DC converter was followed by dozens of
further developments, many leading to reductions in size or increasing
capability to isolate high voltages. But Cummings says most of these
developments would not be classified as innovations. 'We have been in an
innovative period. Now there is a period for good product development and
market development,' he says.
Many companies do not get beyond this stage, according to Stuart Slatter,
visiting professor at the London Business School and author of the book
Gambling on Growth: How to Manage the Small High-Tech Firm. 'So many British
companies have an innovation that is enough to start up a company that gets
sales of Pounds 5m and then they have to come up with the next generation,'
he says. 'Often the next generation involves a new jump that is like
starting a company all over again.'
Newport Technology has in practice accepted this. But instead of seeking its
next innovation within the main operating company, it has set up a discrete
subsidiary, Newport Power Devices. This separately funded company is
developing ways to measure the life and residual power of lead acid
batteries.
'John (Laurie) is not confusing the need for the next level of innovation
with the money-making requirement of the existing idea,' says Cummings.
For Newport Technology, the mixture of product development and innovation -
and the ensuing improvement in margins - has put it in a virtuous circle.
The group has just opened a new manufacturing facility in Guangdong, China,
to increase capacity and take advantage of lower labour costs.
This has given Newport Technology the option to consider moving into the US
 -where it recognises margins will be squeezed - and in particular the mass
market supplying makers of boards for local area networks, each of which
require a DC-DC converter.
With Lans spreading at rapid pace, the attractions of the market are clear.
But Newport Technology does not want to lose the fruits of successful
innovation by going the way of so many British companies that have been
dazzled by the US market and stumbled.
