FT  01 NOV 94 / German insurers face price-fixing inquiry
Germany's federal Cartel Office is investigating the country's leading
insurance companies, which are alleged to have been running a price-fixing
system for car rentals in order to reduce insurance payouts to their
clients.
The price-fixing system is claimed to have been set up last December when
six insurance companies founded a car rental company called Carpartner.
In Germany, insurance policyholders expect to be able to hire immediately a
temporary vehicle at the insurer's expense after an accident.
The Cartel Office suspects that the system was established to reduce car
rental costs that insurers believed were excessive.
'The idea was that if you had a car accident, you would apply to your
insurance company for a replacement car,' claimed Mr Jurgen Kiecker, the
spokesman for the Cartel Office.
In this case, Mr Kiecker said, 'the insurance companies agreed on the car
rental prices among each other, subsidised the rent and generally insisted
that the client should rent only from Carpartner'.
The Cartel Office admits the arrangement would have had the effect of
reducing the cost of car rentals, while the customer's car was off the road.
'But that is not the issue,' he said. 'The issue is price-fixing and that is
what we are investigating.'
None of the insurers was available for comment yesterday.
Over time, more than 60 other insurance companies are said to have joined
the scheme in an effort to reduce their payouts.
The Cartel Office started investigating Carpartner last Tuesday, and the
company has voluntarily provided documents to the authorities.
Mr Kiecker would not say what sparked the investigation, but the Cartel
Office has become more aggressive in probing price-fixing allegations in
recent months.
Germany's rental car replacement market is one of the biggest in Europe.
Unlike in Britain, where the majority of cars are rented on an individual
private basis, in Germany about 50 per cent of all rented cars are
replacement vehicles.
Germany's conservative and liberal parties, still trying to put together a
new coalition two weeks after they were returned to power with a slim
majority, yesterday added taxes to the list of issues on which they
disagree, Reuter reports from Bonn.
Mr Theo Waigel, finance minister and leader of the right-wing Christian
Social Union, said talks were making good progress and could be concluded
this week. But the liberal Free Democrats, junior partner in the
centre-right government, said they remained unhappy about a new income tax
surcharge and would not be rushed into an early coalition deal.
