FT  11 JAN 94 / Counties shake-up sparks confusion
Polls of residents of the next three counties to be restructured by Sir John
Banham's Local Government Commission have revealed deep confusion over the
local government review.
The commission will use the polls - by market research organisation MORI -
as evidence when drawing up its final proposals for the counties of
Humberside, Lincolnshire and North Yorkshire.
But the polls have proved totally contradictory. Majorities in all three
counties said they approved in principle of creating unitary authorities to
replace the current two-tier system of counties and districts. But their
single most popular option when presented with a range of alternatives was
to keep the status quo.
Unitary councils, which the government has backed since last September, are
opposed by 69 per cent of residents in North Yorkshire's Craven district
council, for which the local government minister, Mr David Curry, is the MP.
County councils said the confused figures showed that the case for change
had not been made, while district councils stressed the support for the
principle of unitary councils.
South of the Humber, maintaining the status quo was the favoured option of
38 per cent, while it was favoured by 33 per cent north of the river. In
both cases, the next most popular option was favoured by only 16 per cent.
Final recommendations will be published on January 24.
In another worrying development for the review, a Somerset district council
threatened to apply for judicial review of the commission's proposals.
Mendip, the only district to be split under current proposals, will decide
on Thursday whether it is to follow four counties in taking the commission
to the High Court.
The commission's recommendations on Cleveland also came under attack from
the Teesside Study Group of local businessmen and professionals. The group
criticised the proposal to create four unitary authorities, saying: 'Can
what was the smallest county in England afford four chief executives, four
social services departments, four directors of education and so on?'
Local Labour MPs backed the group's call for the commission to create two
unitary councils instead.
Ms Marjorie Mowlam, MP for Redcar, Mr Frank Cook, MP for Stockton North, and
Mr David Bowe, MEP for Cleveland and Yorkshire North, stated: 'There must
now be a very real suspicion that in reality what the commission is
proposing for this area would actually add to costs rather than produce even
limited savings.'
