FT  01 MAR 94 / Hebron killings kindle anger of Israeli Arabs: A threat to
co-existence
Mohammed Abu Jamar, a 22-year-old bedouin Arab who worked as a waiter in a
Tel Aviv restaurant, got married two weeks ago. Yesterday he was buried in
his home town of Rahat, in the southern Negev, the first Israeli Arab to die
in clashes with the police for almost 20 years.
So far, Abu Jamar is the only fatality in four days of running street
battles between Israeli Arabs and police in the aftermath of Friday's Hebron
mosque massacre. But dozens have been injured and dozens more arrested.
The Palestinian intifada - the spontaneous uprising against Israeli
occupation that erupted in the Gaza Strip and West Bank more than six years
ago - has spread across the pre-1967 borders and into Israel itself. And
Israel's political leaders, calling crisis meetings with leading members of
the Arab community and urging the police to use as much restraint as
possible, can only hope that it will die down once time has begun to heal
the Hebron wounds.
From the Knesset podium yesterday, Israel's Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin
appealed to the 800,000-strong Arab community - one fifth of the country's
population - to remember their decades of peaceful co-existence with the
Jews.
'You are part of us,' he declared. 'You've been with us for decades, through
thick and thin. Loyal partners. We've managed to achieved co-existence and
we want to maintain it.'
But as Mr Rabin delivered his appeal, many of his target audience were
otherwise engaged. For the fourth straight day, in towns and villages from
Abu Jamar's Rahat in the south, to the Galilee in the north, hundreds of
Arab youths were stoning policemen, and facing rubber bullets and tear gas
in return.
In Nazareth, Israel's largest Arab town, windows were smashed on four
Israeli buses. Egged, the national bus company, was told to divert its
routes elsewhere.
In Jaffa, the Arab half of Tel Aviv where some of the worst rioting has been
taking place, a police promise to release dozens of Arabs who had been
arrested in the past few days brought a measure of calm.
But in Rahat, before Abu Jamar's funeral, a group of bedouin protesters,
waving Palestinian flags, chanted anthems familiar from the occupied
territories: 'With fire and blood we shall avenge the fallen. With fire and
blood we shall redeem Palestine.'
Up and down the country, local Arab leaders appealed to the police to clear
out, to enable them to calm the inflamed populace. 'There is a deep crisis
in Arab-Jewish relations,' said Nazareth teacher Ali Zaydan. 'I don't know
who can join them back together.'
Many analysts have been ascribing the ferocious and unexpected outpouring of
Arab rage to the increasing popularity of the Israeli Arab Islamic Movement,
which professes to work peacefully for the advancement of Israeli Arabs, but
is regarded with deep suspicion by most Israeli leaders.
Some Israeli Jews, though, have acknowledged a deeper cause: the
discrimination still routinely suffered by Arab citizens, the minimal
government funding for their local councils, the poorer education system,
the higher unemployment rates.
If Israel wants to avoid its Arabs rioting again in the future, said Dr
Alexander Blei, a former prime ministerial adviser on Arab affairs, 'the
government must introduce policies to bring full equality for Israeli
Arabs'.
But perhaps the most fundamental problem is that Israeli Arabs know that
Jews, to a greater or lesser extent, still doubt their loyalty, still do not
really regard them as 'proper Israelis'.
In an interview after the Israeli-PLO accord was signed at the White House
last September, the Israeli Arab poet Samih al-Qasem spoke of how Israeli
Arabs have felt in the past 'as if we were a fifth column. A time bomb. A
demographic danger.' So the peace accord, he said, had come as a profound
relief, a signal that Israeli Arabs could now 'truly integrate'. Sadly, it
seems, he may have spoken too soon.
