FT  03 AUG 94 / Bank refuses Dollars 750m power loans to India: States are
failing to make hard financial decisions
The World Bank has turned down applications for power loans worth Dollars
750m (Pounds 490m) for projects in some Indian states because of
mismanagement in their government electricity boards.
The bank's loans to central government power projects remain unaffected.
The southern Indian state of Karnataka, which suffers acute power shortages,
will be worst affected by the World Bank's decision.
Mr Veerappa Moily, the state's chief minister, failed to convince senior
management of the bank in Washington that it should lend the state the
Dollars 250m-Dollars 300m it had asked for.
Mr Heinz Vergin, the World Bank's director in charge of India, said that
they had 'every intention to restart a relationship with Karnataka',
provided the state institution in charge of power generation and
distribution became financially viable.
Mr Vergin made his comments when announcing approval of Dollars 168m of
World Bank loans to help India tackle pollution in key industries.
World Bank officials have repeatedly expressed their concern about
mismanagement in state electricity boards.
Many of these boards have gone bankrupt because they have failed to collect
dues, have provided electricity at prices lower than cost, and have ignored
large-scale electricity thefts.
The bank, in its annual country report released in May, urged the need for
restructuring the power sector in the states.
Several large power projects, like Enron US's 2015MW project in Dhabol,
Maharashtra, have yet to reach the implementation stage because they have
found it financially unviable to deal with crisis-ridden state electricity
boards.
The government, which liberalised the power sector two years ago, has
received nearly 75 proposals, amounting to Rs20bn (Pounds 414m), for more
than 32,000MW of generation capacity, half India's existing installed
capacity.
International investors have been asking the central government for
counter-guarantees, which the government has so far been unable to provide,
because the state governments are unwilling to take the hard political
decisions needed to make their electricity boards viable.
The World Bank has recommended the Indian government extend its reform
process to the states.
Mr NK Salve, India's power minister, said the bank's decision had not come
as a surprise to the ministry, which now has a stronger case to urge that
state electricity boards improve their finances.
But he added that central government could not let down the states, and his
ministry was aware of the responsibility to them, especially when most were
facing a 'dangerously suicidal situation' on the power front.
