FT  16 NOV 94 / Survey of Denmark (6): 'Live strong and die young' - How
happy are Europe's most liberated women? asks Hilary Barnes
A shocking encounter awaited me when I first visited Denmark, as a teenager,
some 40 years ago: an elderly lady who habitually smoked cigars. The distaff
half of the Danish population is still puffing away. About 41 per cent of
women were smokers in 1991, significantly higher than in other European
countries.
Some things have changed over the past 30 years, but not for the better: as
many Danish women as men are now classified as heavy smokers, and while
fewer men smoke now than 30 years ago, just as many women do.
Danish women gained the vote in 1915, before women in any other European
country, and ever since they have made a point of adopting the same social
rights as men as well - to smoke and drink like the men, to choose their
sexual partners as freely as men.
European attitude surveys suggest that Danish women regard themselves as
more liberal and independent-minded than women in other European countries.
Religious considerations do not place restraints on their behaviour. They
are less inclined than their sisters abroad to accept decisions taken on
their behalf by 'authorities', taking little notice, for example, of
official anti-smoking or anti-alcohol campaigns.
Since the 1960s, they have also taken to working like men. The female labour
participation rate in Denmark is almost 80 per cent - higher than in any
other country in Europe except Sweden. Generous provision for institutional
care for children from the age of six months onwards has encouraged a family
structure in which both parents work. The 'housewife' as a demographic
category has virtually disappeared.
Equally extensive facilities for the care of the elderly have freed children
from caring for their elderly parents as well. As a Swedish sociologist once
said of the Scandinavian welfare state: it has freed the individual from the
tyranny of the family.
Ms Anne Knudsen, an anthropologist, recently caused public controversy by
asserting that Denmark has become a matriarchy, in which women dominate
opinion. This, said Ms Knudsen, was not a good thing, as women are too
conservative-minded and hold back necessary change.
How much truth there is in her thesis is difficult to know, but there is a
long way to go before women have achieved equality of influence as measured
by the number of women who reach the top in politics and business. About one
third of the members of the Folketing and of the present Cabinet are women,
and two of the eight parties represented in the Folketing are led by women
(three until last month, when the Progress party's Ms Pia Kjaersgaard was
demoted); but in business, women in top jobs are few are far between.
Perhaps equality is, as a young woman journalist specialising in youth
culture commented at a dinner party recently, as she puffed away at her
third cigarette within the hour, 'coming along nicely.' But emancipation is
not without its costs, which were highlighted this year by a report from the
ministry of health.
The report examined female mortality rates in Denmark in the age group 35-64
year (part of an extensive 16-volume study of mortality rates among both men
and women). Mortality in this age group is still higher for men, at about
700 per 100,000, but while the male mortality rate has fallen from about
850, 30 years ago, the female mortality rate has remained almost unchanged
at about 500 per 100,000.
Particularly striking is a comparison of the mortality rate among Danish
women in the 55-59 age group, compared with women in other European
countries (Sweden, Norway, Holland and France). In Denmark the rate
increased from 811 to 825 between 1955-59 and 1985-89. In the other
countries the rates were much lower, and they have fallen significantly. In
the case of France the rate fell dramatically from 838 in 1955-59 to 472 in
1985-89.
The ministry's report attributed the Danish trend to increased death rates
from heart disease, chronic respiratory diseases, lung cancer, cirrhosis of
the liver, cancer of the breast and suicide. Four out of six of these
conditions are directly related to alcohol or smoking or both.
The number of women aged 35-64 dying from cirrhosis of the liver has doubled
over the past 20 years. Deaths from lung cancer in the 45-54 age group have
risen from about eight per 100,000 in the early 1960s to 35 in 1985-89, and
almost 100 per 100,000 for the 55-59-year-olds. For both age groups, the
lung cancer mortality rate is much lower in the other European countries.
Denmark has always had a relatively high suicide rate, but for women in this
age group it has increased, rising from about 23 per 100,000 of the 35-64
age group in early 1960s to 32-33 per 100,000 throughout the period
1970-1990. There is evidence to suggest that mortality rates, as well as
other life-style problems, are especially high among university-educated
women, the career women who are the spearhead of the push for equality with
men.
A survey of living conditions by the Danish Institute for Social Research,
published in 1992, found, among other things:
Women graduates have a higher mortality rate than women in general, while
male graduates have a lower mortality rate than the average.
The risk of death from breast cancer is 40 per cent higher for women
graduates than for women in general.
Suicide among graduate women is a much more frequent cause of death than
among other groups of women, or among male graduates.
One in three graduate women have no children by the age of 35. One in five
graduates never have children.
Among women in management positions, every other one has experienced a
divorce (one in five for men in similar positions), and one in four
attributes divorce to problems associated with a career. One in five live
alone, compared with only 7 per cent of men in similar positions.
'If the result of all our efforts is stress and death, wouldn't it be a good
idea to return to the good old days?' asked Ms Hanne Dam, a writer on
women's issues, in a leading article in her newspaper Information in August.
'Not at all,' she went on. '. . . It behoves society to provide women with
the opportunity for a worthier life.'
The young woman journalist at dinner, as she puffed her way to a possible
early decease, was even less equivocal: 'Live strong, die young. That's the
Danish women's motto,' she said.
