FT  17 FEB 94 / Rangoon may hold talks with Suu Kyi
Lt Gen Khin Nyunt, the most powerful member of Burma's military junta, may
agree to hold talks with detained opposition leader Ms Aung San Suu Kyi,
according to a US congressman who met them both in Rangoon this week.
'I think the future of Burma will be determined by two people: Lt Gen Khin
Nyunt and Aung San Suu Kyi,' Mr Bill Richardson, a Democrat ally of
President Clinton, said in Bangkok.
Mr Richardson, the first foreigner other than her relatives to meet Ms Suu
Kyi during her four and a half years of house arrest, brought her a letter
from Mr Clinton expressing his support.
Ms Suu Kyi told him she wanted 'a genuine, high-level dialogue' with the
junta to resolve Burma's political deadlock. The armed forces crushed a
pro-democracy uprising in 1988 and then ignored the results of a 1990
election convincingly won by Ms Suu Kyi's National League for Democracy.
Lt Gen Khin Nyunt, said he might be authorised by the ruling State Law and
Order Restoration Council (Slorc) to engage in talks with her. He expressed
the junta's desire for better relations with the US and said Slorc would
consider allowing the Red Cross to visit other prisoners in Burmese jails.
Burma's generals are anxious to improve their international image after
years of human rights abuses, but it is not clear how they will be able to
embark on a substantial round of talks with the two sides so far apart.
Ms Suu Kyi sent out a message to her supporters via Mr Richardson saying:
'Be courageous and democracy will win.' The Slorc has silenced most of its
other opponents and is devising a new constitution to entrench the influence
of the armed forces.
'The Slorc made it very clear to me that talks do not mean political
dialogue,' said Mr Richardson. 'What we're talking about is getting two
people together to engage in a pre-dialogue.'
Such a meeting, however, would be the least that would be required for the
US to upgrade its relations with Rangoon, Mr Richardson said. 'I think it's
essential for Slorc to accept this proposal for talks,' he said.
