FT  04 OCT 94 / Survey of World Car Industry (29): Short on speed and range
 -A look at prospects for the electric car
After 100 years of being 'just around the corner', the electric car is
coming into sight. But it is low on power, short of range, expensive to make
and is being pushed and pulled along by environmental legislators and
grumbling carmakers.
Were it not for Californian state clean-air legislation requiring 2 per cent
of each manufacturer's sales to be of zero-emission vehicles (Zevs) from
1998, it is unlikely that the battery-powered car - currently seen as the
only way of achieving zero emissions in urban areas - would be a candidate
for volume production this century, certainly in North America.
Americans pay little for petrol and the economic incentive towards electric
cars is zero. Even in Europe and Japan, where growing urban air quality
problems and much higher fuel prices create a more viable climate for 'EVs'
(electric vehicles), progress is slow and disappointing for their
proponents.
Despite intensive research and expenditure of many hundreds of millions of
dollars, the search for a 'superbattery' capable of giving an 'EV' anything
remotely like the speed and range of a petrol car has so far failed. There
are a few promising alternatives to lead-acid types, but most have
disadvantages.
Thus when the first flocks of battery cars do roll out of Californian
showrooms in less than four years, the certainty is that their high cost
will be subsidised in part by the conventional cars their manufacturers sell
in much larger numbers. And the drivers who have bought them will have made
knowing sacrifices of finance and flexibility as the price of cleaner Los
Angeles air - for range restrictions rule out EVs as 'only' cars for
far-ranging Americans.
But roll out the 'Zevs' will, except in the now-highly unlikely event of the
Californian Air Resources Board (Carb) and other state legislators being won
over, at the 11th hour, by the motor industry's fervent arguments that a
truly viable Zev is not technically achievable by 1998.
Such arguments have been falling on deaf Carb ears for the past several
years, and other states such as Massachusetts have been lining up to impose
similar legislation.
And the '2 per cent' rule is just the start; the legislation requires 10 per
cent of sales, or at least 100,000 in California's 1m-plus new car market,
to be of Zevs by early next century .
Manufacturers have had no choice but to start developing such cars, for the
threatened penalty of non-compliance is exclusion from California's and some
other states' markets.
Certainly the motor industry has little hope of a reprieve through the
still-rumbling debate about whether battery cars are really as clean as they
are made out to be.
As a number of reports in both the US and Europe have pointed out, the
electric power stored in an EV's battery has to be generated somehow. And
whether it is produced from coal, oil, natural gas, hydro or nuclear energy
will have a big effect on the overall environmental impact of a
battery-powered car population.
It is typical of the unfulfilled promise of even the biggest car makers'
electric vehicle plans that as far back as the early 1980s General Motors
was promising 100,000-plus output of small electric cars before the end of
that decade. They never materialised, defeated largely by inadequate battery
technology. Nor did promised vehicles from Ford.
Now GM has the Impact, perhaps the most-trumpeted electric car programme of
all, and trials of which are just getting under way in Los Angeles.
In 1991, GM's electric vehicle programme directors implied, if not
specifically stated, that cars based on the 100mph-plus, purpose-built and
aluminium-bodied Impact would be rolling out of a former Buick plant at
Lansing, Michigan, well before the 1998 deadline.
Even though a fleet of 30 has now been produced under a Dollars 32m
'PrEView' programme which will see 1,000 drivers evaluate cars and charging
apparatus over the next two years, the Impact project appears to have lost
GM's earlier go-it-alone enthusiasm. The world's biggest vehicle maker is
now collaborating with both Ford and Chrysler in pursuit of the viable EV.
One ray of hope on the battery front is a joint venture GM and several other
car makers, including Hyundai of Korea, have signed with the Ovonic battery
company of the US, to produce batteries using nickel-hydride.
In the case of the Impact, says GM, it is believed the Ovonic battery could
double the Impact's 70-mile city driving range using lead-acid bateries.
Even this project falls within a wider US collaborative framework. GM, Ford,
Chrysler, electric utilities and government agencies, formed several years
ago into the Advanced Battary Consortium, have awarded research and
development contracts to five other battery makers pursuing alternative
technologies.
The search for viable battery cars for California has already had its
casualties. At least one City of Los Angeles-backed electric car project has
run out of funds.
Meanwhile, Ford and several European companies are among those arguing that
ultra-low (but not zero) emissions 'hybrid' cars should be considered as an
effective compromoise. They would use a very small petrol or diesel engine
running at constant speed to keep batteries charged when running on open
highways (thus overcoming the range problem) but switching to battery-only
operation in urban areas.
That debate, too, rumbles on both in North America and in Europe, where
there is considerable interest in the activities of Peugeot, a lonely voice
predicting that Europe could have a 200,000-plus market for electric cars by
the end of the decade.
Peugeot says it plans soon to produce electric cars at an initial rate of
5,000 a year. And more than 20 French towns are being equipped with a basic
infrastructure to recharge them. The rest of Europe, far less reliant on
nuclear energy, appears content to stand and watch.
Just how much progress is really being made should become more evident in
California in December. It is then that an important electric vehicle
symposium will take place with Ford, Chrysler, BMW, Mercedes and all others
with a stake in the wealthy Californian market putting their EV wares on
display. The symposium will take place in Anaheim. . . more specifically, at
Disneyland. . .
