FT  17 DEC 94 / Price-fixing probe for EU steel groups: Investigations by
Brussels could trigger steep penalties
The European Commission is investigating the activities of at least eight
European steel producing and distribution companies, suspecting they are
running a price-fixing cartel in heavy duty steel tubes.
The investigations - carried out over the last two weeks - could lead to the
imposition of steep fines if the Commission considers that the companies
have behaved illegally.
Companies involved include British Steel, Italy's Ilva, Vallourec in France,
and Mannesmann and Thyssen of Germany. Europipe, a three-year-old joint
venture between Mannesmannrohren-Werke, of Germany, and Dillinger
Huttenwerke, a subsidiary of France's Usinor-Sacilor, is also under
investigation.
The Commission suspects the companies of meeting regularly to collude on
prices and share out contracts in the oil and gas industries. They allegedly
ran a system whereby all but one company proposed a higher price for a
contract, ensuring the work was channelled to the designated enterprise.
The inquiry comes as talks continue on bringing British Steel's
large-diameter welded pipe business into the Europipe joint venture with
Usinor-Sacilor and Mannesmann.
The investigation marks the latest in a series of drives by Brussels to
stamp out uncompetitive activities by EU-based companies.
So far this year European steel makers, carton-board producers, and cement
manufacturers have been found guilty of collusion after probes by the
Commission's competition authorities. They were fined record amounts.
In February the Commission demanded Ecu104.4m (Pounds 82.16m) from 16
companies for allegedly operating a cartel in steel beams used in the
construction industry.
Only last month it imposed even higher fines on 33 cement producers accusing
them of using secret agreements to rig the market for more than 10 years.
Following the Commission's decision, Mr Karel Van Miert, who is responsible
for competition policy, hinted that other sectors of European industry were
likely to come under investigation, but said evidence of collusive behaviour
was becoming increasingly hard to detect.
The Commission investigates cartels when it suspects that collusive
behaviour is affecting trade between EU members states or countries in the
European Economic Area. Evidence is often hard to assemble as companies have
become adept at covering their tracks - for example, by agreeing not to keep
minutes of meetings where collusive practices are discussed.
In this latest case Commission officials were dispatched on dawn raids to
the companies concerned to seize confidential documents.
If found guilty the Commission is allowed, under EU competition law, to fine
companies up to 10 per cent of their turnover.
This year's record fines on the cement, carton-board and steel producers
have boosted the reputation of Mr Karel Van Miert but infuriated the
companies concerned, most of which have launched appeals in the European
Court of Justice.
The levels of the fines have to be agreed by the College of Commissioners in
Brussels. Mr Van Miert was only just able to secure sufficient support for
the fines on the cement producers, as some commissioners were reluctant to
penalise high-profile companies in their own states.
British Steel yesterday confirmed it had received a visit from Commission
officials but declined to comment on the subject of the call.
The company's wide-diameter steel tubes are made at Hartlepool in
north-eastern England and it is understood that both the Hartlepool plant
and the headquarters of the company's tube business at Corby were visited by
the investigators.
British Steel's tubular products business employs 2,100 people and had
turnover in 1993/94 of Pounds 390m, but this includes smaller tubes and
pipes made at Corby. Its heavy duty tubes are sold mainly to the offshore
oil and gas industry and are also used in heavy construction.
