FT  12 OCT 94 / UK Company News: FR ahead 17% and proposes name change
FR Group, the aerospace engineering company, yesterday reported a 17 per
cent increase in pre-tax profits and said it wanted to change its name to
reflect the whole of the group's activities.
Paradoxically, the proposed name change to Cobham coincided with news of the
planned retirement next June of Mr Michael Cobham, who will by then have
been chairman of the Dorset-based company for 26 years.
FR said its present name was identified too strongly with Flight Refuelling,
the air-to-air refuelling business which accounts for about 40 per cent of
group sales, to the detriment of other divisions.
Sir Alan Cobham - the present chairman's father - founded Flight Refuelling
60 years ago and the group said the name Cobham had a long and well
established association with the industry.
Mr Gordon Page, chief executive, said there were no more members of the
Cobham family involved with the group, but this seemed an appropriate time
to make the change - partly because this year is the centenary of Sir Alan's
birth.
The new chairman will be Sir Michael Knight, 61, a non-executive director,
who joined the board in 1990. He retired as Air Chief Marshall in 1989 after
35 years' service with the Royal Air Force.
FR's pre-tax profits rose from Pounds 10.5m to Pounds 12.3m in the six
months to June 30, on sales up 16 per cent at Pounds 101m. The shares closed
up 12p at 290p.
Mr Page said the group had made good progress by 'sticking to its knitting'.
The order book stood at Pounds 280m at the period end, and was both
long-term and well spread across the group's businesses.
Having cut several hundred jobs in the previous year, Mr Page said that FR
had shed only 40 to 50 jobs in the half-year, and benefited from stable
buying programmes from Airbus and Fokker.
Last month FR paid Pounds 6.7m for Sargent Fletcher, a California-based
supplier of air-to-air refuelling equipment to the US Navy. Mr Page said the
company was well placed to win a Pentagon contract to install aerial
refuelling wing pods on its KC 135 tanker aircraft, which could be worth
Dollars 100m (Pounds 63m) over 10 years.
FR generated cash of Pounds 8.8m during the first half and had net cash of
Pounds 3m at the period end. Earnings came out at 11.01p (9.08p) per share
and the interim dividend is lifted to 2.7p (2.46p).
