FT  14 FEB 94 / People: Leng - A rare species for Gatt
Jean-Pierre Leng, who has just been appointed head of the EU's Gatt
delegation in Geneva, is a rare species of Eurocrat, write Lionel Barber and
Frances Williams.
Unlike many of his senior colleagues who spend their time clambering up the
greasy pole in Brussels, Leng has risen to the top of the Commission's
diplomatic service via foreign postings.
He has spent the past three and a half years in Tokyo as head of delegation,
but he also worked for five years in the mid-1970s in the Commission's
bureau in Washington. While he has been with the Community since 1959, his
only lengthy stint in Brussels was between 1984 and 1990, when he was
involved with textile and steel negotiations, before becoming the director
in charge of relations with the US, Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
In the Uruguay Round of global trade talks, which ended last December, the
European Commission's negotiating mandate on behalf of the 12 member states
was vastly enlarged to encompass trade in services and intellectual property
as well as trade in goods, its traditional staple.
In addition to handling trade negotiations on behalf of EU members, Leng's
immediate agenda also includes China's bid to rejoin the Gatt and future
Gatt work on trade and the environment.
He will also just see in the new, more powerful World Trade Organisation
which will replace Gatt and which is expected to come into being sometime
between January and July of next year. However, he reaches 65 in September
1996 and hence will have been in harness for much less time than his
predecessor, Tran Van Thinh.
A diminutive Vietnamese-born Frenchman, Tran, who was 65 this month, had had
an usually long 15-year stint. The antithesis of a grey-faced Eurocrat, he
was ebullient and unpredictable, with a strong line in extravagant
metaphors.
Highly respected as a skilled negotiator and deal-broker, his farewell
speech to Gatt's annual meeting last month combined, in typical fashion, a
humorous 'ten commandments of Gatt' with a deadly serious proposal for an
import levy to finance environment projects in developing countries.
