FT  18 OCT 94 / Finns see new era of prosperity in Union
The Finnish electorate's clear approval of the country's move to join the
European Union was welcomed yesterday by government and both sides of
industry who believe membership will cement Finland's recovery from the
deepest recession experienced by an industrialised country since the second
world war.
'EU membership is good for our economy,' said Mr Sixten Korkman, director
general of the finance ministry's economics department. 'It should help to
sustain the momentum of our recovery and help to bring down long-term
interest rates. Investment activity should benefit because there will be
more certainty about the rules of the game.' Mr Jarl Kohler, head of the
country's forestry industry association, said: 'This means a lot for
(Finnish) industry, especially for the forestry industry.'
Finland's economy is already rebounding from a recession that between 1990
and late 1993 saw output shrink by some 15 per cent, the deepest slump in
any member of the Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development in
the post-war period.
Loss of vital trade with the neighbouring Soviet Union, the bursting of a
huge 1980s credit boom, the international recession and the burden of a big
welfare system combined to throw the economy violently into reverse, driving
up unemployment to almost 20 per cent of the workforce. This year an
export-led recovery has taken hold, with the country's big forestry industry
and companies such as Nokia, the telecommunications group, benefiting from
renewed international demand and the low value of the Finnish Markka, which
is about 20 per cent below its 1991 level against a basket of currencies.
Gross domestic product is expected to grow by about 4 per cent this year and
by at least 5 per cent in 1995.
Finnish political and business leaders have been careful not to portray EU
membership as a magic formula for greater growth. Although Finnish exports
will no longer be subject to EU customs duties, most of the other direct
trading benefits of membership are already available through Finland's
membership of the European Economic Area.
Mainly because of the extra costs of cushioning Finland's highly subsidised
agriculture from the adjustment to lower EU producer prices, EU membership
will add a net FM10bn (Pounds 1.25bn) in costs to the government's budget in
1995. This will help push up state debt set to the equivalent of 70 per cent
of GDP next year and prolong the struggle to bring the budget deficit to
within the EU's Maastricht criteria for European monetary union.
But the benefits of membership are expected to flow in other ways. Lower
agricultural prices will further dampen annual inflation, already running at
a lowly 2 per cent. Yesterday, long-term interest rates continued the
downward path they have been following since opinion polls began forecasting
a firm Yes vote in the referendum. Yields on 10-year government bonds stood
at around 10 per cent, down from a peak of around 11.5 per cent in
mid-August. The Markka also strengthened in another sign of market
confidence.
The hope is that such trends will boost investment - which is vital to
sustain the ambitious levels of growth needed to make significant inroads on
unemployment. A recent presidential commission on unemployment said annual
growth of 5 per cent was required up to the end of the decade just to get
unemployment down to 8 per cent from the present level of 18 per cent.
Finnish officials are also hoping that being in the EU will encourage
foreign investors to look more seriously at Finland, which only abolished
its last restrictions on foreign ownership of Finnish companies at the end
of 1992. Since then there has been a flood of foreign buying of shares in
Finnish companies, but little direct foreign investment in the country.
In the drive to attract inward investment, the new Invest in Finland bureau,
set up by the government, is stressing the location of the country as a
gateway to trading with Russia, with which Finland shares a 1,270km-long
border and a long history of trading ties.
