FT  29 NOV 94 / Major defeats Euro-rebellion but suffers blow to majority:
Conservative sceptics defy government threat to withdraw party whip
Mr John Major's government had its paper majority in the House of Commons
wiped out last night as the price of crushing a Tory rebellion against
higher British contributions to the European Union.
With the backing of Ulster unionists, the government defeated with a
majority of 27 a Labour amendment that would have delayed legislation to
implement the agreement on European Union finances reached at the Edinburgh
summit two years ago.
After a barnstorming Commons defence of the EU by Mr Kenneth Clarke, the
chancellor, the government won a crucial vote on a Labour amendment to the
European Communities Finance bill by 330 to 303.
But during a day of high drama which exposed again the fault-line in the
Tory party over Europe, seven hard line Tory Eurosceptics ignored Mr Major's
decision to make the vote an issue of confidence and abstained.
Their defiance, in spite of a cabinet warning that defeat would have forced
a general election, resulted in the immediate withdrawal of the Conservative
whip - in effect the rebels' suspension from the parliamentary party.
That meant the government's paper majority of 14 in the Commons over all
other political parties was wiped out. With another Tory MP expected to lose
the whip for abstaining on a second vote on the legislation, Mr Major was
left heading what in theory is a minority administration.
Yet another Eurosceptic was thought to be preparing to resign the party whip
in spite of reluctantly voting for the legislation. The government was in
any case likely to see its Commons majority cut to 13 after an expected
defeat in next month's Dudley by-election. On paper it will now be in a
minority by at least one and possibly by as many as five.
Opponents of the legislation who had buckled under the pressure to fall into
line warned the prime minister that he now faces the prospect of a second,
more dangerous rebellion, over the imposition of Value Added Tax on domestic
fuel.
On the eve of today's Budget, several MPs said that if Mr Clarke presses
ahead as expected with plans to impose VAT on fuel at the full rate from
next April, the government might well be defeated on the issue.
Ministers insisted that in practice most if not all of those suspended from
the party would continue to support the government in its legislative
programme. Unless they are given back the whip, the rebels will not be
allowed to stand as Conservatives at the next election - an incentive to
fall into line.
Cabinet colleagues also pointed out that Mr Major's real, rather than
theoretical, majority was the 27 votes margin by which he won last night's
confidence vote. On most big issues - though not on VAT on fuel - he can
rely on the support of 10 unionist MPs from Ulster.
But although the prime minister joined Tory party managers last night to
celebrate their success, MPs across a wide swathe of the right wing said he
would pay a heavy price for the victory.
Mr Norman Lamont, Mr Clarke's predecessor at the Treasury and a leading
sceptic, called during a heated debate for Britain to redefine its
relationship with Brussels, even if that meant withdrawal from the EU.
Mr Clarke, in a combative performance, accused Labour and the Liberal
Democrats of colluding with the rebels to wreck an agreement they had backed
when it was signed at the Edinburgh summit two years ago.
As the likelihood of a government victory became clear, rightwing opponents
of Mr Major renewed their efforts to gather support for a challenge before
tomorrow's deadline.
But dissidents on the left of the party made clear they were not prepared to
add their names to those seeking a challenge, leaving the rightwingers short
of the required 34 names.
Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade secretary, had earlier rejected any
suggestions that a contest might pave the way for him to win the leadership.
EU tries to agree line on enlargement, Page 2
Aftershock of rebels' revolt will rumble on, Page 10
Joe Rogaly, Page 20
Observer, Page 21
