FT  07 SEP 94 / Primary school reforms 'failing'
Government attempts to raise educational standards by introducing widespread
reforms have had little effect on how primary school pupils spend their
time, says a paper presented to the British Association yesterday.
Mr Ian Plewis of the Institute of Education described how children aged
seven at London primary schools divided their time between activities during
the school day.
He compared the activities of children in the same group of primary schools
in 1986, before the sweeping 1988 Education Reform Act - and last year,
after its implementation.
He also compared the results from last year with the recommendations of the
Dearing report on the school curriculum, published last May, about how
pupils' time should be divided between subjects.
Time devoted to science doubled, although with only nine minutes a day it
was still receiving only half the time recommended by Sir Ron Dearing.
History and geography, which did not figure at all in 1986, took about four
minutes a day last year, still only a quarter of the recommendation.
The biggest increase, from seven minutes to 28 minutes, was in the time
children spent having their activities explained to them. This occupied
almost as much time as science, history, geography and reading combined.
To compensate for these increases, time allocated to art and craft fell from
39 minutes to 17 minutes.
Using computers to study other subjects occupied two minutes a day - less
than a quarter of the Dearing recommendation of nine minutes.
One surprise was that time spent reading increased very little, from six to
eight minutes a week. Moreover, the extra time was devoted to pupils reading
to each other, not to adults.
According to Mr Plewis reading to adults is thought to be important for
developing literacy. Although teachers spend a great deal of time listening
to children reading, each child reads for only a very short time.
In spite of these apparent shortcomings the vast majority of parents are
satisfied with their children's schooling, according to a paper by Dr Martin
Hughes of the University of Exeter. But their reasons for satisfaction have
more to do with their perceptions of the social atmosphere in the school
than with educational standards.
While satisfied with the education of their own children, a substantial
percentage of parents felt that standards generally were in decline.
They felt that reducing the size of classes was more important than changing
the curriculum.
Both Dr Hughes and Mr Plewis said that, in spite of the vast amounts of
money that had been devoted to changing the education system, very little
had been spent on eval-uating the effect of the changes.
