FT  21 APR 94 / Technology: Aids research suffers setbacks - High hopes have
been brought low
The past year has been one of dashed hopes for researchers and sufferers of
Aids. The Concorde study results on AZT, announced earlier this month,
concluded that the drug yields no benefits to people who have contracted HIV
and have yet to show any symptoms. The news was just the latest in a series
of setbacks.
Many Aids medicines have failed to live up to their promise. The Berlin Aids
conference last June was hardly upbeat but several glimmers of hope still
shone. Yung-Kang Chow of Harvard University had just announced positive
results from trials using a cocktail of AZT-type drugs.
A number of companies, including Merck, Roche and Vertex, were concentrating
on a promising new class of Aids drugs, called protease inhibitors. And
Chiron, the US biotechnology group, was preparing for large-scale trials of
vaccines made up of an empty shell of the HIV virus.
Shortly after the Berlin conference, Harvard admitted its data on the
cocktail drug had been faulty. Earlier this year, Merck, said to have one of
the most promising of the protease inhibitors, announced that its initial
trials had held the virus back for periods of only 12 to 24 weeks.
Chiron has suspended research for its Aids vaccine pending government
funding for wide-scale trials. 'We will not move ahead on that until funding
comes through,' says Lawrence Kurtz, a spokesman for the group. Aids
scientists are concerned that continued disappointment may lead the private
sector to put less money into HIV research. 'I think some companies have
been disappointed,' says Fernando Zacarias, regional co-ordinator for the
Panamerican Health Organisation.
Myron Essex, chairman of the Harvard Aids Institute, believes there are
other disincentives to private research. 'There is evidence that the number
of people with Aids in developed countries may be plateauing and even
decreasing. Most new Aids cases are in developing countries, which may not
be able to afford treatment even if it were available. Pharmaceutical
companies don't usually invest heavily in researching drugs for declining
markets.'
The lack of progress is even more disappointing as the public's hopes of
fighting the disease are so high, fuelled by rapid developments in research
early on.
While our understanding of the disease has deepened considerably,
researchers say there is no cure in sight. 'To even think of a cure is going
well beyond anything we have our eyes on,' says Emilio Emini, executive
director of antiviral research at Merck. Even the prospect of controlling
the virus for a period of years has proved daunting.
'The general public thinks in terms of infections you can absolutely cure,'
says Martin Hirsch, a professor at the Harvard Medical School and a leading
Aids researcher. 'But Aids is a virus, and we have never been able to cure
any virus, only prepare the body's natural defence system to attack (the
virus) once it arrives. There is no evidence that the body has any
sustainable ability to fight HIV.'
Aids activists believe this view may be too pessimistic. 'There is no cure
for herpes, but we are able to keep it in control with acyclovir, and that
amounts to the same thing,' says Raymond Schmidt, an Aids activist with the
organisation Act Up.
Scientists point out that in the case of herpes, the drug merely suppresses
the virus long enough for the body's immune system to prepare a
counter-offensive. One of the main problems in fighting Aids is that the
virus invades the cells responsible for immunity, namely the CD4
lymphosytes. There is no pause in the virus's onslaught. Last year,
scientists discovered that HIV uses the period of 'clinical latency' -
during which patients show no increase of the virus in their blood - to
implant itself deeply in the lymph nodes. After multiplying there for years,
it again invades the blood stream.
Another research challenge is that HIV replicates itself with frightening
speed. Vaccines for influenza, for instance, are troublesome because the
virus mutates about once a year. HIV can metamorphose once every few days,
and its ability to transform itself has frustrated many researchers. Merck,
for instance, identifies this mutability as one of the main problems with
the effectiveness of its protease inhibitor.
Protease inhibitors prevent the production of the protease enzyme, which is
necessary for the virus to replicate effectively. However, the inhibitor
matches a certain molecule, and becomes ineffective if that molecule changes
form.
'The Aids virus selects for resistance,' says Emini. 'If the environment
changes, the population will replace the eliminated virus with a new,
resistant strain. Ironically, the more virus you kill off, the more
resistance will occur. With our protease inhibitor, the body switches to the
new resistant strain within 12 to 24 weeks.'
Merck says it will continue research on the protease inhibitor to see if it
becomes more effective when used in conjunction with other drugs, such as
AZT.
News has not been completely bleak, however. While progress in treating
infected patients is slow, a new study with AZT shows that the drug may keep
HIV-positive pregnant women from passing the virus to their children. Gene
therapy also holds promise. 'I think if there is an effective treatment for
Aids, it may come out of gene therapy,' says Essex.
Many scientists believe research on Aids will resemble progress on cancer.
The fight will be long and hard, and no absolute cure is likely to be
discovered soon, but advances will be made. 'We're light years ahead of
where we were on cancer research in the 1960s,' says Emini. 'We can cure
some forms, and we have a number of treatments. Yet there was no blinding
moment when everyone realised progress had been made. I think it will be the
same with Aids.'
