FT  19 MAR 94 / Reluctant challenger runs Berlusconi close: The Forza Italia
leader may come to an unexpected halt in central Rome
One constituency above all others has come under the spotlight in the
Italian election campaign.
This is a seat in the historic centre of Rome where media magnate Silvio
Berlusconi is staking his prestige as an aspiring politician. It is a three
cornered fight between the left, right and centre and could produce a
surprise upset.
The Milanese owner of the Fininvest media empire is not on home territory;
and he would have been far safer in one of the middle class suburbs where
his Forza Italia movement has a sympathetic audience.
In central Rome his electorate mainly consists of small traders and
shopkeepers profoundly mistrustful of political promises. The voters also
include the wealthier members of the professions and the Roman aristocracy:
the former mistrust Mr Berlusconi, the latter feel more at home with the
neo-fascist MSI.
Mr Berlusconi's two main opponents are Prof Luigi Spaventa, the budget
minister, who is backed by the Progressive Alliance of eight left parties,
and Mr Alberto Michelini, a former Christian Democrat deputy, standing for
the centrist alliance, Italian Pact.
'I didn't want to run for parliament but as a Roman I felt I had to meet
this challenge from Berlusconi standing in the heart of Rome,' says Prof
Spaventa. For a reluctant candidate with little to lose, he has proved
something of star, deploying a mordant wit peppered with anglicisms. Even
Forza Italia supporters reckon he is running Mr Berlusconi close.
Both candidates could not be more different. Prof Spaventa, a fellow of All
Soul's, Oxford, is part of Italy's academic elite and an unashamed
intellectual. He is urbane and self-deprecating. Long sympathetic to the old
Italian Communist Party, he nevertheless kept his distance and entered the
Ciampi government as a technocrat minister. Now he is standing as a
candidate for the small left-wing Democratic Alliance, one of the eight
groupings in the Progressive Alliance led by the former communist Party of
the Democratic Left (PDS).
In contrast, Mr Berlusconi is the epitome of a confident self-made man. He
has no intellectual pretensions but is proud of having brought popular
entertainment to the public through his television empire. Despite his
success, he retains the air of a northern provincial and sticks to
long-standing friends. His ideology is avowedly anti-communist - a liberal
democrat embracing the free market.
Mr Michelini finds himself the man in the middle. He was a Christian
Democrat deputy in the last legislature but left the party last year with
his close friend, Mr Mario Segni, the referendum leader. To stand a chance,
he needs the catholic vote which has been split by the break-up of the
Christian Democrats. Though a well-known journalist, Mr Michelini is closely
linked to the conservative catholic movement, Opus Dei, and this may well
limit his appeal to the broad catholic vote.
With a flagging campaign, he was forced to deny this week rumours of a deal
agreeing to stand down in favour of Mr Berlusconi. But he was heard to
complain: 'Berlusconi's got his TV and Spaventa's got the backing of the
communist cadres and their militants.'
Mr Berlusconi is hampered by having to campaign nationally - he has only
devoted three days to Rome so far. Through his carefully orchestrated
television appearances he has made a strong impact; but in Rome he has been
made to look vulnerable by declining a TV debate with Prof Spaventa. Ask any
Rome shopkeeper who would win such a debate and the reply is immediate: 'Il
professore'.
The seat is being fought under the new first-past-the-post system that will
elect 75 per cent of the deputies. The remaining 25 per cent are elected by
proportional representation and majority vote candidates can also stand in
up to three other places.
This is a typically Italian way of offering consolation prizes, and Mr
Berlusconi is standing for a sure proportional seat in the Lazio region.
Nevertheless if he fails in Rome, it would be a damaging blow. On the other
hand if Prof Spaventa wins, he is talked of as a potential prime minister.
