FT  25 JAN 94 / Wind farms may be sold off: Taylor Woodrow's participation
in the sector's biggest operator is under review
Britain's windpower industry may face a significant setback as Taylor
Woodrow, one of the most important industrial players in the market,
considers its involvement in the sector. The construction company is
understood to be reviewing the future of its wholly owned Wind Energy Group
subsidiary (WEG). A sale of the business is thought the most likely outcome.
WEG owns a third of National Wind Power, the biggest operator of wind farms
in the UK, which runs three of the nation's 19 wind farms. National Power,
the UK's largest electricity generator, owns the other two-thirds of the
company.
British Aerospace, which previously owned WEG jointly with Taylor Woodrow,
pulled out last year.
A similar decision by Taylor Woodrow would raise questions about the
finances of wind power when it also faces growing opposition from some
environmentalists and planning authorities. They have complained of noise
and unsightliness.
National Wind Power owns wind farms at Cemmaes in Powys, Llangwyryfon in
Dyfed and Cold Northcott in Cornwall producing a combined 21MW. It operates
a fourth for Yorkshire Water at Chelker in North Yorkshire.
The three National Wind Power farms were shut down temporarily before
Christmas during high winds which damaged three of the 66 turbines.
The company expects to start operating some of the turbines this week and
all of them by the end of April. The problems, however, may have delayed a
decision by Taylor Woodrow to seek a buyer for its interest.
The construction group, after incurring a Pounds 66.1m pre-tax loss in 1992,
made a Pounds 10.1m pre-tax profit in the first half of the current year. It
has told shareholders it intends to free itself from peripheral activities
in order to concentrate on its core businesses of construction,
housebuilding and commercial property and merchanting.
As part of this review Taylor Woodrow has been considering the future of its
windfarm business - which remained profitable until the shutdown.
WEG, formed with British Aerospace in 1978, offers design and supply of
equipment as well as operation of windfarms.
