FT  15 APR 94 / Forte sees rise in corporate custom
Forte, the hotel and restaurant group, yesterday announced full- year
pre-tax profits of Pounds 121m, down from Pounds 164m, and said it had seen
little improvement in the economies in which it operated.
Mr Rocco Forte, chairman, said UK consumer spending was still fragile, but
the group was now seeing an increase in business from corporate customers.
Sales for the year to January 31 were Pounds 2.1bn, against Pounds 2.7bn.
Continuing operations improved 11 per cent to Pounds 1.6bn.
The final dividend of 4.75p gives a total of 7.5p, unchanged from last year
when the payout was cut for the first time in two decades. The dividend was
uncovered by earnings per share of 6.8p before exceptional items, or 10.2p
afterwards.
The net exceptional gain of Pounds 34m followed a profit of Pounds 122m from
the flotation last January of 75 per cent of Alpha Airports Group and the
sale of its 50 per cent stake in Kentucky Fried Chicken. However, there was
a charge of Pounds 88m related to the downward valuation of properties and
fixed assets. A further Pounds 324m was offset against the revaluation
reserve, bringing the total write-down to Pounds 412m.
Forte said it normally revalued its properties by rotation every three
years. Under procedures introduced last year, it supplemented this with a
further review of all its property values. As a result of this year's
exercise, its property and fixed assets were now valued at Pounds 3.4bn,
representing sums at which it was likely assets could be sold within a
reasonable period.
Pre-tax profits before exceptionals were up 23 per cent at Pounds 87m.
The proceeds of the Alpha sale had reduced net borrowings to Pounds 1.05bn.
Gearing was 43 per cent.
While occupancies rose at Forte's UK hotels, rates were hit by strong
competition. Room rates in London fell 6 per cent, but a 9 percentage point
increase in occupancy proraised profits 30 per cent. Mr Forte said London
room rates had improved in the first few months of this year.
In provincial UK hotels, room rates fell 2 per cent last year, but a 3 point
rise in occupancy produced a 12 per cent advance in profits.
Elsewhere in Europe, a decline in Italy was partly offset by new hotel
openings in Malta and Warsaw.
The UK motorway service restaurants saw lower volumes, but enjoyed an
increase in spending per head. The Relais motorway business in France
suffered from the downturn in the French economy. However, the acquisition
of the business in 1992 had been earnings enhancing.
Lex, Page 22
