FT  08 MAR 94 / Martin Marietta bids for Grumman
Martin Marietta, which has become one of the US's largest defence
contractors after a series of acquisitions, launched an agreed Dollars 1.9bn
(Pounds 1.3bn) bid for fellow defence group Grumman yesterday.
It is Martin Marietta's third big takeover deal in less than 18 months and
marks a further consolidation of the US defence industry, which is
rationalising in the face of a rapidly shrinking defence budget.
Maryland-based Martin Marietta is to pay Dollars 55 a share in cash for
Grumman, which is based in Long Island, New York. Grumman's shares closed
Dollars 14 1/4 up at Dollars 54 1/8 . Wall Street enthusiasm for the deal
pushed Martin Marietta stock up Dollars 1 1/4 to close at Dollars 46.
Martin Marietta bought General Electric's aerospace division for Dollars 3bn
in late 1992 and is currently in the final stages of buying General
Dynamics' space launch business for Dollars 208.5m.
Grumman, which reported a 1993 income of Dollars 120.5m, or Dollars 3.50 a
share from continuing operations, on sales of Dollars 3.2bn, used to be
known primarily as a maker of military aircraft, such as the F-14 fighter.
However, a dearth of orders in recent years has forced it to diversify into
electronics and data systems, and the only aircraft it now makes is the E-2C
Hawkeye, a carrier-based early warning aircraft. Its biggest electronics
programme is the J-Stars airborne surveillance system.
Martin Marietta, with 1993 sales of Dollars 9.3bn and earnings of Dollars
450m before special charges, has become the world's largest aerospace
electronics contractor.
Mr Norman Augustine, chairman of Martin Marietta, said the two companies
were complementary both in terms of their businesses and geographical areas
of operation. The acquisition should also mean an immediate improvement in
Martin Marietta's earnings per share.
The deal, taken together with the earlier acquisitions, will give Martin
Marietta 'critical mass' in every one of its product areas.
Mr Augustine refused to rule out job cuts as the result of the merger, and
analysts expect a substantial rationalisation. Martin Marietta has gained
considerable experience in cost-cutting from its takeover of the GE
business, which led to the closure of about a dozen plants.
Mr Renso Caporali, chairman of Grumman, said it had decided already that it
needed to make a strategic move to thrive in a shrinking defence market.
Wall Street, Page 40
