FT  09 JUN 94 / Politicians quarrel over jobs ruling
The government and the Labour party were yesterday locked in a furious
dispute over the European Court of Justice's privatisation ruling, with each
side blaming the other for implementing defective legislation on workers'
rights.
On the eve of the European elections, ministers were anxious to limit any
political damage from the ruling, fearing that it had struck a blow against
the Conservatives' long-standing support for compulsory competitive
tendering of public services.
Labour, however, used the European Court decision to illustrate that it is
far more comfortable than the government with the kind of employment
protection contained in the social chapter of the Maastricht treaty.
At the heart of the dispute was the question of which government had
implemented the legislation on which the European Court based its judgment.
Mr Jack Straw, Labour's environment spokesman, claimed that the legislation
had been introduced by the Conservative government in 1981, but had created
problems because it failed to allow for proper consultation of public-sector
workers whose jobs were contracted out to private companies.
He said: 'A law that British Tories signed up to 13 years ago is now going
to be enforced to give British workers the same rights as are enjoyed by
workers across Europe. The Conservatives signed up to this law and can't now
back away from the consequences.'
He claimed that Labour had been fighting for full implementation of the
acquired rights directive 'to ensure that where people have their employer
transferred over their heads, the rights they had under the previous
employer are carried on'.
However, Mr John Major immediately hit back, claiming that legislation on
the issue had initially been approved by the last Labour government.
At the Tories' Euro-election press conference, the prime minister said:
'This was a European directive approved by the previous Labour government in
1975 and legislated for by them. What they said shows they don't realise
that.'
Mr Charles Kennedy, president of the Liberal Democrats, saw the ruling as an
opportunity to attack the prime minister's recent espousal of a
'multi-track, multi-speed' Europe.
'You cannot get away with picking the laws you like and ignoring the laws
you don't like,' said Mr Kennedy. 'This is what a multi-speed Europe is
really like - a recipe for illegality, disorder and confusion.'
