FT  15 MAR 94 / Business and the Law: Fight to take case to trial - The
challenge to solicitors' sole conduct of litigation
Recent reforms of the legal profession are beginning to bear fruit. Five
years after Lord Mackay, the Lord Chancellor, launched his ambitious plans
to find 'new or better ways of providing (legal) services and a wider choice
of persons providing them', traditional demarcation lines are breaking down.
Solicitors have been granted the right to appear as advocates in the higher
courts. The Bar is considering allowing the public direct access to
barristers. And four organisations, the Institute of Licensed Debt
Practitioners, the Institute of Commercial Litigators, the Chartered
Institute of Patent Agents and the Institute of Legal Executives have
applied to the Lord Chancellor's advisory committee on legal education and
conduct for limited advocacy rights or the right to conduct litigation.
The threat posed to the Bar by solicitor advocates has been apparent for
some time, but challenges to solicitors' monopoly on the preparation of
cases for trial - the so-called conduct of litigation - are new.
Solicitors have little to fear from three of the institutes. The debt
practitioners want litigation and advocacy rights in unopposed debt work in
the county courts. Patent agents, who already hold advocacy rights in the
patents County Court, want litigation rights in the High Court. Legal
executives, who have some rights as solicitors', representatives in chambers
hearings want extended rights for limited areas of work in open court.
The application by the Institute of Commercial Litigators is a different
proposition, however. The ICL was founded by construction consultants James
R Knowles and Bucknall Austin and by chartered quantity surveyors Cyril
Sweett, Tweeds and Beard Dove. It is seeking the right to conduct litigation
in building, construction and engineering matters, including negligence
disputes, in the High Court (mainly the Official Referee's Court), county
courts and in any appeals.
If its application is approved by the advisory committee and subsequently by
the Lord Chancellor and England's four senior judges, members of the
institute could pose a considerable threat to the solicitors' monopoly in
lucrative construction and building litigation.
The construction industry is the largest in the UK with an annual turnover
of some Pounds 30bn, employing around 1.3m people. Construction contracts
can be extremely complex involving employers, main contractors and
sub-contractors working closely with architects, quantity surveyors and
consulting engineers. Problems unique to the construction industry such as
bad weather, unsuitable ground conditions, combined with others such as
design problems and material failures, result in disputes. These disputes,
which often involve complex technical matters, and issues of fact and law,
occur regularly.
Patrick Lineen, Knowles's finance director and a director and founder member
of the ICL, estimates that the construction/building disputes market is
worth about Pounds 150m a year. Construction consultants and quantity
surveyors already take about 30 per cent of that market through their
conduct of arbitrations. They both prepare claims and present them on behalf
of contractor clients. But if a dispute goes to litigation, the conduct of
the case must be relinquished to a solicitor.
This is what construction consultants object to. Mr Lineen says there is
little appreciable difference between preparing a case for arbitration and
preparing it for trial. But more importantly construction clients dislike
the duplication of effort and additional cost when a dispute goes to court.
Paul Jensen, deputy managing director of Knowles, says the advantages to
construction clients of being able to use construction consultants and
quantity surveyors as 'one stop shops' for disputes are clear. He says it is
more economical to brief one group rather than two, consultants are cheaper
than solicitors, and there is a technical affinity between consultant and
client which rarely exits between construction client and solicitor.
'When a client comes to us with a potential dispute involving complex
technical issues we understand the problem immediately, whereas for most
solicitors who don't possess the necessary expertise there is a learning
curve for which the client is paying,' he says.
There is no shortage of legal skills either. Of 186 consulting staff at
Knowles, 26 have law degrees in addition to industry qualifications, 18 are
barristers and 81 are associates or fellows of the Chartered Institute of
Arbitrators.
The ICL's application was put together over 15 months and has been very
carefully pitched. Its professional conduct, discipline and complaints rules
are based on those of the Law Society. Training for those wishing to become
fellows of the ICL would be handled by the University of Bristol under the
guidance of Professor Malcolm Furmston and would follow the approach
currently taken by the Law Society and the Bar - a skills-based course
followed by a period of supervised on-the-job training.
Consultants and quantity surveyors who are already dual qualified as
barristers or solicitors would have to pass an exam on Commercial court
procedures, plug any gaps in their specialist knowledge and undergo a period
of supervised training.
The application is at first sight difficult to fault. But the ICL expects
strong opposition from solicitors. John Bishop chairman of the 200-strong
Official Referee's Solicitors Association and senior partner of Masons, one
of the leading construction litigation law firms, regards competition from
non-solicitors for the right to conduct litigation as 'inevitable and
probably a good thing'.
Provided they are competing with solicitors on level terms by complying with
similar standards of training and conduct he is happy to let the market
place decide. But he says: 'I'd be surprised in the short- and medium-term
if they could match the experience and expertise that solicitors have in
managing major litigation.'
Andrew Lockley, head of the Law Society's legal practice directorate, says
there are some obvious concerns. He foresees problems with the ICL's low
membership - five members at present - and its lack of experience in
training or regulating members.
'It seems odd that they haven't asked their various professional bodies,
such as the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors, with good track records
to apply on their behalf,' he says.
He also foresees a problem in preserving the integrity of expert witnesses.
The ICL seems happy for consultants to conduct litigation and instruct a
member of their own firm as an expert witness, he says.
'It would not be possible for a solicitor, other than in very special
circumstances, to provide a witness from his or her firm and certainly not
an expert. If it is not prohibited by the rules of this institute we would
have very grave concerns,' he says.
Mr Lineen is sanguine about these grumbles. The ICL is prepared to leave it
to the advisory committee, which will at the end of this week put the
application out to consultation. The institute should have a better idea of
its chances of success by the autumn. Mr Lineen says that if the green light
is given it will begin a recruitment drive. He says other industry sectors
such as property, shipping and supply industries might also benefit from
similar rights, and the ICL is budgeting for more than 1,000 members within
five years.
