FT  28 SEP 94 / Leading Article: Don't panic
No infectious disease is more evocative of past cataclysms than plague. The
historical resonance of the Black Death, which wiped out one quarter of the
people living in Europe in the mid-14th century, is still strong enough to
give a frisson of alarm in the western world at the news of two outbreaks of
plague in India. Some Indians have more recent memories of plague, as
epidemics continued there until antibiotics became widely available in the
1950s. So the local panic and mass evacuation of the city of Surat is
understandable.
However, in this case, the customary advice issued by the authorities
whenever there is an alarming outbreak of disease - DON'T PANIC - really is
justified. If tetracycline antibiotics are administered as soon as symptoms
appear, they will cure both forms of plague: bubonic (transmitted by fleas
and rodents) and pneumonic (transmitted directly through airborne particles
from the patient's lungs). Fortunately, the Yersinia pestis bacteria that
cause the disease have not developed significant antibiotic resistance.
The most important plague control policy for India is to ensure that
adequate stocks of antibiotics are available to administer to anyone showing
possible symptoms. That means having enough nurses, pharmacists and doctors
 -who must have been vaccinated against plague - on hand to diagnose the
disease and dispense drugs. It is important not to give antibiotics to the
whole population as a preventative measure, because that might encourage
drug-resistant strains of bacteria to evolve.
At the same time, the Indian authorities are right to take robust measures
to stop people spreading infection by fleeing from plague-affected areas.
The traditional policy of isolation can help to contain the disease.
Outside India, there are disconcerting signs of overreaction to the
outbreaks, with several countries introducing heavy-handed airport screening
of travellers arriving from any Indian destination. Although it is sensible
to make sure that all passengers from India are made aware of possible
plague symptoms - and warned to go straight to a doctor if they feel
anything wrong - individual medical checks are not only a waste of time and
resources but also create unnecessary worry.
Conversely people planning to travel to India, whether on business or for
tourism, should not be scared away, unless they were thinking of visiting
the places directly affected by plague.
Many other germs pose a far more serious and immediate threat to health in
India and elsewhere in the world: cholera, dysentery, tuberculosis and
typhoid, for example. The trouble is that their names do not evoke quite the
same dread as the plague. The world must remain on guard against the growing
threat of new and re-emerging infections, without reacting irrationally to
ancient fears.
