FT  13 SEP 94 / Survey of Sao Paulo (7): Cost of growth on the environment -
Social conditions may be about to improve
Sao Paulo city is an ill-fitting muddle of the developed and developing
world. While all but the poorest houses have electricity and running water,
less than half the city's domestic sewage is treated. Infant mortality and
illiteracy are among the lowest in Brazil, but levels of violence and air
pollution are among the highest. While the city's population growth has
slowed considerably, at least 1m people still live in shanty towns, known as
favelas, which dot the city's outskirts.
This dichotomy has its roots in Sao Paulo's rapid growth over the past 50
years. Until the second world war, the city was a provincial centre grown
rich on coffee profits. As industrialisation gathered pace, it attracted
immigrants from poorer parts of Brazil, especially the north-east. Between
1940 and 1970 the city grew at about 5 per cent a year, from a population of
1.3m to 5.9m.
Growth started to slow only in the 1980s, but not before the population had
nearly doubled, reaching 9.5m in 1991. Industrial suburbs that were once
separated from the city by green belts have merged into a single urban
sprawl. If these suburbs are included, the population of the greater Sao
Paulo metropolitan area is over 15m, making it the largest urban centre in
South America.
Sao Paulo's attraction has always been its economy. Until the beginning of
the 1980s, industrial employment grew steadily and offered even semi-skilled
immigrants the chance of relative prosperity. As Brazil's economic crisis
struck in the 1980s, Sao Paulo's informal economy - ranging from armies of
street sellers to gambling networks - provided a cushion against rising
unemployment.
Families have continued to arrive in the city over the past 10 years,
although in much smaller numbers. Many still regard a poorly-paid job with a
one-room apartment in Sao Paulo as preferable to staying in Brazil's rural
areas. In the city, they have access to better services and opportunities
for their children.
Sao Paulo's rapid growth extracted a very high price from the city's
environment. Urban growth was so rapid it overlooked the desirability of
keeping 'buffer' areas undeveloped to improve leisure options and air
quality. Extreme reliance on automobiles means air quality is usually poor.
The city's main river, the Tiete, has become overburdened. Every day, it has
to digest more than 1,000 tonnes of organic waste and about three tonnes of
untreated inorganic waste, including chemicals and heavy metals; however, a
state government clean-up is under way.
There has also been a heavy social cost. The need to accelerate government
spending on infrastructure and education has left other sectors underfunded.
In the southern municipality of Diadema, which grew rapidly from the 1960s
because it is close to Sao Paulo's car manufacturers, health centres are
only now being installed.
The public transport system has also failed to keep pace. Despite the city's
size, its underground railway system is still restricted to three lines. In
satellite cities around Sao Paulo, workers have to rely on buses and poor
traffic conditions. Father Antonio Carlos Frizzo, of Guarulhos, near Sao
Paulo's international airport, says that his parishioners spend three hours
a day on buses getting to and from the city.
The heavy strains imposed by such conditions are one reason for the growth
of radical protestant churches. Social strains have also led to growing
violence. In some poorer suburban regions, the murder rate is 90 per 10,000
inhabitants. However, there are areas of low violence, mainly in the centre.
The city's overall murder rate is only slightly higher than New York's.
Col Hermes Bittencourt Cruz, of the Sao Paulo police, links violence and
other crime to the continuing process of urbanisation, poor education and
one of the world's highest income disparities. 'Violence is a perverse
result of disorganised development,' he says.
Mr Paulo Sergio Pinheiro, of the centre for the study of violence at the
University of Sao Paulo, complains of a lack of resources and skills in the
judicial and police systems. In Sao Paulo there is one judge per 20,000
people, compared to one per 5,000 in Europe.
Despite these challenges, Sao Paulo's rapid fall in population growth will
allow better planning of infrastructure and services in the years ahead.
Along with the rest of Brazil, Sao Paulo is also developing some
institutions that are common to industrialised economies - from health and
education networks in the shanty towns to environmental pressure groups. 'We
have grave institutional problems, but our civil society has changed
tremendously in the last 30 years,' Mr Pinheiro says.
