FT  13 AUG 94 / Draft guidelines on care of elderly anger opposition
Ministers were yesterday accused of trying to shift the burden of looking
after frail elderly people to families and local authorities.
Draft guidelines issued for consultation would make it easier for hospitals
to move elderly people out of long-stay beds and into nursing homes, where
their families might be forced to pick up the bill.
Labour said the government was watering down guidelines on elderly patients'
rights to free long-term care. The charity Age Concern said the right to
free care would depend on where the patient lived.
But Mr John Bowis, junior health minister, said the draft guidance clarified
the NHS's responsibility to the chronically ill.
The circular follows a watershed case in which a stroke victim who was
unable to eat, move or talk was discharged to a nursing home against his
family's wishes.
Present guidelines say patients should not be transferred from hospital to a
nursing home against their will, but a growing number of hospitals has
flouted the guidelines, closing 'continuing care' beds for the chronically
ill.
The situation has been made worse by growing pressure to treat more
patients.
The proposed guidelines say the NHS should foot the bill for patients with
complex or multiple handicaps who need continuing and specialist medical
care.
Others, whose condition could not be improved medically but who needed
intensive long-term support, would be assessed by social services and health
professionals.
A decision on their future care would take into account the wishes of the
patient and his or her family, and local eligibility criteria.
The document says every effort should be made to meet patients' preferences
within the practical options and resources available.
Where patients assessed as not needing free long-term NHS care refused other
options the health authority and the hospital 'will need to take account of
the needs of other patients in determining how long the person can continue
to occupy an NHS bed'.
Health authorities would have to review arrangements for paying for
long-term care in the light of local needs, ensure that they were making
appropriate provision, and agree and publicise local policies on eligibility
with local authorities and health units.
Mr Bowis said nobody had the right to occupy indefinitely a hospital bed not
required on a clinical basis, but patients were entitled to a clear decision
on whether they were entitled to continuing NHS care.
Mr David Blunkett, the shadow health secretary, said Mr Bowis had failed to
offer any clarification of where he believed NHS responsibilities for
long-term healthcare began and ended.
He said: 'More and more families are going to end up picking up the tab.'
