FT  17 OCT 94 / Management: Robomom to keep the kids in check
Stirring news from Singapore: inventor Steven Chan has launched a Pounds 55
gadget, called Robomom, to help families control the amount of time their
children watch TV. Robomom is a tamper-proof 'electronic telesitter' that
automatically turns your set off after a certain time - a 'form of
electronic agreement between parent and child' that is said to be more
sophisticated than existing gadgets.
Robomom uses a system of 'time credits' that start to be deducted once the
set is turned on. After a sales push in Singapore, the inventor and his
company, Informatics Engineering, hope to export Robomom to Japan and
America, then elsewhere.
What a useful gadget. And what a huge market robots will become - trillions,
I shouldn't wonder, by 2025. Wilfred Thesiger, the famed explorer, curses
the arrival of machines, even cars and telephones. But Thesiger is old and
disillusioned, whereas some, like me, have no fear of robots, even though
one day they will completely outstrip us. In the history of earthly
intelligence, robots will be our heirs.
Before that happens, I want them to be my friends. I want a Robomom to
control the amount of crap I watch on TV. I also want a robofriend to
remonstrate with me every time I behave arrogantly or selfishly. I need lots
of robofriends and will pay good money to get them.
The row over Unilever's Persil Power is still boiling busily, after all
these weeks. Persil Power is the new-generation detergent that gave some of
your washing a bit of a thrashing because it contains a substance (manganese
catalyst accelerator) that cuts up rough in extreme conditions. Unilever
relaunched Persil Power, and claims that the problem has been remedied.
Procter &amp; Gamble, Unilever's arch enemy, has ripped into Unilever. And
Unilever - prissily - has agreed that 'somewhere between research and
marketing, something went wrong'. But I wonder if Unilever's marketing
department and advertising agency are failing to spot a wonderful trick.
Years ago I was shown around Unilever's research laboratories at Port
Sunlight, in the north of England. Everywhere I looked, washing machines and
driers churned and whizzed. The researchers I was introduced to were
preternaturally brainy. There were equations on black-boards.
It was very hush-hush. The stuff they were testing was doubtless a meek
ancestor of Persil Power.
As a result of that visit, I came to appreciate the intense technological
and marketing effort that underpins the dull-sounding, but in fact manically
competitive, detergents market. Europe: Pounds 6bn a year.
But I have a small problem. My clothes last too long. I create no friction,
so they never wear out. Some of them are older than Michael Portillo. I want
them to shred and rot, so I can buy some new ones. I need Persil Power in
its original formulation, or even something zanier: Persil Splatt]] With
vicious Persil Splatt]] I could become a new person.
Unilever should stop apologising and switch to the attack.
It is easy to tease newspapers about their smugness and sluggishness. Jon
Katz, a US media critic, wrote recently in Wired magazine that newspapers
were besieged. 'Television has stolen much of their news, magazines their
advertisers and best writers, cable many of their younger readers. And the
digital revolution has pushed them still closer to the wall.' Newspapers
were 'the biggest and saddest losers in the information revolution. . .our
least hip medium, relentlessly one-way, non-interactive.'
Katz is unimpressed by newspapers' efforts to join the media revolution. So
far, he says, on-line newspapers do not work conceptually or commercially.
With few exceptions they seem to be expensive hedges against on-rushing
technology with little rationale of their own.
We have heard all this before. But Katz doesn't think that newspapers are
doomed to early wipe-out, even though they need to re-attract an alienated
public. If newspapers are to invest heavily in anything, he says, perhaps it
ought to be in younger, more talented, more diverse staffs so that they can
rediscover their vibrancy and relevance.
I agree. I believe that newspapers will still be around when man is on Mars.
But they need their own revolution. My crystal ball shows enormous clouds of
advertising expenditure forming and massing, like inter-stellar gas, and
sweeping this way. But to claim their share, newspapers must spend mightily.
They will have to bid competitively against other media for the best
writers, editors, investigative reporters, commentators and analysts, and
for those rare souls who can inject pace, flair, quirkiness, eccentricity
and fractiousness into newspapers' tired veins. This sort of thing is called
old-product development. It can be just as exciting as Persil Splatt]]
