FT  04 OCT 94 / Survey of World Car Industry (25): Nafta makes its mark -
Mexico: recovery in the US has caused exports to rise
The North American Free Trade Agreement, implemented only nine months ago,
has already had a powerful impact on the car and truck industry in Mexico.
Both imports and exports are sharply up, while companies not previously
operating in the country have announced plans to set up manufacturing
operations.
In the seven months to July, Mexico exported 304,923 vehicles, primarily to
the US, an increase of 26.6 per cent on the same period last year.
Meanwhile, imports were still relatively small at 25,277 vehicles, yet this
represents a 454 per cent increase from the year before. The US Big Three
carmakers - General Motors, Ford and Chrysler  - almost completely
monopolised the import boom.
The increase in exports is primarily attributed to economic recovery, and
therefore rising demand, in the US. But the growth in exports to the US, as
well as Japan, is expected to continue over the medium term as carmakers
invest some Dollars 1.6bn in 1994 alone to increase capacity and modernise
plants. Nissan recently announced that it would move its entire Sentra
production line from Japan to its Aguascalientes, Mexico, plant. This new
factory will supply the US, Mexican, Japanese and other Asian and Latin
American markets.
The rise in imports is primarily due, as stipulated in Nafta, to a loosening
of the complex formula which linked a company's ability to import with its
level of exports. GM has been highly successful with its new line of Chevy
subcompacts brought in from Spain. Based on its first few months on the
market, the Chevy could be a formidable challenger to the Volkswagen Bug,
the market leader. The US company now says it may set up a Mexican
production line for the budget car.
Ford and Chrysler are taking shots at Nissan's Tsuru, the leader in the
compact class, but in different ways. Chrysler is importing its US-produced
Neon, while Ford has begun to sell previously for-export-only Escorts from
its Hermosillo plant. This arrangement gives Ford the ability to use its
import quota for high mark-up luxury cars.
During the Nafta negotiations, Mexico fought hard for low domestic content
rules in order to encourage newcomers to set up shop and export to the US.
With the agreement's stiff 62.5 per cent domestic content stipulation,
Mexico has been pleasantly surprised that newcomers have announced Dollars
300m investments this year to initiate operations. This new production will
be mostly for the domestic and Latin American markets.
BMW, the German carmaker, will account for Dollars 176m of that sum as it
sets up domestic production, scheduled to come on line in 1995. Production
at this new plant will be southerly oriented, with small and mid-size models
destined for the Mexican market and other Latin countries. There will be
only limited integration with the new BMW plant to be built in the US.
Honda is expanding its motorcycle plant in Guadalajara to include facilities
for assembling cars for the domestic market and Latin American exports. At
first, cars will be made from part-kits supplied by Honda plants and
contractors in the US, but Mexico is expected to become an important parts
centre as Honda works towards its goal of production of at least 75 per cent
of its North American sales from plants in the continent.
Mercedes-Benz is setting up a luxury car production line at its rapidly
expanding truck plant and is building a new passenger bus factory in
northern Mexico in an attempt to penetrate the US market. Mercedes' main
competitor in the truck and bus business, Dina, recently bought Motor Coach
Industries, the US market giant, and has spoken to Toyota, Hyundai and Fiat
about setting up a joint venture to expand into car production in Mexico.
Despite the optimism of the new players and plans to increase capacity among
established competitors, domestic sales continue to fall amid general
economic uncertainty and tight credit. Domestic sales dropped 3 per cent in
the first seven months of the year, to 343,207 vehicles. The launch of
carmakers' own in-house retail credit divisions such as GMAC and Ford
Credit, a by-product of the Nafta financial services regulations, should
lead to some market recuperation towards the end of the year.
