FT  22 APR 94 / Arts: More myth and power from Weir - Opera
Over and over a bird sings 'Far away and long ago' at the start of Blond
Eckbert. Like another woodbird in Wagner, she is introducing a tale of
murder and incest from the romantic world of German folk stories, where
huntsmen rove the forests and everybody fights through a dense undergrowth
of Freudian subtext - though there the similarities end.
It is a coincidence that there are two new operas concerned with the power
of myth in London at the moment. At Covent Garden Harrison Birtwistle's
Gawain is an epic on a monumental scale. Blond Eckbert by Judith Weir, given
its premiere by English National Opera on Wednesday, is shorter and sharper,
an evening that says what it wants to say and no more. Weir, after all, did
start with a 15-minute opera with a cast of one. She is not a composer who
likes to waste one's time.
On the face of it the plot is simplicity itself. (Weir has made her own
libretto from the original short story by the 19th-century Ludwig Tieck.)
Eckbert and Berthe, following on from the similarly-named Siegmund and
Sieglinde before them, are not only husband and wife, but brother and
sister. The climax of the tale is the revelation of this truth, but
tantalising shafts of light are shone into the characters' psyches along the
way.
Like the Birtwistle, Blond Eckbert is a story of self-discovery. Where
Gawain goes out into the world to explore who he is through a ritual series
of trials, Eckbert retreats within himself. He traces the roots of his
personality back to his childhood and what he finds is rejection
(definitely), child abuse (possibly) and a life of utter, inconsolable
loneliness.
This must sound awfully gloomy, yet the opera is anything but. Weir is a
quick-witted story-teller, who recounts events with a wry smile creeping
across her face. The music never takes two minutes to describe what it could
in one, sketching the characters deftly, painting the mood with a flick of
the brush, a few glinting colours enough to suggest the danger lurking in
the fairy-tale forest before the murder. The lightness of touch is
reminiscent of Stravinsky's Le Rossignol.
Perhaps one would like to feel a bit more for poor Eckbert. No matter how
much he suffers, the music refuses to get involved, leaving Nicholas Folwell
no channel through which to broadcast his feelings. He and Berthe, taken by
Anne-Marie Owens, remain the playthings of Weir's detached observations.
Three subsidiary characters were well taken by Christopher Ventris. Nerys
Jones's bird flew with more poise than she sang. All seemed reasonably
confident under Sian Edwards's musical direction.
The lesson that Weir has learnt from Britten among others is that the most
probing operas are often the simplest on the surface. Unfortunately Tim
Hopkins (producer) and Nigel Lowery (designer) seem to have set out asking,
'How shall we show that nothing you see in this opera is what it seems?'
'How about some film or some shadow puppets?' 'Or funny walks for the
characters?' 'Or zany drop-curtains and plenty of them?' 'No - it might be
boring. We'd better give them the whole lot'. And so they do.
When Blond Eckbert circulates, as it surely will (Santa Fe already has it
booked for this summer) it asks for a production with the same sleight of
hand as its composer's. Next time I would like to see the opera in a smaller
theatre, where every word can be heard, every nuance savoured. For those who
want to feast on new opera, Gawain is the main course, Blond Eckbert a
sorbet to cleanse the palette. Weir herself is well on course for an
operatic rosette.
Seven further performances at the London Coliseum ending May 18
