FT  16 DEC 94 / Strike impasse dashes hopes for a new start to baseball
Negotiations to resolve the baseball players' strike that cut last season
short have broken down, greatly reducing the chances that the sport will
start again next spring in anything approximating its current major league
form.
Owners of the 28 teams, meeting in Chicago late yesterday, were expected to
declare an impasse in the talks, a legal device under labour relations law
that would enable them unilaterally to impose a cap on player salaries.
The players' union is likely to counter with a lawsuit accusing management
of failing to bargain in good faith. This would lead to an investigation by
the National Labour Relations Board, the independent federal agency, which
could last two months.
The NLRB has already sided with the players on a related issue by announcing
that it has filed a complaint that the owners improperly withheld Dollars
7.8m (Pounds 5m) in contributions to the players' pension fund due on August
1, less than two weeks before the strike started.
Last week the department of Labour certified the dispute as official, thus
clearing the way for the union to petition the government not to grant visas
to non-American players, mostly from Latin America, whom the owners have
threatened to import as substitutes, along with minor league players, in an
attempt to get some kind of season under way next year.
There had been some hope earlier this week that the latest round of
negotiations was making progress on alternatives to a pure salary cap as the
best means of sharing revenues more equitably between rich and poor clubs.
Modified proposals by the owners on taxing team payrolls had not been
dismissed out of hand by the players, but no agreement proved possible.
With spring training due to start in 10 weeks, there has been no break in
player solidarity, though public opinion now tends to blame them more than
the owners for the problems of the country's national sport. Some owners
have expressed misgivings about sacrificing another season, but the majority
seem determined to let the confrontation run its course.
