FT  23 JUL 94 / Raytheon secures deal to monitor Amazon
A consortium led by the US electronics company and defence manufacturer
Raytheon has won a Dollars 1.1bn (Pounds 700m) contract to build a
technological surveillance system in the Amazon rain forest.
The Brazilian government rejected a French bid, represented by Thomson and
Alcatel, to supply and install the Amazon Surveillance System (Sivam).
A statement from the Brazilian president's office on Thursday evening said
the Raytheon tender was technologically and financially superior.
The contract includes the supply of radar equipment, aircraft and
communication networks, which will be used to monitor the Amazon for
environmental research, including deforestation, as well as for airspace and
border control and combating drug trafficking in the region.
The Raytheon consortium includes MacDonald Dettwiler of Canada, Westinghouse
Electric, the University of New Hampshire and the Brazilian operations of
International Business Machines (IBM).
It also includes the Brazilian government-controlled aircraft manufacturer
Embraer.
The Brazilian government will receive eight years grace on payment and a
further 10 years to pay for the contract, which will be financed by the US
Eximbank, according to Mr Esteve Ortis, president of Esca, the Brazilian
company coordinating the project.
Mr Ortis said that the financing proposals offered by both consortiums were
'unbelievably good.'
Brazilian companies, particularly Embraer, will be responsible for supplying
about 40 per cent of the contract value, he said.
The US and French bids were shortlisted in May after the government rejected
tenders from the US's Unisys Corp and a joint bid by Germany's Deutsche
Aerospace and Italy's Alenia.
Both the US and French governments lobbied strongly for the contract. Last
October Mr Gerard Longuet, French trade and industry minister, visited
Brazil and last month Mr Ron Brown, US secretary of commerce, led a trade
mission to the country.
The Sivam project is described by the Brazilian government as 'the largest
and most complex attempt to monitor the environment anywhere in the world.'
It will be made up of a network of fixed and mobile radar, aircraft and
satellite monitoring and a communications network.
The system will be controlled from the capital Brasilia, with centres in the
towns of Manaus, Belem and Porto Velho.
