FT  07 FEB 94 / Chinese laws crack down on foreign missionary activity
China has tightened controls on foreign missionary activities and is seeking
to strengthen measures against unauthorised religious practices.
Publication at the weekend of two new decrees to improve religious
'management' is set to fuel criticism of China's human rights behaviour as
debate intensifies over renewal of its Most Favoured Nation trading status
in the US.
The regulations, authorised by Premier Li Peng, took effect onpublication ,
and coincide with an explosion of religious activity in China. Titled
'Management of Foreign People's Religious Activities in China' and
'Management of the Place of Religious Activities', the new laws come less
than a week after a US State Department report said China's human rights
behaviour fell far short of internationally-acceptable standards.
Under the decrees, foreigners are banned from setting up religious
organisations, schools or offices in China. They were also expressly
forbidden from 'cultivating religious disciples among Chinese citizens and
appointing religious clergy'.
The rules follow the widespread growth of religious activity and increased
contacts with foreign religious organisations.
Attempts to stop 'unofficial' religious activity, especially proselytising
by foreign missionaries, coincides with a heightened campaign by western
religious organisations aimed at influencing President Bill Clinton's
decision on MFN - the lower-tariff regime which facilitates the sale of
billions of dollars worth of Chinese textiles in America.
An American-based organisation called 'Free the Fathers' urged the US
administration at the weekend to withhold MFN status following what it
claimed was recent persecution of priests who have maintained their
allegiance to the Vatican.
China seeks to exercise control over various religious denominations through
nationwide organisations, including the Chinese Patriotic Catholic
Association. Beijing remains estranged from the Vatican, although there have
been signs of a thaw.
Amnesty International added its voice at the weekend to calls for an end to
religious persecution. It complained particularly about the sentencing
recently of 11 Tibetan nuns to between two and seven years' jail for
allegedly taking part in an anti-Chinese demonstration.
