FT  27 JUN 94 / Survey of Russia (7): Thrown in at the deep end / Review of
the privatisation programme
In three days' time, Russia will have completed the most ambitious
privatisation programme in history. More than 11,000 state-owned
enterprises, accounting for 70 per cent of Russian industry, will have been
sold to the public for 148m vouchers distributed free of charge to every
Russian citizen. Under a new government programme which has yet to be
approved by parliament, a second phase of privatisation due to begin after
July 1 would sell remaining state-owned stakes in privatised companies for
money only.
However, as Mr Anatoly Chubais, deputy prime minister responsible for
privatisation, observed earlier this month: 'The great battle for
privatisation has clearly been won, but the battle over the assessment of
its results is only just starting'.
For Mr Chubais, the only radical reformer still in office two years after
the launch of market reforms in Russia, the wider challenge of protecting
his legacy is daunting. Assuming that he manages to stay in office, it
consists of nothing less than ensuring the survival of hundreds of companies
thrown into market reform at the deep end by privatisation. 'I know what to
do to make things right,' he said recently. 'I have the levers and the team
to do it. I carry responsibility for it too.'
Already, however, his legacy is being attacked by conservatives such as Mr
Yuri Luzhkov, the mayor of Moscow, who claim it has aggravated the crisis of
Russian industry, set for a 25 per cent drop in output this year. Even
better-managed factories are starved of the capital they need to modernise,
restructure and survive in a more competitive environment. Companies owe
each other Rbs22,000bn in unpaid debts - their own way of subsidising each
other in order to avoid the harsh realities of market economics.
Although he cannot be held responsible for the high inflation and the lack
of a structural policy which are prolonging the agony of Russian industry,
Mr Chubais faces a dual challenge in helping the more promising companies
benefit from privatisation. One is to force bankruptcies and reorganisations
at companies which are badly managed and have failed to restructure of their
own accord. The other is to encourage investment in companies with the
prospects and the will to change.
The 'mass' privatisation ending this month achieved a qualified success in
attaining the three aims it set out to achieve.
The first was political: to dramatically lessen the over-weening role of the
state in the economy, and make the shift from state planning to capitalism
irreversible. Giving away vouchers entitling citizens to a share of the
nation's wealth, as well as enabling workers and managers to acquire at a
discount of up to 51 per cent from their workplaces, was designed to create
grass roots support for market reforms in the face of opposition from
parliament and old-style industrial managers.
Given the inability of a weak and old-fashioned state bureaucracy to make
managers act in a more market-orientated way, the second goal was to force
enterprises to change their behaviour simply by exposing them to market
forces.
But partly because of the government's reluctance to apply hard budget
constraints to enterprises, many are doing nothing to adjust, paying workers
to come to work while producing less and less. 'They are simply waiting for
something to happen', as Mr Vladimir Shcherbakov, a former Soviet minister
who now heads a privatisation fund, put it.
There have also been some cases of privatisation producing positive changes
in management. One example was provided by the Vladimir Tractor Plant
earlier this year. There, institutional investors elected as chief executive
officer a former deputy director of the plant with a degree from Harvard
Business School - in order to begin the restructuring which an old-style
director had tried to avoid by borrowing money to pay wages and supplying
goods to insolvent customers.
The third aim, to facilitate a flow of foreign investment needed by Russian
companies to acquire not just new technology to replace outdated and
inefficient equipment but business know-how, has perhaps proved the most
successful.
Most of the leading foreign companies with a strategic reason to build an
industrial presence in Russia have begun doing so only thanks to Mr
Chubais's voucher auctions, not least because this has proven easier than
trying to negotiate deals with government officials. Such 'strategic'
investors have typically acquired minority stakes in Russian companies
occupying the markets they would like to join - mostly in consumer
industries such as food-processing, alcoholic beverages, clothing and
tobacco. There has also some growing interest from western fund managers,
attracted if nothing else by rock-bottom prices and hopes of a high return
on a high-risk investment.
Although figures are hard to come by, Mr Chubais says that foreign equity
investment totalled Dollars 1.5bn last year and could reach Dollars 4bn this
year.
Privatisation has itself generated the momentum for some of the further
reforms which are necessary to ensure its success. The overnight appearance
of millions of small investors and of thousands of private companies starved
of investment has created a double imperative for the development of
efficient capital markets.
This means establishing ground rules for everything from the protection of
minority shareholders, to fair advertising standards, company disclosure,
and self-regulating professional associations to run reasonably transparent
markets.
Mr Jonathan Hay, a US adviser to the Russian privatisation ministry (whose
formal title is Committee for the Management of State Property), believes
that the very success of privatisation depends on the development of capital
markets. 'The whole assessment of privatisation will be tied to this. If
companies cannot get access to capital markets, the view will be that
privatisation was an awful thing to do. If they do, people will say that
privatisation laid the basis for the rebirth of the Russian economy and
Chubais will become a folk hero.'
