FT  05 MAY 94 / Clinton explains what in the world he is doing: The
president's 'global press conference' designed to defend his foreign policy
Criticism of US foreign policy has come in waves since Bill Clinton became
president. This has partly reflected peaks in foreign horrors such as
Bosnia, Somalia, Haiti and now Rwanda, partly genuine debate over how best
to approach Russia, China and Japan and partly the swivelling spotlight of a
nation still more interested in its own affairs.
But the latest flood tide has taken on a decidedly personal turn. No longer
is it the much-maligned Clinton foreign policy team in the firing line, but
the president himself.
He stands accused of not being interested in foreign affairs, of providing
no strategic vision of leadership to guide the US and its friends and
enemies in the post-cold war world, of not knowing when to use, or threaten
to use, force, and of being driven by domestic public opinion and its
assorted pressure groups into changes of tack beyond number.
This week even the president's presumed deficiencies of character were
adduced into the foreign policy argument. Far from untypical was a Joe Klein
column in Newsweek which said: 'It may be that Clinton's alleged (and it
must be emphasised unproven) behaviour towards women is not irrelevant when
his behaviour towards Haitians, Bosnians - and Americans - is considered.'
Even E J Dionne, the not unsympathetic Washington Post commentator, had
advance doubts about the purpose of Tuesday night's 'global press
conference' on foreign policy. Recalling the gap between Mr Clinton's
campaign promises and his execution of a foreign policy only marginally more
active than that of President George Bush, he feared 'words again'.
'The test of how well he does will lie not in what he says, but in what he
disciplines himself not to promise.'
The White House is conscious that US criticism has many foreign echoes,
which is why Tuesday night's event, broadcast live around the world by CNN,
saw Mr Clinton take questions from reporters in Jerusalem, Johannesburg,
Sarajevo and Seoul.
Mr Clinton stated, yet again, that the US had 'a clear road map' and ticked
off the predictable list of its signposts and accomplishments, emphasising
trade and economics. But much of what he had to say was explanatory and
defensive.
He repeatedly stressed the limits on the use of unilateral US power. An
accommodation with Pyongyang was 'in the hands of the North Koreans'; Bosnia
could only be resolved by 'a negotiated settlement'; the latest US pressure
on the Port-au-Prince junta was 'to help Haiti grow again and crawl out of
the enormous hole its present rulers have put it in'.
This message - that reasonable people must learn to live and work together
of their own volition, but with a bit of help - is his frequent domestic
refrain. He saw it working in South Africa, the Middle East, in South
America and elsewhere, but its rational appeal to those mired in intractable
rivalries is less apparent.
Mr Clinton was willing to concede this, along with the difficulty of getting
US friends and allies to co-operate, as over Bosnia. At his most irritated
initially in answering an aggressive question from CNN's correspondent in
Sarajevo ('there have been no flip-flops, madam'), he went on to say he had
rejected 'bad advice' to steer clear of Bosnia altogether.
'The US sometimes has to try and make a difference where it cannot control
events but can influence them. That is the situation with Bosnia. We are not
in control. We have some influence. We're doing our best to exercise it and
I think we're better off.' Mr Clinton, in effect, thumped no tubs, as
several of his critics have demanded.
He also drew lessons from the US experience in Somalia, now applicable to
Rwanda. The most important was not to be 'naive' in assuming that
humanitarian disasters had only natural causes. 'What we read of the
conflict between the Hutus and the Tutsis is that there is a political and
military element to this', which meant that any attempt to resolve the
conflict had to address both elements.
Mr Clinton was at his most comfortable talking about the issues closest to
his rational heart, such as trade with Japan and relations with China. He
was conciliatory to Beijing, half suggesting a way out of the impasse over
human rights could be found in the month remaining. 'I do not seek, nor
would it be proper, for the US or any other nation to tell a great country
like China how to conduct all its internal affairs.'
By Mr Dionne's measurement the president probably succeeded in not making
promises he could not keep. But on the opinion pages of the New York Times
yesterday there was former British prime minister Lady Thatcher again
demanding air strikes against the Serbs and a lifting of the arms embargo.
Several newspapers ran moving accounts of Mr Randall Robinson, admitted to
hospital on the 23rd day of a hunger strike in Washington protesting over US
policy towards Haiti.
Mr Clinton's middle ground can seem pallid in comparison.
