FT  10 MAY 94 / Scope of DTI document disappoints independents
Independent gas suppliers eager to take on British Gas in its most lucrative
market sector yesterday expressed disappointment that the DTI's document did
not go further in explaining how competition will be achieved.
'For all the agonising that's gone into it, it's a bit thin,' said Mr John
Astrop, commercial director at Kinetica, a joint venture between Conoco and
PowerGen, the generating company. 'It addresses the major issues but doesn't
sketch out in any detail what the public gas supply licence might look
like.'
Independent gas marketers are keen to see Ofgas's follow-up report to be
published in the coming weeks, which will contain details of the costs to be
charged for using British Gas pipelines.
'The transport costs are the key as to how far we can compete in the new
market,' said Mr Kristoffer Maroe, managing director at Alliance Gas, a
joint venture between British Petroleum and Norway's Statoil.
The gas marketers believe they will be able to offer domestic customers
price savings of between 10 per cent and 15 per cent.
Under the terms of the DTI's suggestions they will be obliged to offer gas
to all comers, but not necessarily at the same price.
The DTI's report recognises that, in a competitive market, prices will more
accurately reflect the costs of supply. That means users in some parts of
the country could pay more than others. The document says this could mean
consumers paying between 2 per cent and 4 per cent more or less for their
gas depending on where they live.
Mr Peter Bryant, deputy chairman at United Gas, believes that regional
distortions in price will not be more than 2p per therm in the most extreme
cases and are more likely to be 1p per therm.
More importantly, some customers - such as those with bad debts, for
example, or those who move house regularly - could now be receiving a
cross-subsidy from other users. This may result in a re-balancing of prices
in a more competitive market.
In order to minimise the effects of the re-balancing on the most vulnerable
customers, the DTI envisages regulation of British Gas's standing charges
beyond 1997 as well as continuation of its present price formula.
Some shippers do not believe that regulators will be able to protect all
customers in a free market. 'It's impossible to stop cherry-picking: that's
what competition is all about,' said Mr Maroe.
He believes around 10 per cent to 15 per cent of British Gas's domestic
customers may not be paying the full cost of supply. 'These customers
probably won't see price reductions, but neither will they see increases,'
he stressed.
