FT  15 NOV 94 / Technology: Microsoft on-line to the future - The software
giant's planned information service for PC users is assessed by Louise Kehoe
Microsoft is set to bulldoze its way into the on-line computer services
business with the launch of the Microsoft Network, unveiled by Bill Gates,
chief executive, yesterday.
Gates described his vision of how data networks will change the way people
work, learn and communicate by the year 2005 at the huge Comdex computer
trade show in Las Vegas. He said his planned on-line service will be a
significant step toward realising the full promise of personal computing by
putting 'information at your fingertips'.
Microsoft's plans are not just futuristic dreams. The world's largest and
most profitable software company aims to make the on-line services business
a central element of its long-term growth. As well as investing heavily in
the new business venture itself, Microsoft is forming partnerships with
telephone companies, publishers and entertainment groups to create a broad
range of on-line services.
In preparation for these services, Microsoft has developed software for
users and information providers. The company is also proposing a business
model that it believes will draw substantial third party investment to
creating new interactive on-line services, greatly expanding the market.
The ultimate goal is to establish the Microsoft Network as a standard
'platform', or technology foundation, for interactive on-line services in
much the same way that its Windows program is the software base for a huge
variety of personal computer applications.
The Microsoft Network 'will provide a setting for a worldwide electronic
marketplace of products and services from Microsoft and third parties,' the
company says.
Access to the Microsoft Network will be one of the features incorporated in
Windows 95, a new version of the widely-used PC operating system program, to
be released next April or May. Purchasers of PCs loaded with the new
software as well as those who upgrade their current versions of Windows,
will be offered a discount or free trial of the basic communications
services of the Microsoft Network. These will include electronic mail,
bulletin boards and chat lines.
But Microsoft plans to expand its on-line services quickly with the addition
of newspapers and magazines, shopping catalogues, games and educational
services as well as its own base of services. To draw publishers to its
network, Microsoft is offering them flexibility in how they run and charge
for their on-line services.
An on-line magazine on the Microsoft Network might, for example, charge a
modest subscription fee but raise additional revenue from advertising. A
shopping catalogue might offer free access but charge a transaction fee.
Both will be able to control the look and feel of their on-line service to
preserve their brand image.
'We will be more flexible than existing on-line services,' says Bill Miller,
Microsoft director of on-line services marketing. 'Providers will not be
limited in the ways in which they realise revenue for their services. More
important, they will retain the majority of the revenues that their content
and services generate.'
Most of the current on-line services charge users simply according to how
much time they spend connected to the service and pay 'content-providers' a
flat 20-30 per cent share of revenue. For users, Microsoft's plan will mean
lower fees for basic services and the option to spend more on specific
information sources. It also eliminates the biggest drawback to exploring
new on-line services - the cost of connect time as you browse.
To support this new approach to the on-line services business, Microsoft has
created a sophisticated billing and tracking system that will be linked to
credit card and direct bank debit processing centres.
Through an agreement with Visa, the biggest credit card provider, Microsoft
is also creating tools to ensure security of on-line transactions using
encryption technology.
Microsoft has also developed software to make its on-line services easy to
use. Methods for navigating the service will be based on the familiar
Windows interface. One enhancement will be 'short-cuts' - the ability to
return to a favourite on-line service simply by clicking on an icon.
Companies could use such icons as a marketing tool, Miller suggests. They
might, for example, send icons to users via electronic mail in much the same
way that companies today distribute advertising materials in the post. Some
users will throw away this 'junk electronic mail', but others will be
tempted to click on the icon to look at the products or services on offer.
By matching its approach to on-line services closely to conventional
business practices, Microsoft expects to attract a broad range of potential
on-line service providers that have until now been struggling to figure out
how to make money in the new world of interactive multimedia services.
Companies going on-line via the Microsoft Network will none the less be
leaping into the unknown. It is yet to be seen how many of Microsoft's
Windows 95 purchasers will then sign on to the service.
In contrast, companies such as Mosaic Communications that are building
software tools to support electronic commerce on the Internet - the
international computer information network with an estimated 25m-30m users -
have an established customer base.
'Companies that are writing applications for the Internet today are going to
be best poised to create businesses in interactive digital services,' says
Jim Clark, chairman of Mosaic Communications, a venture that sells Internet
software. 'Large companies are flocking on to the Internet because it has
worldwide reach,' he claims.
'The Internet is going to get bigger and bigger and bigger and the Microsoft
Network will end up being a footnote. I think it will fail. In the long term
it will become just another service on the Internet.'
In the short term, however, Microsoft's plans are sending a chill through
the commercial on-line services industry. CompuServe, Prodigy and America
Online, the three leaders in consumer-oriented on-line services, which have
about 6m subscribers, are scrambling to drop prices and upgrade their
services in anticipation of the Microsoft Network.
Microsoft acknowledges that the perceived threat to established services may
be overblown. 'The notion that Microsoft enters the market and the world
changes is crazy,' says Miller. 'From where I sit, we have a long way to go
to match the infrastructure and customers and partners of the existing
services.' While Microsoft's entry will undoubtedly create new interest in
on-line services, existing services 'are going to have an advantage over us
in terms of what they can offer to customers'.
But for how long? With some 20m to 30m copies of Windows 95 expected to be
sold in the first 12 months, Microsoft could quickly overtake all its
competitors and fulfil Gates's vision of 'extending the Windows-based
desktop (personal computer) to a worldwide community of people, ideas and
information'.
