FT  25 APR 94 / Signing nears on Palestine pact
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organisation yesterday began what both
sides hope will be a last week of talks in Cairo before the long-awaited
signing of an agreement on Palestinian self-rule in the occupied Gaza Strip
and West Bank town of Jericho.
The two sides said over the weekend they aimed to wind up detailed
negotiations this week preparing for a Cairo summit next week between Mr
Yitzhak Rabin, Israeli prime minister, and Mr Yassir Arafat, PLO chairman,
to be followed directly by a signing ceremony.
Mr Shimon Peres, Israeli foreign minister, is expected to fly to Cairo on
Thursday to meet Mr Arafat to make the arrangements for the Rabin-Arafat
summit. Mr Shimon Shetreet, Israeli economics minister, said yesterday: 'We
are beginning discussions today for a possible meeting on Thursday between
Peres and Arafat, hoping that the signature of the agreement will take place
on the 3rd, 4th or 5th of May.'
However, obstacles remain to be resolved in talks this week, including the
extent of jurisdiction of Palestinian courts over foreigners and Israelis in
Gaza-Jericho; the security zoning arrangements in the Gaza Strip; passports
and whether the Palestinians will have their own currency.
If these issues are successfully negotiated this week the way will be
cleared for the Rabin-Arafat summit where both leaders will have to overcome
further outstanding issues such as the final size of the Jericho enclave and
deployment of Palestinian police on border crossings.
The economic track of peace talks in Paris must also break the deadlock over
migrant labour and the kind of trade regime the self-governed Palestinian
economy would adopt.
Although the agenda appears lengthy and complicated both sides realise
further delays in signing an agreement could fuel Arab-Israeli violence.
Israeli youngsters armed with an air gun went on a shooting spree car in the
Tel Aviv area last night, lightly wounding 10 people, police said, Reuter
reports from Jerusalem. The youths were arrested three hours after they
began firing pellets from a car. Police did not disclose the motive.
