FT  24 MAY 94 / UK Company News: Manchester United scores in VCI's Pounds
28m flotation
VCI, the videos and pre-recorded music publisher, yesterday marked the
publication of its flotation pathfinder document by launching 10 titles
devoted to aspects of Manchester United's league and cup double.
Mr Steve Ayres, chief executive, who hopes the company will be capitalised
at more than Pounds 60m, cited the launch of the football titles 10 days
after the cup final as the example of VCI's speed and flexibility.
'We will probably sell about 200,000 Manchester United videos across the 10
titles,' said Mr Ayres, who pioneered the video sell-through - sale rather
than rental - market in the UK.
The company hopes to raise a net Pounds 28m through a placing and
intermediaries offer to repay debt incurred in the management buy-out with
directors selling 30 per cent of their 17 per cent stake in the company.
Mr Ayres has a 4.9 per cent stake which should be worth Pounds 1.5m to
Pounds 2m as a result of the float.
In the year to December 31 1993, VCI made operating profits of Pounds 5.9m
before exceptional items on turnover of Pounds 59.8m. However, operating
profit for 1992 was Pounds 2.3m, down from Pounds 5.2m.
Mr Ayres blamed the 1992 fall on problems at Strand Magnetics, its
manufacturing arm, and the write-offs on childrens' programming following
the entry of Disney into the market.
Strand was closed and its business sold to Rank. VCI videos aimed at
children concentrate on pre-school titles such as Thomas the Tank Engine and
Sooty.
'The publishing businesses have a fantastic track record and it's the
publishing businesses we are floating. The rest have long since gone,' said
Mr Ayres, who added he had decided that now was the right timing for a
float.
VCI was set up in 1985 and is one of the largest of the independent
publishers. It has sold a total of 44m video cassettes in the UK alone.
Next month, coinciding with the float, VCI will begin its move into personal
computer software for the first time with games and educational titles.
The offer is being sponsored by Samuel Montagu with James Capel acting as
brokers.
