FT  28 JUN 94 / Management (The Growing Business): Tall order for small firm
advisers / A look at the uneven progress of Business Link
Wanted: the wisdom of Solomon and the diplomatic silkiness of Talleyrand,
allied to rigorous diagnostic skills and plenty of demonstrable management
qualities, all for between Pounds 18,000 and Pounds 30,000 a year.
The search for so-called personal business advisers to spearhead the UK
government's latest drive to help small firms is starting in earnest now
that the Business Link movement is spreading across the country.
Business Link is at the centre of efforts by Michael Heseltine, trade and
industry secretary, to overhaul government support services to small
business. The idea is that local and national services to business -
information, training, help with exports and marketing, financial aid,
consultancy and so on - be pulled together in one-stop-shops, branded with
the name Business Link and subject to Department of Trade and Industry
approval.
Training and enterprise councils have been trying to forge local alliances
of councils, chambers of commerce and enterprise agencies to pool these
services. But it can be difficult making the independent interdependent.
'The partners are not automatically natural allies,' said Richard Green,
director of economic development at Birmingham City Council, at a conference
earlier this month to assess progress. 'There's a lot of institutional
ground-beating going on at the moment,' comments Brian Wright, chief
executive of the London Enterprise Agency, on the subject of local turf
wars.
Heseltine has been trying to snuff out such wars, recently telling the
chambers of commerce to 'join with your partners, get fully involved and
don't let sentiment and parochial feelings prevent you from doing what you
know to be right for our businesses.'
Bruce Harris, managing director of Rochdale Enterprises, admits to fears
among enterprise agencies of being submerged - but he has found there is
life after partnership. 'As we began to operate, we found the threat really
wasn't there.'
The evidence so far suggests a greater readiness to bury 'sentiment and
parochial feelings' in the Midlands and north of England than in the south.
Of the 30 Business Link offices and sub-offices which have opened so far,
only three are south of a line drawn from the Severn to the Wash, although
six of the 11 offices opening next month are south of the line.
A further 36 Business Links have been approved by the DTI but of these only
four are in the southern part of England. Six of the 19 proposals awaiting
DTI assessment are in the south.
There is no particular reason why the south is tardier than the north.
Officials surmise that in the north there is a longer standing habit of
co-operation among economic agencies because they have been forced to come
to terms with problems of decline less prevalent in the south.
But where Business Links have been set up, they have evoked a response.
Birmingham has had 12,000 telephone inquiries since it opened last October.
Leicester is receiving 4,500 telephone calls and 1,500 personal visits a
month.
However, DTI officials and Business Link executives believe they can take
the initiative in helping small companies work through management, sales,
financial and production problems. Hence the search for personal business
advisers.
'The personal business adviser is crucial to success. Unless they can make a
practical contribution to business, Business Link will fail,' warned Sarah
Brown, head of the DTI's small firms division.
Manchester Business Link has found 500 small companies with growth
potential, to which it wants to offer its services. 'We want to learn from
the successful. We've also identified a group of triers - the next tranche
on the list for business advisers. We see ourselves starting at the top of
the pyramid and working down,' said John Browne, managing director.
'We've focused on the three sectors of the Walsall economy - automotive
components, plastics and construction products,' reported Bob Baggott,
working to get Walsall Business Link running. The office will target
companies employing between 11 and 50 people. Already it has recruited three
business advisers to go on the staff.
Leicester's main business advice comes from 20 self-employed consultants,
working under contract. 'The average personal business adviser is the
55-year-old executive who wants to put something back in the com-munity,'
said Tony Grice, chief executive of Leicester Business Point.
Certainly the adviser, in Browne's view, must 'have been around the street,'
run a business, have financial skills and two or three years' consultancy
experience. 'Interpersonal skills are the most important because we are
trying to open the minds of people,' declared Sue Cheshire, executive
director of Hertfordshire TEC.
These paragons, actual or aspiring, seem thick on the ground. Walsall put
two advertisements in the regional press for its jobs and had nearly 400
applications.
