FT  04 NOV 94 / Cypriots join in the Aegean war of words
The gap between Greek-Cypriot and Turkish-Cypriot positions over the
island's future is widening ominously, at a time when Athens and Ankara are
already squaring off over territorial rights in the Aegean.
Greek-Cypriot officials have in the last few days accused both the Turkish
Cypriots and Ankara of renouncing the 1977 and 1979 agreements - calling for
the island to be reunited as a bi-zonal federation - which have served as
the basis for all subsequent negotiations.
Leaders of the island's Greek Cypriot majority have always argued for as
full-blooded a federation as possible, while the Turkish Cypriots want
relatively loose ties between mainly Greek and mainly Turkish zones.
Until recently, UN-sponsored negotiations have proceeded on the basis that a
federal Cyprus would be a sovereign state, albeit loosely structured.
But Mr Mumtaz Soysal, the new Turkish foreign minister who has called for a
tougher stance on Turkish-Greek disputes, caused a sensation in Athens this
week by saying that both parts of Cyprus were and would remain sovereign
entities.
He said the Cyprus problem was 'half-solved already' and all that remained
was for the two sides to agree on co-operation in such areas as tourism and
the environment.
The Turkish minister's words were denounced by the Cyprus government,
although there was quiet satisfaction among hardline Greek politicians, who
have all along doubted the value of reconciliation talks.
'We are at a worse impasse than before,' said Mr Alecos Michaelides, foreign
minister in the Greek Cypriot government. 'They (the Turkish Cypriots) are
now abandoning the idea of a federation . . . and this makes it difficult
even to start discussions.'
The Greek Cypriots are now expected to intensify pressure on the UN for a
statement that blames Turkish intransigence for the lack of progress. They
are also stepping up their campaign for accession to the European Union,
something the Turkish side opposes as long as there is no settlement.
In a separate Greek-Turkish dispute, Mr Soysal has again warned Athens that
Turkey will go to war if Greece exercises the option of extending its
territorial waters from six miles to 12 after November 16, when a new
international law on the sea enters force.
