FT  02 APR 94 / Travel: Survival is a dogfight for the wild bunch - Wild
dogs in Africa may become rarer than the rhino. Michael J Woods tracked them
down
There was a dull pock, like the sound of a tennis ball bouncing lightly on
grass, as the compressed air-gun expelled its tranquilliser dart. The
African wild dog sprang to its feet as if it had been stung. With a yelp it
dashed off, a red woollen tassel dangling from the syringe in its shoulder.
'It won't go far,' said Dr Gus Mills, and we sat in his truck for the 10
minutes needed for the drug to work. It took a little time to find the
sleeping dog in the thick bush, as its black, white and tan blotched coat
blended remarkably well with the broken shadows cast on the grey dusty soil.
Once located, though, a radio collar was swiftly fitted, a sample of blood
taken and the antidote injected. In less than a minute the dog was on its
feet and had gone to join the rest of Mbyamiti pack, which now had two dogs
carrying radio transmitters.
Gus Mills is a scientist who works in Kruger national park, a long
rectangular area about the size of Wales on the eastern boundary of South
Africa. He has been researching African wild dogs, also known as Cape
hunting dogs, for some years. His subjects are rangy animals with noticeably
large rounded ears, three-coloured coats and a height of a little over 2ft.
They are efficient hunters, running as a pack and killing at dawn and dusk
if they can, and lying-up in shade during the heat of the day. Only for the
short breeding period are they tied to a den; for the rest of the year they
are nomadic and appear to need a large territory to survive.
There are only about 360 wild dogs in Kruger; the lion and hyena populations
both top 2,000 for the same area. All is not well with wild dogs. They have
become very scarce in Africa - rarer, some say, than the rhino, which makes
them Africa's most threatened large carnivore.
Historically, their undeservedly bad reputation has led to persecution by
farmers. Until 20 years ago, they were even shot in some national parks.
There are still farmers who will not tolerate dogs and consider them vermin,
so that packs straying from conservation areas are at risk.
Only big stretches of protected wilderness will suffice to provide wild dogs
with enough space to survive. The national parks in the north of Botswana
and Zimbabwe and in the south of Tanzania fulfil these requirements, and
contain reasonable numbers of dogs. But these very extensive areas are
largely unpenetrated by roads and, for the discerning visitor, for whom a
glimpse of a dog is more exciting than any of the big five (lion, leopard,
elephant, rhino, buffalo), spotting one is extremely difficult.
Things seem to be slightly easier in Kruger. Finding them by radio is the
only way that researchers such as Gus Mills can ensure that packs are
monitored on a regular basis, and dogs are often seen by visitors to the
park. In fact, Gus was able to use tourist sightings of wild dogs to obtain
a measure of the number of animals in the park.
By offering a free film for every usable photograph of a dog, he soon had
pictures of almost every animal. The dog population in Kruger is one of the
densest so far recorded in Africa, and the extensive network of roads is
frequently used by packs on the move.
'Morning and evening are the best times to look for dogs,' Gus told me.
'That is when they hunt, for they rest in the heat of the day and then their
low profile and disruptive coloration make them almost impossible to spot.'
Kruger has much to offer in addition to wild dogs. I came across lions and
elephants in abundance along with rhino and giraffes. Many of the smaller
animals, so often missed elsewhere, are visible here, too. I found a dwarf
mongoose den by the roadside and was able to watch the lightning activities
of its delightful inhabitants as they foraged through the undergrowth and
then rocketed across open areas for fear of raptors.
On two occasions I had to wait for leopard tortoises to cross the track and
once swerved to avoid a chameleon, bright green against the khaki sand,
rocking its way so very slowly over the ruts.
But it was wild dogs I wanted to see, and the more I questioned Gus Mills,
the more mysteries I encountered. Packs, for instance, fluctuate markedly in
size, and Kruger's Skukuza pack, which numbered 40 dogs in 1989, now
consists of just three males.
Dogs disappear in large numbers for no apparent reason, and bodies are
rarely found. This was the reason for putting a collar on a second animal of
the Mbyamiti pack, as an insurance against the death or disappearance of the
dog already collared.
In Kruger, a wild dog's expectation of life is unusually short - rarely
beyond four years (a hyena's is about 15). Gus has heard several accounts of
lions killing both adults and pups, and would like to investigate more fully
the role lions play in the lives of dogs.
Fortunately, international awareness is growing. The Kruger wild dog study
is funded by the National Parks Board and the independent Stuart Bromfield
Wild Dog Fund of the Endangered Wildlife Trust. This trust also finances
other wild dog projects in South Africa, along with the newly-established
Licaone Fund in Italy.
Meanwhile, the International Union for the Conservation of Nature has
published an action plan for African wild dogs, so there is considerable
hope for the future.
I spent a week in Kruger, and it wasn't until my last day that I found dogs
for myself. The sun was sinking and, briefly, painting the bush a golden
green. The insects were tuning up for their evening chorus and the cacophony
of guinea fowl was at its loudest. There was a sudden snort from an impala
ram in the undergrowth beside the vehicle and he quickly made himself
scarce.
Then I was aware that, coming towards me along the road ahead, were a dozen
lean dark silhouettes with familiar big round ears. The long legs carrying
those lithe bodies touched the ground so lightly that the animals almost
seemed to float along in a distance-devouring trot. I stopped quickly and
the grinning dogs went by. The sun lit them for a second, then they wheeled
and melted into the trees - a moment of pure magic.
Michael Woods was a guest of the South African Tourism Board (London tel:
081-944-8080) and Kruger national park.
He flew from Bristol to Amsterdam with KLM and then caught its long-haul
flight to Johannesburg. KLM runs a similar service from 16 UK regional
airports, thus avoiding the often time-consuming journey to London and the
two-hour check-in.
