FT  24 OCT 94 / Emerging Markets: News round-up
STRATEGY
In the final quarter of 1994 James Capel's emerging markets team is
maintaining a preference for Latin America, recommending an overweight
position against Europe, the Middle East and Africa.
Capel said that it was recommending a broadly neutral stance on Asia,
although it picked out South Korea and Indonesia as worthy of an overweight
position.
Within Latin America, Colombia and Chile have been moved up in Capel's list
to overweight, on the basis that both markets provide 'an attractive
combination of improving economic growth and stable politics.'
Kleiman International Consultants find that over the year to date, of the 65
markets tracked two have reached triple digit gains in local currency terms
 -Egypt by 115 per cent on privatisation and liberalisation progress and
currency rebound, while Ghana rose 120 per cent on strong foreign interest.
TURKEY
Citibank has announced the first warrant on a basket of Turkish equities.
The 'Citi-Bosphorous' basket is believed to be the first ever derivative
product on a diversified Turkish equity portfolio offered to both local and
international investors.
Citibank says that the basket includes 10 important Turkish stocks,
representing about a third of Istanbul's composite index in terms of market
capitalisation and trading volume. Listed on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange,
the warrant has a one-year maturity.
INVESTMENT TRUST
Foreign &amp; Colonial Emerging Markets Investment Trust has said that it has
had firm intentions from more than 30 institutions for its new issue of C
shares. A cap for the issue has been set at Pounds 115m, against an initial
target of Pounds 70m. A further 30m shares will be available to the public
with the offer for subscriptions closing on November 14 and dealings to
begin on November 18.
INDIAN GDRS
The London Stock Exchange has listed its first Global Depository Receipts in
India-based East India Hotels, writes Norma Cohen. The company, listed on
the Calcutta, Bombay and Delhi stock exchanges, is a leading owner and
operator of four- and five-star hotels. Merrill Lynch is sponsor to the
GDRs.
GDRs for two other Indian companies, Shiram Industrial Enterprises, a
manufacturer of food oils and JK Corporation, the country's largest copier
and airmail paper manufacturer, will begin trading in London on October 31.
RUSSIA
Russiamoney, a screen-based English language information service
specialising in the analysis of Russia's emerging capital markets, has been
launched on the Bloomberg financial markets service. Russiamoney, a joint
venture between Emerging Money and the Moscow-based Investment &amp; Analysis
Centre, will initially provide weekly comment and analysis of specific
investment themes. From January 1995 there will be daily reports and comment
on the Russian currency, bond and equity markets.
JAPAN
The Tokyo stock exchange is to relax listing requirements for foreign
companies, maybe before the year-end, in an effort to persuade Asian
companies to trade.
Edited by John Pitt. Further coverage of emerging markets appears daily on
the World Stock Markets page
