FT  26 NOV 94 / How To Spend It (The Electronic Age): Techno-toys - not just
for the boys - Alice Rawsthorn keeps an eye on the electronics products that
will be hitting the high streets within the next year or two
We may be at the dawn of the digital age but to most of us the electronics
world is as chaotic and confusing as ever.
After all, who wants to risk becoming one of those apocryphal
'friends-of-friends' who spent thousands of pounds on an early fax machine
or who bought a Betamax video.
That said, there has never been a better time to treat yourself to a new set
of techno-toys.
The combination of economic recession, fierce competition and pressure from
newly-wired consumers has forced the big Japanese electronics and US
computer companies to sharpen their acts.
Prices have fallen; styling is slicker and the latest electronic devices are
also easier to use.
After a lean period for innovation in the industry, a stream of electronic
products will be arriving on the market in the next year or so.
Televisions
The humble TV set is one of the main subjects for innovation. For years the
industry assumed that high definition TV, or HDTV which offers superior
sound and image quality when compared with conventional television, would be
its hope for the future.
However, HDTV is years away from being launched in the US and Europe, where
the industry is still deciding on standards and specifications.
It is available only in Japan and has not caught on there because of high
prices - a Sony system costs Y600,000 to Y800,000 (about Pounds 4,000-Pounds
5,000) - and a shortage of programming.
Instead, the big hit in Japan is the wide screen. When they were launched
three years ago the industry saw them as a cult product that might appeal to
movie buffs, as the screens have the same shape as a cinema screen. But
wide-screen has become a surprise success.
It accounts for one in five of all the televisions sold in Japan. Now, it is
coming to Europe in the guise of the new generation of PALplus standard
televisions.
Nokia is in the lead, having launched a 28in PALplus set for Pounds 1,500.
Michael Grade, chief executive of Channel 4, has already bought one.
Sony, Philips and Grundig are now finalising their PALplus launch plans for
early next year.
Games
After racing ahead in the late 1980s and early 1990s, the video and computer
game market has reached a hiatus over the past year or so, as games fans
have awaited the launch of the next wave of 32-bit and 64-bit compact
disc-based games.
The new games are more powerful than the old 16-bit cartridge consoles. They
also offer digital sound, three dimensional graphics and cinematic visuals.
'They're streets ahead of their predecessors,' said one expert. 'Playing a
32-bit football game will be like staging your own Match of the Day with the
crowd chanting in the background.'
Two of the first 32-bit games machines, the Sony PlayStation and the Sega
Saturn, are going on sale in Japan this month and in Europe next spring.
The most eagerly-awaited innovation is Nintendo's super-powerful Ultra 64,
which is twice as powerful as the 32-bit games machine and will cost Dollars
200 when it goes on sale in the autumn of next year.
New Music Media
After the success of compact disc, the electronics industry is eager to move
to the next new medium. The hitch is that no one seems able to agree exactly
what the new medium will be.
Philips and Panasonic have joined forces to develop the Digital Compact
Cassette, which they see as a logical successor to the analogue cassette as
it is smaller and more durable with digital sound quality.
Sony and Sharp are pinning their hopes on the MiniDisc, a miniaturised
version of the compact disc that offers the same advantages of random access
and durability in a smaller, recordable format.
All four companies claim publicly that sales are on target. Privately, they
admit that the progess of their new products is scarcely scintillating. One
of their smartest competitors, Pioneer, is playing safe.
It sees DCC and MD as 'intermediate technology' and is concentrating on
developing a miniaturised blue laser disc system which, it hopes, will be
the new medium for the 21st century.
Compact Discs
Yet another battle is brewing over the format for the next generation of
compact discs.
There are now three competing formats on the market. So far CD-ROM - the
interactive disc that combines text, graphics and sound - looks like the
winner particularly in the US where Microsoft has been playing on parental
consciences by selling CD-ROMs as educational aids, notably encyclopaedias.
The competing formats are CD-i, the interactive compact discs developed by
Philips for use on dedicated consoles that cost from Pounds 299 and plug
into television sets, and 3DO, a top-of-the-range games system.
Confused? Just wait until video CD comes on stream. This is the new genre of
disc that plays films, just like a video tape, as well as music.
Video CDs are already trickling on to the Japanese market. But most
manufacturers are loathe to mount full-scale launches elsewhere until the
industry has resolved the timing problem of whether to stick with the
current crop of 74-minute discs - which are long enough for albums, but not
for feature films - or to develop an expensive new digitally-compressed
format.
Computers
Main themes in the computer market over the next few years will be
integration and miniaturisation. Compaq has led the field in integration
with multimedia machines that operate as CD players, PCs, fax machines,
CD-ROM drives and even telephones selling for Dollars 1,000 in the US, or
for around Pounds 1,100 in the UK.
Sony is making waves on the miniaturisation front with the Personal
Intelligent Communicator developed in conjunction with AT &amp; T.
The PIC, which sells for Dollars 995 in the US, is a portable gadget, the
same size as a Filofax, that functions as a fax, database and an E-mail
machine. It is available in the US only, although Sony hopes soon to launch
a similar format in Japan.
Global positioning systems
If anything can claim to be the techno-treat of the early 1990s it is the
global positioning system, the hand-held devices that enable the user to
plot where they are and where they want to go.
Philippe Starck, the superstar French designer, uses his in his private
aircraft.
The GPS is still seen as something of an indulgence in Europe, but in Japan
it is rapidly becoming commonplace. The must-have accessory is a digital
map, or in-car global positioning system; a CD-ROM drive is tucked away in
the boot and a map of the route flashes on a dashboard screen.
Sony sold 90,000 Digital Maps last year and expects sales at least to double
in 1994. Its latest ruse is a Y400,000 digital map with a real-time traffic
information system that uses a cellular phone link to warn drivers of jams
ahead. Sony hopes to start with the digital map in Germany, in April.
Meanwhile, Pioneer is working on the next generation of in-car hardware
which, it hopes, will offer an on-line digital map, a CD player,
radio-cassette and cellular phone - all in one machine.
