FT  24 MAR 94 / Technology: Legislation drives the innovators - Optimism
among environmental innovators
The environmental technology industry - which is growing so rapidly that its
sales may exceed world chemicals production by the end of the century - is
holding its showcase UK exhibition this week.
UK companies lag well behind their competitors from Germany, Japan and the
US in the world environmental technology market. According to a recent OECD
report this market is worth Dollars 200bn (Pounds 140bn) a year, with growth
projected to between Dollars 300bn and Dollars 600bn by 2000.
Even so, the 300 exhibitors at the ET94 show in Birmingham were in
optimistic mood. Many believe that the fledgling UK industry is on the brink
of an export breakthrough, with continental Europe the main target.
Exhibitors agreed that growth in all sectors of the market - air pollution
control, water and effluent treatment, and solid waste management - was
driven primarily by legislative requirements.
'If the UK enforces decent environmental legislation, it gives a great
stimulus for us to develop the technology and then use our home market as a
base for expansion into Europe,' says William Averdieck, managing director
of Pollution Control &amp; Measurement Europe.
PCME was founded in 1990 with private funding to commercialise an innovative
dust emissions monitor. The monitor works by detecting the transfer of
electric charge from dust particles to a probe in the factory chimney. It is
particularly suitable for measuring low dust levels in small smokestacks.
There have been two vital ingredients in PCME's success, Averdieck says. One
was the demand created by the 1990 Environmental Protection Act for
industrial dust monitors. The other was a grant from the Department of Trade
and Industry's Environmental Technology Innovation Scheme to develop the
product in collaboration with Imperial College, London, and Johnson Matthey,
the metals group.
Now PCME's D-Tech dust monitor has 60 per cent of the UK market for
small-stack monitoring equipment and export sales are growing. At ET94 this
week, the company launched its first product for the traditional 'large
stack' market, including power station chimneys. It uses 'optical
scintillation' technology to measure dust levels from the variation in a
light beam across the chimney.
However, not all the innovations at ET94 came from new companies. Montec, a
20-year-old company bought last year by Northumbrian Water, has developed a
monitor for low volumes and flows of liquid effluent.
Bryan Jackson, Montec sales engineer, says this market is driven by the
National Rivers Authority's policy of making companies pay to discharge
effluents into rivers and fining them for unauthorised discharges.
Another feature of ET94 is the number of UK government agencies that are
selling environmental services. They include AEA Technology, the
Meteorological Office, Natural Environment Research Council and Adas, the
farm advisory and research service.
The latter carried out Pounds 42m worth of environmental consultancy last
year, according to Chris Stansfield, Adas head of land development. It
expects to pick up more business from the Waste Management Licensing
Regulations which become law on May 1. They will drive up waste disposal
costs and make it more attractive to recycle waste or use it on the land.
Colin Rudd, Adas waste management consultant, says: 'It will certainly pay
producers to conduct feasibility studies in their waste disposal options
now.'
Four years of Adas tests and evaluations have borne fruit for National Power
and PowerGen. These show that gypsum - a mineral produced in large
quantities by 'flue gas desulphurisation' plants from coal-fired power
stations - can be spread on fields to improve the soil, rather than dumped
in expensive landfill sites.
