FT  18 MAR 94 / Management: From microwave to multimedia
Over the past three years Hewlett-Packard has transformed its oldest
business into the 'point division' for its charge on to the multimedia
information superhighway.
The Stanford Park division grew directly from HP's roots in the scientific
instruments venture formed by Bill Hewlett and David Packard 55 years ago.
'We still had engineering drawings in our manufacturing area with Bill
Hewlett's signature,' recalls Jim Olsen, who heads the newly-named Vid group
(Video Communications Division). 'We've gone from selling microwave
instruments to gearheads (engineering types) to selling video equipment to
men with ponytails and earrings - artists, editors and film producers.'
Vid has become a symbol, within HP, of the capacity to adapt to change. It
is also at the forefront of the company's efforts to draw on the diverse
expertise of its various business groups to create products.
Vid is still part of HP's test and measurement instruments organisation, but
it worked closely with the printer divisions to create the first 'video
printer', producing paper copies of video images that can be used to speed
up editing. Similarly, Vid's 'video server', a video juke box for
interactive television services, incorporates measurement, communications
and computing technologies from various parts of the company.
As the market for multimedia communications products develops, HP may need
to create a business group to focus on it. For the moment the company
prefers to form ad hoc collaborative 'cross-organisation' teams rather than
restructuring its operations.
'If we reorganised HP today to formalise how the divisions work together it
could waste a lot of time,' says Olsen. The biggest change in moving from
microwave to multimedia, he says, has been the accelerated pace of business.
'Product development cycles used to be two to five years, now it is six to
nine months.' When speed becomes critical, corporate structures take a back
seat.
