FT  21 MAR 94 / Natal fans political fires in run-up to S African poll: The
regional events undermining peace hopes
It is easy to predict that next month's all-race elections in South Africa's
Natal province will not be free and fair, whatever is done in the next five
weeks to make it so. Those who live in areas controlled by the Inkatha
Freedom party will not dare to vote, because the IFP will be boycotting the
poll; those who live in African National Congress areas will not dare to
stay at home, because the ANC will want them to vote.
The only remaining question is how many people will die before polling ends
and, perhaps more importantly, how many will opt for violent resistance to
the new government once it takes power.
Several events last week helped to stoke political fires in Natal, where
weekend violence left 11 dead.
ANC officials, including President Nelson Mandela, tried more or less openly
to incite popular rebellion in the KwaZulu homeland. Chief Mangosuthu
Buthelezi, the KwaZulu leader, replied with belligerence and aggression, and
sabotaged a planned peace meeting between Mr Mandela and the Zulu King
Goodwill Zwelethini by inviting armed Zulu warriors to attend.
The Independent Electoral Commission said it would soon take measures to
enforce free political activity in Natal, putting it on a collision course
with Inkatha, which is preventing voter education and campaigning in many
areas.
Then, on Friday, the prestigious Goldstone Commission of inquiry released
details of how some of the most senior men in the South African police
allegedly manufactured homemade guns and gave them to Inkatha. On the same
day, King Goodwill called on thousands of Zulu warriors - many of them
carrying firearms - to boycott the elections and defend the 'sovereignty' of
the Zulu nation 'at all costs'.
So after months of uncertainty, some clarity seems to be emerging. Barring a
last-minute miracle, Inkatha will not participate in the April poll and the
Zulu king could take leave of reality entirely and declare KwaZulu
independent.
Nonetheless, international mediation of the country's constitutional dispute
will go ahead - indeed, Inkatha negotiators say they expect to announce the
names of mediators today. But the results of mediation will be implemented
only after the poll.
According to the best-case scenario, consensus will be reached on
constitutional changes and the new constitution, to be written by an elected
constituent assembly, will be changed to reflect it. Then Inkatha would
prepare to fight the second elections (in 1999) from a base of
extraparliamentary opposition.
But Mr Philip Powell, commander of the Mlaba training camp near the KwaZulu
capital of Ulundi where some 5,000 Inkatha members have been given military
training to form 'self-defence units', makes clear that Inkatha's strategy
will be to render Natal ungovernable, just as the ANC made South Africa
ungovernable in the 1980s.
'The ANC has proved by mass action that you can make government impossible.
We've learned lots of valuable lessons from what they have done', says the
former police officer.
He says Inkatha cannot resist if the Electoral Commission uses the army to
install polling booths and enforce voter education. 'We don't even entertain
the possibility of fighting the South African Defence Force. We have no
army, no armoured vehicles, no helicopters.' But such a move would galvanise
support behind Chief Buthelezi, and provide recruits for a 'low intensity
guerrilla war against the (new) government of national unity'.
The Vietnam war is a case in point, he says. 'That war was won by people
with bicycles and homemade hand grenades.' Mr Powell concedes that no such
war is likely in South Africa. After the decision of right-wing whites to
take part in elections, fighting would be limited to Natal and Inkatha would
lack the Vietcong's powerful backers.
But if a new ANC government seeks to crush Inkatha, or if the ANC-dominated
Transitional Executive Council (which holds the true reins of power in the
run-up to elections) chooses to impose elections by force, much bloodshed
could result.
