FT  21 JAN 94 / International Company News: Hewlett-Packard adds credibility
to Taligent / A look at computing's latest alliance
The recent decision by Hewlett-Packard to take a 15 per cent stake in
Taligent, a joint venture between International Business Machines and Apple
Computer, sent a frisson of anticipation through the computer industry.
HP, now the most profitable computer manufacturer in the US, intends to use
Taligent's technology to develop and extend its principal computer operating
software. It will also make available to Taligent its own software for
company-wide computer networks.
Partnerships and strategic alliances are increasingly common among computer
manufacturers but HP's involvement in Taligent gives a new credibility to a
partnership seen as much as a move to counter Microsoft's domination of
computer operating systems as an attempt to push back the frontiers of
computing.
Taligent's stated objective, however, is to change the way companies process
data by introducing advanced operating software better suited to running
networks of high powered workstations and personal computers than today's
limited and unfriendly systems.
Taligent technology should make it easier for companies to develop software
quickly to meet new requirements.
Mr Jean Claude Malraison of IBM Europe says: 'The whole software landscape
is going to change as a result of this new approach.' Experts agree, with
reservations.
Price Waterhouse, the management consultancy, says: 'Taligent has the
monumental, albeit risky, opportunity to re-define the nature of computer
operating systems.'
Operating systems - software which controls and manages the internal
workings of computers - are complex and the choices open to customers are
frequently confusing.
Microsoft is the leading supplier of operating systems for individual PCs;
of the world's 100m PCs most run on MS/DOS and Windows. The Apple Macintosh,
with its own unique operating software, accounts for other 8.5m computer
users.
Microsoft has developed an operating system suitable for linking PCs and
workstations in company-wide networks - Windows NT - but it is at an early
stage in its acceptance.
Taligent is targeting this market for enterprise-wide computing. Its
operating system is derived from a version of Apple software, code-named
'Pink', and uses an advanced technology called 'object orientation', in
which software is written in self-contained, re-usable, modules.
IBM's reasons for involvement in Taligent are clear. It allowed Microsoft to
take control of the PC operating system market in the 1980s and its own
large-scale operating system, OS/2, has not been an immediate success. It is
struggling to return to profitability after several years of losses and
wants greater influence in the direction of the industry.
Apple's involvement is also strategic. While still the second largest
manufacturer of personal computers, it is at a crossroads. Its operating
software, though well regarded, has been eclipsed by the marketing power of
Microsoft. There are 30,000 applications programs running on MS/DOS and
Windows and only 7,000 for the Apple Macintosh. Apple's survival is in
question unless it can exploit new trends.
The relief in Apple president Mr Michael Spindler's voice is almost palpable
when he says: 'With the commitment and support of industry leaders like HP,
IBM and Apple, Taligent is now poised to provide the volume object platform
for enterprise computing.'
But why should HP, the undoubted US electronics star of the 1990s, with
annual revenues in excess of Dollars 20bn, wish to ally itself with these
stumbling giants?
Because it aims to be the world leader in electronics hardware manufacture
rather than software: 'HP will never be a leader in operating systems,' says
Mr John Golding, managing director of HP's UK offshoot, which is responsible
for about a third of its research and development. 'We want to be the
hardware manufacturer of choice.'
The first Taligent products should emerge from the laboratory this year.
Unlike earlier operating systems which have been offered as complete
products, Taligent will release a series of 'frameworks' or sub-systems.
A complete set of frameworks will be equivalent to a complete operating
system.
These frameworks will be incorporated in the partners existing operating
systems - IBM's OS/2 and AIX, Apple's system and HP's HP-UX this year; IBM's
OS/400 and MVS next year. These systems cover the range of personal
computers, mid-range machines and mainframes. The aim is to make the change
for customers as painless as possible.
Microsoft, meanwhile, has its own developments under way. 'Chicago', the
code name for an improved version of Windows, was announced recently.
'Cairo', Microsoft's own object oriented version of Windows NT should make
its appearance later.
By next year it should be clear whether HP has put its money on the right
operating systems horse.
