FT  05 OCT 94 / A shock to the system: The policy implications of plague in
India
The panic that has gripped India since the outbreak of plague in the city of
Surat less than two weeks ago has had at least one salutary effect. The
country's elite has been forced to consider the shocking physical conditions
in which most of their countrymen live.
Although only 50 people have so far died from the disease, a tiny number in
a population of 900m, plague has shaken the complacency of middle-class
Indians. In India, as in other countries, plague has spread fear because of
its frightening history, its mysteriousness, and the speed with which it
strikes.
With the disease claiming new victims every day, the outbreak has prompted a
political debate about India's public health and economic and social
development.
Indian newspaper commentators have attacked the government of Mr P V
Narasimha Rao, the prime minister, saying the free-market economic reforms
pursued for the past three years are not enough to bring genuine prosperity
to the great mass of Indians.
As the Times of India, the premier English-language daily newspaper, said in
an editorial: 'Unless India strengthens its social foundations . . . it can
hardly hope to build a globalised industrial economy.'
India prides itself on the advances in the health of its population over the
past 40 years. Since independence in 1947, average life expectancy has
almost doubled from 32 years to 60 years. The infant mortality rate has
fallen from 165 per thousand births in 1960 to 79. Smallpox has been
eradicated and leprosy brought under control.
But despite these achievements, India has fallen behind many other
developing countries. According to the United Nations Development
Programme's annual report, India ranks 134th among 173 countries in the
average citizen's overall quality of life, including health and education
standards as well as per capita income. Since India is placed 114th by
income per head, the country's education and healthcare are failing to match
its economic perform-ance.
India spends just over 3 per cent of its national income on health, about
the same as other poor countries monitored by the UNDP. But expenditure has
stagnated in recent years, because of a squeeze on public spending which
started in the mid-1980s and became more severe after Mr Narasimha Rao
started his reforms in 1991.
According to the World Bank, the proportion of gross domestic product spent
by India's states on social services, including health and education, has
fallen from 5.3 per cent in 1990-91 to 4.8 per cent in the year to March
1994. Professor D Banerji of the centre of social health and community
medicine at Jawaharlal Nehru University in New Delhi says: 'In the past few
years we have compromised our health services.'
The impact on public health of the modest priority given to health spending
is compounded by the way funds are used. India has 146 medical colleges,
which offer some of the best quality training in the developing world. The
medical establishment prides itself on producing doctors who carry out
world-class research and perform advanced neurosurgery and heart
transplants.
But too little attention is paid to providing basic services for the poor,
such as affordable clinics. Private health clinics have mushroomed in the
past decade, even in slums. They often offer poor quality health services,
with some doctors accused of working in league with local pharmacists to
foist the maximum amount of tablets on ignorant patients.
And, as the plague outbreak in Surat has shown, private clinics cannot
replace public services in an emergency. Private doctors and nurses were
among the first of the 300,000 people who fled the city.
Better medical services are not the only requirement, however. India's poor
need good water supplies, drains and sewers. The country has spent heavily
on some of these basic amenities since independence, bringing safe water to
75 per cent of the population. However, other services have been neglected,
notably the provision of toilets. Only 13 per cent of Indians have
lavatories; the rest use public conveniences or squat in the open air.
The impact of this is bad enough in the villages; it is much worse in the
sprawling, fast-growing cities. An estimated 20 per cent of urban Indians
have no properly built home and sleep in the streets or in huts made of mud,
wood, rubbish and plastic sheets.
Although many have lived in the same homes for years, they usually have no
legal right of occupation and the municipal authorities cannot provide
services. As Mr K K Dutta, director of the government's National Institute
of Communicable Diseases, says: 'How can you plan for these unauthorised
settlements?'
Even in middle-class districts, the drains and sewers are often blocked and
the rubbish is collected infrequently. The municipal authorities have
limited powers to fulfil their responsibilities to provide these services -
especially to raise taxes to pay for them.
Until the plague erupted, Indians mostly thought nothing of a pile of
stinking refuse rotting in the street. 'We lack civic sense,' is a common
complaint of middle-class Indians. What has been missing, however, is an
understanding of the dangers of living surrounded by so much filth.
The plague has forced people to confront these facts. Already there are
improvements: the streets of Delhi and Bombay have never been as clean as
they are today. But sustaining this requires investment in municipal
services and in public health education.
It will be difficult for the government or municipalities to find the money
needed to improve services. But India cannot afford to neglect social
services - poorly housed, badly fed, illiterate workers cannot participate
fully in a fast-moving modern economy.
While India has succeeded in the past three years in curbing the overall
amount of public spending, it has done little to direct it into the areas of
greatest need. State administrations spend 41 per cent of their revenues on
interest payments, wages and other administrative costs, up from 31 per cent
in the 1980s. That leaves 59 per cent for development spending such as
building schools, sewers and hospitals.
As part of his economic reform plan, Mr Narasimha Rao has considered
full-scale privatisation to raise funds for clearing debt, early retirement
to cut public sector staff levels and improvements in tax collection. With
the exception of the latter, there has been little progress. Perhaps the
plague will galvanise the authorities into action.
