FT  09 MAR 94 / Violence mars road to Colombia elections: The congressional
campaign trail
If more elections and more contenders are a sign of greater democracy, then
Colombia is doing well. There are 928 slates of candidates registered for
congressional elections on Sunday, when the official Liberal party
presidential candidate will also be chosen.
However, at least 10 congressional candidates have been killed, kidnapped or
injured during the campaign. One sociologist calculates that elections in
more than half Colombia's municipalities are affected by guerrilla violence.
The proliferation of congressional lists seems to be more a measure of the
atomisation of the two main parties than of democratic vigour. In the
south-western department of Valle, for example, more than 25 Liberal groups
are competing for the 13 seats.
The power of the regional chiefs has broken down and the new voting card
makes it more difficult to buy votes than it was in the past. Even a young
political party such as M-19, the former guerrilla movement, is suffering
from disunity and presenting three slates in Valle.
Given that so many candidates are unknown and have little more than a slogan
for a programme, the Liberal party of current president Cesar Gaviria is
trying to capture voters with vague, feel-good publicity.
Abstention normally varies from about half to two thirds in Colombian
elections; this time the large number of investigations into congressmen's
misdoings and a widely held assumption that drug money helps fund many
campaigns have reinforced disillusionment with politics. However, the
Liberal party holds, and will probably retain, a comfortable majority in
both houses.
In the race for the Liberal party presidential candidacy, the winner is
virtually certain to be Mr Ernesto Samper, who is far ahead of his Liberal
rivals in the opinion polls. The first round of the presidential elections
will take place on May 8, followed by a second round on May 29 if no
candidate wins an outright majority.
Mr Samper has been on the campaign trail since the middle of last year, but
his Conservative party opponent, Mr Andres Pastrana, launched himself into
the race only last month. Although some opinion polls give Mr Pastrana a
clear advantage, others put Mr Samper slightly ahead.
A Liberal presidential victory is less likely to guarantee continuity in
economic policy than a Conservative one. While both candidates stress social
spending to offset the effects of opening up the economy, Mr Pastrana leans
further towards wanting to attract foreign capital, privatisation and
joining the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Mr Samper is staking a lot on an ambitious employment programme linked to
economic growth rates of more than 5 per cent a year. Arguing that poverty
and violence go with unemployment, he hopes to create 1.5m jobs over the
four-year term through sectoral plans for agriculture, the modernisation of
industry, exports and small businesses.
Although they both say they would like to be remembered for bringing peace
to Colombia, neither Mr Samper nor Mr Pastrana has come up with a considered
strategy for reducing violence. Both agree that dialogue is still an option
and the government is currently talking on three fronts  - with splinter
groups from the main guerrilla armies, with drug traffickers and with urban
militia organisations.
However, the attempt to bring the guerrillas into the democratic system will
be hampered by the experience of former Maoist guerrillas who chose the
democratic path and founded the Hope, Peace and Freedom party: 140 of them
have been killed.
