FT  15 APR 94 / Safeguards for birds sought on Cardiff barrage
Work on the Cardiff Bay barrage must not start until assurances are given
that more will be done to compensate for the loss of bird habitat, the
European Commission has told the government.
The 1.1km barrage will replace tidal mudflats with a 500-acre freshwater
lake intended to stimulate commercial development around the Welsh capital's
waterfront. The bird species most affected will be dunlin and redshank,
which are declining in Britain.
Site preparation for the barrage has been completed. Five weeks ago Cardiff
Bay Development Corporation recommended that the main Pounds 93m
construction contract should be awarded to a joint venture of Balfour Beatty
and Costain. However, the Welsh Office has yet to give its approval.
Mr Yannis Paleokrassas, environment commissioner, has called for the
assurances in a letter to Mr John Gummer, environment secretary. He says the
barrage may be acceptable for socio-economic reasons under the new habitats
directive which comes into force in June. But the government 'must undertake
to carry out as a matter of priority' additional compensation measures for
the birds, including the classification of the rest of the Severn estuary as
a special protection area.
The letter - written in January and leaked to Friends of the Earth, the
environmental group, which publishes it today - says there should also be a
management plan for the estuary's habitats and a clear 'national
conservation plan' for dunlins and redshanks.
The Department of the Environment said yesterday that the matter was
'ongoing' with the commission and considered 'confidential'. The Welsh
Office said it would not comment on a leaked document, nor on whether the
commission's demands were delaying the approval of the construction
contract. However, it added: 'We are quite confident that we have complied
with Brussels on the directive.'
Cardiff Bay Development Corporation intends to spend Pounds 5.7m creating an
alternative habitat of 740 acres, but most will not be saltwater. It said
the Severn estuary has 39,000 acres of mudflats and believed freshwater
species would come to Cardiff Bay's lake.
Friends of the Earth said the UK had one of the worst records in Europe for
designating special protection areas.
