FT  10 JUN 94 / Contact made with Moslem kidnappers
Indian authorities have established indirect contact with the group of
Moslem militants holding two Britons in Indian-held Kashmir.
Mr David Housego, a Delhi-based businessman whose 16-year-old son Kim is one
of the captives, said yesterday the contact was informal and tentative. He
was cautious about rumours circulating in Kashmir of their impending
release.
Police believed a doctor had attended to the other captive, Mr David Mackie,
36, a video director, who had a knee injury.
'What the authorities hope is that once they begin to establish contact,
they will have a better idea of their location and can begin negotiations,'
said Mr Housego, a former New Delhi correspondent of the Financial Times who
has considerable experience of Kashmir.
It seemed the captors were repeating their demand for three jailed guerrilla
leaders to be freed. A note left on Tuesday had sought their release, but
the Harkat-ul-Ansar militant group later issued statements saying the
kidnappers aimed only to draw attention to human rights abuses in Kashmir.
Speaking by telephone from Srinagar, Mr Housego said the militants seemed
likely to take their lead from groups in Pakistan and from Mr Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar, the guerrilla leader who is prime minister of Afghanistan. The
captors were mostly Pathans.
Mr Housego said statements by the Pakistani government and militant groups
based in Pakistan, urging the release of the Britons, had helped.
Mr and Mrs Housego and their son were robbed by gunmen while trekking
south-east of Srinagar on Monday. They were taken to a guest house where Mr
and Mrs Mackie were being held. During Monday night, their captors abducted
Kim Housego and Mr Mackie.
It was thought in Srinagar that Indian troops would seek to avoid
intervention by large units, which could alarm the captors into a
gun-battle. Earlier this year, an Indian army officer kidnapped by
Harkat-ul-Ansar was killed in a shoot-out when the Indian army attacked
their hideout.
Mr Housego appealed for the help of Moslem guerrilla leaders in securing the
release of the captives. 'I do not see how kidnapping a boy of 16 serves the
cause of Islam or of Kashmiris,' he wrote in a letter to Mr Syed Salahuddin,
leader of Kashmir's fundamentalist Hizb-ul Mujahideen group.
