FT  26 NOV 94 / All present and correct: Why we abandon restraint in the use
of language at our peril
To be politically correct may be good for us, in small doses. This
observation is not conventional. What we are supposed to say about the pc
tendency is something like 'cannot stand them' or 'the trouble with lesbians
. . .' or 'beware the new censorship' or 'this is stultifying orthodoxy' or,
mostly, 'yeugh'.
It is too simple. When good liberal folk like you and me consider who is
decidedly against pc, we begin to see some merit in it. Some of the antis
are particularly twitchy. Their knees jerk so far to the Right they look
like one of the bent-metal nudes that won the Turner prize this week. Can we
walk with such individuals? We should think hard before taking any such
step.
Our starting text is the memorandum prepared by John Maples for the
Conservative party and leaked to the FT this week. It cites 'distrust of
politically correct, liberal minded 'do-gooders'' as 'the main reason not to
vote Labour'.
This glowering suspicion was measured by qualitative survey research into
the opinions of 80 subjects of the Queen who voted Conservative in April
1992 but who now say they might or would not. Who are these people?
According to their general range of views they are right-wing Tories, shock
troops for Michael Portillo or Alf Garnett. They say the same sort of thing
as do the natural authoritarians identified in the British Social Attitudes
survey described here last Saturday. They may reflect the opinions of as
much as 40 per cent of the electorate.
These are in no way pc. Respondents to the Maples memorandum expressed 'very
right wing views on crime and immigration, deep disapproval of 'scrounging'
on social security' and 'deep fear of 'loony lefties''. These are mists and
fog patches in which lurk hangers and floggers, xenophobes and homophobes,
putative bullies who tremble in fear at changes they do not understand in a
world they do not like. We broad-minded cosmopolitans must take care. The
party that meets their dreams would probably sweep the country.
Or would it? On Thursday Patrick Nicholls was forced to resign as
vice-chairman of the Conservatives. The MP for Teignmouth had made an error.
In an article in the Western Morning News he described the French as 'a
nation of collaborators', the Germans as 'warmongers' and lesser members of
the European Community as 'beggars'. Mr Nicholls misjudged the level of
bigotry to which it is safe to descend in print. He offended Conservative
political correctness.
Other famous Tories have done the same. Enoch Powell lost his place in the
Conservative party following his 'rivers of blood' speech. The late Nicholas
Ridley had to leave the cabinet after writing an article in The Spectator
magazine in which he expressed views of the Germans with which Mr Nicholls
might well have concurred. This week the same journal carries a letter
accusing its editors of being unable to distinguish between 'racist cant'
and 'thoughtful commentary'.
It is signed by 15 luminaries of the film world, including Kevin Kostner,
Kirk Douglas, Charlton Heston, Frank Mancuso, Steven Spielberg, Barbra
Streisand . . . you name a name, it is there. The 15 object to a recent
article by William Cash in which he asserted that most of the members of
Hollywood's 'New Establishment' were Jews. The editor says that Mr Cash's
use of the word 'cabal' was 'unfortunate', but has otherwise published a
prolonged defence of the original piece. In passing, he observes that two
years ago Mr Ferdinand Mount, editor of the Times Literary Supplement, wrote
that he had found, in The Spectator, articles 'of an astonishing sourness
attacking the Italians, the French (twice), the Swiss, the Greeks, the
Poles, the Russians, the Germans . . .'
I am not surprised. The Spectator is a stimulating current affairs weekly,
not to be missed, if only for its cartoons. I always pick it up first, yet
over the years I have felt the same unease as has Mr Mount. The house
journal of the British right sometimes appears not to comprehend that there
is indeed a potential connection between verbal disparagement and actual
discrimination. Freedom to say what you like, which I would defend with the
best of them, does not absolve any of us of the need to consider the
possible consequences of our remarks.
This is not to say that we should all now become absolutely politically
correct. Never. The phrase embraces most of the manifestations of
contemporary social ferment, including militant feminism, coercive campaigns
against smokers, an illiterate rejection of works by 'dead white European
males', and absurd attempts to tailor the English language. You would have
to be very intellectually challenged to swallow even a tenth of it.
Yet the motivations of moderate purveyors of pc are not always malign. In
Johannesburg in the 1950s there was much debate among white editors about
what to call black South Africans. Your political position was defined by
whether you preferred the derogatory 'kaffir', the condescending 'native',
apartheid's 'bantu' or the civilised 'African'. The history of the spread of
white acceptance of blacks as equals may be traced in the dwindling usage of
the three offensive words. In the course of his lifetime, Nelson Mandela has
been called all four.
The women's movement could doubtless produce a similar analysis of the
etymological history of the feminine gender. Disabled and handicapped
individuals may likewise attest that crude terminology represents the
thinking of an unkinder age. I do not propose excessive virtue here. The
transference of phrases once confined to lavatory walls to the front of
printed T-shirts is an example of what happens when restraint is abandoned.
Such obscenity is tedious. But language that assaults groups can be lethal.
