FT  24 FEB 94 / UK Company News: Hopes for a turnround in injury time -
Wembley has five weeks to attempt to pacify lenders and investors
Britain's self-proclaimed 'Venue of Legends' has moved into financial injury
time.
Wembley, owner of the north London sports and exhibition complex, has
exactly five weeks in which to complete a radical disposal programme that
threatens to kill off its position as a diversified entertainment and
leisure group.
Since mid-1992 it has sold off assets worth more than Pounds 37m, but still
failed to pacify lenders owed Pounds 139m and investors who have seen the
share price tumble from a 1987 high of 157p to 16p.
Profits have not fared any better. In spite of steadily rising turnover, the
group reported a pre-tax loss of Pounds 12m in 1992 on sales 13 per cent
ahead at Pounds 191.4m, and only moved into profit last year following asset
sales.
Sir Brian Wolfson, chairman, is candid about where the group went wrong.
'For six years, we spent Pounds 1m a month on Wembley and we thought we
could spin out businesses from the stadium. We did that using cash, and then
we hit the recession at 100 miles an hour with a weak balance sheet.'
Confronted with a debt mountain and operating profits dependent on bookings
for pop concerts and a few full-house soccer matches, the banks told him to
start selling assets.
As he prepares to sign away the next tranche of subsidiaries in the US,
analysts in London are predicting that Sir Brian will be left with a company
still valued at more than Pounds 45m but with few assets to speak of.
Once the disposal programme is complete, all that will remain is the north
London exhibition arena, conference hall and stadium, plus a few greyhound
tracks and a hospitality furniture business.
Although Sir Brian is confident that there is scope there to generate fresh
operating profits, analysts are expecting 1993 annual losses of at least
Pounds 1.5m and, at best, a Pounds 500,000 gain in 1994.
'They are going to have start motoring a bit to see any earnings growth.
Even if pre-tax profits reached Pounds 3m, earnings per share would be no
more than half a penny,' according to one analyst.
The balance sheet, meanwhile, could be further depleted as the disposal
programme feeds through.
The group's operating properties were valued at Pounds 286.2m in December
1990. But assets sales are now expected to lead to large write-downs on
fixed assets, which the group put at Pounds 353m at the end of 1992.
A shadow, meanwhile, has been cast over future income by a dispute with the
Football Association, which now wants a share of the perimeter advertising
revenue which Wembley earns from soccer matches.
In a piece of brinkmanship, Mr Trevor Phillips, the FA's commercial
director, threatened to move England fixtures and the FA Cup Final elsewhere
if he could not extract a better deal.
Wembley knows such a move is unlikely, but the threat has unsettled its
investors. Worse still, it has failed to secure pop concert bookings this
year - a main revenue earner.
Acknowledging the importance of such concerts, Mr Bob Heaver, a Wembley
director, says: 'Only about half our revenue comes from football; the FA Cup
Final is probably the biggest earner, but Madonna can run it close.'
Nevertheless, he is optimistic that the stadium can lead the company back to
financial health. Standing in one of the executive suites in the 80,000-seat
arena, he says the company has drawn up plans for a large-scale
refurbishment.
Chartered surveyors, architects and engineers have been consulted to see if
another tier of seats could be added, an athletics track installed, the
internal pillars removed, and, most ambitiously, it is investigating roofing
over the pitch.
'Once the technological problems with maintaining the turf are sorted out, a
roof over the complex could go up in 18 months,' he says.
Analysts, however, say Wembley's performance since its last right issue,
which raised Pounds 37.3m in 1992, could make it difficult to attract fresh
capital for these schemes.
'There is some uncertainty whether they could ask investors for more cash,
especially given the concentration of offshore shareholders,' said one
analyst.
His concern centres on the interests of Rolaco Holdings, a Switzerland-based
company with stakes in Club Mediterranee and the Kempinski hotel group.
Rolaco is the investor group behind Orpington Investments, which holds an
11.25 per cent stake.
Mr Heaver dismisses such concerns. He says the company can rely on
shareholders controlling at least 16 per cent to push through its plans.
Those plans involve turning Wembley into the fulcrum of a stadium management
business. To that end, it has set up Wembley International, a new division
which has already won a 10-year contract to run the new HKDollars 80m
(Pounds 7m) Hong Kong Stadium and acted as consultants for new arenas in
South Africa and east Asia.
'These stadiums are all multi-purpose venues and that's what we're
developing at Wembley,' says Mr Heaver.
'We know there's a lot of work to be done, but the game's not over by a long
way.'
