FT  27 MAY 94 / Record sales of fleet cars forecast
The UK is on course for record fleet car sales of more than 800,000 this
year in a total market for new cars which may top 2m for the first time
since 1990, a senior Vauxhall executive said yesterday.
The assessment of the market prospects, the most optimistic from a leading
industry source this year, was made by Mr Michael Banner, Vauxhall's fleet
sales director.
Total fleet car sales were up 17 per cent on a year-on-year basis during the
first four months of the year and the trend is expected to continue, Mr
Banner said.
He was commenting on the results of an eight-month investigation into the
structure and future of the company car sector by Henley Management College.
The research, commissioned by Vauxhall, indicates conclusively that 'the
company car is here to stay', said Mr Peter Cooke, director of the college's
Centre for Automotive Management Research.
The college questioned 2,000 fleet operators, dealers, contract hire,
finance and daily rental companies for what it claims is the most
comprehensive study undertaken into the future of the market.
It concludes there will be no decline in the number of company cars but
there will be significant changes in the methods of provision, funding and
management. Mr Cooke said: 'The recession brought us leaner, meaner fleet
managers who are demanding greater added value, often expressed in terms of
known costs and reliability to reduce the risk on the business.'
One identified change with implications for manufacturers is the rapid
growth in the number of women managers. By the end of the decade 38 per cent
of managers are forecast to be women, many of them likely to have a partner
also running a company vehicle.
Mr Cooke said one partner was likely to require a 'lifestyle' vehicle such
as a four-wheel-drive, rather than the household having two similar cars.
A surge in the number of self-employed people, reaching 25 per cent to 30
per cent of the working population by the end of the decade, is expected to
create a boom in small business cars.
