FT  31 MAY 94 / Survey of the Computer Industry - Battle for the Desktop
(10): Quicker decisions, higher efficiency / Imaging has moved out of the
backroom and into the mainstream of business re-engineering - Improved
document handling
An imaging system has brought about a startling change at Birmingham
Midshires Building Society. Two years ago it took an average of five weeks
to process a mortgage application. Now a department only one fifth of its
previous size processes applications in three weeks.
According to Mike Jackson, chief executive of the Wolverhampton-based
society, 80 per cent of mortgage deals are now offered within this new
time-scale. More remarkable is the reduction in staffing levels, from 150
people processing mortgages, to a staff of 30 or so.
'Overall, we've reduced staffing by 1,000, from 2,450 to 1,450 since August
1992,' says Mr Jackson. 'But this is very much part of a wider process of
re-engineering the business. We've already gone through one 'pass' and now
we are doing it again.'
Birmingham Midshires' system is based on Wang's Open/image software,
implemented by City-based Relational Developments RDL - 'the imaging system
has improved the speed of decision-making,' says Mr Jackson.
'One of the key benefits is having all the information on hand, and being
able to answer customers' and brokers' questions immediately from the screen
without having to refer to paper.
'The second part is that using the database coupled with the imaging system,
we have a lot more information and history available on the customer than we
ever had available through a paper file; that has brought our arrears levels
significantly lower than they were before.'
It is into this mainstream arena of business process re-engineering (BPR)
that image processing is emerging from its niche, in partnership with other
information sharing technologies such as groupware and workflow. This
drawing together of parallel technologies has been made possible by the
general adoption of powerful, highly adaptable (and lower cost) desktop
workstations, and robust networking software.
More specific to the imaging market is the mundane but vital business of
getting the images into the system, and storing them, once captured. Images
are space-hungry, but optical disks have helped: an optical disk of 12ins
diameter can store more than 100,000 A4 documents. Scanning technology has
also become much cheaper, and like the fax and the PC, come within the reach
of departmental budgets.
According to Geoff Bedser, a senior consultant at CMG, (Computer Management
Group), image processing is far more relevant to business than it is to
information technology (IT) - 'IT people don't like it because it reduces
their power-base,' he comments.
A banker by training, he has long argued the business case for imaging, and
his work in CMG's finance division has given him a bird's eye view of the
various imaging developments, as well as the offerings and alliances of
various suppliers whose products have come and gone.
'Over the last five years hardware and software have advanced at an
astonishing rate. The emphasis of the system suppliers is now on improved
process automation and document handling, rather than straightforward
storage and retrieval. Companies who are aiming for optimum efficiency in
their document handling are starting to consider the benefits of totally
restructuring the way they work.'
Andrea Wharton, research director of Twickenham-based Wharton Information
Systems, writes an annual review of the UK imaging market in association
with the UK Association for Information and Image Management (UK AIIM). She
estimates that electronic document management (EDM) systems doubled sales in
1993, generating a total revenue of more than Pounds 130m.
Ms Wharton's report, Document Management: the Next Steps, estimates the
current number of image processing sites in the UK at more than 7,000.
Although the larger share of new installations still goes to specialists
such as Canofile and Cimage, the report identifies increasing interest among
mainstream software publishers including Lotus, Oracle, and Sybase.
Ms Wharton believes that recent improvements in technology including data
compression and the availability of high-quality ISDN telephone links, have
helped make imaging more appealing as an alternative to acres of filing
cabinets.
'One of the most difficult things was putting the data around the network.
It's now faster, and PCs are more able to handle images without expensive
extras.
'Large organisations which had a real need, went ahead and did it anyway.
Despite the deficiencies of the technology three or more years ago, they
created their own environment behind closed doors. But increasingly we're
seeing a desire to give much wider inter-departmental access to image
information, so that image becomes simply another data-type.'
Both Mr Bedser and Ms Wharton underline the fragmented nature of the imaging
market, and remark on how difficult it is to break into it. Even companies
with as much muscle as Digital Equipment have changed direction several
times, and eventually given up the struggle to establish a market share.
As in any emerging market, there are clever innovators in specific niches.
Ealing-based Trimco, one-time Cimage distributor, has developed its own
large-format technology. Imagesolve of Finchley (acquired in November 1993
by US-based Banctec) has both PC-based and client-server solutions. US
company Excalibur has software for intelligent correction of optical
character recognition (OCR), eliminating the inevitable problems of OCR such
as coffee-stains on documents.
Concentrating on image rather than text is Bournemouth-based 4Sight, which
has practically cornered the market in newspaper publishing with its
software for transmitting images via ISDN lines between incompatible
hardware.
At the low end of the market are turnkey storage and retrieval systems such
as Keyfile and Watermark, sold through third parties. High-end offerings
such as Filenet ImagePlus and Plexus have already been widely adopted by
banking and financial users.
Wang's partnership with RDL in the Birmingham Midshires site is typical of
its strategy to use third parties and systems integrators to sell
Open/image. After a disastrous loss of direction, and some years in the
financial wilderness, Wang has focused sharply on imaging. David Allcock,
marketing manager at Wang UK, is working to develop third-party channels for
Wang's technology.
Always clever at building in extras, Wang has built performance measurement
into Open/image, but kept its own role anonymous - 'we allow VARs to absorb
completely our technology into their application: no two-second commercial
when the user enters the system,' says Mr Allcock.
'Previously we had too many irons in the fire. In the last three years we
have spent Dollars 50m developing our imaging and workflow technology, and
the only way we have of re-couping that is to sell in volume, through
resellers, not direct.'
Partners now include more than 20 Value Added Resellers (VARS) including
House of Speed, Fraser Williams, and Lynxserve.
Open/image's intelligent workload assessment measures the time taken to
process workloads, so that financial directors can see the gains - 'it
allows you to justify the spend and see where the benefits are,' says Mr
Allcock.
'Increasingly the quality of systems is such that any dealer can supply
shrink-wrapped imaging solutions. I can see the imaging market turning into
a commodity market, like PCs.'
The report, Document Management: the Next Steps, available from Wharton
Information Systems, tel 081 891 6197.
