FT  12 OCT 94 / Business and the Environment: Camera friendly / A look at
Japan's attempts to clean up the disposal of used photo development solution
The Japanese photo film industry is facing up to international pressure for
a more environment friendly way to dispose of used photo development
solution.
The country's photo film industry generates around 140,000 tonnes of used
photo development solution a year, some 20 per cent of the world's output.
The used solution is being placed in containers and then dumped into the
sea.
However, dumping of industrial waste is to be banned at the end of next year
under the London Convention, a worldwide treaty on sea pollution.
The Japanese environment agency is to put together its own legislation,
which will be put into effect at the beginning of 1996.
Companies are now searching for alternatives to dumping, ahead of the London
Convention. One option is to decompose the solution.
Attempts to do this have until recently been unsuccessful, as once the
chemicals for development are combined into a solution, that solution
becomes highly stable and difficult to decompose. However, Fuji Photo Film,
the country's leading photo film manufacturer, earlier this month announced
the first technology to purify used photo development solution.
Toxic elements, including ammonia and nitrogenous compounds, are eliminated
from the waste solution by microbial decomposition and oxidation using a
metal catalyst, leaving only water and salts. The company has installed a
Y300m (Pounds 1.9m) demonstration system in eastern Japan, and officials say
since incineration is not involved, nitrogen oxides and other gases are not
emitted. However, the prototype system for commercial use is expected to
take more than two years to develop.
Konica has already partially solved the solution waste problem with its
waste water recycling machine, developed with Tokyo Electric Power, the
electric utility concern.
The machine, sold commercially since the beginning of last year, allows
retail photo development laboratories to condense the used development
solution to less than a tenth of the original amount.
The machine is integrated into the company's 'mini-lab' photo operation, a
computer-controlled development system which costs Y5.6m for one version and
Y7m for a higher capacity machine. Using heat and pressure, the solution is
divided into water and sludge. The water can be reused in the photo labs for
photo development, while the sludge is collected by a subsidiary of Konica
for incineration.
An average lab which produces 20 plastic tanks containing 20 litres of the
solution in each, will only have to deal with seven 5-litre bags of sludge
when using the machine. Lab owners can also save on storage space and do not
have to transport heavy tanks of waste.
Moreover, Konica says the machine is cost-effective as well as
environment-friendly. By using the recycled water and cutting down on waste
collection fees, the company believes that users who develop 50 rolls of
film daily can save up to Y20,000 a month.
So far, the company has sold around 600 units and last month started full
production of the 'mini-lab', manufacturing 1,500 units a year.
Meanwhile, Konica announced last month that it expected the introduction of
chemical tablets - to replace the traditional chemical solutions - to
increase sales. The tablets are dissolved in water and come in plastic
cartridges which are collected and reused.
Konica says that because the tablets are not messy, are easy to carry around
and eliminate errors when mixing several chemicals together they are
extremely user friendly.
