FT  16 MAR 94 / Curb wind farms, says tourist board
Restrictions on wind farms are backed by the Wales Tourist Board today in a
strategy for tourism in the principality.
The board says in its Tourism 2000 strategy document - to be launched today
by Mr John Redwood, Welsh secretary: 'The quality of Wales's natural
environment is one of the industry's greatest assets.
'Tourism 2000 recognises the need to conserve and enhance that environment
and is concerned about threats which might impact upon the industry, for
example wind farms.' It endorses the policies of the Countryside Council for
Wales, which opposes wind farms in national parks and other designated
areas.
Wales has eight wind farms, about a third of the UK total, and planning
consent is being sought for many more. But opposition from local authorities
and residents is increasing because of the visual intrusion and noise of the
turbines.
The WTB says the strategy's overall aim 'is to achieve sustainable
development which respects the needs of the environment and is sensitive to
the aspirations of the host community'.
The strategy hopes to create 10,000 jobs in the principality and a growth in
earnings of Pounds 700m in current prices by the year 2000. Tourism employs
about 95,000 people in Wales, or 9 per cent of the workforce, and
contributes Pounds 1.3bn, or 6 per cent, to the principality's gross
domestic product.
Wales is the second most popular destination for UK holidaymakers after the
West Country. But the board acknowledges: 'The image of Wales to potential
new visitors elsewhere in the UK remains somewhat problematical, while in
overseas markets the image is insufficiently strong to get the country on to
the shopping list of possible destinations.'
It says there needs to be effective marketing, improvements in customer
care, more investment to improve visitor satisfaction and cleaner beaches.
There is an urgent need to rationalise promotional activities, 'reducing the
proliferation of tourism literature'.
Next month the board will introduce new grant schemes, including for the
upgrading of hotels and guest houses and for conference facilities.
