FT  20 MAY 94 / Russian MPs threaten to revise budget
The Russian budget, the centre of the government's efforts to retain a grip
on inflation, is again under severe pressure.
At the same time, President Boris Yeltsin has harshly criticised the
government of Mr Victor Chernomyrdin, the prime minister - though he will
not insist on any cabinet changes.
The threat to the budget came yesterday when Mr Sergei Yuzhenkov, chairman
of the defence committee, announced that the committee had approved extra
budget expenditure of Rbs17,000bn-Rbs18,000bn (about Pounds 6.6bn) all of
which is to be spent on defence. Mr Yuzhenkov said that the previous vote by
the parliament's lower house to approve the budget without the increase
could be overturned - and since the membership of the committee contains
representatives of all main parties, it seems likely that it will.
The decision for increased expenditure has followed sustained and passionate
lobbying from the defence ministry, which had seen its demand for military
spending to be set at Rbs87,000bn slashed to Rbs37,000bn. Mr Andrei
Kokoshin, the deputy defence minister, said yesterday that such a level
would bring a 'tragic end to some unique defence technologies', while Mr
Yuzhenkov said that the increase would bring the budget up to 'the minimum
below which the army would disintegrate'.
The effect will be to push budget spending up to around Rbs200,000bn, and
the deficit to around Rbs80,000bn - a level Rbs20,000bn above that which the
government agreed with the International Monetary Fund when receiving the
second half of the Dollars 3bn (Pounds 2bn) so-called systemic
transformation facility loan earlier this year. If further pressure on the
budget weakens still more the restrictive stance of the government, the
danger is that inflation - brought down to around 8 per cent a month
presently from highs of 30 per cent a month - will again begin to climb.
The political consequences of the continuing and very large fall in
production are now becoming more obvious at top levels of government. Mr
Yeltsin on Tuesday summoned Prime Minister Chernomyrdin for what seems to
have been a dressing down on the ineffectiveness of his economic strategy.
On Wednesday, Mr Chernomyrdin in his turn severely criticised his economic
ministers and senior officials, stressing the need for discipline and harder
work.
Mr Vyacehslav Kostikov, the president's press secretary, said yesterday that
Mr Yeltsin had been displeased with the slow results of reform and the
splits and disagreements in the cabinet.
However, he said that Mr Yeltsin had 'no intention to press for changes',
and he denied all rumours of resignations and sackings.
According to Mr Kostikov, Mr Yeltsin had agreed with Mr Chernomyrdin that
bankruptcies should be instituted in the hopeless enterprises which had no
chance of becoming profitable - as long as these were 'under strong
control'. Mr Chernomyrdin has in the past few weeks laid increasing accent
on the need for bankruptcies, saying he has a list of enterprises slated for
closure.
The political climate has been heated following the dismissal of Mr Sergei
Shakhrai from the post of nationalities minister and his own resignation
from his parallel post as deputy prime minister. Though Mr Kostikov said
yesterday that Mr Yeltsin had not accepted Mr Shakhrai's resignation, he
also scolded him for his 'capriciousness and tendency to accumulate too many
jobs'.
Mr Shakhrai later said he had had no contact with the president.
