FT  06 JAN 94 / Sinn Fein to push for peace talks with Major
Mr Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein president, is to write to Mr John Major, the
prime minister, to press home his calls for direct talks with the British
government on last month's Downing Street declaration.
Mr Adams said last night that the 'various interpretations' of the
declaration illustrated the need for 'full and frank' clarification of the
key issues.
Mr Major's 'present policy of addressing republicans through the columns of
newspapers' was 'a childish nonsense and . . . grossly irresponsible', he
said.
Downing Street said it would study Mr Adams' letter - but officials pointed
out that Mr Major has repeatedly ruled out any talks with Sinn Fein in
advance of acceptance of the joint declaration.
Mr Adams' statement overshadowed an increasingly heated war of words between
politicians in the province over the failure of republican leaders to date
to say definitively whether they will embrace the UK-Irish peace initiative.
The row erupted after Mr James Molyneaux, the Ulster Unionist party leader,
made it clear on Tuesday night that he thought the IRA had already in effect
rejected the declaration.
Mr Molyneaux's unexpectedly downbeat remarks were immediately criticised by
Mr John Hume, leader of the mainly Roman Catholic Social Democratic and
Labour party, and by Mr Adams.
But in Dublin, Mr Dick Spring, the Irish foreign minister, made a point of
praising the statesmanship displayed by Mr Molyneaux while urging republican
leaders to renounce their 25-year armed struggle.
Speaking to the Irish Labour party's general council, Mr Spring appealed for
patience but said: 'We must keep sending the message again and again that
the causes - or excuses - behind the so-called armed struggle have ceased to
have any relevance for anyone on this island.'
Mr Spring said the armed struggle would 'never persuade, or achieve any form
of willing consent'.
Mr Adams yesterday referred to the British government's 'hypocrisy and
cynicism' and claimed it was 'in reality seeking a public justification for
a renewed onslaught on Irish nationalists'. He added: 'This is clearly the
Unionist objective.'
Mr Ken Maginnis, Ulster Unionist security spokesman, said: 'One is left to
wonder whether this is just posturing by Mr Adams in line with what appears
to be a pessimistic attitude emanating from the nationalist community.'
