FT  14 MAY 94 / Gardening: Doctor, about my eritrichium . . . - Robin Lane
Fox seeks advice on plants from Jack Elliott, one of Britain's most revered
gardeners
When the spring winds were still cold, I stood in the gardens of Dr Jack
Elliott, one of our greatest plantsmen, and asked him how a keen gardener
could become a better gardener.
Elliott ought to know. For years, he tended one of the best collections of
rare bulbs in Britain. He has grown more rare alpines beautifully than you
or I have killed in the past 10 years. He has a sky-blue Tropaeolum azureum
in flower in his cold greenhouse and a Magnolia proctoriana in the main
garden. He has judged the finer points of hardy plants in national shows and
presided over their great societies.
If I was an eritrichium, I would grow for him - and not just because most of
his professional career was spent as a GP, most recently in Ashford, Kent.
The Elliott view is many sided but the main advice for self-improvement is
clear: join a specialist national society and buy a load of grit. In pots
topped with grit, you can then grow the rarities which the societies send
you from their seed lists.
His advice is my advice, except that he has been better at living up to it.
On two Sundays in the year, he opens the gardens at Coldham, Little Chart,
near Ashford, and each time those in the know descend on his plant stall and
clear the better things out soon after opening time at 2pm.
Everything is grown in a proper garden compost: the M20 may be a long road
but where else do you go to buy the latest hardy Diascias, properly-rooted
Haberleas, the new blue veronica from the Caucasus, and things such as
Verbascum creticum, which ought to be yellow-flowered but which I have never
even seen?
The next Sunday opening is July 3 and word is getting around: Coldham is
within striking distance of the Channel ports and within the fall-out zone
of the new Channel rail link. Since mid-April, coach-loads of French
visitors have been tripping across to nearby Sissinghurst, pre-booked and
undaunted, therefore, by the changeable weather. There have even been one or
two French at Coldham, including a visitor keen enough to ask for the blue
Tropaeolum.
As a past president, Elliott recommends membership of the Hardy Plant
Society at Little Orchard, Great Comberton, Pershore, Worcestershire. Like
the Alpine Garden Society, it issues superb plant lists and helps to raise
your ideas of the possible. In my own garden, I realise how I owe to these
societies my particular plants of the month, the cream-yellow broom Cytisus
kewensis and the curious yellow and black-flowered Prophet Flower, or
Arnebia.
Easy plants of this type come to your notice through other experts' writings
but will seldom turn up in the local garden centre. The tactic of society
membership and seed-raising is particularly well suited to small gardens
where the baseline can be made up of specially-chosen small hardy plants and
then given height with an upper layer of tall shrubs, small shrubs and
climbers on both.
It is far easier to design an original and lasting garden by this route of
self-improvement rather than by following a colour-chart of a book and its
advice on siting a barbecue and planting the spreading green Prunus Otto
Luykens.
How do you raise new seeds when you are sent them? You sow them in a light
mixture of peat, perlite and sharp grit: you surface them with about  1/2 in
of grit and when you transplant them, you move them into a more solid
compost with yet more grit. Like most experts of his generation, Elliott
remains a convinced gritter, ordering finely-crushed grit from a builders'
merchant and then surfacing each pot of seedlings and each of his raised
beds.
I failed his test for experts, of course. Coldham's gardens have odd forms
of almost anything between the tennis court and the pleasing design of
occasional beds. Near the house, the climate is vastly kinder than mine and
I excuse myself from joining the long list of know-alls who have failed to
diagnose a rather spiky shrub with dark leaves as a Pittosporum anomalum.
But I did notice tips which we can hunt up in our books: the pale yellow
Anemone seemanii, which is 3in high but nonetheless lights up an entire
flower bed with its flowers, or the use of white perennial Cardamines
against shaded walls where we might think of nothing but Hellebores. They
are easy and handsomely leaved and are a treat for spring.
What is life like, I wondered, if you are slave to thousands of pots,
custodian of a unique yellow paeony and a grower of rarities such as Parrya
or pink double Anemonella?
You need the neat temperament and the patience, both of which I have noticed
in gardening doctors or dentists, perhaps because they have to be methodical
and meticulous. It also helps to have a friendly climate, a deep soil and an
expert neighbour.
Elliott, now in his 60s, remarks on his debt to the great plant collector,
Paul Furze, who lived nearby and brought him seed from bulbs found on his
many expeditions to Turkey and the Middle East.
Eventually, disease attacked even the doctor's fritillaries: 'Botrytis hit
the frits,' as he puts it. He then concentrated on his other strong suit,
alpines and small hardy plants.
Sometimes, I think my garden looks like a mortuary, at other times a
hospital, not just because the beds are filled with vegetables. Perhaps if I
was a real doctor, too, they would look like an exemplary waiting-room in
which everything looked pleased and healthy and growing up in gratitude.
