FT  10 MAR 94 / IRA attack shatters peace hopes: Mortars fired on Heathrow
as MPs debate terror law
The IRA last night renewed its mainland terrorist campaign with a mortar
attack on Heathrow airport, shattering lingering hopes of an early peace
settlement in Ulster.
The provocative and potentially devastating attack, in which four mortar
bombs were fired from a hotel car park towards the airport's northern
runway, came as the Commons debated renewal of legislation to combat IRA
violence. MPs also voted to set up a new cross-party committee on Northern
Ireland issues.
The attack - in which no-one was injured - came on the eve of the latest
meeting in London of Irish and British ministers to prepare a blueprint for
a political settlement in the province.
Mr John Major, the prime minister, is likely to come under pressure in the
Commons today to make clear that the government's patience has run out in
waiting for a response from the republican movement to the Downing Street
declaration. MPs will demand that the government now enforces a new security
crackdown.
Last night's attack, which police said was accompanied with a recognised IRA
warning, caused widespread disruption at Heathrow, which is the world's
busiest international airport.
The four mortars, fired from beyond the airport perimeter, failed to
detonate, but two landed on the airport's northern runway. Aircraft
continued to take off from the runway for about 30 minutes after the attack
until it was closed by police.
Six-foot long tubes full of high explosives were used to fire the devices in
the attack about 400 yards from the runway. The devices were fired from a
Nissan Micra car just before 6pm from the Excelsior Hotel car park.
The attack, announced to the Commons by Mr Michael Howard, the home
secretary, provided a powerful reminder of the failure of last December's
Anglo-Irish declaration to halt the IRA's terrorism campaign, and again
demonstrated its ability to strike high-security targets.
London and Dublin have been hoping that Sinn Fein might persuade the IRA to
end its campaign of violence and enter the peace process.
But with its hopes apparently rebuffed, both governments will today make
clear their determination to press on with talks aimed at a political
settlement. Downing Street said last night that the declaration and the
principles underlying it remained intact.
The attack, the first time the IRA has used mortars in mainland Britain
since its attempt to bomb 10 Downing Street in 1991, coincided with the
House of Commons debate on the annual renewal of the Prevention of Terrorism
Act.
Mr Howard said he was 'deeply concerned' at what had obviously been a very
serious attack. He had called for a detailed report on the incident and
would see what lessons could be learnt.
As the Commons backed the renewal of the act by a margin of 86, Mr Howard
told MPs: 'I do not know whether that incident is supposed to send some
message to the House as we conclude our debate on these matters.'
He added: 'If it is, I know that there is only one conclusion that this
House can responsibly take. We know in unequivocal terms that the
Association of Chief Police Officers considers this act in its present form
to be essential in the fight against terrorism'. Earlier, an attempt by the
Labour party to establish a new cross-party consensus on the retention of
the anti-terrorism legislation ended in acrimony and recriminination in the
Commons.
Labour MPs were angered by Mr Howard's rejection of opposition calls for an
inquiry by a senior judge into the provisions permitting terrorist suspects
to be detained for questioning for up to seven days, and for those from
Northern Ireland to be excluded from mainland Britain.
Heathrow is an important economic target. In addition to handling more than
42m passengers a year, it employs 50,000 people - 1,400 of them security
staff - and supports an estimated 20,000 local jobs.
No let-up in the search for Ulster settlement, Page 7
