FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (19): Long price freeze bears fruit - Sweden's
top maker of office furniture has outgrown its home market and pins its
future on overseas expansion / Exporter Profile / Kinnarps of Sweden
Tucked away in what was once a small village from which the company took its
name, Kinnarps, Sweden's leading manufacturer of office furniture, was for
years content to concentrate on its home market and Norway.
But just as the company's huge 93,000 sq metre factory has expanded to
dominate the village in the countryside 120km east of Gothenberg, so
Kinnarps (pronounced Shinnarps) has outgrown its domestic market and is now
embarking on a big export drive to sustain growth and competitiveness.
The crunch came with the sharp Swedish recession of the past three years.
Before then, a booming economy, in which commercial property raced up in
value, allowed Kinnarps to more than double annual sales from SKr415m in
1985 to SKr875m in 1990. Since then Kinnarps, a private company still owned
by the family that founded it 50 years ago, weathered the slump better than
many.
Despite a 50 per cent drop in the office furniture market in Sweden over the
past three years, Kinnarps used its financial strength to good effect. By
freezing prices for four consecutive years, it has increased its market
share in Sweden, kept sales on an upward trend and stayed in profit.
But the days when Kinnarps had a return on capital of approaching 30 per
cent and won an award (in 1987) as the best company in Sweden, have long
gone. The impressively automated factory, with more than two-dozen
driverless robotic fork-lift trucks criss-crossing the plant from delivery
area, to assembly to despatch, is only working at about 50 per cent
capacity.
The strategy has therefore become crystal-clear. 'Our future expansion must
be outside Sweden, because this is a limited market,' says Mr Soren Persson,
brought in in mid-1993 to direct the new export drive. Mr Henry Jarlsson,
the chief executive and eldest son of the founders Jarl and Evy Andersson,
says: 'We will concentrate on Europe where deliveries can be made from the
factory here. We like to ship direct to the customers where we can. The UK,
France and Germany will be the main centres. That is where we have to be
very, very strong. Around these we will serve the other countries.'
The aim is that exports should account for 50 per cent of turnover - which
last year totalled around SKr1bn - within five years, compared with 30 per
cent today. To do that, Kinnarps needs to take a three per cent market share
in Europe. 'We aim to be one of the leading actors in the office furniture
market in Europe in five years - and no company will have as big a share of
their home markets as Kinnarps in Sweden and Norway,' says Mr Persson.
Kinnarps' selling points are its expertise in wooden and
ergonomically-developed furniture, its 'green' production and its office
planning service.
Kinnarps has a long-established outlet outside Sweden and Norway - in
Britain.
Kinnarps UK is separately owned from the mother company in Sweden but has
been selling Kinnarps products for 20 years, accounting for the bulk of
existing exports. That is set to continue, but Kinnarps is setting up
wholly-owned sales operations in France and Germany.
Kinnarps admits that its strategy is expensive, especially in the the
initial stages. Mr Jarlsson says the company is spending between SKr50m and
SKr100m a year on development costs, including keeping its production at the
forefront of technological development. But the company has eschewed
acquisition or franchising as the way to expand abroad because it wants to
keep full control of its operations, from manufacture to customer service.
As Kinnarps undertakes its export drive, it provides an interesting insight
into the regulatory climate now facing Swedish companies as they seek to
move into European markets. From January 1 this year, Sweden - along with
fellow Efta members Norway, Finland, Iceland and Austria - gained freer
access to European Union markets through the Efta-EU European Economic Area
agreement.
Kinnarps says this has provided immediate benefits. One is that it is much
easier and cheaper to base Swedish staff around EU centres, thanks to the
free labour movement section of the EEA deal. Mr Jarlsson says the time and
costs involved in securing work and residence permits for expatriate staff
were significant.
Another big potential bonus is the right now gained for Swedish companies to
bid for public sector contracts in EU countries. Last year, Kinnarps
achieved the first of these for the company when it won a contract to fit
out the British Department of Health offices in London. It hopes more public
contracts will now follow.
Until Sweden's application for full EU membership is successful, however,
Kinnarps faces the barrier of customs bureaucracy which its EU-based
competitors do not. The cost of completing customs documentation amounts to
between one and two per cent of export value, according to Mr Persson, a
figure that translates into a weighty SKr10bn a year for Swedish industry as
a whole.
Aside from that, Kinnarps chief concern over export costs is the diversity
of standards application across the EU. In line with most manufacturers in
Europe, the company looks forward to the day when standards are harmonised
within the EEA.
