FT  04 MAR 94 / World Trade News: BT chairman assails curbs on ownership
Sir Iain Vallance, chairman of British Telecommunications, yesterday said
talk in the European Union of restricting foreign ownership in the
telecommunications industry was a 'dangerous game' which could encourage
escalating protectionism in other parts of the world.
However, Sir Leon Brittan, the European trade commissioner, speaking at the
same conference in London, said the EU was committed to an open trade
stance. He attacked what he called one-sided criticism of its anti-dumping
policy.
Critics overlooked the fact that many other countries also had anti-dumping
policies, which could be used against EU exports. Such policies were
essential to maintaining confidence in the world trading system by
correcting market distortions.
'Anti-dumping is not a carte blanche for protectionism,' he said. He had
instructed the European Commission officials responsible for the policy to
be 'scrupulously unpolitical' and to enforce it fairly.
Sir Iain said there were already signs of moves to strengthen foreign
ownership restrictions in the US, while the recently proposed alliance
between France Telecom and Deutsche Telekom also appeared intended to reduce
competition.
Foreign ownership curbs were often defended on national security grounds, he
said. 'Yet the point about open markets is that diversity of supply should
mean that no interests - foreign or local - are in a position to dominate
anything.'
He said BT's recent alliance with MCI, the US carrier, differed from the
proposed Franco-German link-up because it was between two companies
operating in competitive markets and was designed to exploit emerging
opportunities for international value-added network services.
Sir Iain also called for the the inclusion of telecommunications services in
the Uruguay Round to be extended to cable television and broadcasting.
Separating regulation of these services would, he said, 'force multi-media
into a maze of conflicting regulations and operating constraints, with the
potential for inflicting real damage on this new and exciting field of
communications services'.
