FT  18 JUL 94 / Cabinet reshuffle due before election of new Labour leader
The battle lines of British politics until the next election will be drawn
this week with sweeping changes among top government ministers and the
almost inevitable election of Mr Tony Blair as Labour leader on Thursday.
Mr John Major is likely to announce his cabinet reshuffle on Wednesday, a
day before the Commons rises for the summer recess, although it could come
as early as today. The changes will pit a modernising Labour leader
promising new political ideas against a government seeking to re-establish
its popularity after two divisive years in which morale and cohesion have
been sorely tested.
The new line-up of ministers will give Mr Major a chance to reassert his
authority over a fractious Conservative party which has suffered setbacks in
recent local government, European and parliamentary by-elections.
They will face a reconstituted Labour leadership. Also contesting the
party's top job are Mrs Margaret Beckett, acting party leader and shadow
leader of the Commons, and Mr John Prescott, shadow employment secretary.
While Mr Blair, shadow home secretary, looks assured of victory, there is
less certainty over the outcome of the contest for deputy leader. But
political observers say it isincreasingly likely Mr Prescott will defeat Mrs
Beckett for that post.
Commenting on the government reshuffle, Sir Norman Fowler, outgoing Tory
party chairman, said yesterday that the prime minister would aim to bring in
new faces. 'I imagine there will be quite a number of changes,' he said.
However, it is thought unlikely that any of the three main offices of state
will change hands.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, chancellor, remains the standard bearer of the
government's determination to restore the public finances to health. Mr
Douglas Hurd is expected to stay as foreign secretary despite pressure from
the party's right wing for a Euro-sceptic replacement.
Mr Michael Howard, home secretary, has had a difficult year pushing the
Criminal Justice Bill through parliament, but his position is considered
safe.
Instead, the focus of the reshuffle will be the appointment of a new party
chairman to rally the party until the next general election. Favourite for
the post, which should come with a place in cabinet, is Mr David Hunt,
employment secretary. However, in recent weeks Mrs Gillian Shephard,
agriculture minister, and Mr Jeremy Hanley, armed forces minister, have been
suggested as contenders.
Those most likely to leave their posts are Mr John Patten, education
secretary, and Mr Peter Brooke at National Heritage.
Spending probe urged, Page 8
Ne'er the rose without the thorn, Page 15
