FT  09 AUG 94 / Navy steps up protection for trawlers: Waldegrave pledges to
stand by fishermen in face of Spanish 'harassment'
Two Royal Navy ships will be in place in the Bay of Biscay later today to
protect a small group of Cornish fishing vessels from further attacks by
Spanish fishermen angry at their use of driftnets to catch tuna.
Mr William Waldegrave, agriculture and fisheries minister, said yesterday:
'We will stand by our industry.' Announcing the despatch of the second
fishery protection vessel, HMS Alderney, he said: 'It is unacceptable that
UK flagged vessels should be prevented from legitimate fishing as a result
of harassment or damage by other vessels. We will see that they are not.'
The two vessels will protect a maximum of a dozen Cornish boats that use
driftnets for tuna fishing in the Bay of Biscay - with no more than six
usually present at any one time. Last week Spanish fishermen, who use baited
lines to catch tuna and object to the high-technology driftnets, cut the
nets of two Cornish boats and forced several others to flee home.
Mr Waldegrave rejected calls for a Royal Navy frigate to be sent to the
area, saying the two fisheries vessels would provide adequate protection.
HMS Anglesey has been in the area since last week.
At the same time, he strongly defended the action taken by the navy to check
a complaint by a European Union fisheries inspector that the Charisma, a
trawler based in Padstow, Cornwall, had used illegal nets.
The Charisma was found to have a net 153 metres longer than the 2.5km
permitted by the EU. This is just over the 5 per cent allowed for natural
stretching of the nets and a ministry spokesman said charges against the
skipper had not been ruled out.
Mr Waldegrave said it was right that the case should have been investigated.
'We have shown that we enforce the rules properly.'
The Cornish vessels have turned to tuna fishing in the Bay of Biscay, about
400 miles off Land's End, because catches of traditional white fish around
Britain's coasts have fallen. One Cornish skipper said yesterday: 'We've got
so little fish left to catch through our own quotas, we've just got to do
something different.'
Mr Mike Townsend, chief executive of the Cornish Fish Producers'
Association, said his group would maintain regular contact with the navy and
its two protection vessels on the movements of the Cornish boats in the Bay
of Biscay.
A British crewman working on a Spanish boat blamed British trawlers for last
week's clashes.
He said: 'They are more aggressive than us. They have been crashing into us,
smashing our boats. We have just been retaliating for what they have done to
us.'
The government yesterday proposed simplifying the complex system for
licensing 8,900 fishing vessels as part of its deregulation drive.
The proposals, which will come into force next January subject to a
two-month consultation period, include a reduction in the number of licence
categories from 160, a simpler licence format and more straightforward rules
on the issue of licences.
Most of the 3,200 licensed vessels over 10 metres long would have to carry
only one licence instead of several.
