FT  28 SEP 94 / International Company News: AIG steps in to bolster
loss-making Californian insurer
American International Group, the US insurance group, yesterday stepped in
to support 20th Century Industries, a Californian insurer whose capital base
had been strained by an estimated Dollars 815m of losses from the Northridge
earthquake.
AIG said it was injecting Dollars 200m immediately into the company in the
form of convertible preference shares. It is also acquiring warrants to buy
another 16m shares in the company. These arrangements, together with an
option over a further 15 per cent of 20th Century's shares, would give the
US's biggest property/casualty insurer rights to nearly 40 per cent of the
company's ordinary share capital.
AIG will also take over some of 20th Century's liabilities through a quota
share reinsurance agreement. It has also provided a stop-loss policy to cap
the company's earthquake losses for a period, said Mr Richard Baum,
California's chief deputy insurance commissioner.
20th Century was the worst-hit of the insurers affected by January's
earthquake in southern California. At first, it put its losses at only
Dollars 160m, but has since increased that estimate several times. The total
insured losses from the disaster are now put at about three times the
insurance industry's original estimate of Dollars 7.5bn, as all insurers
have discovered deeper structural damage to property than originally
expected.
20th Century's finances reached a critical point at the start of this month,
when it announced the latest increase in anticipated earthquake losses. It
was asked by regulators to formulate a plan to boost its capital base. Under
an agreement with California regulators, 20th Century had already been given
permission to retreat from the homeowners' insurance market in California,
the source of its problems.
For AIG, the deal represents a way into the automotive insurance market in
California, the largest in the US. Under the plan, which will involve AIG
naming two directors to the company's 11-person board, the insurers will
expand through joint ventures outside California.
