FT  15 AUG 94 / Police give last-minute go-ahead to Ulster march
A republican demonstration in Belfast to mark the 25th anniversary of the
deployment of British troops in Ulster passed off without incident yesterday
after police took a last-minute decision to allow it to go ahead in spite of
fears of clashes with loyalist supporters.
Thousands of republicans converged on City Hall where Mr Gerry Adams,
president of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, said he remained
confident that a peace settlement was attainable, although he warned that
the next steps would be 'difficult and dangerous'. He refused to be drawn on
the possibility of an autumn ceasefire by the IRA but said he was serving
the security forces with 'redundancy notices'.
He appealed to unionist leaders to enter negotiations for a political
settlement 'which would have the allegiance and consent of all'.
A Protestant gospel meeting at the City Hall at the same time was called off
after the Royal Ulster Constabulary refused to allow the two meetings to
take place simultaneously.
The annual march by the Protestant Apprentice Boys in Derry on Saturday also
passed off without incident. It was this march 25 years ago which triggered
two days of riots which brought about the deployment of troops.
Police allowed the marchers to walk along a section of the city's ancient
walls for the first time in 25 years.
Yesterday's republican marches also marked the 23rd anniversary of the
introduction of internment without trial in August 1971.
IRA units marked the anniversaries by planting two bombs in holiday resorts
in the south of England. One bomb exploded in the shopping centre of Bognor
Regis, West Sussex, on Saturday evening. A second bomb found under a pier at
Brighton, East Sussex, was defused.
No casualties were reported but considerable damage was done to shopfronts
in Bognor Regis.
The bombs were hidden in panniers on mountain bikes - the first time on the
mainland that bicycles have been used to conceal bombs, both of which were
'big enough to maim and kill', police said.
Police said they hoped holidaymakers taking photographs or videos might be
able to help their search with footage of the bombs being planted on
Saturday.
Police also checked security videos from shops in Bognor Regis town centre
and appealed for help from companies hiring bicycles.
Numbers painted on both bicycles and the locks were 'similar to those which
would be issued by bicycle hire companies,' police added.
