FT  19 DEC 94 / Debt-for-equity scheme criticised by accountants
Controversial plans announced in the Budget to explore ways of allowing
failed companies to swap their debt for equity have been attacked as flawed
by practitioners in the insolvency profession.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, said that consultations would take place
on a scheme to establish 'a mechanism to help substitute equity for debt of
firms in administration or receivership'.
The deadline for comments on the proposal was last Wednesday.
Mr Ian Bradbery, president of the Society of Practitioners in Insolvency,
said: 'We have concluded that the proposals are flawed in principle, that
they could not work in practice, nor would they be in the creditors' best
interests.'
Under the proposals, which were originally contained in an academic paper
published in November last year, most company debt after a corporate
collapse would be wiped out and the equity placed with the senior creditor.
All other creditors would be ranked and offered options to buy share
capital.
Mr Bradbery said: 'We acknowledge that the authors' aim to maximise the
efficiency of insolvency processes and achieve best returns to creditors is
praiseworthy. However, we have difficulty in reconciling the workings of the
proposed scheme with the commercial realities of an insolvency situation.'
Professor Roger Gregory of accountants Touche Ross also attacked the
proposals, which some insolvency experts believe have won influential
government backing.
Prof Gregory, an expert in corporate recovery, said: 'One can see why the
chancellor is so delighted with this new idea - at the very moment when a
company goes bust it immediately and automatically becomes solvent. The
creditors are forced to capitalise the company to the extent of their debt.
These proposals do not appear to be just.'
Prof Gregory said that it might not be sensible to force everyone to swap
debt for equity. 'They are not equivalents - the life-blood of commerce is
money, not dodgy share certificates.'
He added: 'There is a further suggestion that the insolvency practitioner
may be required to make a market in the share capital options. The whole
thing looks to me like the apotheosis of junk marketing: If the debt proves
indigestible, let them eat shares.'
