FT  06 APR 94 / International Bonds: Lire deals provide focus for investor
interest
The high-yielding European currency sectors provided the main talking point
in the international bond market yesterday, sporting a handful of new issues
in Greek drachma and Italian lire.
However, in general, the volatile bond market background continued to deter
many borrowers and investors, and syndicate officials predict that new issue
activity is likely to remain subdued for a while.
Following the outcome of the Italian general election last month, syndicate
officials claim there is 'some retail interest' in the lira sector, although
many of them believe that yesterday's two lira deals were driven mainly by
favourable swap opportunities rather than strong investor demand for
Eurolira paper.
The International Finance Corporation, the private sector arm of the World
Bank, launched a L150bn, 10-year deal with a coupon of 8.625 per cent. BNL,
the lead manager, said investors were attracted by the borrower's triple-A
credit rating and the relatively high coupon, as the yield at net fees was
8.79 per cent.
Syndicate officials said market conditions were tricky yesterday, with many
of the European government bond markets opening lower after the Bank Holiday
weekend in response to the sharp decline in the US. But BNL said it expected
to see further new issues in the Eurolira sector given the favourable
arbitrage opportunities.
GECC reopened its existing five-year Eurolira deal with a 7.375 per cent
coupon, adding a further L100bn to the existing L250bn issue which was
launched at the beginning of January.
The IFC also tapped the Greek drachma sector with the third Eurobond issue
to be denominated in this high-yielding currency. The Dr10bn, five-year bond
issue has a coupon of 15.25 per cent and was aimed primarily at retail
investors who are hungry for high-coupon bonds. The bonds were launched at a
price of 100.875 and traded up to 101.50-102.00 by late afternoon. So far,
the EIB and the World Bank have issued bonds in the Greek currency, and the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is rumoured to be
considering tapping this sector.
Tele 2000, a Peruvian cellular telephone and cable TV company, launched the
first Euroconvertible bond for a Peruvian name, with a Dollars 40m,
three-year issue. The bonds will be convertible into ADRs according to
Bankers Trust, the lead manager.
