FT  04 OCT 94 / IMF/World Bank in Madrid: Gatt says Uruguay Round worth
Dollars 500bn
The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) has upgraded its forecasts
for the economic benefits of the Uruguay Round of trade liberalisation
agreements, Mr Peter Sutherland, Gatt director general, said yesterday.
Mr Sutherland, who was in Madrid for the annual meetings of the
International Monetary Fund and World Bank, said that global income in 2005
might be more than Dollars 500bn (Pounds 316.4bn) higher than it would have
been without the market opening measures agreed in the Uruguay Round. That
compares with earlier Gatt estimates of a Dollars 235bn income gain.
He said the upgrading was the result of work on a new economic model that
sought to capture some of the competition enhancing effects of trade
liberalisation and the opportunities that it would offer for spreading fixed
costs over larger markets.
Even so, the estimates of benefits from the Uruguay Round might be on the
low side, because they did not take account of such lasting beneficial
effects as increased investment, accelerated economic growth and a healthier
climate for research and development and the development of new products.
Mr Sutherland said the Gatt secretariat estimated that, over time, the
merchandise trade volume of the 25 industrialised countries of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development would be between 7
per cent and 8 per cent above what it would have been without the Uruguay
Round. Developing countries are expected to secure a greater expansion of
trade with Gatt's most conservative estimates showing a 14 per cent
expansion in their trade.
The Gatt secretary general said he was now more optimistic than before about
the outlook for ratification of the Uruguay Round and the eventual creation
of the World Trade Organisation, the successor to Gatt, by the beginning of
next year.
Altogether 27 governments have signed and ratified the WTO agreement and
around 50 governments have said they expect to have completed domestic
ratification procedures by the time of the WTO implementation conference in
December. He was encouraged about the progress of ratification in the US
where, he said, Congress had clarified its procedural intentions in a
positive manner.
However, Mr Kenneth Clarke, the UK chancellor, warned in his speech to the
joint IMF-World Bank development committee that some of the beneficial
effects of the Uruguay Round could be undone through 'backdoor
protectionism'. Attempts to impose labour standards by trade sanctions were
not, for example, the solution to the problem of establishing human rights
at the work place.
Reviewing industrial country policies towards the third world, the UK
chancellor said that it was necessary to have more effective action on debt,
more effective and leaner international organisations, a sharper focus on
results and more determined action on population growth. He said there was a
need to improve the design and implementation of policies and programmes to
provide more effective assistance on the ground.
