FT  26 MAR 94 / Major supporters who harbour private despair
Standing in one of the bars in the Plymouth Pavilion, the young delegate
from the Midlands drew on her cigarette and chose her words carefully.
'Talking on the record, I think John Major is the best leader we could
possibly have,' she said. 'Off the record, I think we need a change of
leader as soon as possible. The situation is desperate.'
Public satisfaction and private despair with the prime minister were much in
evidence in the bars and tea rooms at the Conservative central council
yesterday. Publicly, the 400 delegates who make up the party's most loyal
activists were full of praise for Mr Major: for his negotiating skills, his
human qualities, and a tough stance on Europe.
But cajole the delegate, and ask who they would like to see as party leader
by the end of the year, and it is clear they have thought the issue through
very carefully.
'Heseltine has all the charisma and the punch to give us the impetus we
need,' said a prospective parliamentary candidate, carefully turning over
his conference pass so his name could not be seen. 'He has the leadership
qualities, the oratorical skills, the judgment to bring us victory.'
Another prospective candidate agreed. 'Looking back,' he said, 'I think we
made a mistake not to choose Michael in the last leadership contest.' Six
months ago, Mr Heseltine, the trade and industry secretary, might have been
discounted by many for his role in bringing down the last leader. But as one
delegate said: 'All that was aeons ago.'
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, also had supporters. 'He is a class act,'
said a woman from the west country, 'and the Budget was a technical
triumph.'
There is no doubt that Mr Major retains strong support. 'I have met him
personally and he is stronger than any other candidate,' said Ms Glenys
Hurle-Hobbs, a councillor.
But the praise yesterday was often lukewarm, apologetic. 'He will stay as
long as he wants to stay,' said Mrs Dene Thomas from Brecon and Radnor. 'He
took over at a time of huge difficulty for the country,' said one delegate.
'He has done nothing wrong, it's just that people don't trust him any more.'
By chance, Mr Major, Mr Heseltine and Mr Clarke will address the conference
today in what some Tory party managers are lightheartedly calling a beauty
contest.
However some delegates are troubled by deeper issues than who will be their
leader. After six months of revelations about Tory politicians' personal
lives, the Scott inquiry and questions over the accountability of
government, they are voicing fears that the party and its MPs are losing
touch with ordinary people.
'I don't care who is leader,' said a woman who runs one of the largest
constituency associations in the south of England. 'But if there is a
contest, I hope the candidates start it by putting on false moustaches and
glasses, getting out of Westminster and speaking to people.'
