FT  11 FEB 94 / Scott hears of decision in Matrix case
Customs officials decided to prosecute Matrix Churchill executives accused
of illegally exporting arms to Iraq even though an important argument in
their defence had been accepted by senior Whitehall officials, it emerged
yesterday.
The prosecution went ahead after lawyers for the Customs and Excise
Department predicted mistakenly that a judge would rule against disclosure
of sensitive government documents.
Details of the latest twist to the controversial case at the heart of the
arms-for-Iraq affair emerged yesterday after Sir Robin Butler, head of the
home civil service and cabinet secretary, provided Lord Justice Scott with
new evidence.
The evidence, in the form of notes taken by Sir Robin's former private
secretary, show how senior officials conceded that Matrix Churchill
executives had a reasonable basis for believing that they were exporting
defence-related machine tools to Iraq with government approval.
The notes were of a meeting attended by Sir Robin, other cabinet officials,
and Sir Brian Unwin, the head of Customs, in December 1990 - three months
before Matrix Churchill executives were charged by Customs. The meeting was
to discuss advice given to machine tool manufacturers by Mr Alan Clark, the
former defence and trade minister, which officials described as 'ambiguous'
and 'occasionally idiosyncratic'.
Sir Robin told the inquiry yesterday: 'The trouble was Mr Clark had left
himself open to misunderstanding.'
The notes were brought to the attention of Lord Justice Scott only this
week, prompting a public complaint from the judge that the Cabinet Office
had not provided the document at an earlier stage in the arms-for-Iraq
inquiry.
Further evidence made available to the inquiry shows that Sir Brian Unwin
advised Sir Robin that Customs lawyers preparing the Matrix Churchill
prosecution were 'very robust' that the judge in the trial would not order
disclosure of documents relating to Mr Clark's meeting with machine tool
manufacturers.
The advice preceded the decision by customs lawyers to call Mr Clark as a
prosecution witness.
