FT  24 DEC 94 / Travel: Woe to Joy as Japan falls to Schiller - Gerard Baker
tries to understand why Beethoven's Ninth Symphony takes such a firm grip on
the Japanese at this time of year
I caught the first few bars of the familiar tune one morning as I headed for
the subway station. 'Freude, schoner, Gotterfunken, Tochter aus Elysium . .
.'
Behind me, a beWalkmanned middle-aged Japanese gentleman was belting out
Schiller with more brio than I imagine even its author felt as he penned
those famous lines. There was nothing particularly unusual about the scene.
The socially-dependent Japanese escape into a kind of delinquent solipsism
when they slip on their headsets, and I knew well enough that they have a
strong penchant for western classical music (if you have ever heard Japanese
classical music you will probably know why).
But what I did not know then, and only later discovered, was that the early
morning chorister was probably preparing to take part in one of the oddest
of Japanese rituals. For every new year, in what can only be described as a
national mania, the country is completely hooked on Beethoven's Ninth
Symphony.
In late December and early January, hundreds of performances of the Choral
symphony, or the Daiku, meaning 'The Ninth', are held throughout Japan.
They range in skill level and sense of occasion - from the world's best
orchestras playing to packed houses in the costliest pieces of real estate
in the world, to desultory gatherings of the amateur, the tuneless and the
tone-deaf under the moonlight and the influence of drink in snowy mountain
villages.
This year more than 70 concerts are planned in Tokyo alone - and that is
just the official sort, for which enthusiasts pay up to Y150,000 (about
Pounds 950) per head.
Elsewhere, in the pretty joyless surroundings of Tokyo's concrete maze, the
amateurs hopefully intone the Ode to Joy.
Someone, somewhere, once estimated that up to one third of the entire
Japanese population - 40m - hear a rendition of the Daiku over the new year
period.
This might appear hard to fathom anywhere outside Japan. Cross-cultural
influences are limited and it is not easy to imagine a third of the
population of the US taking up sumo or 25m Germans putting in overtime at
the karaoke parlours.
But in Japan, a country hardly lacking in its own cultural heritage, the
capacity to absorb western influences seems limitless.
That capacity produces its nadir of poor taste in the Christmas season.
Although less than 2 per cent of the populace professes Christian belief,
the Japanese enter into the spirit of yuletide with all the enthusiasm of a
small child confronted with a pile of presents on Christmas morning, and
about the same degree of spiritual awareness.
From gaudy lights and carol muzak to pine trees (at Pounds 15 per foot
surely the most expensive bits of conifer anywhere in the world?) and
round-the-clock showings of Hollywood's most saccharine seasonal creations,
Japan enjoys a particularly noisome merry Christmas.
The Daiku fixation is the most extreme (and the least unappealing)
manifestation of that embrace of things western. For weeks beforehand,
singers brush up on their German pronunciation.
That is no easy task for most Japanese since the letter L defeats many of
them and German has far more vowel sounds, so phrases such as Flugel weilt
are rendered almost incomprehensible. Public radio stations help, though, by
providing weekly tuition from the middle of November on how to sing the
Daiku.
As with most traditions, no one seems to have the definitive explanation as
to how it started. Theories range from the implausible - German prisoners of
war in Japan (Japan?) in 1917 used to chant it on circuits of the compound -
to the improbable.
One theory has it that it was first performed by a German conductor on
contract to a Japanese orchestra during the second world war - a thesis that
leaves one with the unnerving thought that what is now the official anthem
of the European Union was once a kind of battle hymn of the Axis powers.
Mercifully, most experts think its provenance is more recent - its present
popularity is probably the result of a media embellishment in the early
1980s of an obscure rural tradition. But much harder to answer is the
question: why has it captured the imagination of a whole nation in such a
spectacular way?
The sophisticated view, to which many Japanese cling, is that the
combination of Schiller's words and Beethoven's music attests to earth's
beauty and the harmony of man and nature - subjects close to the hearts of
Japanese, appar-ently.
It was striking that at the official launch of the latest political party in
Japan - the Shinshinto, or New Frontier Party - earlier this month, the
Ninth was waved like a talisman, explicitly invoking a spirit of
co-operation and harmony otherwise noticeably lacking in the proceedings.
What better time for the nation to express that harmony than at the start of
a new year?
A more cynical explanation is that the chorale appeals to the basic Japanese
demand for uniformity. The need for thousands of people all to be doing
exactly the same thing at the same time is almost a model of Japanese
society at work.
There is as little scope for individuality in singing the Ode to Joy as
there is on the production line, the office, the home or the beer hall.
It is the musical expression of Japaneseness - perfect togetherness where,
even if someone departed from the lyrics, he would never be heard and would
be shamed back into conformity.
That might be a little unfair these days as Japan's confidence in its own
perpetual social cohesion is starting to shake a little. And maybe the
simplest theory, that it is just a good tune, and the Japanese have
excellent taste, is the correct one.
In any case, it beats getting drunk and offensive in London's Trafalgar
Square.
