FT  27 AUG 94 / Britain's hire education: Andrew Gilligan looks at the
international appeal of UK universities
Martin Ruehl left school in Frankfurt with an academic record which would
have made him welcome at any university in Germany.
Instead, as national barriers come down, Ruehl - along with thousands of his
countrymen - has decided to study in Britain, where conditions for students
are much better, and his fees will be met by UK local authorities. He is one
of an increasing number of young Europeans to take advantage of EC
regulations enabling them to escape overcrowded campuses in their own
countries.
Figures from the Department for Education show that the number of
continental EC students at British universities has risen to 35,200, almost
seven times the figure a decade ago. The numbers arriving have risen by a
quarter in each year since 1988.
The flood of foreign undergraduates is increasing the already stiff
competition among British school leavers for the most favoured university
places, because there is little incentive for the British to study abroad.
Ruehl, in his second year at Queens' College, Cambridge, explains: 'My
friends at German universities are scrambling for floor-space in lectures
with 800 other people. Here, I get two hours' one-to-one contact with my
professor every week.'
Some nations seem keener on Britain than others. The Germans are becoming as
ubiquitous on campus as they are in holiday resorts. Greeks are running them
close, and both groups now outnumber the former leading nation, America. The
French, however, are scarcely visible.
Previously, continental Europeans have come to Britain as postgraduates, or
as part of a course based in their home countries. But the recent increase
is made up mostly of students choosing Britain for a first degree. They
follow the same syllabuses as everyone else; they sit the same exams; many
even come complete with British A-levels, taken at sixth-form colleges in
the hope of improving their entry chances. Most importantly of all, under EC
rules their fees are paid by the British local authority where they study.
For the cosmopolitan, multilingual children of the European bourgeoisie, it
is a bargain.
'British higher education is idyllic, Elysian compared to most European
systems,' says Judie Cole of the German Academic Exchange Service, a
London-based agency which advises those wishing to study in the UK.
In an odd inversion of the normal rules, continental European students
travelling across the English Channel are wafted from a struggling,
utilitarian world of dormitory beds and plastic cutlery into a privileged,
even sybaritic, existence of private rooms and personal tuition.
The continental tradition of accepting for degree courses all who pass a
school-leaving exam may be egalitarian, but it also brings overcrowded
halls, impersonal teaching and, say many, academic mediocrity.
'You are just a number,' says Cole. 'Many have never spoken to their
teachers.'
Students must sometimes sit through a morning of lectures outside their
subjects in order to be sure of a place for the afternoon. Unlike in
Britain, drop-out rates are high.
British universities' selectivity, as much as their comparative luxury, is
the attraction for the bright and ambitious.
'A British degree marks you out from the crowd,' says Ruehl. 'German
employers know it's tough to get in.'
A three-year BA is a quicker way of showing your mettle than the traditional
continental route of a further degree, rarely accomplished in under six
years.
Universities are happy - and perhaps slightly flattered - to welcome their
clever new applicants. Dr Graham Richards, senior tutor of Brasenose
College, Oxford, wrote in the university's magazine that they were 'likely
to become a major part of our admissions' from which 'the university can
only gain'.
For British universities' traditional customers, however, the academic
migrants are a threat. Every place for a continental high-flyer means one
less for a British student. As yet, the numbers are too small to matter
much, but Dr Richards predicts that 'if in 10 years, 25 per cent of our
intake is from the continent, the British parent who has paid large public
school fees in the hope of buying an easier route to Oxbridge may begin to
squeal'.
Dr Richards' forecast is a long way from fruition; 400 Germans at Oxford is
still not many in a university of 13,000. But the cross-channel students,
many destined for their countries' elites, already have an importance for
Britain's European relations out of all proportion to their numbers.
Ironically, however, the very factors which draw students to Britain in the
first place are disappearing even as they arrive in increasing numbers. As
high a proportion of the British student-age population now attends higher
education as in the rest of Europe; and with the sector's breakneck
expansion have come problems, albeit in embryonic form, familiar to any
inmate of Bochum, Padua or Grenoble.
Top 500 independent schools, Pages XIV and XV
