FT  16 MAR 94 / Business and the Environment: Lasagne recipe for soil
renewal - A new technique for salvaging contaminated land is being tested in
the US
A novel approach to one of the US's most common but most intractable
environmental problems is being tested by a team of scientists at a US
federal uranium-processing facility in Kentucky.
The field test has nothing to do with radioactive waste or nuclear safety,
however. The scientists are seeking a process for cleaning up leaked fuel,
industrial solvents and other substances that have contaminated the soil at
thousands of sites in the US. The technology raises new hope that many of
these areas of land can return to productive use. It also promises to speed
up the faltering 14-year effort to clean up the worst of the areas.
'One of the things that has hampered progress is a slow pace of
technological innovation,' says Bill Roberts, a toxic waste expert at the
Environmental Defence Fund, a private lobbying group. Of the 1,200 to 1,300
sites designated as the most dangerous under the Superfund programme, set up
in 1980 by the US government's Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to
clean up contaminated land, about 200 have been reclaimed so far.
The new technique, known as the lasagne process, involves using electrical
current to draw wastes through 'treatment zones' in the soil. Toxic waste
materials can often be rendered harmless in the zones, which resemble the
layers of a lasagne, without being brought to the surface. Scientists say
the process is effective in densely packed soils that are nearly impossible
to reclaim with current techniques. It may also prove cheaper and safer.
As part of a wider initiative announced in January by the EPA, the project
highlights the Clinton administration's policy of encouraging co-operation
between the public and private sectors and among rival companies in the
fight against pollution. Three big US industrial groups, Monsanto, DuPont
and General Electric, have taken leading roles in the project, together with
the EPA and the Department of Energy.
'The common denominator of the primary collaborators was that we each had
difficult and expensive soil clean-up problems to deal with and were
frustrated by the lack of cost-effective technology to do the job,' says
Philip Brodsky, director of corporate research and environmental technology
at Monsanto, the big US chemical group. 'The EPA's willingness to play a
matchmaker role was critical in getting the process rolling.'
Soil remediation lends itself to joint research and development. 'There are
economies of scale that come into play here,' Roberts says. 'There is no
long-term return in a company investing in this kind of new technology by
itself.'
The effectiveness of the lasagne process has yet to be demonstrated,
however, with testing so far limited to small-scale trials. The Kentucky
site where its evaluation begins this spring was chosen because it is
typical. In an isolated storage area at the facility, the solvent
trichloro-ethylene, widely used as a paint-stripper, has penetrated the
dense soil. The EPA says it will be 'a couple of years' before comparisons
of the process's cost and efficacy can be made.
Currently, the main approach to dealing with contaminated land is to
excavate the toxic material and either incinerate it or seal it in
watertight pits. However, toxic substances, leaking from ruptured tanks, for
example, may spread deep below the surface. The expense is also prohibitive,
and the risk of human exposure is great.
If the contamination is deep, but the soil is relatively permeable, wastes
may have collected in ground water, which can be pumped to the surface and
neutralised. But in soils with impermeable clay layers, so-called 'pump and
treat' methods are ineffective. Residual contamination usually infiltrates
fissures in the hard clay below the ground water and eventually seeps back
in.
The lasagne process may provide a solution in such cases. Brodsky, who
initiated the project, says various geological conditions are present in
most sites and it is impossible to pinpoint which may be suitable for the
lasagne treatment. But the technology may contribute to an overall solution
in a substantial proportion of them.
Brodsky's idea was to combine three existing technologies.
First, a process called electro-osmosis flushes the contaminants out of the
clay fissures. A cathode is inserted into the ground, which emits
low-voltage electrical current that pulls the positive ions in the waste
droplets at the rate of about once inch a day.
Second, a series of 'treatment zones' - the lasagne's layers - are carved in
the soil. The top and bottom strata are filled with an electrical conductor,
such as graphite. Waste gathers in the middle layers when the current is
switched on.
The third step deals with the contaminated material once it is there. Often,
catalysts are available to help convert hazardous compounds to benign
substances once inside the treatment zones. Alternatively, 'bioremediation'
systems to degrade the waste organically are being developed by a number of
companies, including Monsanto, DuPont and GE. Another option, used in the
Kentucky test, is to put activated carbon in the treatment zones to absorb
the contaminants.
The new technology has surfaced at a propitious time. Last month, the EPA
proposed sweeping revisions of the Superfund law, following widespread
perception that it has failed to achieve many of its goals.
Among its proposals, the EPA would ease standards for cleaning up some
Superfund sites in an effort to encourage redevelopment of abandoned land.
More importantly, the new accent on flexibility is likely to spill over into
state and federal rules applying to cleaning up the thousands of waste sites
not covered by the Superfund programme.
Even if the lasagne project fails, Brodsky believes the joint effort will
continue. 'The collaborative paradigm has already proved very productive,'
he says, citing advances in bioremediation, soil flushing and other areas.
