FT  22 DEC 94 / Bonn goes it alone on foreign workers
Germany is to go ahead unilaterally with national rules on the rights of
foreign workers, after European social affairs ministers failed yesterday to
agree minimum European-wide employment rights for people working outside
their own country.
Construction workers from the EU's poorer member states could be badly hit
by the German move and the likely free-for-all of tougher national rules it
looks set to unleash.
The main cause of yesterday's failure is the UK's doctrinal opposition to EU
action in this area, although Greece, Portugal, Ireland and Italy have
problems with details in the EU directive, which they say does not offer
so-called 'posted' workers sufficient protection. Britain's opposition could
now lead to more stringent measures being taken by individual states.
Mr Norbert Blum, German employment minister and president of the EU Social
Affairs Council, said he would discuss national rules at a meeting with
German employers and unions today.
Commission officials say foreigners working 'on the black' in Germany's
building industry, undercutting wages for local workers, 'amounts to 80 per
cent of the problem' the posted workers' directive is intended to deal with.
Mr Blum said after yesterday's last-ditch special meeting in Brussels that
guaranteeing the 'same wages for the same work in the same place is
absolutely elementary, or we are going back to the 19th century. We could
just sit around and wait until we have a European policy,' he added, but 'I
am paid to act'.
Germany wanted an agreement yesterday, to be able to have at least one
success to exhibit in an EU presidency it hoped would be strong on social
policy. But Bonn's purposes are just as well served by a failure which
justifies unilateral action.
Mrs Ann Widdecombe, UK employment minister, said: 'We should be looking at
creating jobs in Europe, not messing about trying to impose uniform
conditions.'
France, which takes over the EU presidency next month, looks set to have one
more try for an agreement. But next year's EU entry of Austria, Sweden and
Finland, all of whom back the plan, could lead to the objectors being
outvoted.
