FT  02 JUN 94 / UN index points way to future civil wars: Canada tops
quality of life assessment, but many other countries are heading for
disaster
Persistent threats from hunger, violence and illness to individuals'
security in their daily lives are the root cause of increasing numbers of
internal conflicts worldwide, according to a report released yesterday by
the United Nations Development Programme.
The Human Development Report 1994, the fifth annual assessment of quality of
life in 173 countries, draws its conclusions from its key instrument, the
Human Development Index (HDI). A total of 17 countries are heading for the
kind of national breakdown witnessed in Somalia as a result of critically
low levels of human development, it says.
The HDI, which ranks countries by a measure combining life expectancy,
educational attainment and basic purchasing power, is intended to add
another dimension to World Bank reports on economic indicators by seeing how
economic growth translates into people's lives.
This year, Canada tops the HDI list - scoring 0.932 on a scale of 0 to 1 -
up from second place behind Japan in 1993, and Barbados, on 0.894, is ranked
first for developing countries. A new measure showing HDI progress between
1960 and 1992 reveals that among the 114 countries where data were
available, Malaysia, Botswana, South Korea, Tunisia and Thailand showed the
most progress.
Life expectancy in the developing world rose from 46 years in 1960 to 63
years in 1992 and the infant mortality rate was halved. The adult literacy
rate in the same countries increased from 46 per cent to 69 per cent.
But Afghanistan, Angola, Haiti, Iraq, Mozambique, Burma (Myanmar), Sudan and
Zaire face disaster as a consequence of critical levels of socio-economic
deprivation. A bloodbath has happened in Rwanda while other countries which
could face national breakdown include Algeria, Burundi, Ivory Coast,
Liberia, Nigeria and Sierra Leone.
Of the 82 conflicts between 1989 and 1992, 79 wars have been within nation
states and the report argues that national collapse has tended to follow
persistent threats to the human security of the people. In the 1980s,
military spending to social spending ratios were among the highest in Iraq
(8:1), Somalia (5:1) and Nicaragua (3.5:1).
Current patterns of aid distribution promise little remedy. Many nations
have sacrificed human security for more sophisticated weaponry. India
ordered 20 advanced MiG-29 fighters at a cost that could have provided basic
education to all the 15m girls now out of school, the report says. Though
global military spending has been falling 3.6 per cent a year since 1987,
the cumulative 'peace dividend' estimated at Dollars 935bn (Pounds 623bn)
has not been harnessed for human development needs.
Patterns of development funding still bear the scars of the cold war,
reflecting donors' strategic interests rather than development requirements.
On average, high military spenders receive about 2 1/2 times as much per
capita as low military spenders. El Salvador, for example, gets 16 times
more aid per person than Bangladesh, even though Bangladesh has just half
the per capita gross domestic product.
The report suggests new financial arrangements for human development to be
put into action at the World Summit for Social Development in March 1995,
hosted by Denmark on behalf of the UN.
The core proposals are:
A cut of 3 per cent a year in future global military spending, with a fifth
of the savings by rich nations and a tenth by poor nations earmarked for
global human security.
A global compact to provide basic education, primary health care, safe
drinking water and family planning services by earmarking at least 20 per
cent of the existing developing country budgets and 20 per cent of donor aid
allocations to these human development projects.
A global human security fund, financed from means such as a tax on the
speculative movement of international funds, as suggested in a contribution
to the report by Professor James Tobin, 1981 Nobel prizewinner for
economics.
The report also proposes the establishment of an Economic Security Council
in the United Nations to become the highest decision-making forum to
consider issues such as poverty, unemployment, food security, drug
trafficking, pollution and population migration.
The Human Development Report. Oxford University Press, 2001 Evans Rd, Cary,
NC 27513, US. Telephone (919) 677 0977, fax (919) 677 1303. Price Dollars
17.95
