FT  02 JUN 94 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (8): Rude awakening for investors
 -The amount of interest in exotic currencies in 1994
After the rather giddy romance between investors and exotic currencies in
1993, the first quarter of 1994 has proved to be a chastening experience.
The attraction lingers, but investors are now wary and more mature than they
were only six months ago.
Last year interest in exotics, particularly in south-east Asia, soared on
the back of the emerging markets story. The motor for this growth was the
internationalisation of US pension and mutual funds, partly a secular trend,
but also a function of the search for higher yields at a time when US
interest rates were lower and domestic equities expensive.
Two events in the first quarter combined to spoil the story. One was the
carnage in international bond markets. The liquidity pressures this
generated - for example, the need to raise cash against losses suffered in
European bond markets - spilled over into selling pressure elsewhere.
Unhappily, as investors were to discover, exotic currencies are not
so-called for nothing, and selling out of a currency was not as easy as some
assumed.
Jon Bowen, head of the exotics desk at Midland Global Markets, comments:
'People couldn't work out why they could enter the market over five days,
but not exit in one.'
Perhaps fittingly, the second event involved Bank Negara, the Malaysian
central bank. Ironically, given the bank's reputation until recently as one
of the foremost speculators in world currency markets, it decided to step in
to curb the influence of speculators on the Malaysian ringgit. The effect of
Negara's intervention was to cause the ringgit to fall, between Christmas
and New Year, by more than 5 per cent against a bakset of currencies,
inflicting heavy losses on many investors.
The discovery, says one broker, 'that the central bank could call a stop and
change the rules, came as a big shock to a lot of people'. Negara, he says,
was 'the big stick that taught people these currencies are not what you are
used to. You can't just drive them around with flows of money'.
For US fund managers in particular, the newest kids on the block, and many
naive in the ways of the developing world, these events were a rude
awakening. Mr Bowen notes that the Negara episode has had a 'noticeable
impact on trading', particularly in the Thai baht and the Indonesian rupiah.
He says turnover in the five leading Asian currencies - the Hong Kong
dollar, Malaysian ringgit, Thai baht, Indonesian rupiah and Singaporean
dollar - has, if anything, shrunk in the first half of 1994.
Negara, of course, is not alone in the hands-on management of its currency.
Singapore is also a country which does not want its currency
internationalised, in the sense of allowing the free market to determine the
rate.
Exotics, of course, mean more than south-east Asia alone. Indeed, it
encompasses any currency beyond the dollar, yen and those of western Europe.
The other main exotic blocs are Latin America, with eastern Europe also an
emerging area. Investors in these and other areas also come armed with a
healthy stock of cautionary tales.
An obvious recent example concerns the Turkish lira, where concern about
government economic policies caused the currency to fall by more than 50 per
cent against the dollar during the first quarter.
Latin America remains the almost exclusive preserve of US banks, which have
something of a 'backyard' perspective on the region. Trade is handled mostly
from New York. Volumes, however, are still tiny compared to Asia.
Albert Maasland, managing director at Chase Manhattan in London, says
eastern Europe is probably on a par with Latin America, but business is
largely one way - money going into the currency for local investment. 'We
can buy the local currency, but can't sell it for foreign currency. Often
this can only be done through a local bank.' He adds: 'We see lots of
opportunities there, but they are years behind the Asian market.'
The problem south-east Asian countries have faced is that the clamour to
invest has caused their currencies to appreciate. This obviously effects
export competitiveness, and countries such as Singapore and Malaysia, which
have long-term economic development plans, do not like outsiders coming
along and upsetting the environment.
Notwithstanding recent tribulations, for those who know the market - Chase,
Standard Chartered, Barclays, Midland, Natwest and Citibank are the main
players in London - it remains an exciting prospect. Mr Maasland says they
continue to see 'dramatic growth in trading, especially in Asian
currencies'. He estimates that trading activity in the five Asian currencies
rose 50-100 per cent year on year.
'In a number of them we will quite regularly see Dollars 50m-Dollars 100m
transactions, which was not the case two or three years ago,' says Mr
Maasland.
It is not only a case of greater volumes. There is also more use of foreign
exchange derivatives, though immature domestic capital markets still act as
a constraint on trading.
Investment into the region is likely in future to be more cautious. 'The
trend is still there, but the problem was that it was a fashion,' says Mr
Bowen. 'We've been through the boom times, now times are quieter. I do think
we will see it grow again, but not at the rate of last year for a while.'
Until liquidity in some of the markets improves, investors are likely to
limit the size of their deals. Liquidity, in turn, will improve as
deregulation progresses.
As David Clark, treasurer Europe at HSBC, notes: 'Deregulation is the friend
of the foreign exchange market - it encourages people to operate across
borders.' The other side of this coin, however, is politics and as Mr Clark
observes: 'Politics still plays a bigger part in foreign exchange than
economics does.'
As the story of the yen in 1994 shows, you do not have to go to developing
countries to discover this truth. But it is especially true with exotic
currencies in the developing world, where politics still has the upper hand
over markets.
