FT  29 AUG 94 / Brussels calls time for EU late-payers: Jenny Luesby on an
issue the Commission sees as impeding the single market
Across Europe, recession has seen companies taking longer to pay suppliers,
boosting their own cashflow at the expense of their business partners. And
despite tentative economic recovery - and much piety about business ethics -
late payment is a prop that companies are proving slow to relinquish.
The European Commission believes late payments are hindering the development
of the single market and acting as a deterrent to cross-border trade. It
argues in a draft recommendation, now with member governments for their
comments, that businesses 'hesitate to commit themselves to cross-border
trade because they are worried about exaggerated payment periods, and it is
widely believed that it is far more difficult to recover debts abroad than
in the home country'.
Mr Stan Mendham, head of the Forum of Private Business, representing 22,500
small businesses in the UK, argues that late-payers are also hindering
recovery. 'Our economies are being held back from growing out of recession,
because people cannot get their bills paid on time,' he says.
In an effort to ease the problem, the Commission is proposing, after several
years of consultation with businesses across Europe, a package of measures
which include:
a statutory right to interest at commercial rates, and compensation, for
late payment;
a simplification and extension of court procedures to seek redress against
late payment;
a statement of payment terms on invoices;
the disclosure in annual accounts of a company's payment policies and
performance;
allowing value added tax to be paid only on payments received.
One step short of a directive, a Commission recommendation does not require
members' approval. Brussels can simply issue it, after consultation, on the
basis that it should be acted on but is not legally binding. However, the
recommendation is backed with the threat of a directive if it has brought no
results within two years.
Whether such a threat could be carried through is uncertain. There is a
large and vocal business lobby in favour of legislation to curb late
payments, but it faces opposition.
Although the UK has the worst record for late payment within the EU, the
British government is the firmest opponent of binding legislation. It
recently concluded an extensive consultative process with British
businesses, followed by a ministerial review on late payments policies. In
May, it announced in its white paper on competitiveness that it would not be
introducing statutory interest.
Pointing to fears that the measure could make matters worse for small
companies - deemed to be most at risk from late payments - it argued that
larger companies would move to protect themselves from incurring interest
charges by seeking longer credit periods. The result would be later payments
from prompt customers as well as from the not so prompt.
Within the EU, contractual payment periods vary from an average of 20 days
in Germany, through 30 days in the UK, to 60 days in France and longer in
Italy. However, payments are an average 18 days overdue in Germany, 23 in
the UK, 19 in France and 20 in Italy.
As a result of these late payments, invoices in the Union take an average of
66 days to be paid, with a quarter of businesses having to wait more than 90
days to be paid, says the Commission.
Whether punitive interest would lead to longer contractual payment periods
would depend on the relative strengths of buyer and seller in negotiating
terms. But, says Mr Bo Goranson, chief executive of Intrum Justitia,
Europe's largest debt collection group, even if the result was longer agreed
payment periods, companies would be dealing with greater certainty and could
budget, or increase prices, accordingly.
But the UK government is concerned about the danger of over-regulation. It
is also doubtful about the Commission's assertion that payment periods and
late payments are deterring trade, describing it as an assumption that has
yet to be borne out by research. Even if true, there is little evidence from
EU members that introducing statutory interest improves payment performance,
it says, pointing to the lack of improvement in France, which introduced
binding legislation on late payments 18 months ago.
But campaigners for legislation argue that the introduction of statutory
interest in Sweden, for example, in the mid-1970s has seen a fall in late
payments to an average of just seven days.
UK Department of Trade and Industry officials also argue that shaming
companies into improving their record through pushing them to publish
details is impractical. There is ample scope for companies to hide poor
records through a few large payments at the end of the accounting year, they
say. And the introduction of the sort of 'foolproof' sampling used to assess
government departments' performance would increase auditing costs far beyond
what could be justified by the gains.
The debate is muddied by the existence of a sizeable, if hidden, band of
beneficiaries from late payments, enjoying free loans.
However, in opposing legislation, Britain will be doing battle twice -
within the EU, and within its business community. The government says that
while a majority of businesses it consulted favoured legislation, there was
no consensus.
The Commission, however, found during its consultations that businesses
'think that the existing legal framework is not sufficiently dissuasive for
bad payers'. And last month, Intrum Justitia published a study showing that
an overwhelming majority of businesses surveyed in the UK wanted statutory
interest to combat late payments.
Even Britain's usually anti-regulatory Institute of Directors has come out
in favour of legislation after pressure from its members, many of them small
businesses vulnerable to late payers. They want action, they say, because
their cashflows and profits are suffering.
