FT  17 OCT 94 / Business Travel: Dream of luxury loses its appeal
Airline executives are the first to admit that travelling business class on
short European flights these days is an expensive way to drink champagne.
This unexpected candour from an industry which relies on selling dreams of
luxury travel that rarely live up to reality is no sudden accident. In
recent months, airlines have become increasingly worried by the continuing
migration of their most profitable business customers to the economy cabins
on their European services.
During the past four recession-hit years, many business travellers were
forced by rigid company budgets to abandon first- or business-class air
travel. But with signs of economic recovery, many airlines were hoping to
see business travellers flock back to business class.
Although first- and business-class traffic has picked up, especially on
long-distance, intercontinental flights, there has been no great rush to
return to the business cabin in Europe. The reason is simple: businessmen
still find it hard to justify the heavy club-class premium on short flights.
A survey by the Gemini Consulting group of 50 leaders in the European
aviation industry shows airlines acutely aware of the challenge facing them.
What they have to do, the airlines now realise, is rekindle passenger
enthusiasm for air travel through product development and innovation.
Kieron Brennan, the Gemini vice-president who conducted the survey, says
that all the airline executives interviewed agree that the European industry
now has to adapt to a much more consumer-driven market.
'We've always said we were customer-focused, but over the next couple of
years we are really going to have to prove it,' explains one respondent.
Another says: 'In the US the customer plays a key role in pushing for lower
fares. In Europe there is no visible consumer movement yet, although we're
beginning to see the signs on the most competitive routes.'
Many feel that consumer demand rather than European air transport
liberalisation will become the driving force for change. 'Airlines are
adapting to the same change in consumer attitudes that has taken place in
the car industry,' says Brennan. 'A few years ago people were proud to pay a
premium to buy a Mercedes. They are now proud to pay less for a Lexus.'
Airlines, it is acknowledged, will only survive if they respond to the
demands of air travellers. 'We used to think that liberalisation would
create the environment to change. Now we believe the customer will. The
customer has less loyalty to flag-carriers than governments have,' remarks
one respondent.
An airline executive adds: 'The whole industry has been run for too long by
aviation enthusiasts and civil servants. It's now time for a consumer-led,
businesslike culture.'
The survey shows that the majority of respondents expect only one in five
passengers to travel business class by 2000.
Competition for business passengers on long-distance flights has already led
to significant changes in inflight services and products. An increasing
number of airlines have dropped their first-class cabins on transcontinental
routes; instead they offer first-class service at business-class fare.
In Europe, however, airlines are still offering 'an economy service at a
business-class fare', as one airline executive puts it. Many travellers who
fly business class on long-haul flights feel cheated by European
business-class standards and prices after being treated like kings on
transatlantic flights, Brennan says.
In future, European business-class passengers will have to be offered a
wider menu of value-added services (for example, baggage collection and
delivery, improved lounges, better seating, chauffeur services). Airlines
will also have to speed up their rate of product innovation and continually
upgrade and improve business-class services.
'It simply won't be sufficient to launch with great fanfare a complete
revamp of business class and then do nothing more for five years,' says
Brennan. British Airways, for example, has just announced a Pounds 70m
relaunch of its Club Europe business-class services. And high time. The
original Club Europe brand was launched in 1988.
Many airlines already offer some of these new and enhanced services. But the
survey suggests that the airlines' offerings are - at best - patchy and
fragmented. Such services are integrated only weakly with the airlines'
sales and distribution channels, says the report, so that only the most
assiduous customers can find out about them.
As one executive traveller says: 'I look forward to the day I am treated as
well as a UPS or DHL parcel.'
