FT  07 DEC 94 / Survey of Zimbabwe (1): Time for Mugabe to show vision - The
future for southern Africa has never looked brighter. But whether the
country makes the most of the new era depends on the prime minister
Fifteen years after independence, and four years down the road of economic
reform, Zimbabwe is poised to take advantage of the dawn of the new southern
Africa.
Democracy in South Africa, multi-party elections in Mozambique, and the
recent Angola agreement have changed the face of a region battered by war
since the early 1960s. If Angola's ceasefire holds, southern Africa will be
at peace for the first time in 30 years.
Never has the future looked brighter for a region whose resources include
oil in Angola, the wealth of the Rand, natural gas in Mozambique, plentiful
arable land, and long-established stock markets in Johannesburg and Harare.
Whether Zimbabwe makes the most of the new era, however, largely depends on
one man - the country's enigmatic leader, Mr Robert Mugabe.
Increasingly aloof, frequently intemperate in response to criticism, and
autocratic by nature, he dominates the political scene as never before.
The structural adjustment programme he reluctantly adopted has gone a long
way to change Zimbabwe's economic environment. Trade has been liberalised,
most foreign exchange controls have been lifted, and foreign investment
opportunities have markedly improved.
erratic, with several issues prompting donor concern, including the budget
deficit and the slow pace of privatisation.
Whatever the long-term benefits, cutting state spending and putting
state-owned enterprises onto a commercial footing are always painful
exercises.
Few observers, therefore, expect Mr Mugabe to tackle these vital issues
before the elections, due early next year. Should he fail to act swiftly
after the poll, however, donors will begin seriously to doubt the depth of
his commitment to market-driven reforms.
Given what seems to be his abiding attachment to socialism, judging by his
remarks at the September congress of the ruling Zanu party, it is remarkable
that the government has gone as far as it has.
Measured against what should have been done, however, performance has been
modest. But government minds may be concentrated by the vision of the new
southern Africa in which a more efficient, competitive Zimbabwe could
flourish.
In many respects, the country is well-equipped to meet the challenge. Its
infrastructure is sound and its industrial and mining sector second only to
South Africa, while labour is considerably cheaper than in its southern
neighbour.
Zimbabwe's commercial farming sector has flourished since independence in
1980, and its political stability seems assured.
What is more, Zimbabwe is at the geographical heart of a region which, if
its membership of the Preferential Trade Agreement is taken into account,
embraces some 250m people, and a total GDP of Dollars 155bn.
The problem for Mr Mugabe is that economic reform to date has not been a
vote-winner. Most Zimbabweans' experience has been of considerable pain and
little gain.
Although the greatest impact on standards of living has been the 1992
drought, the worst in living memory, structural adjustment tends to get the
blame for some grim statistics. Poverty has deepened, infant and maternal
mortality are rising, real incomes are lower than at independence, and per
capita incomes are not expected to return to pre-structural adjustment
levels until the year 2000.
Formal sector employment has risen only by 250,000 since 1979 to 1.24m, yet
each year some 250,000 school leavers come on the market. Some find work in
the informal sector, others on family smallholdings.
But for the majority of Zimbabwe's young people - more than a fifth of the
11m population are between 16 and 25 - life is tough.
If Mr Mugabe led a vibrant and effective party, prospects for sustained
reform would be brighter. As it is, Zanu is corrupt and complacent. Mr
Mugabe has surrounded himself with a cabinet that verges on the sycophantic.
Much to the dismay of donors and the business community, two key portfolios
 -finance, and trade and industry - have stand-in ministers, as a result of
the illness of Mr Bernard Chidzero, the key figure behind the programme, and
the death in a car accident last January of Mr Chris Ushewokunze.
On the face of it, any opposition party worth its salt would be confident of
success in the forthcoming poll. It might have to accept the parameters of
the structural adjustment programme; but if it stood on a platform of clean,
efficient government it should in theory be able to give Mr Mugabe a run for
his money.
A succession of scandals over the years has undermined the integrity of the
party and government. The exposure of the so-called Willowgate affair in
1989, in which government ministers used their positions to get preferential
terms for the purchase of motor vehicles, seems to have little effect on
government morality.
The most recent example of abuse of power involved the allocation to
ministers and leading party supporters of farms compulsorily purchased by
the state, ostensibly for the resettlement of peasant farmers. Although the
allocations were eventually rescinded by Mr Mugabe, the affair has done
lasting damage to the government's reputation.
At the same time, the opposition could point to the government's increase in
military spending at a time when regional tensions have been reducing, while
health spending has fallen.
These and other commonly voiced criticisms now overshadow the government's
considerable achievements in the early years of independence - notably in
the fields of education and health.
Meanwhile, what should be pressing concerns - such as the rapid
deterioration of the environment and the impact of Aids - seem to take
second place in the ruling party to the Byzantine rivalries within and
between the two leading clans of the majority Shona tribe - the Zezuru, of
which Mr Mugabe is a member, and the Karanga.
Zanu's political ally, the now defunct Zapu party, once its main rival,
seems content to play a minor role.
Yet if it is hard to find anyone enthusiastic about the government, it is
even harder to find anyone who is prepared to back the fractious opposition,
led mainly by discredited figures from the past.
Some of the strongest critics of the government, both outside the party and
within its ranks, have taken a tactical decision not to join the opposition.
They argue that the Zanu party machinery - subsidised by the state to the
tune of ZDollars 30m a year, and backed by the predominantly
state-controlled media - is too powerful to oppose.
The answer, they say, is to reform from within. Proponents of this approach
are hard-pressed to find any examples of an African government which,
without pressure from an opposition party, has voluntarily changed its ways.
The net result is a frustrated, disillusioned and cynical electorate, which
displays a marked lack of enthusiasm for the election.
Barely 50 per cent of eligible voters are thought to have registered, and
local observers say it would be surprising if more than half of those voted.
Meanwhile, as the election looms, there is a danger that complex issues
which require cool heads and carefully worked-out policies - such as the
compulsory purchase of white-owned commercial farmland for redistribution to
peasant farmers, or the continued white dominance of the economy - will be
subject to populist treatment by government politicians.
The latter issue is currently rarely out of the papers, disquieting both the
local white business community and potential foreign investors alike.
Some senior businessmen have sought to cool emotions. 'Indigenisation is not
a plot to deprive established businesses of their assets,' says Mr Ariston
Chambati, chief executive of TA Holdings, one of Zimbabwe's largest
companies and widely tipped for membership of the post-election cabinet. 'It
is a policy aimed at widening and broadening the economic base through a
process of levelling the playing field.'
According to Mr Chambati, 'economic empowerment of blacks can be justified
on moral and socio-economic grounds. It is an important and urgent issue
that cannot be left to an evolutionary process that is completely governed
by market forces.'
However, the government has yet to spell out what form such intervention
might take. As with the reform programme, Zimbabwe waits on word from the
president.
He could well surprise his critics. No one in Zimbabwe forgets the role Mr
Mugabe played in the past, and his capacity to buck conventional wisdom.
To the astonishment - and heartfelt relief - of white Rhodesians the man
many of them had vilified as a 'communist terrorist' emerged from his
success in the 1980 independence election as a compassionate pragmatist,
marking his victory with an appeal for reconciliation between the races.
If at this critical stage in the country's development, Mr Mugabe can
display the same statesmanship and vision, he may once again make an
indelible mark on Zimbabwe.
