FT  02 MAR 94 / International Capital Markets: World government bonds suffer
heavy losses in February
World government bond markets suffered heavy losses last month, sparked by
the combination of US inflation worries, concern about the slow pace of
monetary easing in Europe, and heavy selling of European bond futures by US
hedge funds.
The UK was the worst performing government bond market, with a loss of 3.47
per cent in February in local currency terms, according to figures compiled
by JP Morgan Securities.
Spain was the next worst performing market, with a loss of 2.79 per cent,
followed by Canada with a decline of 2.68 per cent.
Japan was the top performing government bond market, but still showed a loss
of 0.71 per cent in local currency terms. However, in US dollar terms,
Japanese government bonds showed gains of 3.92 per cent, helped by the
strengthening of the yen against the US currency last month, and putting the
JGB market well ahead of the other main government bond markets.
The event which triggered the fall in government bond prices was the
decision by the US Federal Reserve on February 4 to raise short-term
interest rates to curb inflationary pressures.
However, the move had the effect of heightening concern in the markets about
the prospect of rising US inflation and further tightening by the Fed.
Despite small cuts in interest rates across Europe last month - including a
25 basis point cut in the UK base rate, a 50 basis point cut in Germany's
discount rate, and a 10 basis point reduction in the French intervention
rate - many investors were disappointed at the slow pace of easing.
Heavy selling of European government bonds, particularly of the futures
contracts, by US hedge funds during the last two weeks of February pushed
the European markets down strongly.
France's economy minister, Mr Edmond Alphandery, is to loosen drastically
issuing procedures in the French domestic bond market to bring them into
line with those in the Eurofranc market, Reuter reports from Paris. He said
that issuers would, however, still be able to book a time spot for issuance
if they wanted to have priority. He gave no further details.
Mr Alphandery also said issuers and intermediaries would do away with a
one-day delay between payment and making funds available and reduce the
costs of financial services for new issues.
