FT  25 JUN 94 / Property: It's the mixture as before - Lime was used to make
mortar 3,000 years ago. Now, it is causing a minor revolution in the
building trade / Conservation
There is a minor revolution going on in the building trade. At the heart of
it is a four-letter word, the roots of which go back even further than those
four-letter Anglo-Saxon words much favoured by British workmen.
The word is lime. For approaching 20 years it has been much favoured in
building conservation circles, but the problem has been one of converting
the ordinary builder back to lime, according to masonry consultant Bob
Bennett.
Bennett runs the Lime Centre, a small enterprise dedicated to training
people in the use of this most ancient of building materials.
'Man has been using lime for 3,000 years,' he says. 'Cement is a mere
passing phase. Unfortunately, since the second world war when cement became
widely known through its use in concrete defences not only builders but also
private individuals have turned to it for repairs to traditional buildings.
'Usually, this is all wrong. Almost all these buildings were built with lime
mortar, which is far less harsh than cement, more forgiving and, above all,
allows buildings to breathe.'
Lime is on the way back, though. It began in the mid-1970s with the start of
a 12-year programme of conservation on the west front of Wells Cathedral in
Somerset, and now there is a handful of experts who, like Bennett, run
regular courses on using this material. At the Lime Centre, Bennett's
fortnightly courses attract private individuals as well as builders,
architects, conservation officers and other interested professionals.
In the Chilterns, building conservator Ian Pritchett runs similar courses.
Like Bennett, he slakes lime and supplies it to specialist restorers.
'We seem to be gaining more enlightened clients on our courses all the time
 -especially surveyors - but we could still do with more builders,' he says.
Near Stroud, in Gloucestershire, Woodchester Mansion Trust is using the
unfinished Victorian mansion there as a focus for the revival of traditional
building skills. The trust runs occasional courses on the use of lime
mortars in stone buildings.
And, at Gosport in Hampshire, the English Heritage Conservation training
centre at Fort Brockworth also runs courses based on the use of lime.
The key to the 'back to lime' philosophy is the fact that old buildings
breathe. In the past, it was accepted that this happened because of the
vapour-permeable nature of lime mortar, which means that moisture absorbed
by the fabric emerged through the joints. Insert a modern pointing of
Portland cement in an old wall and damp is likely to stay in the wall, say
the proponents of lime.
'If a wall can't breathe the result is often damage to brick and stonework -
or even to the whole wall,' says Bennett. 'The answer, particularly in older
buildings, is to replace like with like - which usually means lime.
'People forget that until the coming of Portland cement in 1824 lime was in
common use in the construction of virtually all buildings.
'The ancient Egyptians used it, the Greeks appreciated its qualities and, in
this country, the Romans used it very widely, and many buildings right up
until the outbreak of war in 1939 were built with lime mortar.'
In the widespread move back to lime mortars, many builders still resist the
trend, according to architect Rodney Black of East Bergholt, Suffolk, who
has been specifying lime mortar for work on traditional buildings.
'Many builders avoid lime mortars if possible because they are slower to lay
than cement mortars,' he says.
In some parts of the country, however, their use has barely died out. In
Devon, where many of the older buildings are made of cob - a mixture of clay
and straw - large quantities of lime were always used. Builder Kevin McCabe,
of Colyton, near Honiton, is one of a handful of builders who has always
used lime on old buildings.
For several years, he has done his own slaking. 'It is a cheap, relatively
quick process and you know exactly what you are going to get,' he says. In
spite of the lime revival, however, it is still unusual nowadays for
builders to slake their own lime.
'Lime has such a good track record. It should not be taken as read that all
new building developments are necessarily better than the original,' says
McCabe.
Information: The Building Limes Forum, 2 Cross Cottage, Kiddington,
Oxfordshire OX20 1BN; The Lime Centre, Long Barn, Morestead, Winchester,
SO21 1LZ; Building conservation training courses, Fort Brockhurst, c/o
English Heritage Room 528, Keysign House, 429 Oxford Street, London W1R 2HD.
IJP Building Conservation, Hollow Tree Cottage, Binfield Heath,
Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire RG9 4LR; Woodchester Mansion Trust, 1 The Old
Town Hall, High Street, Stroud, Gloucestershire GL5 1AP.
