FT  07 NOV 94 / German parties at odds
The three parties in Germany's new coalition government last night agreed on
a series of measures to combat crime but were again unable to reach
agreement about a controversial income tax.
During five hours of talks, which were described as 'extremely difficult',
the coalition agreed to review new laws designed to combat international
crime and to amend them if necessary. However, no new laws were agreed, an
outcome reflecting the resistance of the liberal Free Democratic party
(FDP), which has argued that new legislation alone would not reduce crime
levels.
All three parties also agreed on small changes which will make it easier for
foreigners to receive German nationality.
However, the issue of the solidarity surcharge, a 7.5 per cent income tax
designed to fund investment in eastern Germany, was again postponed until
the next session of talks due to begin tomorrow.
Before yesterday's talks the FDP, which badly needs to show that it has
secured concessions from its coalition partners after its poor result during
the recent elections, said it would insist on a list of criteria which could
be used to decide when the solidarity surchage could be scrapped.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and its more
conservative Bavarian sister party, the Christian Social Union (CSU), have
so far refused to give way to FDP demands for a deadline by which the tax
would be removed.
Despite differences among the parties, however, it is likely that the talks
will end with a broad-brush agreement, short on commitments, that will
enable the coalition to govern smoothly.
This would also help to ensure that all the coalition's 341 deputies in
parliament would vote to re-elect Mr Kohl in a ballot likely to take place
on November 15. The coalition has a majority of just 10 seats over the
combined opposition.
Some FDP members fear, however, that if the party does not use the present
talks to secure its demands it will have even less leverage once Mr Kohl is
safely re-elected. The final composition of the cabinet will also only be
agreed after the 'chancellor vote'.
