FT  06 OCT 94 / Yugoslav economy in the balance: James Whittington assesses
the war legacy and the pressures as sanctions are eased
There cannot be many places in the world where a central bank governor is
hailed as a national folk hero. But in Serbia and Montenegro, the two
remaining constituents of Yugoslavia, the septuagenarian governor of the
National Bank of Yugoslavia, Mr Dragoslav Abramovic, is viewed as the
nation's economic saviour.
A former employee of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, Mr
Abramovic is credited with reversing the economic collapse of rump
Yugoslavia caused by international sanctions and the war in Bosnia. On
January 21 he introduced an economic stabilisation programme based on a new
currency, the super-dinar, which was pegged at parity with the D-Mark and
backed by hard currency and gold reserves.
The results, eight months on, have confounded his critics and exceeded all
expectations. Inflation was brought down from a dizzy 313m per cent in
January to -0.8 per cent in March. Last month it stood at 0.2 per cent,
according to the Belgrade Institute of Economic Sciences. Industrial
production is on the increase, wages are rising, and shops have been
surprisingly full in spite of an economic embargo imposed by the
international community 28 months ago as punishment for fuelling the war in
Bosnia.
The psychological effect of the affable governor who relentlessly seeks to
explain and convince the population of his programme has been immense. The
lifting of some sanctions yesterday in the fields of sports and culture, and
the re-opening of the international airport in Belgrade, will be a further
boost.
But cracks are appearing and there are signs that what the Serbian press has
dubbed 'the economic miracle' might be crumbling.
The re-appearance of black market money-changers trying to meet an
insatiable demand for D-Marks has signalled a weakening of the dinar. A
black market rate of 1.2 dinars to the D-Mark last week had risen to DM1.4
yesterday. One money-changer in Belgrade explained that the demand for
D-Marks comes from widespread smuggling and sanctions-busting operations.
'People need hard currency to trade outside and buy petrol and demand is
very high, especially from (Serb-held) Bosnia,' he says. 'Until now supply
simply met demand but as people are getting rich from smuggling they want
more.' As the black market premium widens, people are switching to D-Marks
for fear of a repeat of the hyper-inflation of last year.
Moreover, shop prices are showing inflationary pressures. In the past week
there have been shortages of milk, meat, and cooking oil as shopkeepers have
removed their stocks rather than raise their prices. And the price of
smuggled petrol is also rising.
Mr Jurij Bajec, from the Belgrade Economic Institute, believes that the
central bank must quickly intervene to defend the dinar while maintaining a
tight hold on monetary and fiscal expansion. He says that at the beginning
of the economic programme the money supply was increased slowly in tandem
with the growth in foreign exchange reserves, but by mid-year it began
moving ahead.
'The money supply has reached a critical point of YD2.1bn of which around 50
per cent is in cash, which is enormous. If it exceeds this then inflation
will return which will be beyond control,' he says.
Foreign exchange reserves, which are supposed to be a national secret, stand
at around DM500m, which leaves little room for manoeuvre.
Mr Abramovic dismisses these fears of inflation. 'There's no need to
question the fate of the dinar because nothing negative has happened so far
in the economy,' he says. He points out that average monthly wages have
risen from DM30 in January to DM200 in September.
Instead of maintaining tight fiscal and monetary policies he wants to expand
credit and increase investment to maintain the rise in output. This year
gross national product of about Dollars 10bn is forecast to grow by 8 per
cent, after contracting by 30 per cent in 1993. 'I don't believe in a credit
inflation,' he says. 'The private sector is flourishing and our enterprises
need more, not less, money.'
Where this is to come from is not clear. The domestic banks are in so much
trouble that they can only afford withdrawals of DM30 a month on even
healthy current accounts. The Belgrade stock market is all but defunct apart
from trade in short-term promissory notes. And the government has no access
to international capital markets or its foreign bank accounts because of
sanctions.
Most of the ifs and buts surrounding the economy come back to psychology. If
Mr Abramovic can continue to persuade the Serbs that they have never had it
so good under the sanctions, all will be well.
Until sanctions are lifted, however, the unnatural distortions in the
economy, including the miraculous fixed exchange rate, are likely to store
up problems.
