FT  06 JAN 94 / Education overhaul accepted by Patten: Dearing plan wins
state backing but teachers' boycott may continue
The government tried to end the five-year controversy over its education
policy by accepting in full the sweeping recommendations in Sir Ron
Dearing's review of the national curriculum in England and Wales yesterday.
Mr John Patten, education secretary, said there would be a cut in the
mandatory content of the national curriculum and that vocational education
courses would be offered to 14-year-olds for the first time since the second
world war.
The move, however, may not head off continued industrial action by teachers'
unions. Mr Patten's personal position also remains under threat after
continued criticism by Conservative backbenchers.
Mr Doug McAvoy, of the National Union of Teachers, the biggest teaching
union, declared that its boycott of all national curriculum tests would
continue.
However, Mr Peter Smith, general secretary of the Association of Teachers
and Lecturers, said he could see no reason why the tests should not
continue, opening a split between the unions for the first time since their
industrial action began last April.
Sir Ron's review was ordered by Mr Patten last year in response to the
boycott. He has now recommended that tests should be restricted to the 'core
subjects' of English, mathematics and science, while reducing the proportion
of teaching time that must be devoted to the government's prescribed
curriculum to about 80 per cent.
For 14-year-olds, he suggested that the ambitious compulsory curriculum of
10 academic subjects should be abandoned. Instead, pupils should study the
basic academic subjects of English, mathematics and science, with short
courses in technology and a modern language, and should be allowed to devote
the rest of their time to vocational education.
Sir Ron said he thought the measure would reduce truancy and encourage
children not interested in academic subjects to continue in school. But he
said: 'This is not to be seen as a major change for the short term. Proper
courses need to be developed by schools, and that will take time. I am
rather looking to the second half of the decade.'
The proposals were welcomed by employers' organisations, including the
Confederation of British Industry, and by all teachers' unions.
Mr Patten's acceptance of Sir Ron's proposals on testing was greeted with
relief by backbench Tory MPs.
Sir Rhodes Boyson, a former Conservative education minister, said: 'We are
moving back to a sensible position, and teachers will welcome that.'
Mr Alan Howarth, another Tory former education minister, welcomed the
decision to give teachers more scope to decide what they wanted to teach.
But he was concerned that the greater emphasis on vocational training would
force schoolchildren to specialise too early. 'We need to think very
carefully before we encourage people to specialise on a narrow front,' he
said.
Rightwing educationalists remained unhappy. Dr Sheila Lawlor, director of
the Thatcherite Centre for Policy Studies, attacked the proposals, saying:
'If the government's policy is to encourage choice and competition in
schools, why is it still imposing a comprehensive curriculum on them?'
The Labour party took the opportunity to focus a new attack on Mr Patten
himself, claiming that he had been forced into an embarrassing U-turn by the
Dearing report.
'John Patten is now saying things that he patently was not saying 12 months
ago, and that makes him look extremely foolish,' said Mrs Ann Taylor,
Labour's shadow education secretary. 'He cannot bring himself to admit that
there has been a mistake.'
Teacher unity shows signs of cracking Page 6
Editorial Comment Page 13
UK's wrong turning on training Page 13
