FT  08 DEC 94 / International Bonds: South Africa's debut global issue
increased to Dollars 750m
The strength of demand for South Africa's debut bond offering under the
country's new government led to the issue being increased from Dollars 500m
to Dollars 750m.
The long-awaited global offering of five-year bonds was launched yesterday.
Dealers expect a price margin at the lower end of the launch spread of 193
to 198 basis points over US Treasury bonds when the exact pricing is
announced today at 10am, New York time (3pm GMT).
Traders said more than half the offering was sold to investors in the US,
with European investors accounting for about 35 per cent of the deal and
Asian investors for about 15 per cent.
Asian interest was relatively weak largely because 'Asian investors will
want to see how the new credit performs before buying the new issue,' one
dealer said. 'They will also be waiting to see whether South Africa decides
to issue a yen-denominated bond in the future, which will be more attractive
to Asian investors,' he added.
Some investment fund managers said the bonds looked expensive at any price
below 200 basis points, but thought the offering would nevertheless be
successful.
Caja de Madrid, Spain's second largest savings institution and the country's
highest rated bank credit, made its debut in the euromarket with a Dollars
200m offering of floating-rate notes.
The issue, which offered a coupon flat with three-month Libor, found early
demand with European investment accounts, joint-lead manager Lehman Brothers
said.
Some traders said the bonds were priced aggressively, but a Lehman official
said the pricing was justified by the bank's Aa2/AA - credit rating.
Activity in the floating-rate note sector increased markedly yesterday with
borrowers bringing two dollar and two D-Mark FRN issues to market.
In the dollar sector, Bristol Oaks, a special-purpose limited partnership
backed by non-performing residential mortgages, launched a multi-tranche
global issue of FRNs.
Around 75 per cent of the main tranche, a Dollars 275m offering of FRNs due
July 1999, was placed mainly in Europe among corporate investors, banks and
fund managers, said joint lead manager Citicorp.
ANZ Banking Group launched a Dollars 250m issue of three-year floating-rate
notes via UBS offering a coupon of 10 basis points over three-month Libor.
In the D-Mark sector, BBDO Canada, part of Omnicom group, the US advertising
company, issued DM200m of five-year floating-rate notes though Morgan
Stanley.
The notes offered a coupon of 65 basis points over three-month Libor. This
represented an attractive pick-up in yield compared with borrowers of a
similar credit, such as a Citicorp's D-Mark issue currently trading at
around 20 basis points over Libor, syndicate managers said.
The bonds found demand with UK fund managers, German commercial banks,
retail investors in the Benelux countries, and with some high net worth
individuals, lead manager Morgan Stanley said. The proceeds were not
swapped, according to market sources.
