FT  17 AUG 94 / Calculators fail to boost maths skills of pupils in UK
schools
British school pupils lead the world in their use of calculators - but not
in their mathematics skills, UK government education inspectors said
yesterday.
In England, 87 per cent of primary schools not only permit the use of
calculators but also provide them for their pupils. In Scotland, the figure
is 95 per cent, said the report by the Office for Standards in Education
(Ofsted).
Asian countries are far more strict. In South Korea, no primary schools
provide their children with calculators, while 55 per cent ban their use
altogether.
Findings by the National Institute of Economic and Social Research published
last year showed English pupils scoring an average of 59.5 per cent in
standardised international mathematics tests, while Korea and Taiwan, where
only 1 per cent of primary schools provide calculators, both achieved 73 per
cent.
The inspectors' report, which also detailed widespread shortcomings in the
teaching of mathematics and science in England and Wales, said schools
should consider whether children used calculators too much.
Mr Mike Tomlinson, Ofsted's director of inspection, said: 'We need to look
at their use to make sure they are not usurping the teaching of basic skills
in mathematics.
'The important thing is the balance between using them and developing and
understanding the principles of basic numeracy.'
Calculators are less widely provided in British secondary schools, but they
are still available to more pupils than in any of the other countries
covered by the report. In England, half of all schools provide calculators,
compared with 21 per cent in the US, 19 per cent in the former Soviet Union
and 17 per cent in France.
In South Korea, no secondary schools give their pupils access to
calculators, while 35 per cent bar their use.
The report concluded that in England and Wales 'not all science and
mathematics teachers have the skills and talents required to do their job'.
Teaching criticised, Page 6
