FT  28 DEC 94 / Attention is focused on Algeria's hidden war: Some 800
people are dying each week in a vicious civil conflict which is largely
invisible to the outside world
The dramatic television pictures of the Air France hijacking contrast with
the near invisibility to the outside world of the conflict in Algeria itself
in which some 800 people are dying every week.
Foreign camera teams, either banned by the Algerian government or afraid of
being targeted by fundamentalists, have been unable to record what Amnesty
International says is 'a growing spiral of violence (in which) the security
forces and armed Islamist groups (act) in total disregard of international
and humanitarian law'.
The hijacking appeared to have been timed to coincide with the third
anniversary on December 26 of the general election which the Islamic
Salvation Front (FIS) seemed certain to win before the poll was annulled by
the military-led Algerian government.
The result has been the loss of 30,000 lives - 25,000 of them this year
alone.
An attempt last summer by the head of state, General Liamine Zeroual to
establish a dialogue with the FIS leaders, Mr Abassi Madani and Mr Ali
Benhadj, collapsed in October. Too many people on both sides of the divide -
the army and the Islamist groups - had no wish to see it succeed and the
violence worsened.
Supporters of radical Islam have traditionally used violence, notably
against 'degenerate' women and have recently taken to decapitating their
victims and keeping their heads. The extreme Armed Islamic Group (GIA),
reported to have been responsible for the Air France hijack over the
weekend, has burnt down at least 500 schools and a number of university
research centres and have been known to gun down children.
At the same time, the army, led by General Mohamed Lamari, the tough chief
of staff who believes the FIS can be 'eradicated', has turned to torturing
and murdering people suspected of supporting it. There are reliable reports
that they have burned whole forests to flush out guerrilla groups and have
destroyed villages as retribution for the killing of soldiers.
More than 80 foreigners - including four Roman Catholic priests murdered
yesterday - have been killed since September 1993, most of them at the hands
of Islamists whose aim is to scare away international capital and knowhow
vital to Algeria's economy. Embassies have closed and many foreign companies
have withdrawn their personnel.
Since its birth five years ago the FIS has been a broad church. Its
supporters have included pious members of the middle classes, well educated
but radical younger Algerians and unemployed youths who despair of ever
getting employment or housing.
The GIA is the more notorious group, but western officials say that
disentangling one radical group from another is impossible. Many are
believed to be led by local emirs and the military security forces are
suspected of manipulating others.
The fault-line in Algerian society runs through family, tribe and region.
Recently a security officer shot a terrorist and when he pulled the
balaclava off the dead man's face, he recognised his son.
Intellectuals and members of the professional classes have been caught up in
the confrontation between a privileged elite which has held power for a
generation and the radical Islamists who say that 'those who criticise us
with their pen will die by the sword'.
They view intellectuals such as the writer Tahar Djaout, whom they murdered
in May 1993, as 'apostates' who deserve the same fate as 'Jews, Christians
and foreigners who are part of a colonial plot to commit profanities on our
country'.
These events, occurring on Europe's doorstep are kept not only from the
western eye. The authorities have imposed harsh measures on local
journalists who are also increasingly victims of fundamentalist terror.
The resulting sparse coverage of the brutality on both sides is in the
Algerian government's interests. It is well aware that television reporting
in particular could lead some in Europe to question the largely uncritical
support afforded it until now by western powers since 1992.
Most western leaders, notably President Francois Mitterrand of France,
tacitly endorsed the coup of January 1992. For the past three years the same
leaders have been keen to denounce fundamentalist violence but are notably
coy about the brutal methods of the army. The US and, to a lesser degree
Italy and Spain, have been more even handed in their condemnation of
violence.
French leaders have strongly backed the regime and led the chorus for
financial support. However, the Algerian government's handling of the
hijacking will do nothing to improve its standing in the eyes of its own
people.
Other security lapses could be economically costly. Were Algeria's vital oil
and gas export facilities at Arzew or Skikdda to be successfully targeted by
the fundamentalists, it would be a serious blow to the country's capacity to
earn foreign exchange.
Meanwhile, key civil servants are among the estimated 50,000 professional
people who in the past two or three years have joined in exile the estimated
100,000 well educated Algerians who left years ago. Many would agree with
the Spanish writer Juan Goytisolo that refusing the FIS its electoral
victory was 'a remedy worse than the disease'.
Algeria's modern history is one of continuing violence, first during 130
years of French colonial rule which culminated, between 1954 and 1962, in a
traumatic war of independence where native Algerians fought the French and
civil war prevailed within each camp. Thirty years of socialism, widespread
corruption and lack of freedom of expression have added to the country's
woes.
The fallout of further violence in Algeria, be it among its Maghreb
neighbours or the 2m North African community in western Europe, many of whom
live in France, cannot be discounted. Morocco and Tunisia, however, are
unlikely 'to fall off the shelf', in the words of one senior diplomat. If
anything, the violence in Algeria appears to be acting, for the time being
at least, as a powerful aversion therapy there.
Francis Ghiles is leaving the FT to become an independent consultant on
North African affairs
