FT  17 DEC 94 / World Bank urged to set up nutrition programme
The World Bank is calling for the inclusion of nutrition schemes 'in every
appropriate Bank project' in order to combat deficiencies in Vitamin A,
iodine and iron.
Without these so-called micronutrients, development is hindered in many
countries by the need to care for the more than 1m cases of blindness,
mental retardation, learning disabilities and low work capacity, says a Bank
report.
The recommendation to devote more resources to these nutrients is contained
in 'Enriching Lives' published by the Bank's human resources division, now
the fastest growing sector in the giant multilateral lending institution.
The real growth in social programmes began a decade ago. Last year the Bank
lent Dollars 3bn (Pounds 1.8bn) for various health, education, population
and social programmes.
'There came a general awareness that in order for us to make a real dent in
poverty, we must attack basic problems like education and healthcare,' said
Mr Klas Bergman, a Bank spokesman.
According to the report, the cost of deficiencies of Vitamin A, iodine and
iron is enormous - as much as 5 per cent of a country's gross domestic
product - in terms of deaths, disabilities and productivity. Remedies would
cost an estimated Dollars 1bn a year, according to Mr Bergman. Bank lending
for everything last year totaled Dollars 20.8bn.
The Bank next year will lend at least Dollars 60m for micronutrient
projects. The biggest, to be funded with UN agencies in China, is that
country's first salt iodisation programme and will cost Dollars 27m.
In Mali the bank is financing the world's first trial of a new method of
iodising water. Water pumps will release small amounts of iodine every time
they are used.
The Bank's other health programmes are growing. It has become the largest
single source of external financing of aids programmes in the developing
world, lending Dollars 600m to 50 projects since 1986.
It is stressing women's health, having concluded that improvement is
essential to reduce poverty. Over the past six years, the bank allocated
nearly Dollars 5.7bn to more than 100 projects, dealing with family
planning, sexually transmitted diseases, nutrition, gynaecological cancer
and other health problems.
The Bank also issued a report calling violence against women an obstacle to
development.
