FT  22 JUL 94 / London Stock Exchange: Strong close as the Footsie
challenges 3,100 - Market Report
The currency markets came to the rescue of a lethargic UK equity sector
yesterday. Dollar stocks rose sharply late in the session as the US currency
turned higher after the US Treasury Secretary told Congress that the Clinton
administration wanted a strong dollar and recognised that a renewed drop in
the currency could threaten global recovery.
The FT-SE 100 Index, which had moved uncertainly earlier as the Bundesbank
left key interest rates unchanged, made a determined, albeit finally
unsuccessful, run for the 3,100 hurdle in the final hour of trading. Shell
Transport, British Petroleum, Glaxo and SmithKline Beecham were all in
demand - even though Wall Street was a shade easier at the London close.
The final reading showed the FT-SE 100 just off the day's best at 3,095.1
for an advance on the session of 17.9 points. The FT-SE Mid 250 Index gained
13.9 at 3,600.9 as optimism spread beyond the dollar stock sectors.
For most of the day share prices moved erratically, with company trading
statements providing many of the features. At the opening, markets in London
were under the shadow of the overnight setback on Wall Street, and the
concern over US interest rates revived on Wednesday by the appearance before
Congress of Mr Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve.
A weak start saw the market down by 16 points on the Footsie and although
some recovery was soon made, shares drifted off again after the Bundesbank
left its key rates unchanged at its last meeting before the summer recess.
Markets were pleased to hear that the Bundesbank was not easing its
anti-inflation stance, although this did little to ease the renewed
uncertainty over global interest rate prospects.
Company trading statements gave a somewhat negative lead to the market.
Wellcome shares fell sharply in spite of higher profits as investors shied
away from the disclosure of lower sales of Retrovir, the group's widely
known anti-Aids treatment. Boots, the high street retailer and chemist, also
gave ground as the annual meeting brought no news on plans to sell the
pharmaceuticals divisions.
Outside these special situations, trading volume was thin and the market
lacked enthusiasm, or even direction. Little attention was paid to the
announcement that Britain's trade deficit with non-EU countries had dipped
to Pounds 495m in June, compared with market forecasts of a Pounds 700m plus
deficit. Nor was the market greatly interested in the outcome of the
leadership elections of the UK opposition Labour party, or in the reshuffle
of the Conservative government.
It was left to the upswing in the dollar to provide the impetus behind the
late improvement in the London stock market. Trading volume increased as the
Footsie moved steadily into positive territory. By the end of dealing, Seaq
volume stood at 607.6m shares, still well short of the 679.7m of the
previous session. On Wednesday, retail, or customer, business was worth
Pounds 1.57bn, again at the high end of this year's daily averages.
The September contract on the Footsie gave the lead to equities, and futures
trading served to strengthen the boost given to business in the Footsie 100
stocks by the gain in the dollar. Half of yesterday's equity business was in
Footsie-listed stocks, with the non-Footsie sectors playing a less active
role than of late.
Strategists, while commenting that the market was showing signs of moving
into its summer lethargy, saw the late advance in share prices as an
indication of underlying confidence. Any prolonged recovery in the US dollar
would be likely to inspire strength in bond markets, and provide the basis
for an advance in equities.
