FT  05 MAY 94 / Political Notebook: Filling the European cracks
It has only just started. Even before the votes have been cast in today's
local elections the cracks over Europe in the Conservative party have
re-opened. Mr Douglas Hurd's supply of high-class Polyfilla is running
dangerously low.
Mr John Major faces another five weeks of it. However badly (or, just in
case, however well) the Conservatives fare today, ministers are unanimous
that the results of the European parliament poll next month will be worse.
The difference between a bad and catastrophic outcome on June 9 is likely to
determine the prime minister's future. If the government holds on to more
than 15 or so of its 32 seats in Strasbourg Mr Major has a fighting chance.
If that number drops to 10 or below, the manner of Baroness Thatcher's
assassination four years ago will begin to look rather a civilised affair.
Even before the campaign is under way, Mr Major has been obliged to rebuke
Mr Michael Portillo for breaking cabinet ranks over the issue of a single
currency.
But Mr Portillo, a politician with a self-confidence which far outstrips his
junior cabinet post, cannot be sacked. In a few weeks the 40-year-old chief
secretary has emerged as the only candidate of the right in any leadership
contest.
The latest spat had the unreal quality which has become characteristic of
the current debate within the Tory party over Europe.
Mr Portillo made some unguarded remarks about the undesirability of a single
European currency. Nothing really surprising about that.
The sceptics have long seen economic and monetary union as the point at
which Britain will have no option but to draw a line in the sand. For them,
a single currency means political union, which in turn means the absorption
of the nation state into a European superstate.
It was in order to finesse that problem and to delay the inevitable breach
within his own party that Mr Major negotiated the British opt-out at
Maastricht.
Up until now the line that Britain will cross the single currency bridge
when it comes to it (ie after the next general election) by and large has
held. But these days the Tory party goes looking for things to fight about.
If there is no immediate casus belli then why not anticipate the battles
ahead and fight them now. The sceptical right, whose influence has risen as
Mr Major's leadership has weakened, is not about to cede its newly won
ground.
Against that background, the election manifesto produced by Mr Hurd is a
masterpiece of rationality. Against the hopes of the Europhobes Mr Major has
not torn up the original draft and replaced it with a chauvinist tirade
against all things European.
The document has been shortened. In typescript it is closer to 40 pages than
the former 60. Some of the attacks on the 'federalist' Labour and Liberal
Democrat parties have been couched in coarser terms than flow naturally from
the pen of the foreign secretary. But all the essential compromises of the
original have been maintained.
The emphasis, as expected, is on Britain's case for a decentralised,
competitive and open Europe. The nation state, it asserts with confidence,
is here to stay. So too is the British veto. It argues for minimum
interference from Brussels, for a renewed drive to deregulate, and for
intergovernmental co-operation rather than integration in areas like
defence, interior and immigration matters.
Labour, it asserts, would sign up for a single European currency tomorrow.
The Liberal Democrats would just backdate a wholesale transfer of
sovereignty to Mr Jacques Delors and his Brussels cronies.
Mr Hurd's hope is there is plenty of ammunition in all of that for the less
enthusiastic Europeans in the party to fire at the opposition.
But however naive may be its hope of persuading the rest of Europe to make
common cause with British pragmatism, the manifesto is not an anti-European
document.
In deference to the enthusiasts (there are still a few) and the realists in
the Tory party, it does not question Britain's place in Europe. It leaves
open the option of participation in a single currency and signposts the
route to a more coherent European defence identity.
In other words, it presents the issue not in terms of Europe right or wrong
but of Europe right or left.
Mr Major has signed up to the strategy. It fits his own instincts. It has as
good a chance as anything else of holding together his party during the next
few weeks.
The question, however, is whether the prime minister will stick to it. If
the opinion polls point to a landslide defeat, Mr Major may well be tempted
to abandon the pro-Europeans and appease the sceptics. That would provide
the trigger for civil war. The Conservatives, right and left, would look for
another leader.
