FT  27 MAY 94 / Survey of Relocation in the UK (11): Rail and road in a new
climate - Franchising and motorway tolling
What the railways achieved in the middle of the 19th century, the motorways
have done in the second half of the 20th. Both opened up parts of the
country previously cut off from the commercial mainstream and increased the
choice of locations available to business.
But while both transport networks are now substantially in place, the ways
in which they are managed and financed are undergoing considerable change.
British Rail is being privatised after 47 years in public ownership while
the motorways, previously free at the point of use, are being prepared for
an ambitious electronic tolling programme.
If these two experiments are successful, there is every prospect that both
road and rail will provide a better service for the business community. But
the more commercial climate in which both modes of transport will be
required to work could have considerable financial implications for the
business user.
To take rail first: the privatisation, or more accurately the franchising
out, of British Rail's operations will lead to the creation of 25
independent train operating companies. They will compete to provide train
services, using leased rolling stock on track rented from a separate
infrastructure company, Railtrack.
Management buy-out teams and trade bidders from sectors such as buses and
shipping are all gearing up to bid for BR's operating companies as they are
put up for sale over the next three years. The operations on offer range
from single lines such as the London to Gatwick airport express to entire
networks such as Scot- Rail and Great Western.
Successful bidders will acquire franchises, probably for between five and 15
years, to provide a rail service over their designated routes. As the train
operators settle down, they are likely to want to expand their activities to
compete with other franchisees.
The government will maintain a considerable level of subsidy to most of the
operating companies but it hopes that managers freed from the constraints of
BR will be able to expand the market place.
Many of the BR managers currently contemplating bids have ambitious
marketing plans. Despite the sophistication of BR Intercity's marketing to
the business traveller and its success in expanding rail usership, there is
still enormous potential among business travellers previously wedded to the
company car.
While much of the market growth is expected to come from expanding off-peak,
discounted leisure travel, some rail managements have plans to attract
business travellers who may not have used a train for the past decade. Many
businessmen and women have an outdated idea of the service now offered by
the railways.
Ideas under consideration include free travel to reintroduce people to the
idea of using the train, the provision of 'club class' carriages for
business travellers, and an increase in high-speed shuttle services designed
to attract the businessman.
Privatisation does, however, also increase the prospect that little-used
lines will close. The government says it expects there will be no
significant changes in the extent of the rail network for the first few
years but splitting up the railway will expose to public view the
profitability or otherwise of individual routes. It would then prove harder
to justify massively loss-making lines.
Less radical change appears likely for the freight side of BR where its bulk
operations, carrying products such as coal and steel, are being split into
three geographically defined companies and put up for sale to the private
sector. The domestic container business, moving 'boxes' from ports to inland
railheads and the international business, shipping containers by ferry and
the Channel tunnel, will also be sold.
Domestic rail freight has always been hampered by the absence of many viable
long-haul routes in the UK but the opening of the Channel tunnel will plug
the British rail network into that of continental Europe and does open up
significant opportunities.
The government's plans for BR coincide with moves internationally to free
railways from state control though the British approach is considerably more
ambitious than that elsewhere. Proposals to introduce tolls on the motorway
network, on the other hand, follow a pattern long-established in France and
Italy.
With ever-tighter constraints on the government's transport budgets, the
idea is to make better use of the existing motorway network rather than to
continue building new roads. The Department of Transport recently dropped or
shelved nearly a third of its Pounds 21bn roads programme.
The department is currently working with nearly 400 private sector companies
to develop a comprehensive electronic tolling system which could cope with
Britain's busy motorways. The system needs to be capable of registering and
charging up to 12,000 vehicles an hour travelling at speeds of up to 70mph.
The likelihood is that overhead or roadside 'readers' would record the
passage of a vehicle, deducting a sum from the driver's pre-paid account or
billing him or her for future payment. The government has rejected from the
outset the idea of installing payment booths on the motorway on the grounds
that they would slow the traffic flow.
In its technical detail this programme is more advanced than any tolling
system in use around the world, a factor which causes some observers to
doubt whether the government will achieve its ambitious target date of 1998
to introduce the new system.
Mr John MacGregor, transport secretary, has spoken of charges of 1.5p a mile
for cars and 4.5p a mile for lorries. The government calculates this would
raise Pounds 700m a year if the entire 1,900-mile motorway network were
covered. These charges are low compared with those imposed on the continent
but the government is fearful of driving motorists off the motorways to
other trunk roads.
Motorway tolling will force travellers to make a payment at the time of
travel. That may lead them to consider if their journey is worthwhile or
whether they should take the train. Clearly, the impact of tolling will
depend on the level at which charges are finally set, though travel costs
would be only one issue among many to be taken into account.
There is no doubt, however, that modern manufacturing methods frequently
require raw materials, components and sub-assemblies to travel considerable
distances between factories. The cost of transport will therefore increase.
But motorway tolling should lead to a reduction in congestion and thus
reduce journey times for the business traveller and lorry shipments.
 ---------------------------------------
              POPULATION
 ---------------------------------------
REGION                  Millions (1991)
 ---------------------------------------
1.  SCOTLAND                 5.1
2.  NORTH                  3.084
3.  YORKS &amp; HUMBER         4.954
4.  NORTH WEST             6.377
5.  WALES                  2.886
6.  WEST MIDLANDS          5.255
7.  EAST MIDLANDS          4.026
8.  EAST ANGLIA            2.091
9.  SOUTH WEST             4.723
10. SOUTH EAST            17.558
11. N. IRELAND             1.594
 ---------------------------------------
             UNEMPLOYMENT
 ---------------------------------------
  Percentage of workforce (April 1994)
 ---------------------------------------
1.  SCOTLAND             9.4 percent
2.  NORTH               11.4 percent
3.  YORKS &amp; HUMBER       9.7 percent
4.  NORTH WEST           9.9 percent
5.  WALES                9.8 percent
6.  WEST MIDLANDS        9.8 percent
7.  EAST MIDLANDS        8.9 percent
8.  EAST ANGLIA          7.3 percent
9.  SOUTH WEST           8.5 percent
10. SOUTH EAST           9.3 percent
11. N. IRELAND          13.3 percent
 ---------------------------------------
                  GDP
 ---------------------------------------
REGION             Per capita (1992)
 ---------------------------------------
1.  SCOTLAND          Pounds 8,276
2.  NORTH             Pounds 7,902
3.  YORKS &amp; HUMBER    Pounds 8,178
4.  NORTH WEST        Pounds 8,099
5.  WALES             Pounds 7,455
6.  WEST MIDLANDS     Pounds 7,964
7.  EAST MIDLANDS     Pounds 8,664
8.  EAST ANGLIA       Pounds 8,818
9.  SOUTH WEST        Pounds 8,313
10. SOUTH EAST        Pounds 9,598
11. N. IRELAND        Pounds 6,586
 ---------------------------------------
