FT  20 JAN 94 / Howard signals changes in courts reform
The government was preparing yesterday to water down plans to reform the
police and courts in the face of growing opposition in the House of Lords to
key aspects of its legislative programme.
Mr Michael Howard, home secretary, signalled the climbdown after Lord
Whitelaw, a former Conservative home secretary, attacked the police and
magistrates' courts bill for the second time in two days.
Mr Howard, who defended the bill after it was mauled by Conservative critics
in the Lords on Tuesday, said he was 'prepared to listen to detailed
suggestions which might improve upon the form of legislation'.
The government's problems in the upper house were compounded by Lord Taylor
of Gosforth, the Lord Chief Justice, who criticised a key aspect of Mr
Howard's plans to reform the so-called right to silence.
Lord Taylor said there was 'nothing unfair' about proposals in the criminal
justice bill that juries in criminal trials should be told that defendants
had refused to answer police questions.
But the government's proposal that judges should demonstrate a defendant's
unwillingness to give evidence by calling him or her to the witness box
could produce 'undesirable and unfair results'.
Lord Taylor's comments suggest the law and order measures face a rough ride
in the Lords, which has also criticised proposals in the education bill to
reform student unions.
The growing difficulties in the upper house are a fresh blow to Mr John
Major's back to basics initiative to encourage a return to traditional
values. Senior officials conceded it would be 'difficult' to persuade peers
to accept proposals in the deregulation bill, published yesterday, to give
ministers sweeping powers to repeal existing legislation.
The depth of opposition to the police and magistrates' courts bill surprised
ministers, who had taken little heed of widespread criticism from police and
magistrates' associations.
Most of the opposition centres on proposals to give the home secretary
powers to appoint five of the 16 members of newly-formed local police
authorities, including the chairman, and to put magistrates' clerks on fixed
term contracts. Critics claim the proposals would reduce the operational
independence of chief constables and expose clerks to the possibility of
pressure from ministers or officials.
Mr Howard assured the Commons home affairs committee last night that the
five appointed members would not be 'party political placements'.
There was fresh embarrassment for the government last night when it admitted
that not one of the 360 letters it received from organisations on the
composition of police authorities fully supported its proposed changes.
Political notebook, Page 7
