FT  23 AUG 94 / Labour attacks supergun 'scandal'
Labour yesterday launched an attack on government moves to disqualify six
directors of Astra Holdings, the collapsed munitions company involved in the
Iraqi 'supergun' affair.
Mr Michael Meacher, the shadow open government minister, said the Department
of Trade and Industry's treatment of the directors was 'a significant piece
of the cover-up over arms to Iraq'. He said it was 'a grade-one scandal'.
The DTI launched disqualification proceedings this month, nearly a year
after seven Astra directors were criticised in a DTI inspectors' report on
the company's Pounds 22m acquisition in 1989 of PRB, a Belgian defence
company.
Astra, which is in receivership, became involved in the 'supergun' affair
after discovering that PRB had a contract to supply propellant.
Customs officers blocked the project by seizing giant steel tubes in 1990.
The DTI report criticised the directors for continuing with the PRB
acquisition in spite of warnings from advisers about PRB's financial
condition. They were also criticised for misleading shareholders about
Astra's financial situation.
Mr Meacher yesterday wrote to Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry
secretary, claiming that the proposed disqualifications were 'a shabby and
sordid political vendetta'.
He said the move was 'designed to intimidate and discredit the former Astra
directors because of what they have revealed about the secret and illicit
arms trade with Iraq and the government's connivance in it'.
He added that the government wanted Astra closed because the directors had
discovered that subsidiaries it had purchased were being used, with the
connivance of the government, for the illegal export of arms to Iraq during
the Iran-Iraq war.
Mr Meacher said the political motives behind the government's actions were
'clearly revealed' by the exclusion from the disqualification list of Mr
Stephan Kock, an Astra director with links to the security services.
Mr Kock was criticised by the DTI report, but the department said there was
insufficient evidence to justify disqualification. Mr Meacher said it was
'obvious' that he had been excluded because of his 'close links' with the
security services.
Mr Meacher also criticised the government for failing to reply to a
parliamentary question tabled six weeks ago asking when Mr Kock had acquired
British nationality, and which government department intervened with the
police in Argyll, Strathclyde, after he fired an automatic pistol at two
motorists in January 1990.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, a junior defence minister, promised a month ago
to write to Mr Meacher, but has not done so.
