FT  07 MAR 94 / VW embarks on plan to cut car production costs: Piech
strategy aims to simplify global operations
The Volkswagen group of Germany, Europe's leading carmaker, is embarking on
a radical restructuring of car development and engineering operations to cut
costs and simplify its global manufacturing activities.
VW, which is losing money heavily, is planning to reduce the number of basic
chassis platforms which are used to produce its range of cars from 16 to
just four by the next decade.
The strategy will embrace all four makes in the group - Volkswagen, Audi,
Seat and Skoda - and will eventually have a big impact on its manufacturing
operations in Germany, Spain, the Czech Republic, Brazil, Mexico, China and
South Africa. It will hold the key in the long term to VW overcoming its
unenviable position as the high-cost producer in the European and world car
industry.
Volkswagen, led by Mr Ferdinand Piech, the controversial management board
chairman appointed 14 months ago, has sought in the short term to stem
losses by a harsh mixture of deep cuts in capital spending, a sharp
reduction in the workforce and the introduction in Germany of a four-day
week with corresponding cuts in pay. He has also imposed a squeeze on
components suppliers to reduce purchasing costs.
If the strategy is applied as rigidly as planned by Mr Piech and Professor
Ulrich Seiffert, group research and development director, it will spell the
end for production of the Beetle, assembled in Mexico and Brazil.
It will also rule out development of new products such as a micro-compact
car, like the two-seater city car prototype unveiled by Mercedes-Benz last
week which would call for an additional platform.
Prof Seiffert said the VW group's four car platforms (excluding light
commercial vehicles and the multipurpose vehicle under development with Ford
of Europe) would consist of:
the AO platform for small cars, which will form the basis of the new
generation VW Polo, due for launch in the autumn, and will later spawn
derivatives to replace cars such as the Skoda Favorit and the Seat Ibiza
launched last year.
VW's planned low-price small four-seater car due for production in 1996-97
would be based on a shortened version of the AO platform.
the A platform for lower medium cars, which will provide the base for the
next VW Golf, a second Skoda range, a new small car for Audi (A2), and a
Seat Toledo replacement.
the B platform for upper medium and executive cars, which will spawn
replacements for the Audi 80 (A4) and 100 (A6) and the next VW Passat.
the D platform for the aluminium-bodied Audi A8 luxury car.
In a separate move, VW is increasing its stake in VAG Sverige, its Swedish
importer and subsidiary of Saab-Scania, the Swedish truck and aerospace
group. It is expected to raise its holding to 50 per cent from one-third and
to increase representation on the six-man board from two to three.
VAG Sverige is the importer and distributor for VW, Audi and Seat cars in
Sweden and had sales last year of 19,200 units with turnover of DM765m.
Volkswagen has increased holdings in its main distributors in Europe, and
now controls distribution in its main markets of Germany, France, Italy, the
UK and Spain.
Platform for growth, Page 23
