FT  17 DEC 94 / Labour sights set on Midlands citadels
Labour's celebrations of its victory in the Dudley West by-election, which
started at 1.30 yesterday morning, spilled over later in the day into a mood
of breezy optimism about prospects in the West Midlands, traditionally the
cockpit of British electoral politics.
Mr Tony Blair's warning against complacency notwithstanding, the reaction
was natural. Although the Conservatives had been resigned to the likelihood
of massive defeat, Labour won more handsomely than it had dared expect. The
29.3 per cent swing 'exceeded our wildest expectations on a small turnout',
an official said.
The thinking was that a majority of 6,000 to 7,000 would have been
creditable, while a swing on the same proportions as the 21.3 per cent
achieved in the 1990 Mid-Staffordshire by-election would have been
outstanding.
But there is dispute about Conservative voting patterns. Only 7,706 turned
out to vote for Mr Graham Postles, the Conservative candidate - 27,023 fewer
than voted Tory at the 1992 general election.
The missing Tory voters might have stayed at home because the weather was
bad, the day was inconvenient or the electoral register was out of date. On
the other hand, the government might have forfeited their loyalty and they
changed allegiance to Labour.
Conservatives yesterday clung to the first set of possibilities.
Mr Postles said by-elections were a chance for a protest vote. He added:
'Even given that opportunity, people have chosen not to exercise it.
Conservative voters have chosen not to exercise it.'
A Labour official claimed the opposite: 'This was a breakthrough with voters
who had ignored Labour for 20 years.' He cited the example of the
Kingswinford wards, where rates of owner-occupation are more than 84 per
cent and Conservatism has been a habit of life. There, he noted, the turnout
was among the highest in the constituency.
The Dudley West by-election, the first in the West Midlands since the last
general election, saw Labour carrying on from where it left off in 1992.
Then, it won eight of the 10 seats it made priority targets.
The optimism in the party yesterday sprang from the belief that the Dudley
West victory brings within closer reach the winning of Conservative seats
such as Birmingham Edgbaston, Birmingham Hall Green, Burton on Trent,
Wolverhampton South West and Worcester.
All the drama of Dudley West has become a historical footnote. The Boundary
Commission has decided that Dudley East and Dudley West will become Dudley
North and Dudley South. The southernmost ward of Dudley West will go to
Stourbridge.
