FT  23 NOV 94 / China debts row hits plans for investment
China's rash of troubles with Western creditors over unpaid debts is casting
a pall over plans by foreign companies to invest heavily in Chinese
infrastructure, and the power sector in particular.
Western bankers are also reporting signs of nervousness in international
debt markets over China exposure. Loan syndications for state-owned
companies are meeting resistance,
Mr Paul Schulte, China analyst at CS First Boston in Hong Kong, yesterday
described the debt-repayment issue as 'critical' to perceptions of China as
a safe destination for equity investment. 'Everyone wants to do business
with China,' he says, 'but from a macro-economic point of view the central
authorities must be seen to be managing debt prudently.'
International power companies have been locked in difficult discussions with
the Chinese authorities over returns on billions of dollars of proposed
equity investment.
Beijing's attempt to 'cap' rates of return at 12-15 per cent had not found
favour with nervous investors worried about repayment risks.
But the Chinese now appear prepared to tolerate higher returns commensurate
with the risks involved, although there has not as yet been public
indication of a change of heart.
Mr Schulte's comments followed reports in the past week of Chinese
institutions failing to honour commitments. These included an announcement
by Lehman Brothers, the US investment bank, that it was suing several of
China's most prominent state companies for alleged non-payment of debts
arising from foreign exchange trading.
Foreign banks, including 24 Japanese institutions, last month petitioned Mr
Zhu Rongji, senior vice-premier in charge of the economy, for the recovery
of Dollars 600m in loans that had gone sour, mostly from leasing deals.
European banks are also among those exerting pressure on the Chinese
authorities over the non-payment of debts by state enterprises from leasing
arrangements that date back to the early 1980s.
China's foreign debt reached Dollars 83.5bn at the end of 1993. It is
expected to rise to Dollars 100bn this year.
China's agency responsible for monitoring foreign debt has urged restraint.
An official of the State Administration of Foreign Exchange Control under
the People's Bank, said recently foreign debt had 'expanded a bit too fast'.
The representative in Beijing of a large European bank said it was 'getting
harder' for China to borrow. There had been a 'knock-on effect' from recent
adverse publicity.
The banker said he was advising clients to tighten up in their dealings with
China. 'If a corporate client asked whether to do business with China on a
collection basis or by way of a letter of credit, I would advise a letter of
credit.'
China's reputation for meeting its commitments has also not been helped by a
dispute between the China International Trust and Investment Corporation
(Citic) and the London Metals Exchange.
The dispute involved an alleged default over payments of Dollars 30m-Dollars
50m lost in futures trading.
Citic said initially the losses were incurred as a result of unauthorised
trading by its Shanghai branch. But it has subsequently softened its stand
and put the matter in the hands of Price Waterhouse, the international
accountants.
Roads paved with gold, Page 27
