FT  21 SEP 94 / Survey of Logistics (3): Road-ways to the future - Europe
aims at a vast integrated network
For all the huge sums which have been invested in Europe's roads and
railways, the continent's transport networks remain fragmented.
This, at least, is the view of the European Commission, which has been
refining its transport policy over the past four years.
It is now working on ambitious plans to upgrade the continent's transport
infrastructure. Its programme of trans-European networks envisages the
spending of Ecu220bn over the next 15 years though it is not yet clear where
much of this money will come from.
The commission's plans involve nothing less than the creation of an
integrated transport system including road, rail, air and inland and coastal
shipping. A parallel programme, costing a further Ecu180bn, is intended to
improve telecommunications and energy networks.
Even governments such as the British, which do not hold with integrated
transport planning on a national basis, are joining in. The spur is the
prospect of community funds to help finance domestic programmes.
It remains to be seen whether the funds can be found to carry out the
improvements planned. But if the commission's programme is pushed through it
should produce considerable benefits for the distribution industry.
The aim of the transport programme is to make Europe more competitive and
provide the physical means for the free movement of goods, services and
people promised by the creation of the single European market in 1993.
Transport networks have in the past been designed largely to meet national
needs, leaving gaps and bottlenecks between countries.
Rail transport is made unnecessarily complicated by differing track and
loading gauges and by incompatible power and signalling systems. The
Eurostar trains which will carry passengers through the Channel tunnel have
been designed to take account of three different electricity networks and
four signalling systems (including the one in the tunnel itself).
Governments set different rules for combined transport operations while the
inland waterway system lacks cohesion. In the air, traffic management and
control systems are splintered and Europe has no fewer than 42 air traffic
control centres.
At the same time, transport systems differ in quality and availability
within the 12 European Union members, according to Mr Jurgen Erdmenger, a
director of the commission's transport directorate, DG7.
Poorer countries on the periphery such as Greece and Portugal are further
isolated by a shortage of good transport links.
Closer to the geographical centre of Europe, transport routes such as the
Rhine-Rhone corridor, rail transit across London and Paris, and air traffic
paths in north-west Europe are congested.
Although large sums have been spent on transport projects over the years,
transport's share of national budgets has been falling. Transport accounted
for 1.5 per cent of the European Union's combined gross domestic product in
1975 but is now down to about 0.8 per cent.
The picture is further complicated by the imbalance between the different
means of transport. The rapid growth of road transport, in particular, has
led to a decline in the use of other networks, notably rail, increasing
congestion and damage to the environment.
Freight shipments have increased by half over the past 20 years and road
transport now accounts for 70 per cent of goods transported. Rail and barge
traffic has declined in relative terms. Passenger travel, meanwhile, has
increased by 85 per cent, mostly in the form of private car journeys, which
account for 79 per cent of all travel.
At present European governments spend 66 per cent of their transport budgets
on roads, 23 per cent on rail, 6 per cent on airports and 5 per cent on
canals and ports.
The trans-European network programme, in contrast, envisages spending 30 per
cent of its money on roads, 60 per cent on rail and 5 per cent on inland
waterways.
In detail, the programme involves:
the designation of a rail network of 70,000 kilometres including 23,000 km
of extensions and new lines for high-speed trains and 23,000 kms largely
devoted to freight/combined transport.
the creation of a 58,000 km road network including 15,000 km of new or
improved roads. Roads would be of a minimum twin two-lane standard but would
not have to be motorways.
improvements to trans-shipment terminals for combined road-rail transport
and agreement on a uniform loading gauge for intermodal rail shipments.
filling in gaps in the canal network and improving seaports to increase
waterborne traffic.
improvements to airports and their connections with other forms of
transport. The establishment of an integrated air traffic management system.
Many of these improvements will have to be funded from the transport budgets
of individual countries. But the European Commission believes community
funds, European Investment Bank money and private sector finance can also be
employed.
A progress report on the trans-European networks programme is to be made to
the European Council when it meets in Essen, Germany in December.
The Commission's prime concern is links within the EU but it has also given
thought to connections with the countries of central and eastern Europe.
East-west transport links were neglected during the Cold War but must now be
improved.
Several projects are currently under way in eastern Europe with the help of
funds from the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
They include a new motorway linking Budapest in Hungary with Vienna, Austria
and Bratislava in the Slovak Republic and the upgrading of nearly 600 kms of
the Belarus section of the Berlin-Moscow highway. The Slovenian railway
network is also being improved.
Important though the physical links between the countries of Europe are
there are other equally powerful though less visible barriers. The
complexity of trade documentation puts a considerable cost on business. A
development team is currently working on a project codenamed Bolero to
create an electronic bill of lading. This should create a faster, more
secure way of sending shipping documents.
Projects such as these are drawing the countries of Europe closer together.
At the same time transport demand from both the private and commercial
sectors is increasing inexorably.
It will not be easy to develop transport networks which can meet this demand
without imposing considerable strains on the environment.
But the European Union is convinced that unplanned growth would prove even
more damaging.
