FT  16 NOV 94 / Nirex seeks to avoid rocky horror: The construction problems
of a Sellafield repository
Excavating a tunnel is risky at the best of times - as engineers involved in
the collapse under Heathrow airport will attest - but to construct caverns
under Cumbria to store some of the world's most deadly materials represents
a huge engineering task.
The problem of how to keep secure long-lived radioactive waste from nuclear
power stations is taxing the construction ingenuity of many nations.
Political skills may also be required to persuade communities to accept the
development of deep underground structures which will need to remain safe
for hundreds of thousands of years.
In the UK the task falls to Nirex, which is jointly owned by British Nuclear
Fuels, Nuclear Electric, the UK Atomic Energy Authority and Scottish
Nuclear. The company, in which the government holds a golden share, has
spent Pounds 50m on investigating 500 possible sites for a repository in the
UK.
The choice has been narrowed down to 2 sq km of land beside the Sellafield
nuclear reprocessing works in Cumbria, which produces about 60 per cent of
the country's intermediate-level waste.
An alternative site, close to Dounreay nuclear power station in Caithness,
was shortlisted but later rejected because of cost and the potential risk of
transporting waste over long distances to such a remote site.
A final decision on whether to go ahead at Sellafield will depend on the
outcome of some of the most intensive and costly geological and engineering
studies conducted in this country.
A public inquiry still has to be held into the project, which is expected to
cost a total of Pounds 2bn. Nirex expects to have spent close to Pounds 1bn
and 18 years on design and planning by the time construction is expected to
start in 2005.
A further Pounds 100m has been spent on preliminary investigations. This has
included drilling 20 boreholes up to 2km deep.
Scientists have also been investigating likely ground and water movements
during and after excavation.
Engineers will have to take into account the possible effects of global
warming as well as predictions that an ice age could return to affect
Cumbria in the next 10,000 years.
Their next step will be to build a Pounds 120m underground laboratory to
determine more precisely how rocks laid down 470m years ago may respond to
large-scale excavation. Some 1,200 metres of tunnels are planned 700 metres
below the surface to create the test facility.
A planning application to build the 'rock characterisation facility' was
submitted to Cumbria County Council this year. Nirex said engineers might
have to freeze surface sandstone to prevent water entering access shafts
during construction.
The test facility - and ultimately the repository itself - will be built in
dense volcanic rock underlying the sandstone. The volcanic rocks, equivalent
to a medium-strength granite, allow very little water to permeate as
minerals washed out of the rock, in hundreds of tiny fissures, form a
natural grout.
This is important as water seeping into the caverns could carry
radioactivity back to the surface.
Intermediate-level waste, including cladding from spent nuclear fuel,
filters, worn-out plant and equipment which has been in contact with
radioactive materials as well as isotopes used in medical treatment, will be
placed in steel containers. These will be filled to the brim with cement
before being stored underground.
Nirex said the steel drums and boxes would eventually corrode. It has
developed a chemical additive to a cement which will be used as a third
layer of protection, around the steel containers.
Dr Alan Hooper, Nirex science manager, said the company was seeking a patent
for the cement which was 'designed to inhibit radioactive particles from
dissolving in the water and will remain effective for thousands of years'.
Nirex is working with its French and Swedish equivalents ANDRA and SKB on a
Pounds 1m project to test methods of construction by building two tunnels
five metres in diameter, 430 metres below ground, at Aspo in Sweden. These
will be excavated by various techniques, from blasting to using a
tunnel-boring machine.
Mr Brendan Breen, Nirex's mining manager, said: 'I have never worked on a
project where the planning has been so meticulous but the consequences of
failure are so horrendous.'
