FT  20 JUN 94 / FT Guide to the Week
MONDAY 20
Union leaders meet Kohl
European trade union leaders will meet chancellor Helmut Kohl in Bonn to
urge Germany to give top priority during its forthcoming presidency of the
European Union (which begins on July 1) to strategies of job-creation,
economic expansion, and social protection.
Unice, the European employers' organisation, today publishes Making Europe
More Competitive. The report calls on EU members to acknowledge and take on
board the details of its action plan: to reverse Europe's declining
competitiveness, to create growth and generate new jobs. The report has the
backing of the Confederation of British Industry.
Italy's foreign minister, Antonio Martino visits Bonn to meet his German
counterpart Klaus Kinkel. Cesare Previti, Italy's defence minister is also
visiting Germany and Paris to meet his respective counterparts. The visits
are seen as a public relations exercise by Italy's right-wing coalition
government.
Tennis: The Wimbledon Lawn Tennis Championships begin (to July 3).
World Bank Report: Developing nations must reduce inefficiency and waste in
their use of infrastructure, according to the World Bank. This year's World
Development Report, published today, argues that the savings from more
efficient use of infrastructure over a three-year period could generate
sufficient resources to provide safe drinking water for 1bn people.
FT Conference: A two-day conference on European Telecommunications -
Responding to Change is being held at the Inter-Continental hotel in London.
The need for and impact of liberalisation of the marketplace are among
issues being discussed.
'Harry and Louise' return to US television screens for another round in the
ferocious lobbying campaign conducted by the Health Insurance Association of
America against the Clinton health care reform plan. Hard-hitting television
advertisements featuring the yuppie couple are credited with much of the
weakening in public support for the plan.
FT Surveys: Electricity in Europe and Spain: Banking and Finance.
Holidays: Argentina, Bangladesh, Cyprus, Greece, Pakistan.
TUESDAY 21
Talks on Hong Kong
Britain and China are to hold a meeting of the Joint Liaison Group, the
bilateral body which is overseeing Hong Kong's transfer to China in July
1997 (to June 23). It is the first such meeting to be held since December
last year.
The talks come amid signals from Beijing that China wants to improve
relations with Britain. What this means for bilateral talks over Hong Kong
remains to be seen, but hopes are high that the colony's project to build a
multi-billion dollar airport will benefit.
US vice-president Al Gore and Russian prime minister Victor Chernomyrdin
begin three days of talks in Washington on mutual economic cooperation. The
meeting could be topped by the signing of a Dollars 9bn deal to develop oil
reserves on Sakhalin Island. Mr Chernomyrdin is also expected to sign loan
documents for four World Bank loans totalling nearly Dollars 1bn.
Vaclav Havel, the Czech president, begins a two-day visit to Romania where
he will sign a friendship treaty between the two countries. It is Mr Havel's
first visit to Romania as president. Mr Havel, who will travel on to
Bulgaria, has previously declined to visit Romania, mainly due to the
country's human rights record.
Saleroom: Sotheby's in London offers its fifth sale of manuscripts from the
library of David Solomon Sassoon (1880-1942) this afternoon. Among the 76
lots is a medieval Spanish Hebrew Bible in contemporary binding, estimated
at Pounds 150,000-Pounds 200,000. The sale of western manuscripts and
miniatures includes the most important classical text on vetinary medicine,
written and illuminated for Ferrante I of Aragon, King of Naples 1458-94.
This royal manuscript (detail below) also belonged to Lorenzo the
Magnificent and is estimated at Pounds 80,000-Pounds 120,000.
Morihiro Hosokawa, Japan's former prime minister, is to testify in the Diet
about his personal finances - the issue that forced him out of office in
April. He will be questioned about a Y100m (Dollars 9,523,000) loan he took
from transport company Sagawa Kyubin in 1982.
Anti-semitism report: The Institute of Jewish Affairs in London releases its
annual Anti-semitism World Report.
Holidays: Algeria, Bombay, Pakistan.
WEDNESDAY 22
Close to peace partnership
US Secretary of State Warren Christopher is to meet in Brussels with Mr
Andrei Kozyrev, Russian foreign minister, before a meeting of the North
Atlantic Council at which Russia will formally sign up for Nato's military
co-operation programme Partnership for Peace.
South African budget
It is budget day for South Africa's new government of national unity:
international investors will be watching closely as finance minister Derek
Keys balances the demands of the country's post-apartheid reconstruction and
development plan, while keeping the budget deficit to the targeted six per
cent of GDP.
Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, testifies before the House of
Representatives budget committee. Financial markets will be looking for
confirmation that the pace of economic growth is slowing, making interest
rate increases less likely. The Fed's 'beige book' assessment of regional
business conditions will also provide data on economic conditions.
Germany's opposition Social Democrats hold an extraordinary congress in
Halle. Party leader Rudolf Scharping may face criticism of his leadership,
held responsible for a poor performance in last week's European Parliament
and local government elections. However, he will likely be nominated as the
party's candidate for chancellor, as it has no obvious alternative.
UK monetary policy: The minutes of May 4's meeting between Kenneth Clarke,
UK chancellor, and Eddie George, Bank of England governor, will be studied
for a shift in monetary policy from the previous 'bias towards easing' to a
neutral or more rigorous stance.
Before Corfu: Christian Democrat leaders from member states meet in Brussels
to try to agree on a candidate to succeed Jacques Delors as Commission
president. Germany's Chancellor Helmut Kohl is expected to try to persuade
Ruud Lubbers, the Dutch premier, to give way to Belgian prime minister
Jean-Luc Dehaene. Meanwhile, Socialist leaders meet in Corfu to agree their
position on the succession, and on how to operate in the European
Parliament, where they are the dominant group.
Romanian trade unions and government have set a deadline for today for
agreement over the collective labour contract.
Holidays: Sri Lanka.
THURSDAY 23
Japan presents budget
The long overdue budget for the year starting April 1 is expected to clear
the upper house of parliament the final hurdle, today. This brings to an end
a political amnesty between the opposition and minority government, setting
the scene for another round in Japan's perennial party political power
struggle.
Germany's Bundesbank council, heads for Potsdam, near Berlin, for its annual
token meeting in the east.
For once, the question of whether M3 and prices statistics will be ready in
time for the council meeting is not of pressing interest. Central bankers
have made plain their short-term discount and Lombard rates are to stay for
the time being. However, May M3 data due this week is expected to show
higher growth than the Bundesbank's 4 to 6 per cent target range. The
consensus forecast is for 14 per cent against 15.4 per cent in April.
Belarus, a nation of 10m on Russia's western border and the
least-independent minded of former Soviet republics, is to hold its first
presidential election. Front-runner for the new post is Vyacheslav Kebich,
the neo-Communist prime minister.
Mr Kebich has the advantage of the full support of the state-
controlled media; he considers his other ace to be his negotiations for a
monetary union with Russia, which he claims will save Belarus' unreformed
economy from disaster.
Mr Kebich enjoys an advantage over his competitors if only because of his
media exposure, yet it is not clear whether he will overcome widespread
discontent with his government.
WTO bids: Switzerland and Germany push their respective bids to host the
World Trade Organisation, due to succeed the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade on January 1 1995. Germany applied last week for Bonn to become
the site of the secretariat. Switzerland's offer for the trade watchdog to
remain in Geneva is the only other candidacy.
Golf: The French Open
The competition begins at the National Golf Course in Paris (to June 26),
when Europe's top players get a little relaxation after Oakmont.
FT Survey: Korea.
Holidays: Estonia, Latvia, Luxembourg.
FRIDAY 24
EU holds summit in Corfu
EU heads of government will try to choose a successor to European Commission
president Jacques Delors at their two-day summit on the Greek island of
Corfu. Two Christian Democrat prime ministers from the Low Countries, the
Dutchman Ruud Lubbers and the Belgian Jean-Luc Dehaene are the
front-runners. Neither appears willing to step aside for the other,
increasing the chances of a deadlock, and possibly an extra summit to settle
the issue.
The 12 will also sign a wide-ranging partnership agreement with Russia's
president Boris Yeltsin, opening the way to an EU-Russia free-trade zone by
the end of the century. A similar accord was reached last week with the
Ukraine, and a priority at the summit will be to follow this with a nuclear
safety plan, aimed at closing the Chernobyl reactors.
Turks in Bosnia: The first contingent of Turkish troops is due to set off to
join UN peacekeepers.
FT Surveys: Indonesia and Norway.
Holidays: Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Sweden, Thailand, Venezuela.
WEEKEND 25-26
State poll in Saxony-Anhalt
The eastern German state of Saxony-Anhalt votes for a government on Sunday.
The first result since the recent European Parliament poll, it should
provide an indicator for the October federal elections.
The Christian Democrats, governing in coalition with the Free Democrats, as
in the federal government in Bonn, are attempting to retain power. The party
lost only 2 percentage points in the recent local government elections,
despite a spate of corruption scandals.
Ukraine's presidential poll on Sunday sees incumbent Leonid Kravchuk
fighting a close race against his former prime minister, an industrialist
who favours closer ties with Russia. Communists and extreme nationalists are
figuring prominently in simultaneous local elections.
Germany's president Richard von Weizsacker visits Poland on Saturday on the
last foreign trip of his presidency, before Roman Herzog takes over on July
1.
Compiled by Patrick Stiles and Angela Bleasdale. Fax: (+44) (0)71 873 3194.
