FT  17 AUG 94 / UK Company News: Kalon 15% ahead and seeking purchases
Kalon, the decorative paints group, is on the look-out for acquisitions in
continental Europe after a first half which saw pre-tax profits rise 15 per
cent, from Pounds 8.7m to Pounds 10m.
Mr Mike Hennessy, managing director, said Kalon was ready to take on
acquisitions following the success of the February 1993 purchase of Novodec
in France. The group would look for potential targets in Germany and France,
and pay cash for anything up to about Pounds 25m, he said. 'It is more
likely to be a small acquisition for cash than a large one for paper,' he
said.
Kalon's results for the six months to July 2, which were struck on sales 10
per cent ahead at Pounds 83m, reassured analysts and investors unsettled by
the recent rise in raw material prices. These had increased by about 0.2 per
cent, and had been largely offset by savings on larger volumes arising from
the Novodec purchase. Mr Hennessy said higher raw material prices were
unlikely to affect profits in the second half.
The UK paint market continued to stagnate, with volumes almost static and
revenues falling by 1 per cent. Mr Hennessy said that the promotional
price-cutting of a year ago had largely disappeared and prices seemed to
have stabilised. Kalon had coped with the soft market by introducing lower
priced paint products, rather than cutting the prices of existing paints.
Kalon also benefited from its increasing emphasis on serving trade customers
through its Leyland paint centres and squeezing overheads by some Pounds
475,000. While the group's sales to retail customers fell by more than 10
per cent, trade sales rose by a similar amount. The UK paints division was
just 0.5 per cent ahead to Pounds 6.2m on sales down 4 per cent to Pounds
48m.
Novodec contributed profits of Pounds 3.5m, against Pounds 2.45m for five
months. Kalon has opened its first trade paint centre in France and plans
another for the turn of the year. Vallance, the UK sundries business
acquired in February, almost trebled profits to Pounds 414,000.
Earnings per share rose to 5.17p (4.46p). The interim dividend is lifted to
1.5p (1.3p).
COMMENT
Kalon has become a victim of its own success. Having dealt with the
management problems of the late 1980s, and established itself as a leading
own-label paint manufacturer, it has to find a new angle for growth or
stagnate. Repeating the success story in continental Europe seems logical.
Everything now depends on Mr Hennessy's talent for spotting the right
acquisitions. He will have to do something soon if he wants to alleviate
fears about the effects of rising raw material prices and a dull UK market.
Forecasts are for about Pounds 22m this year, which leaves the shares on a
prospective p/e of about 15 times. Not a compelling buy, but the prospects
could be intriguing.
