FT  28 JUN 94 / SPD ready to join Kohl on postal privatisation
Germany's opposition Social Democrat party said yesterday it was likely to
support a crucial vote to change the constitution and clear the way for the
sale of the postal and telecommunications service, the country's largest
privatisation.
Mr Hans Gottfried Bernrath, the SPD telecommunications spokesman, said the
party leadership was due to endorse the privatisation plans at a meeting
last night, overriding objections from the German Postal Union (DPG).
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's government needs a two-thirds majority in the
Bundestag, or lower house of parliament, tomorrow - days before the summer
recess - so that the constitution can be changed and the privatisation can
go ahead.
If the change is approved, the state-owned postal and telecommunications
service which employs 670,000 people will be turned into three joint stock
companies on January 1, 1995: Deutsche Telekom, Postdienst and Postbank, the
post office's banking arm.
Telekom, the first of the three likely to be fully privatised, wants to
offer 30 per cent of its capital to the stock market in 1996. The SPD has
said it will back privatisation if money can be found to guarantee future
pensions payments and other rights.
These safeguards have been mostly agreed but Mr Peter Paterna, the SPD
deputy who chaired the parliamentary postal committee which oversaw the
legislation, said the package before parliament was a 'disaster'.
An independent study forecasts that the three companies would have to find
about DM35bn (Pounds 14.2bn) to cover pensions and other commitments, making
it difficult for them to keep up with their international competitors, Mr
Paterna said.
He accused the finance ministry of being short-sighted for failing to make
more money available.
Burdened with extra liabilities, the share issue price for the companies is
now likely to be much lower and the shortfall will have to be financed by
the finance ministry anyway, Mr Paterna said.
Meanwhile a series of warning strikes and demonstrations which have
interrupted the postal service during the past three weeks were set to
continue as talks between management and the DPG remained deadlocked.
