FT  07 NOV 94 / Survey of China (4): Spratly Islands row heats up - Dispute
over offshore oil and gas resources
It is possible that a group a submerged reefs in the South China Sea could
be the site of the world's next big conflict involving the ownership of oil
resources.
At issue is the ownership of the Spratly Islands and their surrounding seas
which are claimed, in whole or part, by China, Vietnam, the Philippines,
Malaysia, Brunei and Taiwan.
The main protagonists in the dispute are, however, China and Vietnam. They
have come to blows once - in 1988 when China sank two Vietnamese vessels
with the loss of more than 70 lives - and continue to frustrate each other's
attempts to mine the oil and gas believed to be in liberal supply below the
sea.
The South China Sea is one of the world's most important shipping lanes. The
possibility of a naval conflict over sovereignty would engage the vital
interests of Japan - 70 per cent of its oil imports pass through the sea -
and surrounding claimants. The US, which is not taking sides, would
inevitably become involved if hostilities broke out  - 'the Chinese
government's position is clear,' says Chen Bingqin, vice-president, China
National Offshore Oil Corp. 'We want to put the dispute on the shelf and
explore (for oil and gas) jointly. It is the only way peacefully to explore
the area.'
On the question of sovereignty, a senior Chinese government official was
adamant: 'Sovereignty belongs to China and that's a matter that brooks no
discussion.'
China claims that there was never any dispute about its sovereignty in the
South China Sea until oil and gas were discovered in the 1970s. The Spratly
Islands are too far south to show on the above map of China. The size of
Beijing's territorial claim - 80 per cent of the South China Sea - is
breathtakingly audacious, even by China's standards. The U-shaped claim runs
the length of Vietnam's coast and along the western coast of the Philippine
islands, meeting off the coast of Brunei and Malaysia to the south.
In 1990, Beijing offered to put the issue of sovereignty to one side and
embark upon joint development of the South China Sea. But in May 1992, China
awarded Crestone, a relatively small US oil explorer, the right to drill for
hydrocarbons in a bloc situated at the extreme south-west of its claimed
territory.
In retaliation, Vietnam awarded a consortium of oil companies, led by Mobil
of the US, a bloc adjacent to Crestone's and within China's territorial
claim. This group began prospecting in June.
Both countries have offered naval support to their respective prospectors.
In June the Vietnamese navy interfered with a Chinese vessel conducting a
seismic survey of Crestone's bloc. The Vietnamese claim similar interference
by the Chinese navy. For China, which is likely to remain a net oil importer
for many years to come, the promise of abundant oil reserves in the South
China Sea would be a boon to its offshore oil industry.
Since 1982, offshore oil finds in the Yellow and East China seas have failed
to live up to early expectations. This year the China National Offshore Oil
Corporation expects to produce 44m barrels of oil from 12 fields. It hopes
to double production by 1997 when other areas come on stream.
Vietnam, by contrast, is extracting 33m barrels a year from one field in the
South China Sea, with production set to rise sharply with the addition of
two more oil fields in production by the end of this year.
