FT  26 NOV 94 / Books: Lenin: true father of The Terror - Recently
declassified Soviet archives are revealing Russia's hero in a new light
LENIN: LIFE AND LEGACY by Dmitri Volkogonov HarperCollins Pounds 25, 558
pages
Embalmed and canonised, Lenin was removed from the vulgar gaze for half a
century following his premature death and rapid apotheosis. His mummified
body lay in a sarcophagus in Red Square tended by a laboratory which grew to
employ 60 experts, among them three soviet academicians, a corresponding
member of the academy of sciences, three doctors of science and 12 PhDs.
His brain was sliced into 30,963 sections and lodged in a special institute
where it was compared with the lobes of lesser geniuses. Although horribly
withered by the cerebral disease which killed him at the age of 53, this
organ was periodically reported to have quite exceptional features - until,
that is, Dr Oleg Adrianov pronounced in January: 'In the anatomical
structure of Lenin's brain there is nothing sensational.'
Lenin was sensational in one way, however, says Dmitri Volkogonov. He was
the greatest revolutionary of the century. For the rest, he was as fallible
as any man - though much more callous. Unable to govern once he had grabbed
power, he sought refuge in violence. He was the true father of The Terror.
For 25 years after Nikita Kruschchev had denounced Stalin's 'mistakes', says
Volkogonov, the Russian people asked themselves where Stalin had acquired
his cruelty. 'None of us - the present author included - could begin to
imagine that the father of domestic Russian terrorism, merciless and
totalitarian, was Lenin.'
This biography comes with two attributes which recommend it over other,
perhaps more literary, portraits. One is the elegance of Harold Shukman's
English translation. The other is the remarkable personal history of the
author.
Dmitri Volkogonov, a military historian, was once a loyal slave of the
system whose roots he now seeks to dig up. His father was executed on
Stalin's orders and he grew up with his mother in a political exiles' labour
camp in Krasnoyarsk, western Siberia. He was a young tank commander, a
high-ranking commissar and propaganda expert. As he told this reviewer when
his biography of Stalin appeared in English: 'I accept that I was one of
those who did a lot to strengthen the totalitarian system.'
A former general in the Red Army and subsequently President Yeltsin's
military adviser, he commanded the forces that shelled the recalcitrants in
the Moscow parliament building last October. Above all, he was chairman of
the commission responsible for declassifying the Soviet state, Communist
Party and KGB archives.
In the painful process of his own recantation, says Volkogonov, Leninism was
the last mental bastion to fall. In the book he presents Vladimir Ulyanov as
a gently-reared professional revolutionary with a compelling mind and
wolfish eyes, neither vain nor personally cruel but driven by promiscuous
and ruthless rage against his real or imagined enemies.
He stripped the liberal and democratic content out of Marxism and swore
allegiance to the fanatic principle that everything is justified - treason,
civil war, terror - in pursuit of the goal.
Lenin was an intellectual who read Aristotle and Spinoza and who described
intellectuals as the 'shit' of the nation. He seethed with hatred for the
kulaks but, says his biographer, would have been among the first to be
purged if he had not sold the family estate.
Among the facts that lay hidden in the archive were details of his ancestry
(Jewish, Asiatic and European as well as Russian), of the German financial
support for his Bolshevik party, of his nervous disorder and final mental
illness, of his direct responsibility for the murder of the Tsar and his
family.
Nor, argues Volkogonov, did Lenin ever espouse a more liberal economic
system. 'War communism' was his chosen method and the so-called New Economic
Policy merely a temporary stratagem forced on him by circumstances. 'It is
the biggest mistake to think that NEP will put an end to the terror,' he
wrote to Kamenev in 1922. 'We shall return to the terror and to economic
terror'.
Volkogonov makes lavish use of the files to sustain his thesis that Lenin's
ideas - his habits of mind, rather - characterised Soviet 'partocracy' until
the very end. By way of illustration he quotes from a 1987 politburo meeting
where we hear Gorbachev speaking of Lenin's genius, Ligachev worrying about
Trotskyism and Shevardnadze unhappy with the phrase 'liquidating the
kulaks'.
The October Revolution of 1917 was in fact a counter-revolutionary coup,
according to Volkogonov. It created a political culture that still permeates
the Russian citizenry. 'In worshipping the 'genius of abuse' we cultivated a
slavish psychology in ourselves.'
The icon may have been smashed, but worship is more powerful than knowledge.
