FT  24 SEP 94 / The Long View: When numbers deceive
Truth is an elusive concept, in the financial markets as anywhere else.
Whatever the scope for developing measurement standards of precise technical
accuracy, the commercial pressures will often dictate a blurring of the
vision. Harsh numbers can create discontent, unless tweaked or evaded.
This week, I have spent an instructive few days in Edinburgh at a congress
of European financial analysts who are, rightly, concerned about whether the
companies in which they invest are telling the truth about their
performance. But, too often, the analysts are in turn busily pulling the
wool over the eyes of their own clients, whether pension plans or investors
in mutual funds.
The argument for accurate financial reporting by listed companies is simple
and powerful. Only if clear and honest numbers are reported can share prices
be set accurately by the markets, so that capital can flow in an efficient
way to the most attractive investment opportunities. At the same time, it
can be withdrawn from enterprises that have large quantities of capital
employed but can only achieve low returns.
In the real world, however, companies rarely produce strong and progressive
profit figures. There are awkward fluctations, even in the profits of
successful companies. So, finance directors are tempted to iron out the
variations, to generate the nice, smooth sequence of profit numbers that the
stock market appears to want.
One of the dodges employed by British companies has been to use take-overs
as a cover for profit smoothing. The rules of acquisition accounting have,
until now, permitted companies to set up large balance sheet provisions to
cover the direct costs of acquisitions and the subsequent expenses of
restructuring.
Far from mergers being expensive and disruptive, which is the economic
reality, the accounting presentation has been that takeovers often generate
immediate earnings gains. Hence the uproar this week when finance directors
attacked the restrictive new draft accounting standard, FRS7, which curbs
the ability of acquisitive companies to shuffle take-over costs from their
profit and loss accounts and bury them in their balance sheets.
In Edinburgh, the chairman of the Accounting Standards Board, Sir David
Tweedie, pointed out to the analysts that this was simply one more stage in
the process of eliminating creative accounting. Already, the 'extraordinary'
items which used to litter the accounts of British companies have been
eliminated.
The old rule was that exceptional items counted towards earnings per share
but extraordinary items did not. Oddly enough, exceptionals almost always
seemed to be positive but extraordinaries were negative. It is, however,
still possible to play a game with exceptional items, as is shown by the
practice of 'big bath' provisions.
The stock market can, perhaps, be persuaded that so-called 'charges' set up
in anticipation of restructuring expenses or redundancy costs are unusual
and do not reduce - indeed, may even improve - the future earnings
potential. Grand Metropolitan tried this one on Monday for the second time
in less than a year. But if such provisions become routine, how can they be
described as exceptional?
Fragile accounting concepts can take a terrible battering when major
commercial objectives are at stake. But do the financial analysts have their
own hostages to fortune here? Murky things can also go on when fund managers
present their own investment returns, and it is interesting that the
European analysts have set up their own commission to attempt to raise
standards in this area.
Often, the whole embarrassing subject of investment performance is avoided
carefully. During the Edinburgh conference, for instance, four Scottish
investment institutions - Standard Life, Scottish Widows, Murray Johnstone
and Baillie Gifford - outlined their achievements and their strategies. None
offered performance data of any kind, an omission equivalent to four major
listed companies giving presentations without mentioning their profits or
their returns on capital.
The uncomfortable underlying truth, of course, is that most fund managers
produce unexciting results: indeed, by mathematical principle, the average
manager cannot beat the index. Moreover, academics have shown that most
managers who do outperform for short periods do so simply by chance.
(Incidentally, on a slightly different subject, a French professor, Bertrand
Jacquillat, presented a study which indicated that analysts working for
brokers who attempt to forecast company profits also show no signs of
consistently beating the herd. Such results do not show that the analysts
are incompetent but, rather, that the markets are efficient).
The European analysts - the European Federations of Financial Analysts'
Societies, to give them their full title - are setting up a commission to
try to sort out the jungle of performance measurement. At present, it is
notorious that investment houses tend to cherry-pick their best-performing
funds and individual managers and present them as representative rather than
exceptional. Weak funds are, somehow, dropped. Everybody in the fund
management business, if you believe the claims, has a better-than-average
performance, at least over some carefully-selected period or other.
If chance and the law of averages are indeed the dominant influences, it
might be better to choose a below-average fund manager whose fortunes may be
on the turn rather than a top performer whose lucky streak is about to run
out. Ironically, the better and more reliable the performance numbers
become, the more irrelevant they may be seen to be. Truth may be less
influential than fiction.
