FT  28 MAR 94 / FT Guide to the Week
28 MONDAY
Italian elections
Monday is the second day of the Italian elections. A clear pattern may not
be apparent until late on Tuesday and it may take many days to form a
government. The two leading contenders are the Alliance for Freedom - led by
Silvio Berlusconi's Forza Italia - and the Progressive Alliance, led by the
Democratic Party of the Left.
Ugandan polls
Uganda holds elections for a constituent assembly that will debate President
Yoweri Museveni's new constitution. The most controversial clause of the
draft charter seeks to ban political parties until at least the year 2000.
During the current campaign, candidates have not been allowed to identify
themselves publicly with any political party, but they have been able to
argue in favour of a return to party politics.
G-15 summit
PV Narasimha Rao, the Indian PM, hosts a three-day summit of representatives
of 15 developing countries. His guests include Dr Mahathir Mohammed of
Malaysia, President Suharto of Indonesia and heads of government from
Nigeria, Argentina, Senegal and Zimbabwe plus cabinet-level representatives
from Algeria, Brazil, Egypt, Jamaica, Mexico, Peru, Venezuela and Chile.
North-south issues top the agenda.
Nazarbayev visits Moscow
President Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan is scheduled to begin talks in
Moscow with President Boris Yeltsin.  Talks will focus on the future of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, economic agreement between Russia and
Kazakhstan, and the future of the Baikanur space launch centre - where a
deal is now thought likely on a proposal to run the centre jointly between
the two countries. Also thought to be susceptible to compromise is a quarrel
between the two states on the issue of dual citizenship for the 40 per cent
of the population of Russian origin.
Radio 5 Live launched
The BBC launches Radio Five Live, its 24-hour news and sport network, backed
by an extensive advertising campaign.
The new network emerged as a compromise following the bitter row created by
plans to turn Radio 4 long-wave radio over to an all news network and
restrict Radio 4 to FM coverage. This would have prevented Radio 4 coverage
reaching continental Europe. The loss of the Radio Five sports network also
raised opposition, although sports programmes are transferring to the new
network.
Albanian president in London
President Sali Berisha will begin the first visit of an Albanian head of
state to Britain today, nearly two years after the two countries settled a
long-standing dispute over Albanian gold seized in the second world war.
FT Survey: Risk management.
29 TUESDAY
Craxi goes on trial
Former Italian prime minister Bettino Craxi goes on trial in Milan, becoming
the highest ranking politician yet to face charges in the country's
corruption scandals.
The trial begins a day after a general election based on a new electoral
system in which three-quarters of deputies in the parliament's lower house
will be elected on a first-past-the-post basis. About a fifth of the
parliament's outgoing members have been involved in the corruption
inquiries.
Mr Craxi, former leader of the Socialist party, is to be tried over bribes
alleged to have been paid by an insurance group for contracts with Eni, the
state energy concern. Mr Craxi, who denies the charges, faces a possible
maximum jail sentence of five years.
Cairo talks resume
Talks resume to put the finishing touches to the deployment of Norwegian
observers and Palestinian police in Hebron, where an Israeli fanatic
massacred Moslems last month.
EU argues over mad cows
The UK and Germany confront each other at a meeting of EU agriculture
ministers over Bonn's wish to ban British beef imports because of fear of
'mad cow disease', or bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE). The European
Commission will tell Germany that it will take legal action if it introduces
a unilateral ban. Health ministers of the 12 will also discuss the BSE row
on Wednesday.
Loch Ness submarine
The first submarine to take passengers on a deep dive to try to glimpse the
Scottish lake's elusive monster will be launched.
Japanese retail sales
The Japanese economy may be reaching the bottom of its long downturn but
retail sales remain sluggish. Figures out today are expected to show a 2.5
per cent decline in the year to February. In the year to November, the fall
was 6.9 per cent. Rising unemployment is expected to limit the ability of
retail sales to rebound.
Heseltine to defend takeover
Mr Michael Heseltine, UK trade and industry secretary, is to be questioned
by MPs over the takeover of Newspaper Publishing, owner of The Independent
and The Independent on Sunday, by a consortium backed by Mirror Group
Newspapers. Mr Heseltine decided last week not to refer the deal to the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission on the grounds that the papers were not
economic as going concerns.
FT Survey: Rhone Alpes.
30 WEDNESDAY
Clarke meets Bank head
The monthly monetary meeting between Kenneth Clarke, chancellor of the
exchequer (left), and Eddie George, governor of the Bank of England, will
consider the merits of a cut in interest rates. The weakness of sterling and
last week's disappointing inflation figures may point them away from a cut;
however, Mr Clarke may be keen to reduce rates to offset the impact of the
1994-95 tax increases and to create some good news ahead of the May local
elections.
Highways Agency born
The Highways Agency, which will take over the detailed implementation of
Britain's road building and maintenance programme from the Department of
Transport, comes into being. Nearly 2,500 civil servants will transfer into
the agency which will pay its senior officials on a performance-related
basis depending on the speed and efficiency with which they build roads.
Also the Maritime Safety Agency and Coastguard Agency take over
responsibility for ship safety, maritime pollution and emergency rescue
services at sea.
Pensions debate
MPs will discuss personal pensions and the need for direct regulation of the
private pension sector. The full-scale House of Commons debate is set to
focus on concerns about the mis-selling of personal pensions to those
leaving or transferring out of occupational pension schemes; and to those
contracting out of the state earnings-related pension scheme.
It will also cover the controversy about the right system of regulating
financial services for the private investor. The government backs the
planned personal investment authority - which also has the support of the
Prudential, the biggest UK life company - while Labour would prefer direct,
statutory regulation.
EU and Lithuania talk trade
The European Union and Lithuania hold the second round of talks on a free
trade agreement.
Japanese industrial production
The figures are expected to show a seasonally adjusted monthly rise of 2.1
per cent, compared with a 1 per cent increase in January. However,
production will still be lower than it was a year ago.
Indian trade policy
India will make its annual statement on trade policy, which is likely to
include further important measures to liberalise imports and exports.
FT Survey: Investing in India; Japanese Financial Markets
31 THURSDAY
CIS hears Russia's terms
The Commonwealth of Independent States' leaders come together in Moscow.
Russia's proposal for a 'rouble zone' is likely to be pressed once more -
but the Belarussian representatives will ask why their efforts to become
more closely integrated with Russia have so far been repelled.
The new members from the Caucasus, Georgia and Azerbaijan, will press Russia
to settle the conflicts on their territories and in the former's case,
salvage its collapsed economy. Ukraine, where elections may reveal a swing
towards pro-Russian political forces, has the problem of indebtedness to
Russia for energy to settle - and that of the ownership of the Black Sea
Fleet.
Russia is likely to make it clear that the terms for assistance are becoming
increasingly steep, and that if the countries want help, they must act as
hosts to the Russian army and support the Russian political line.
Clinton's unacceptable list
The Clinton Administration plans to issue a preliminary list of what it
considers unacceptable trade barriers implemented by foreign nations against
American exports. On March 3 President Clinton revived the Super 301 trade
policy weapon, allowing him to impose sanctions against targeted countries
if they fail to dismantle barriers to American exports.
Commons recess
The House of Commons will break for Easter between March 31 and April 12.
Nicholson arraigned
Actor Jack Nicholson is scheduled to be arraigned in Los Angeles on charges
stemming from an incident in which he is alleged to have smashed another
driver's windscreen with a golf club.
Romanian budget delay
Romania has until today to adopt a 1994 budget, otherwise, under the
constitution, last year's budget will come into force. The delay is holding
up a Dollars 700m International Monetary Fund loan package.
French unemployment figures
The French government will be hoping that February's unemployment figures
will show a slowdown in the rise of joblessness. Economists expect another
increase, although they believe that the rate is unlikely to rise much above
the current level of 12.2 per cent.
One in four young people between the ages of 16 and 25 are out of work, the
highest rate in the G7 group of industrialised countries. Attempts to reduce
youth unemployment, through the introduction of apprentice schemes under
which 16-25 year olds can be paid less than the minimum wage, have, however,
prompted widespread student demonstrations.
Air France ultimatum
Air France has given its 14 unions until today to agree to a plan to boost
productivity by 30 per cent at the loss-making state-owned airline over
three years.
1 GOOD FRIDAY
British Rail dismantled
British Rail takes another important step towards its eventual privatisation
with the handing over of BR's tracks, signalling and stations to Railtrack,
a newly created company. Some 25 passenger train operating units,
corresponding to BR's existing profit centres, will take over the running of
trains. Three rolling stock leasing companies will be set up to lease
locomotives and carriages to the train operators.
UK tax changes bite
Value added tax is imposed on domestic fuel, at 8 per cent, rising to 17.5
per cent next year, and prescription charges rise from Pounds 4.25 to Pounds
4.75, an 11.6 per cent increase. Many householders have been pre-paying
their gas and electricity bills to avoid VAT.
Maghreb summit
Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco, Libya and Mauritania, who together form the
Maghreb Arab Union, will hold their annual summit on April 2 and 3 in Tunis.
Hungary bids to join EU
Hungary submits its formal bid to become a full member of the EU - the first
ex-Warsaw Pact state to do so.
2-4 SATURDAY-MONDAY
Brazilian election deadline
April 2 marks the final deadline for Brazilian ministers, mayors and
governors to resign if they wish to run in this year's presidential,
gubernatorial and congressional elections, due in October.
All eyes will be on finance minister Mr Fernando Henrique Cardoso, who has
appeared undecided whether to run for president. One presidential hopeful
expected to stand is Mr Paulo Maluf, mayor of Sao Paulo.
Zhirinovsky congress
The extreme right-wing Liberal Democratic Party of Vladimir Zhirinovsky
holds its congress on Saturday. Despite the party's success in December's
Russian elections, he is expected to face strong criticism for his extremist
outbursts and meddling in the internal affairs of eastern European states.
UN secretary-general to visit Russia
UN secretary-general Boutros Boutros-Ghali will visit Russia from April 1-5.
US summer time: US clocks go forward on Sunday.
Compiled by Robert Anderson.
Fax: (+44) (0)71 873 3194.
