FT  17 NOV 94 / Technology: How the Japanese measure up - A look at a new
database of body sizes
A band of British MPs visiting Japanese schools recently were surprised that
the children's body frames were far larger than they had expected. 'There
were a few as big as me,' said one after a day at a school in central Tokyo.
Japanese children are becoming generally taller and bigger than previous
generations. Changes to the normal diet, now containing more meat and dairy
products rather than fish and vegetables, and a more westernised lifestyle -
using chairs rather than sitting on tatami-matted floors, for instance - are
reckoned to have contributed to the modern Japanese physique.
Such changes have also started to affect industrial manufacturers. Calls
from companies for more accurate data on the growing sizes of the Japanese
have prompted the government to compile statistics in order to capture the
changes. A comprehensive survey of physical sizes was initiated at the start
of last year for the first time since 1978.
After two years of gathering data, the Research Institute of Human
Engineering for Quality Life (HLQ), an organisation affiliated to the
Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Miti), started marketing its
database last year.
The institute gathered data from 35,000 people between the ages of seven and
70. A measuring machine equipped with laser beams captured three-dimensional
images of the bodies, with measurements provided for every three
millimetres.
The institute has received more than 400 queries and has now sold 95
database packages. The statistics are expected to help manufacturers save on
product sizes and reduce risk of accumulating unwanted stock. Clothing
makers, consumer electronics and automobile companies are among the
purchasers.
The washing machine division of Matsushita Electronic Industries, the
leading consumer electronics company, has used the institute's data on arm
length, while Nissan Motor says it bought the data to determine seat size
and the amount of room between the head and the car roof.
Toto, the lavatory maker, says the data confirmed that Japanese toilets did
not need to be altered as bottom sizes were not changing drastically.
Goldwin, a sportswear maker, added a new size for shorter, plumper
middle-aged women on to its mountain climbing gear line after buying the
data, while a spectacles manufacturer was surprised that head sizes of
primary school children were getting larger than expected, and increased the
number of spectacle sizes for children.
Yoji Fukuda, head of technology development at HLQ, says the institute spent
Y500m (Pounds 3m) on the project. The database provides data of 178 body
parts, from the thickness of the hand to the distance between the eyes.
According to the data, females in their 40s were 2.7cm taller than 15 years
ago; males in the same age group were 3.5cm higher. Women in their 20s were
2.2cm taller; bust and waist measurements were larger by 1cm.
The statistics also show that the Japanese foot has become narrower, but
indicate that Japanese still have shorter, lower legs and upper arms
compared with Caucasians.
Miti is currently reviewing the Japan Industrial Standards - national size
and format standards for industrial products - based on the data.
It is comparing the differences with the standard sizes set in 1980 and is
expected to revise the national standards in 1996.
Fees for the database, available on floppy discs or paper, depend on the
menu required. A basic package covering 1,000 people costs around Y180,000,
while small and medium-sized companies are eligible for discounts.
A ski-boot maker, for instance, buying foot measurements of 10 categories
could pay between Y380,000 and Y1.3m.
