FT  26 APR 94 / Technology: Every day in every way - Many PC users need
constant expert backup as well as rescue services / A look at a UK council
It's 10 minutes past 10 in the morning. Dozens of people are working on
their personal computers. Suddenly the screens all go fizz-bang, as an
electrical contractor accidentally touches a positive to a negative wire.
The surge of power leaves 65 PCs dead or smoking, plus their printers and
five Novell file servers - the hubs of a PC network. Even the two UPSs -
Uninterruptable Power Supply units - are dead. The UPS is designed to
protect computers from damaging surges in power, but not to withstand 480
volts.
This sounds like a 'disaster recovery' scenario, dreamt up to test crisis
procedures. But the nightmare really happened, in the building which houses
many of Brent Council's social services staff, in March this year.
Lubna Ibrahim, Brent social services client IT manager, was already very
busy as users are in the process of upgrading from mainframe applications
and Wang minicomputers to standardised PC software. All are supplying vital
care management and support services, and could not do their jobs without
the computer system.
Her first call was to BIT Information Services, one of the new breed of
council-owned contractors. BIT, formed from the former IT department of
Brent, competed independently to win the support business for social
services and for two other large internal client departments.
Following government directives on efficiency, Brent has devolved from a few
large divisions into almost 100 business units, each of which can choose its
own IT hardware and software. A corporate IT team, CIT, is responsible for
council-wide policy, setting standards where appropriate in software,
hardware and procedures, and co-ordinating generic systems such as local
area networks.
Brent's decentralisation, coupled with a new open systems policy, has
brought about a system consisting of 30 interlinked Unix and Novell file
servers, which are taking over many of the mainframe functions. It serves
3,000 Brent Council employees, more than 1,000 of whom are PC users, in 30
buildings.
BIT supports all the telephony at Brent, but it is up to individual
departments whether they use BIT's services for support. Social Services is
one of the three large departments that have opted to use BIT.
So when disaster struck, Ibrahim immediately contacted BIT support manager
Jim Sarath and asked him to replace all the damaged equipment, about Pounds
100,000 worth. According to Bob Roberts, deputy customer-services manager of
BIT: 'By 3pm we'd ordered 40 replacement PCs. By Thursday, they were all up
and running with centralised printing services. We have a number of
strategic alliances with suppliers, so in a crisis, we can get help
quickly.'
Software is often a greater problem than hardware. The power cut jeopardised
all the procedures and data the PC users had built up: desktop publishing
formats, standard electronic mail forms for exchanging information, and
other frameworks embedded in their day-to-day operations.
'What BIT did to rescue the data was to mop it up from the hard disks,
saving the data, the formats, the forms, and the libraries. What we
preserved was the working environment as well as the actual data,' says
Roberts.
BIT seldom has to respond to such urgent purchasing requirements. It takes
an everyday role in supporting users and training them to use new systems.
Ibrahim's role is a good example of how the mushrooming of IT services on
PCs and networks has produced a need for localised, specialised support. She
is on the spot for Social Services, part of their operation rather than an
IT person first and foremost, and sympathetic to IT novices.
'In the past year, we've migrated from the old system to the new, from Wang
or even mainframe applications to the PC, using Microsoft Office and cc:mail
applications,' she says. 'We already have 123 users, all trained and
supported by BIT. I always insist that people have the new system as soon as
they've finished training, so that they become users straight away.'
Brent social services department uses a well-established software package,
SSID, for Unix and PCs, as well as its customised applications. New needs
are always arising. Ibrahim defines the problem, then turns to BIT for the
solution: she can even browse through the technology available in a
'one-stop showcase' in their nearby office.
'I have a bad habit of ringing them and saying: can I have this yesterday.
So far, they've always delivered,' she says. 'They're not just doers,
they're thinkers, they have helped us evolve our IT practices. They also
have to be good all-rounders because from 8am to 6pm they are dealing with
every sort of inquiry, from 'what is my password?' to a PC catching fire.
BIT loans us equipment in the case of any hardware problems, but software is
much more tricky.'
Roberts agrees. 'It is the help-desk's job to analyse where a problem
originates. If it is software, it could be anything from a software package
on a Unix minicomputer, to a PC application built in-house. We try to fix
the problem here in the help-desk, before involving any outside supplier or
even our own support engineers.'
Software support involves expensive expertise, on call all day. Lack of
communication is the biggest hazard, resulting in help-desk bottlenecks and
frustrated users. Without central control, it is only too easy for several
help-desk staff to be chasing the same problem, unaware that it is a common
one, with a known correction.
From the user's point of view, talking to a help-desk can be daunting,
especially when - like talking to a bank or a utility - they never get the
same member of staff twice, and have to start from the beginning with every
call.
Anxious to avoid these pitfalls, BIT drew up a shortlist of three help-desk
tools from 20 or so suppliers, and tested three. HDE, from Digital Networks
International in East Grinstead, won on three counts. HDE software could
work on PC Lans as well as Unix servers, and development of modifications
was easy with a quick programming language, or 4GL. Its inbuilt inventory
management facilities cover hardware and software, right down to the
individual user level. Knowing who is using what can be a problem in any
organisation where a free rein with IT purchasing has led to different
generations of the same software, running on hybrid hardware.
'You have to have something to control the help-desk traffic,' says Roberts.
'We tried a home-grown solution but while it gave us a log, there was no
real control ability, which is what HDE provides. It gives us dynamic
control over the current situation.'
HDE logs support calls, and allows work to be shared out between the
help-desk team. The logged data can be 'sliced and diced' to look at
individual workloads, specific problem areas, or focus on the origins of
problems. Behind it is a database of premises, addresses, and users. HDE
'learns' from the fixes logged in the system, proffering menus of possible
solutions, and instant checklists for the support staff to suggest to the
user.
'HDE has been very successful because we can see what the issues are, and
how we can allocate resources. It allows us to know about common problems
that are happening to various different people: we can draw on the prior
knowledge of fixes, and apply it the next time around,' says Roberts.
Remote access to the user's terminal is an important HDE feature. Taking
this one step further, BIT is currently testing the Intel LAN Desk Manager,
which provides 'over the shoulder' remote control of the user terminal (on
the same principle as the dual controls used for driving instruction), plus
remote control of the network.
The information provided by HDE provides analytical fodder for BIT's
purchasing policy, and even a way of measuring and monitoring third-party
service contracts.
BIT has become hard-nosed, according to Roberts. 'A few years ago, what you
would have seen is a standard centralised IT department. These days, what
you find is more of a commercial organisation. Our job is not to make a
large profit from our users, but to break even.'
