FT  24 MAR 94 / On the brink of a breakdown: The impasse on voting rights
that threatens to provoke a crisis over EU enlargement
The European Union loves to live dangerously. Brinkmanship runs in the
blood, but there comes a point when members of the club must decide whether
to pull back or precipitate a crisis.
This point is approaching rapidly in the dispute over power-sharing in an
expanded Union. Without an agreement in the next week or so, there is a
serious risk that Finland, Sweden, Austria and Norway will be unable to meet
the agreed date of January 1 1995 for EU entry.
A delay threatens to erode fragile public support for EU membership among
the four Nordic and Alpine applicants, where only the Finns show a
consistent majority in favour of entry. Postponement of enlargement would
reinforce the sense of disarray in the Union, rekindling doubts about more
ambitious projects such as a common foreign and security policy and a single
European currency.
There may be other unpredictable consequences. Britain and Spain's
insistence on maintaining their ability to block decisions in an enlarged
Union has attracted nationalist cheers at home. But it threatens to break
the informal truce among heads of government over the constitutional future
of the Union, a truce which barely held during the painful ratification of
the Maastricht treaty.
Until the latest imbroglio over voting rights, the consensus among the
Twelve was to hold fire on constitutional issues until 1996, the date set
for a review of Maastricht. But the power-sharing dispute has forced member
states to confront matters which many hoped to postpone: the relationship
between voting power and population in an expanded Union, and the
organisation of a Union of 20 or more member states, including the central
and east Europeans.
With Hungary's application to join the EU due next month, pressures for
faster integration of the east are growing. Germany, which takes over the
rotating EU presidency from Greece on July 1, is planning several
initiatives, including invitations to the former communist countries to send
permanent non-voting delegations to the European Parliament, and invitations
to heads of governments to attend European summits. 'We have to rethink our
whole policy toward eastern Europe,' said one senior Commission official.
It seems unlikely that the British and Spanish governments intended to open
up the debate about the future shape of the EU. Together they make an odd
couple: the pioneer of enlargement (Britain) hitched up with an EU partner
which has more reservations than most about its impact (Spain). The next few
days, starting with an EU foreign ministers meeting in Greece at the
weekend, will determine whether the London-Madrid alliance is a marriage of
convenience or principle.
Both Spain and Britain want to preserve voting rules in an expanded Union
which prevent two large countries and one small member state being outvoted
 -23 votes are at present needed to muster this blocking minority. Britain
is pressing for a legally binding protocol which would safeguard this
present position. Spain may settle for something less, but it remained firm
at Tuesday's meeting of EU foreign ministers.
Voting procedures do not affect matters of sovereignty such as foreign
policy or European monetary union, where a national veto by one member state
can be exercised; but they do cover decisions on 'second tier' issues such
as the environment, health and safety regulations, tobacco advertising, and
trade action. For instance, the UK collected enough votes to block the first
Commission proposals for reform of the Common Agricultural Policy in the
early 1990s; and last year won support from Germany and the Netherlands to
block trade reprisals against cheap aluminium imports from Russia.
For the Madrid government, the planned switch to a 27-vote threshold is
especially worrisome because it challenges the power of the 'olive oil
minority'. This grouping allows Spain to combine with Italy and Greece to
muster 23 votes to block decisions judged to infringe its vital interests,
mainly in the area of Mediterranean agriculture.
For the UK, the tale is more tangled. Along with Germany, Britain had ranked
as the Nordic applicants' best friend. Yet British support for 'widening'
Europe has always been based on the assumption that it would not come at the
price of further 'deepening' of Euro-institutions.
The British calculation is that enlargement can proceed without further
erosion of national sovereignty, and its conviction has strengthened in the
past two years as ministers have watched public ambivalence about Maastricht
grow on the continent, particularly in France and Germany. The belief that
the tide in Europe is running Britain's way is widely held in Westminster,
even though it has proved misplaced in the past and is not held in the
Foreign Office.
Brussels officials express astonishment that the UK has invested so much
capital on an issue which they describe as peripheral compared with the
greater political prize: enlargement of the Union to include wealthy,
free-trading Scandinavians who will very soon be net contributors to the EU
budget.
The suspicion is that Mr John Major, UK prime minister, is wrapping himself
in the Union Jack to prevent a civil war in his own party over Europe in the
run-up to the European Parliament elections in June, where polls suggest the
Tories will suffer heavy losses. The prime minister also looks boxed in by
his own Cabinet, where a mixture of Euro-sceptics and pretenders to the
premiership have turned an arcane voting system into a cause celebre.
When EU foreign ministers met on Tuesday, Britain and Spain were clearly
isolated. Ten countries declared there was no question of offering
legally-binding protection for the 23-vote blocking minority, a position
echoed by the European Parliament, which must give its assent to the
enlargement treaty by early May or postpone consideration until after the
June polls.
Here is the big risk. Without an early favourable vote in the Parliament,
there seems little hope of Finland, Sweden, Austria and Norway holding
referendums on the accession treaties in time for the target date for entry
into the Union. 'The whole momentum of enlargement would be lost,' said one
Scandinavian ambassador.
British officials say their best hope lies in persuading Germany to come up
with a compromise. The Bonn government has little appetite for making
population reflect voting power more accurately because it would mean a more
populous Germany acquiring more votes than France, thus jeopardising the
relationship with its closest ally. It insists that the threshold is raised
from 23 to 27 votes.
British officials are hoping, however, that Germany may agree to a deal
whereby certain areas - notably social policy - would be subject to the
23-vote blocking minority in return for UK acceptance of 27 votes on most
other areas. But such a solution still runs the risk of being turned down by
the Parliament.
What irks Britain and Spain's partners is that London and Madrid implicitly
accepted the principle of a 'mechanical' adjustment in voting weights at the
Lisbon summit in June 1992. The European Commission, as well as
federalist-minded countries such as Belgium and the Netherlands, argued in
favour of more far-reaching reforms to streamline decision-making in an
expanded European Union; but they were overruled by the UK and Germany which
insisted that enlargement should come first.
A Dutch diplomat, echoing widespread sentiment in Brussels, argues that the
UK's strategy is to 'roll back' Maastricht and push the European Union
further towards loose inter-governmental co-operation. 'The British are
taking a very consistent line,' agrees a German official.
The question is whether the rest of the Union has the stomach to provoke a
confrontation now, or cobble together a compromise in the hope that the deep
divisions over the future shape and pace of integration can be resolved in
1996.
Mr Jacques Delors, Commission president, has no doubt about the best
outcome. 'It is better to have a crisis than to have a bad compromise which
later turns out to make things five or six times worse.'
