FT  10 JUN 94 / Shortlist for Channel link bidders finalised
The names of the consortia shortlisted to bid for the Pounds 2.7bn
high-speed rail link between London and the Channel tunnel are expected to
be announced by the Department of Transport in the next few days.
Officials yesterday were still negotiating over the membership of some of
the consortia but the chosen bids, barring any last-minute hitches, are
expected to include:
EuroRail, the only all-British bid involving a joint venture between BICC,
Trafalgar House and GEC. The bid is supported by bankers National
Westminster and HongKong and Shanghai Banking Corporation.
London &amp; Continental Railways, involving UK consulting engineers Ove Arup
and Sir William Halcrow; Bechtel, the large US construction group;
Sofrerail, French consultants; National Express, the coach company, and
cement group Blue Circle.
A consortium led by Hochtief, a German construction group supported by
Costain, the UK construction and engineering group; Nishimatsu Construction
of Japan; Siemens and Siemens Transport Systems of Germany, and
Westinghouse, the US engineering group.
It was not clear last night whether a fourth consortium involving UK
construction companies John Mowlem and Taylor Woodrow, and Philipp Holzmann,
a German construction company, would also be included on the shortlist. This
consortium includes Transurb Consultants of Belgium and WS Atkins, the UK
consulting engineers.
London Electricity, the chairman of which is Sir Bob Reid who also chairs
British Rail, yesterday announced it had withdrawn from the EuroRail
consortium because of a possible conflict of interest. Similar horse-trading
is thought to have been occurring between officials and other consortia.
The contract to build and run the 68-mile link will combine private and
public-sector finance under the government's private-finance initiative. The
contract is expected to be awarded early next year. The size of the
public-sector contribution will be an important factor in determining the
winning bid.
The scale of the contract, together with the lack of domestic expertise in
operating privately financed large transport systems, has attracted wide
international interest.
This has been encouraged by the government which wants to increase
competition for privately financed infrastructure projects. Nine consortia
originally asked to be considered for the shortlist. The government has
offered to cover a third of the bid costs of failed bidders, up to a maximum
of Pounds 1.5m.
Final tenders for the link are expected to be submitted by December. The
line will need to be capable of carrying at least six trains an hour each
way at speeds of up to 140mph.
