FT  21 NOV 94 / IRA admits its members killed postal worker
The IRA admitted last night that its members murdered a postal worker during
a robbery in Newry, County Down, 10 days ago.
But the IRA leadership insisted that it remained committed to the success of
the peace process and said it had not sanctioned the raid. It blamed a
'fault' in its chain of command and apologised for the attack.
Mr Frank Kerr was shot when masked raiders entered the sorting office in
Newry and escaped with more than Pounds 130,000. It was the first killing by
the IRA since its ceasefire started on September 1.
A statement issued in Dublin said: 'Those carrying out the robbery were
acting on instructions but the so-called operation had not been sanctioned
by the IRA leadership.'
It added: 'Responsibility for this incident lies with an identified problem
in the army's chain of command and not with the volunteers involved. This
has now been rectified.'
The statement followed an investigation the IRA promised on November 12 when
the organisation banned the use of firearms by its members.
Two men appeared in court last Wednesday charged with the murder of Mr Kerr
and stealing more than Pounds 130,000.
Neither Downing Street nor the Northern Ireland Office would comment on the
statement last night.
The BBC reported that Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president, had said he was
disappointed at the IRA's involvement and added that it was now up to the
IRA to ensure there was no repetition.
Mr Peter Robinson MP, deputy leader of the Democratic Unionist party, urged
Mr John Major, the prime minister, to 'wipe from his mind' immediately any
thoughts of entering into dialogue with Sinn Fein.
He accused the IRA of 'blatant hypocrisy'. In the same message, he said,
they had admitted murdering Mr Kerr and expressed their devotion to the
peace process.
Earlier Mr Ken Maginnis MP, Ulster Unionist party security spokesman, said
the IRA planned to launch an offensive of sporadic attacks under the guise
of a breakaway group.
Stewart Dalby in Belfast writes: The possibility of such a breakaway move
had been dismissed at the weekend by Mr John Hume, leader of the Social
Democratic and Labour party.
His comments followed reports that an IRA faction based in South Armagh
would split from the organisation and resume violence by March if Britain
did not make significant constitutional concessions to the republican
movement.
He said: 'I have been at the centre of the (peace) process from the very
beginning. I can tell you there are no deadlines for the IRA, no secret
deals.'
Earlier, Mr Hume said he firmly believed the ceasefires by the IRA and the
loyalist paramilitaries would prove to be durable.
He said: 'Peace and justice in the north transcend party politics in the
south.'
