FT  21 APR 94 / International Capital Markets: SEC relaxes rules for foreign
issuers
The US Securities and Exchange Commission has agreed on new rules that
should make it easier for foreign companies to issue securities on the US
market.
The rules will allow more companies to use a shorter form of the SEC's
standard documentation, helping to reduce the initial cost of obtaining a US
listing.
The SEC estimates that the change in rules will increase by as much as
one-third the number of foreign companies allowed to use the short F-3
filing form, which usually runs to about 20 pages, rather than the full F-1
form of 60 pages or more.
Companies with a public float of Dollars 75m will now qualify, instead of
Dollars 300m previously. The SEC will also require a reporting history of
only 12 months, instead of 36 months, so long as the company has at least
one annual report.
'As our experience with foreign issuers grows, we will continue to discover
ways to assist them with the transition to our disclosure system, and
therefore our markets, while not compromising in any way our mandate to
protect the American investor,' said Mr Arthur Levitt, the SEC chairman.
Although more than 600 foreign companies are now registered with the SEC,
many find US reporting requirements burdensome and costly.
Mr Kevin Cramer, a partner in the Washington office of lawyers Jones, Day,
Reavis &amp; Pogue, said use of the F-3 form would not only reduce the amount of
paper a company had to file, but also cut the time the SEC staff would take
to review it.
'A UK issuer that wanted to take advantage of market conditions could have a
higher degree of confidence that they could get into the market when they
want to,' Mr Cramer said.
Among other measures included in the package, the SEC voted to allow foreign
companies to use the same unallocated shelf registration process already
available to US issuers.
Under this process, a company can file a single registration statement,
without specifying in advance whether it will issue shares, bonds or some
other form of security.
Another important measure described by Mr Levitt as a 'landmark step' would
allow foreign companies to present cashflow statements prepared in
accordance with International Accounting Standard Number 7, rather than US
accounting standards as currently required.
