FT  07 MAR 94 / The Monday Interview: The making of a media mogul - Bernard
Simon meets David Radler, the deal-making partner and confidant of tycoon
Conrad Black
All Conrad Black's deals, from his first foray into newspapers in rural
Quebec 25 years ago to his purchase last week of the Chicago Sun-Times, have
had one thing in common. They would not have happened without David Radler.
Officially, Radler is president and chief operating officer of Hollinger,
Black's Canadian holding company. In reality, he is Black's closest business
confidant, his chief deal-maker and, when necessary, his hatchet man. He
keeps a much lower profile than Black. However, Black, who spends most of
his time these days in London, seldom makes an important move without
consulting Radler in faraway Vancouver.
Radler sits on the boards of Hollinger's two flagship investments - the UK
Telegraph group and Southam, Canada's biggest newspaper chain. It was
Radler, not Black, who touched down in Chicago to announce Hollinger's
investment in the Sun-Times, the US's ninth biggest newspaper, and it is
Radler who will take over as chairman of the Sun-Times Company.
Adding to his clout, Radler has a minority stake in Ravelston Corp, the
private company which controls Hollinger. The only other sizeable Ravelston
shareholders are Black and Peter White, another long-time friend and
business associate, whom Radler had met during a Quebec election campaign in
the late 1960s. Radler was working for the finance minister, who had earlier
been a waiter in Radler's father's restaurant.
With the Sun-Times investment, Hollinger's world is unfolding much as Radler
predicted in 1992 when he and Black were unsuccessfully pursuing the New
York Daily News.
The international media industry will centre on 15-20 heavyweights, he said
at the time, 'and we want to be one of them. I wish we could determine where
we're going to be, but we're going to be wherever the opportunities are.'
Radler, 51, is almost the complete antithesis of Black. 'Conrad and David
have an ideal partnership,' says Martin Maleska, a New York investment
banker who advised Hollinger on the Sun-Times deal. 'I find it amazing that
they complement each other so well.'
Black, urbane and sociable, is a product of the stuffy Anglo-Canadian
establishment, and is at home in the company of (preferably conservative)
statesmen, aristocrats and intellectuals.
By contrast, Radler is a scrappy Jewish Montrealer, who won his business
spurs in the family restaurant and his own shop selling native handicrafts
at Expo 67 in Montreal. He moved to the west coast in the early 1970s when
the three partners bought a small paper in Prince Rupert, British Columbia.
He still works from cramped offices in an unpretentious Vancouver
residential neighbourhood, a sharp contrast to the opulence of Black's bases
at Canary Wharf in London and the elegant turn-of-the-century post office
which houses Hollinger's Toronto offices.
The two men work together more as partners than as chief executive and chief
operating officer. Although they consult frequently by phone, each has
carved out a primary sphere of influence. Black concentrates on the
Telegraph and on Fairfax Holdings, Australia's second-biggest newspaper
chain of which the Telegraph has 24 per cent.
Radler spends most of his time looking after Hollinger's North American
interests which, until the Sun-Times purchase, consisted mainly of about 300
small-town newspapers in the US and Canada, as well as the 8.3 per cent
stake in Southam. He is also chairman of the Jerusalem Post, which Hollinger
bought in 1988.
Radler's interest in newspapers was aroused in his boyhood by a Time
magazine cover story on US publisher Si Newhouse. The cover showed newsprint
going in one side of a machine and dollar bills coming out the other. 'I
said 'This can't be a bad business',' Radler recalled.
His admirers praise him for his efficiency and tenacity. According to
Maleska, 'he has a very keen understanding of how businesses operate at the
most mundane level'. Others are less flattering, however. One long-time
associate, who asked not to be identified, described Radler as 'difficult'.
Even Black, in his recently-published autobiography, mentioned his friend's
'fanatical determination'.
In particular, Radler has a reputation as a fearless cost-cutter. Black
recalls in his book that when a reporter at the Sherbrooke Record in Quebec,
their first newspaper, marched into Radler's office to present a petition of
grievances, Radler deducted two cents from the man's weekly pay cheque for
wasting a sheet of paper.
'I don't think I'm any worse or any better than anyone else in the
business,' Radler says. 'If I can see that an operation can be run by two
people, and we have six, I want it run by two.'
Radler has applied this philosophy to justify the relatively high prices
which Hollinger has paid over the past eight years for many of its 280 rural
US papers, most of them formerly family-owned. As a result, many papers in
neighbouring towns now share printing presses, advertising departments and
even news-gathering resources.
The Dollars 180m Sun-Times deal is in a different league. The purchase
fulfils Black's and Radler's ambition to add a North American metropolitan
paper to their stable. Radler says that he and Black first looked at the
Chicago paper more than two and a half years ago. The Sun-Times, which has a
daily circulation of 535,000 and Sunday sales of about 524,000, propels
Hollinger into the top ten US newspaper publishers.
Although the Sun-Times plays second fiddle to the Chicago Tribune, Radler
says it is profitable and 'has loyal readers and advertisers'. The tabloid
is best-known for its fearless coverage of Chicago's rambunctious political
scene.
True to form, Radler insists that there is 'a potential for improving
operating margins' at the Sun-Times - in particular, Hollinger plans to
modernise its technology. The paper's previous owners, comprising
institutional investors and senior managers, have been hobbled by the heavy
debt-service burden incurred through a leveraged buy-out from Rupert Murdoch
in 1989.
The Sun-Times' 1,550 employees may get an early taste of the Radler style.
The paper's labour contracts come up for renewal later this year. Radler
says: 'They've absolutely nothing to fear. I'm not going to set a new policy
because we're in control.' But it would be out of character if he did not
push hard for concessions. As he says: 'We'll seek a better deal for
management, and labour will do the same for themselves'.
