FT  31 DEC 94 / Arts: The battle for history - War and Peace (Populist
social history and glimpses of hell) / Antony Thorncroft discusses the
changing strategies of war museums
It is extremely unlikely that the Imperial War Museum in south London will
ever change its name to the European Peace Museum. Its director Alan Borg
thinks that any pejorative element in its title has long been accepted as a
quirk of history. No one visiting the museum could think for one moment that
it glorifies war or colonial conquest. Its theme is the history of warfare:
if anything it is likely to make pacifists of us all.
But the current museum is not quite what its creators anticipated when the
old Bedlam lunatic asylum was converted after the first world war into a
memorial to its veterans and as an example to their children. Then there was
a more heroic, patriotic, theme. Now Borg is keen to play up the wider
ramifications of nations at war.
The two most successful exhibitions held there recently, on 'Forces
Sweethearts' and the 'Wartime Kitchen and Garden', illustrate this greater
concern with the social history of wartime. It also helps the museum to
widen its appeal - attendances have risen steadily to nearly 500,000 a year.
In the future the IWM is set to become even more sensitive to changing
attitudes. Its permanent displays will feature recent events more
prominently - the comparatively bloodless strategies of the cold war, and
the activities of United Nations peace keepers. Borg is also about to launch
a multi-million appeal for funds to convert part of the IWM into something
very close to a Holocaust museum.
These have become very popular in recent years, with an impressive museum
just opened in Washington. Borg's project will not concentrate exclusively
on the experiences of the Jews. It will look at all victims of conflict. It
draws some inspiration from the successful Museum of Tolerance at Los
Angeles.
Of course traditional military museums, full of uniforms, and weapons, and
paintings of battles, will continue. The National Army Museum is an
under-appreciated gem in Chelsea, with enough red coats on display to stir
the blood of any retired Cheltenham colonel; regimental museums litter the
land; the Royal Armouries has succeeded in persuading commercial backers to
join the government in helping to fund a large new museum in Leeds to
supplement its display at the Tower of London. The de-commissioning of
barracks and naval bases throughout the UK following defence budget cuts
should free historic buildings that heritage entrepreneurs will see as ideal
homes for yet more museums dedicated to military life.
But basically these will be depositories of objects, many harking back to
distant conflicts in far-off centuries. War museums telling the history of
war, like the IWM, are very rare and are already outnumbered by museums of
peace. There is a case to argue that more resources should be devoted to
keeping alive poignant reminders of officially sanctioned death.
This popular embarrassment about war is affecting the commemorations
surrounding the 50th anniversary of the second world war. The British
government gave itself a bloody nose with its crass attempt to celebrate the
50th anniversary of the D Day Landings last year with parties; the veterans,
marshalled by Dame Vera Lynn, wanted, and eventually got, a more sober
tribute, based around on the personal memories of the participants.
The government has given the department of National Heritage a modest Pounds
5m to spend on VE and VJ Day memorials but they are unlikely to be too
triumphalist. Significantly the IWM is also adopting a low key approach to
remembering the end of the second world war. Its exhibitions concentrate on
minor themes, like the German occupation of the Channel Islands, London at
war, and the war in the Far East.
With the main participants - the UK, the US, Germany and Russia - indecisive
about how to react to this major anniversary it has been left to Belgium to
mount the most comprehensive exhibition ever devoted to the second world
war. If you would like to see the piece of paper Chamberlain waved after
Munich; Himmler's death mask; Stalin's hand gun; Hitler's personal world map
and order to invade Poland; Monty's uniform, and more, so much more, you
must visit the Museum of the Army in Brussels before May 14.
Called 'I was 20 in '45' it attempts to popularise the war without
cheapening it; presenting it as a thrilling story to the generations with no
wartime memories while respecting the more sombre feelings of the
participants, both active and passive. In fact it achieves at a gallop what
hundreds of military museums offer in a reserved and restricted manner - to
consign the war to history, but history with a heart.
Perhaps it is now time to look objectively at the conflict. Very few people
can observe the battlefield at Agincourt and feel little but excitement at
David defeating Goliath. Waterloo, too, is given over to military historians
and battlefield touring groups, with minimal identification with the
suffering endured. The Somme and Paschendale are losing something of their
message for our times as personal survivors dwindle. The second world war,
because it was less pointless, and less bloody, than the first, is fast
becoming an unemotional issue.
The Brussels exhibition helps this process along. It might be thought that
Belgium, always at the epicentre of European warfare, is in the best
position to see things objectively. This is a vain, indeed an unwarranted,
expectation: there can be few wars in which the villain is more blatant.
But, as in many military museums based on objects, it still remains
difficult to find the horror in documents like the Russo-German pact, or
Boris Yeltsin's written confirmation that the Russians perpetrated the Katyn
massacre. The documents and artifacts of war too often look bureaucratic,
although the memorabilia of the Holocaust, in photographs and artifacts,
like gold teeth torn from the Jews, will always freeze the soul.
Where the exhibition scores is in its unexpected tableaux. You move through
a chronological history, starting in 1914 and including the gun of Princip,
the assassin of the Austrian Archduke, and then are suddenly enveloped in a
recreated trench of the first world war. It is slightly misleading in being
the trench occupied by sentries rather than the actual bunkers where the
troops spent most of their time, but the point is made.
It is made again in other imaginative tableaux - a cabaret bar in Berlin
just smashed up by Nazis; a schoolroom in Belgium raked by the invading
Germans; a London Underground station where the population sheltered at
night; Hitler's luxurious bunker; and, most spectacular of all, a view
through a window of a devastated Berlin at the climax of the war. It is in
these fabricated mock-ups that the reality of war hits home, more
effectively than in the genuine relics.
What with videos and old film, broadcast speeches and uniforms, photographs
and maps, extending over a two kilometre plus journey, the exhibition is
relentless in its barrage of images. But it ends on a sobering note -
totally white and empty space to convey the nothingness that follows an
atomic blast.
'I was 20 in '45' is unashamedly populist, tugging at the emotions, but it
is also historically fair, carefully non- controversial, and sometimes
tedious. It manages the challenge of offering reflections to those with long
enough memories and information to the young. It could well be the last
comprehensive exhibition of the second world war in which visitors can
identify personally with the objects. In future, war museums will be
conveying history; peace museums tolerance.
