FT  31 AUG 94 / Russians pull out of the Baltics: Samantha Knights watches
their quiet departure
Russian troops slipped quietly across the Estonian and Latvian borders
yesterday ending 50 years of Soviet military presence in the Baltic states
but leaving behind a legacy of environmental damage, an unsolved border
dispute and intense domestic criticism in Estonia about the retired Russian
officers who will remain in the Baltics.
At the deserted Soviet naval base in the centre of Tallinn yesterday
morning, a Soviet army jacket and cap were slung over a chair where before a
guard would have stood. Only a few parked Ladas and a military jeep stacked
high with tables, chairs and household objects gave any indication of the
remaining 20 men still to leave the base.
With farewell posters reading 'Bye' in Russian pinned up throughout Estonia,
some of the returning officers professed sadness before today's formal
handover of all but two of its bases to the Baltic states.
'I'm sorry to leave here - I had a good flat and life was good. Of course I
don't want to go,' said a 35-year-old marine officer as he piled the last of
his possessions on to a vehicle. 'It's not clear where I will live in
Russia, I have no flat there and I don't know what I will be doing.'
Many of the returning men feel disgruntled by the orders from the Russian
defence ministry forbidding any leaving ceremony, and a couple of hundred at
the naval base in Tallinn are refusing to leave, saying they have nowhere to
go. Some have spent their entire working lives in the Baltics.
At the height of the Soviet empire about 350,000 Soviet troops were
stationed at over 1,000 military bases in the three Baltic states - Estonia,
Latvia and Lithuania - enjoying a high standard of living, good apartments
and privileges. Now, Russia will officially leave only 210 military men
behind to dismantle the nuclear submarine base at Paldiski in Estonia and
about 300 will continue work at Latvia's radar installation at Skrunda until
the end of the century.
However, on the eve of the Soviet withdrawal yesterday, there was no
jubilation among Baltic officials. A Soviet ship was still in Paldiski
harbour, a train carrying soldiers and their equipment was waiting for
permission to enter Russia from southern Estonia and the foreign ministries
in the Baltics had little idea of exactly how many troops remained in each
country. 'It is too early to celebrate', said an Estonian foreign ministry
official.
There has been a gradual withdrawal from the region since March, and by July
there were only 2,400 soldiers still on Estonian soil, but some local people
fear that many officers are simply taking off their uniforms and
disappearing into the civilian population.
Negotiation over troop withdrawals has been the main topic of debate in the
Baltic states since they declared independence in 1991. The pullout
agreement was hailed by Mr Mart Laar, Estonian prime minister, as the
'ending of the second world war on Estonian soil'. He confessed to having
saved a bottle of whisky for the event, while President Lennart Meri said he
would toast the last troop to leave with champagne. Church bells will ring
simultaneously in Estonia and Latvia on September 1 to mark the first day of
complete independence, but official celebrations have been cancelled on the
grounds that too many problems would be left behind.
Troops left Lithuania last year, but Russian relations with Estonia and
Latvia proved more difficult after Moscow's insistence on social rights for
its military pensioners in Estonia. In addition, Russia's wish to retain a
military presence at Skrunda proved unacceptable. Compromise agreements
signed with the three Baltic states provoked a storm of domestic criticism.
The opposition in Latvia termed the decision to allow Russians to remain at
Skrunda a 'sell out' to western pressure. On the Russian side, President
Boris Yeltsin recently said Latvia was discriminating against Russian
citizens in its citizenship law.
In Estonia, the main sticking point is whether 10,000 retired Russian
military personnel will be granted residency. Officials argue that many of
the so-called retired officers are still in active service. 'Russia keeps
them as a dissenting fifth column,' said academic and opposition MP Endel
Lippmaa. 'These are not pensioners.'
Tension has increased in the past few weeks as Russia has started marking
the disputed border between the two countries taking territory which Estonia
claims as its own under the 1920 Tartu Treaty.
Not least in the trail of complaints is the environmental damage caused by
Soviet occupation, for which the Russian Federation refuses to take
responsibility. The airbase at Tukums, Latvia, for example is polluted with
jet fuel, while Estonia estimates that Dollars 4bn is needed to clean up its
bases.
