FT  14 JUN 94 / Mexico buys into Cuban telecoms
President Carlos Salinas of Mexico announced yesterday, during a visit to
Havana, that a Mexican company has bought 49 per cent of Emtelcuba, the
Cuban telephone monopoly.
An official of Grupo Domos International said the company had a Dollars
1.4bn (Pounds 927m) agreement. It is to pay Dollars 740m for its share of
the telephone company and invest a further Dollars 740m over seven years to
improve the island's telephone system.
The president was accompanied on his six-hour visit to Cuba by Mr Javier
Garza Calderon, head of Grupo Domos and a member of the Garza family of
Monterrey, Mexico, which has interests in such industrial giants as Visa,
Femsa and Bancomer.
Mr Garza Calderon was an unsuccessful bidder for Telmex when the Mexican
government privatised its telephone monopoly in 1990.
The Cuban telephone system is antiquated. Fewer than five in every 100
people in Cuba have telephone lines and as many as half of those lines are
not functioning at any time.
However, Domos is betting that negotiations between Cuban and US officials
will open a lucrative long-distance calls market between the two countries
beyond the current limit of 300 calls per day.
Even with the limit, those and other international calls generate
hard-currency income of an estimated Dollars 2m per month for Emtelcuba.
The Mexican government will begin to implement unilaterally the local
economic programmes proposed in its peace offer to the Zapatista rebels in
Chiapas, despite their overwhelming rejection of the plan at the weekend.
Efforts to try to implement the programmes, aimed at helping the indigenous
people in the impoverished southern state, will be made in areas not under
rebel control.
The move is seen as an attempt to show the Zapatistas that the government is
serious about its offers, and to isolate the rebels from potential
supporters in surrounding areas. The rebels are in a weak position
militarily, virtually surrounded by the Mexican army.
