FT  06 JAN 94 / Kravchuk faces Clinton squeeze
President Bill Clinton will not meet President Leonid Kravchuk of Ukraine
during his visit to Moscow next week unless significant progress has been
made on US demands that Ukraine honour its promises to give up the nuclear
weapons based on its territory.
Although talks between the US, Russia and Ukraine on the nuclear missile
issue have accelerated in recent days, White House and State Department
officials have been much more cautious about the prospects for reaching
agreement than have their Ukrainian counterparts.
In Kiev, Ukrainian officials have been reported as saying that Mr Kravchuk
had already been invited to Moscow by President Boris Yeltsin.
US officials, who have been meeting this week in Washington with Mr Valery
Shmarov, the Ukrainian deputy foreign minister, insisted nevertheless that a
deal of such importance could not be rushed through just to fit in with the
Moscow summit.
'My understanding is the meeting will occur if President Kravchuk is
prepared to sign on behalf of Ukraine the non-proliferation treaty;
likewise, the pledge that all the SS-19 and SS-24 missiles will, in fact, be
dismantled and the warheads shipped back for destruction in Russia,' Senator
Richard Lugar, who is visiting Moscow, said yesterday.
Although Ukraine made these promises in 1991, it has not lived up to them.
It has found that it tends to be taken more seriously both as a foreign
policy voice and as a recipient of economic aid while it still holds nuclear
weapons on its territory.
US Defence Secretary Les Aspin, yesterday spoke to Russian Defence Minister
Pavel Grachev on a new hotline, Reuter adds.
The hotline talk was another step in warming relations between the former
cold war superpower foes. The US and Russian militaries will hold a joint
exercise next summer.
The direct telephone link between the offices of the defence leaders is an
addition to existing hotlines linking the US and Russian presidents and a
teletype connection between military 'war rooms' in Washington and Moscow.
