FT  10 NOV 94 / AT&amp;T in Mexican joint venture
AT&amp;T, the US telecoms group, and Grupo Alfa, a large Mexican industrial
conglomerate, are to form a Dollars 1bn (Pounds 625m) joint venture to
provide telecommunications services in Mexico.
The new company, of which Alfa will own 51 per and AT&amp;T 49 per cent, plans
to invest about Dollars 1bn in telecommunications during four to six years,
and to begin operations next year. It will apply for a licence to offer
long-distance services from January 1997, when Mexico's telecommunications
market is to open to full competition.
Mexico's telecommunications are valued at about Dollars 7bn a year, with
about Dollars 4bn accounted for by domestic and international long-distance
traffic. The long-distance segment is expected to grow rapidly over the next
decade, as a result of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
AT&amp;T becomes the fourth large US telecommunications carrier this year to
agree to ventures in Mexico. MCI is to form a company with GF Banacci,
Mexico's largest financial group; Sprint with Iusacell, a cellular company;
and GTE with GF Bancomer, Mexico's second largest bank, and Visa, a large
industrial holding company. All are hoping to enter the lucrative
long-distance market.
The alliance between Alfa and AT&amp;T has raised questions about the long-term
strategy of Telefonos de Mexico (Telmex), the current monopoly long-distance
and local carrier. Telmex had been expected to reach a long-distance
agreement with AT&amp;T. Telmex's share price fell after the announcement was
made public, with analysts concerned that its ability to compete in the
North American telecommunications market would be hampered without a strong
US partner at its side.
Alfa, a Monterrey-based conglomerate with business interests in steel, food,
packaging and petrochemicals, posted sales last year of Dollars 2.5bn. The
company has more than 15 joint ventures with leading international
companies, and follows a strategy of diversified growth in Mexico.
The Mexican government recently established in principle that there would be
no limits to the number of competitors it would allow in the long-distance
telephone market.
