FT  24 AUG 94 / UK Company News: NFC struggles to overcome City doubts -
Recent events have not helped
NFC had always prided itself on the strength of its paternalistic staff
culture, but while Mr Peter Sherlock was chief executive there was a growing
sense that the tide was turning. His departure yesterday suggests that the
employees have, for the moment, won.
However, the company will struggle to win back respect from the City, where
investors were already beginning to tire of the lack of results from Mr
Sherlock's strategic review.
It is unclear whether this was the fault of Mr Sherlock, or the result of a
lack of support from his fellow management, many of whom were far from
enthusiastic about his overhaul.
He certainly failed to turn round NFC's profit performance. June's interim
results were disappointing, with no evidence of the economic recovery
feeding through to profits, and no concrete results from the new strategy.
On the day of Mr Sherlock's departure, NFC disappointed again, with profits
from Europe and North America below budget in the third quarter.
'The stock market was looking for reassurance that the strategic plan was
working', said an analyst at a British brokerage. 'The last thing we needed
was this.'
UBS Securities, brokers to NFC, have lowered their 1994 forecast from Pounds
120m to Pounds 110m, as a result of the disappointing figures.
Pre-tax profits before exceptional items rose only 6 per cent in the third
quarter, despite the economic recovery and the Pounds 263m new funds from
December's rights issue.
Mr Sherlock's strategic review involved a refocusing of management attention
and capital on the higher value added businesses in NFC's repertoire, namely
transport and logistics.
The most controversial proposal was a merger of NFC's two largest
businesses, BRS and Exel Logistics - a move which is understood to have been
strongly opposed by some of the 'old guard'.
The logic was that a merger of transport and contract distribution would
link the two ends of of the distribution chain, so removing costs and
enhancing revenues. Other businesses, such as contract rental and parcels,
would remain non-core oper-ations.
The plan was welcomed by analysts, and there are inevitable concerns that
the removal of Mr Sherlock may reduce the pace of change, in spite of the
board's stated commitment to the strategy.
The appointment of Mr Sherlock, an outsider, implied a realisation that the
paternalistic management needed a little shaking up. Mr James Watson,
chairman, will find it hard to demonstrate that commitment if he opts for an
internal replacement, such as Mr Robbie Burns.
However, the problems encountered by Mr Sherlock may not encourage other
leading executives to fill his shoes.
One fund manager said: 'This company needs someone powerful who will take
NFC by the scruff of its neck, tell the City what it is going to do, and
then achieve it.'
Insiders expect something more in keeping with NFC's paternalistic roots.
