FT  12 DEC 94 / World Bond Markets: Investors take Greenspan at his word -
US Treasury bonds
Last week was tumultuous for the bond market, but not even unsettling events
such as the largest municipal bankruptcy in US history swayed the bond
market from believing the Federal Reserve will hold the line against
inflationary pressures.
The yield curve, one of the key indicators of market sentiment about the
economy, is nearly flat, with the spread between yields on two-year notes
and the long bond only 35 basis points. It is, therefore, giving a clear
message that investors have taken Mr Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal
Reserve, at his word when he says he will not let inflation or inflationary
expectations get out of control.
It is something he has been promising since the start of the year, when the
spread between the long bond and the two-year note was 210 basis points.
Even five increases in the US base rate only brought the spread down to 110
points by early November as investors demanded high yields to counter the
risk of holding a 30-year bond through a potentially inflationary period.
Then came the November 15 move, when the Fed pushed up base rates by 75
basis points to 5.5 per cent. With the market expecting a rate increase
close to a 50 basis points, the central bank's action jolted the market into
the realisation that the Fed meant business and the yield curve began almost
immediately to flatten.
Part of the reason may be that US investors are bringing back money they had
in European and Japanese securities and putting it into longer-term
securities, including 10-year Treasuries, according to Mr Richard Gilhooly
of Paribas Capital Markets in New York.
But while economists believe the trend toward flattening or even inverting -
an indication that the market expects recession - will hold, they warn
against counting on steady flattening in the near-term.
Ms Janet Showers of Salomon Brothers believes the curve will be flat to
slightly inverted by late in the first quarter of next year, but refrains
from trying to explain contortions it may go through before then.
'The market is confident of the Fed being able to control inflation and
moderate growth,' she says. 'The market can also quickly change its mood
with the next numbers that come out.'
Ms Showers points out that on Monday the yield curve was at its flattest
level in more than four years after strong employment figures led investors
to conclude that the Fed would raise interest rates soon.
Toward the middle of the week, however, the curve reversed course after
Orange County, California, declared bankruptcy and the market decided the
Fed would refrain from further tightening to stave off more losses.
By the end of the week, the curve had flattened again after Mr Greenspan
told a Congressional panel that Orange County's losses not deter him from
more tightening.
This week, the market will look closely at figures on producer and consumer
prices and capacity utilisation to determine when the Fed is likely to raise
rates again.
A consensus is building that base rates will go to 6.5 per cent by the end
of March, but opinion is divided about whether the central bank will tighten
immediately after the December 20 meeting of its open market committee.
Mr Stephen Slifer of Lehman Brothers believes that there may be some
intermediate steepening of the yield curve in the short term.
The market has factored in a December rate increase, Mr Slifer says, and if
the Fed fails to do that the two-year/30-year spread could increase by 25 to
30 basis points.
'I don't disagree with the trend, but I think we've gotten a little ahead of
ourselves,' he says. While he foresees a 100 basis point interest rate
increase by March, he thinks the Fed will have to be careful if it is to
avoid recession and an yield curve inversion.
'If you start talking about a serious inversion with the Fed really
hammering away (at rates) then you're talking about recession and then you
avoid any chance of a soft landing,' he says.
