FT  18 FEB 94 / Action] . . . . . . and cut: Martin Dickson on the tasks
facing Paramount's new bosses
Blue Chips, a high-budget movie about skulduggery in college basketball,
starring square-jawed actor Nick Nolte and real-life basketball star
Shaquille O'Neal, opens across the US tonight, and early reviews suggest it
could end a run of disappointing box office returns for Hollywood studio
Paramount Pictures. In the words of The Hollywood Reporter, a movie industry
newspaper, it's a 'slammin'-jammin' saga'.
Nobody will be hoping so more fervently than Mr Sumner Redstone, the
70-year-old chairman of cable television group Viacom, who on Monday night
won an epic, five-month takeover battle for Paramount Communications. The
group owns the Hollywood studio as well as book publisher Simon &amp; Schuster
and a host of other entertainment interests, yet has had lacklustre
financial results for years.
The takeover, together with Viacom's related acquisition of video rental
retailer Blockbuster Entertainment, transforms the group from being a
fast-growing but medium-sized (revenues of Dollars 2bn) cable television
programming and services company into an entertainment giant (revenues of
Dollars 8bn), alongside rivals such as Time Warner and Mr Rupert Murdoch's
News International.
According to Viacom, this new 'global media powerhouse' will be strongly
placed to take advantage of a boom in the world entertainment market, due to
the development of multi-media interactive television in the west and the
collapse of communism in the east.
Yet for all these fine words, Mr Redstone and Mr Frank Biondi, Viacom's
athletic, 49-year-old chief executive, have just taken on one of the most
daunting jobs facing an American management team.
They must sharply improve the Paramount group's performance to justify the
high price paid for the company: at Dollars 9.7bn, the winning bid is some
Dollars 2bn more than many observers think Paramount is worth.
At the same time, they face the extremely intricate task of merging not two,
but three corporate cultures and management systems, thanks to the January
agreement under which Viacom is buying Blockbuster in return for Blockbuster
providing cash to support its Paramount bid.
The takeover of Blockbuster could still fall apart or need renegotiation,
because Blockbuster shareholders, who must approve the deal, are unhappy at
the plunge in the price of Viacom's stock - the currency in which they are
being paid - since the merger terms were agreed.
Mr Redstone needs Blockbuster's strong cash flow and balance sheet to
bolster the finances of a heavily indebted Viacom-Paramount combination,
which Wall Street reckons would generate enough cash to cover its annual
interest payments about twice.
Mr Redstone has shown in the past that he can successfully handle high
levels of indebtedness: when he acquired Viacom - best known for MTV, the
pop music cable television network, and Nickelodeon, a channel for children
 -seven years ago for Dollars 3.2bn, he took on Dollars 2.8bn of debt. Yet
he has presided over a period of rapid growth without selling off the
group's assets.
And if Viacom eventually needs to cut its leverage it could sell off bits of
the Paramount business, though Mr Redstone says there are no specific assets
for sale now.
Three central, inter-related tasks face the Redstone-Biondi team. The first
is to cut costs by combining jobs currently carried out separately by the
three businesses. For example, some corporate overheads will go, while the
cost of developing and distributing television programmes will be reduced by
combining some of these functions at MTV, Paramount and two small Hollywood
studios owned by Blockbuster, called Spelling and Republic. Mr Biondi
reckons this could produce annual cost savings of about Dollars 200m within
12 months.
The second is to improve Paramount's financial performance, and especially
that of Paramount Pictures, which for years has suffered from too many flops
of high-budget films, low staff morale and a revolving door of top
executives. Recent disappointments include the ghoulish comedy Addams Family
Values and a family drama, The Search for Bobby Fischer.
Big personnel changes seem certain. Mr Stanley Jaffe, who as president of
Paramount Communications is ultimately responsible for its entertainment
results, is not expected to stay at Viacom, which may also seek an eventual
replacement for Ms Sherry Lansing, Mr Jaffe's one-time business partner and
the Paramount studio head.
For now, Mr Biondi says: 'We have confidence in Sherry Lansing. We have
asked her to stay, and she's indicated she'd like to.'
Getting the right team to run Paramount Pictures may be the most important
single decision facing Viacom over the next few months, for while the studio
may account for only 10 per cent of the combined group's operating revenues,
it is widely regarded as the crucial element which may allow the group to
create synergy between its disparate elements - hit movies, spin-off books,
records and video-games.
Yet Mr Redstone and Mr Biondi themselves have no experience of running such
a volatile business as a film studio. They are known as efficient asset
managers, not creative artists.
The third challenge is to begin creating the cross-fertilisation between
Viacom, Paramount and Blockbuster which might justify the creation of Mr
Redstone's Dollars 9.7bn 'global powerhouse'. Initial plans include
persuading Paramount to make films featuring successful Viacom cable
television characters, such as MTV's teenage anti-heroes Beavis and
Butt-head.
Mr Redstone is also keen to follow the lead set by film-makers Walt Disney
and Warner Brothers and set up a a chain of 'studio stores' - glossy shops
featuring Viacom and Paramount film-related merchandise. Blockbuster, with
its sophisticated retailing management systems, would play an important role
in this ven-ture.
Wall Street, which generally favoured the strategy behind a Viacom-Paramount
bid, but initially questioned the wisdom of bringing Blockbuster into the
partnership, seems a little more inclined to accept the logic behind the
triple alliance.
'At the end of the day, a fully vertically integrated manufacturer and
distributor of audio, video and published copyright material, with
extraordinary marketing skills in reaching early users of new technologies,
should win,' according to Mr Christopher Dixon of broker PaineWebber.
But that is by no means a universal view, and the multi-media future for
which Mr Redstone is preparing remains a long way away and of uncertain
shape.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Paramount: the final picture
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Divisions                      Revenues      Cash flow
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Entertainment                    27%            13%
Publishing                       19%            16%
Video rental/retail              18%            23%
Cable TV networks                16%            18%
Live entertainments               7%             6%
Music retail                      5%             4%
Broadcasting                      4%             8%
Cable systems                     4%            12%
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Smith Barney/Viacom
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
