FT  28 MAY 94 / Lunch with the FT: The safest bet for the Derby - Michael
Thompson-Noel meets Peter George, Ladbroke's chief executive
Next Wednesday, a group of valuable racehorses will careen round Epsom
racecourse, near London, in that blaze of colour, sweat and pageantry known
as the English Derby. The owner of the winning horse will puff with pride,
while the owners of the also-rans sag with disappointment. But the real
winner will be Peter George - the World's Biggest Bookmaker.
In most countries, racehorse betting is handled via government-run
pari-mutuels, and commercial bookmaking is heavily restricted or illegal.
But not in Britain, where off-track bookmakers run thousands of betting
shops.
The leader is Ladbroke, which calls itself the world's largest commercial
off-track betting organisation. It has operations in Belgium, Ireland, the
US and Argentina, as well as in Britain. As a result, Peter George,
Ladbroke's chief executive since the start of the year, must be the world's
biggest bookie. He could even be the tallest (he is 6ft 5in).
If you met him, as I did, in the Windows on the World restaurant on the 28th
floor of the Hilton Hotel in London's Park Lane, you would guess he was a
businessman.
In part, he is an hotelier - Ladbroke owns Hilton International (159 hotels
in 47 countries, bought for Dollars 1bn in 1987). It also owns the troubled
Texas Homecare, Britain's second-largest DIY and home-care retailer, and has
a property division. All up, it operates in nearly 50 countries and employs
78,000 people.
Not in 400 years, though, would you guess that George was also a bookmaker.
He is not fat. He is not shifty. His jollity is calmly measured. His suits
and ties are boring. He is erect and frank-talking.
Yet a bookie he is. His father was a bookmaker and George, now 50, had
worked for Ladbroke for more than 30 years, mainly on the racing side,
before gliding through on the inside rail to take the chief executiveship
when Cyril Stein, Ladbroke's charismatic and controversial guiding spirit,
retired early.
Some bookmakers do not know a horse's head from its fundament. They are
accountants, after all: experts at setting odds that lighten the punters'
pockets of millions in the course of a working month. But George knows his
way round a racetrack.
'Do you like racehorses?' I asked.
'Sure,' said George.
'Ever owned any?'
'Not so far.'
'Because of the exhorbitant cost?'
'No, not the cost. I've sometimes talked about it, but there has never been
the right sort of opportunity.'
'Do you like a bet yourself?'
'Yes, but not often. I was at Aintree for the Grand National and had three
bets, but they all went down.'
'What's your average stake?'
'Pounds 100, I guess.'
'And what is your maximum?'
'Still Pounds 100.'
I rolled my eyes.
The world's biggest bookie said: 'Oh, very well - call it Pounds 200.'
'Tax in advance?' (A betting ploy that denotes confidence).
'Yes, tax in advance.'
Originally, Peter George wanted to join the Royal Air Force, but was too
tall to fly. So he started with the family bookmaking firm, founded by his
grandfather. Later, to gain experience, he went to Ladbroke and has been
there ever since. At 26, he was Ladbroke's chief racecourse representative -
a period of 'great fun'. The biggest bet he remembers handling was a
businessman who lost Pounds 100,000.
He joined the main Ladbroke board in 1980 and became joint chief executive
three years ago. He is a workaholic, with no side to him, and is described
by colleagues as solid, shrewd and far-seeing.
The world's biggest bookie will watch next Wednesday's English Derby as
closely as anyone.
'At Ladbroke, we are paying close attention to developments in international
gambling,' says George, 'especially gaming - which means, primarily, casinos
and gaming machines. In the US, above all, there is an explosion in new
forms of gaming, especially towards casino gaming: on Mississippi-style
riverboats and on Indian reservations.
'We operate four casinos in Hilton hotels, three in Puerto Rico and one in
Aruba, and would like to have more.' Ladbroke used to operate 14 UK casinos,
which yielded fat profits, but, to its embarrassment, was stripped of its
licences in 1979 for breaches of the rules deemed 'disgraceful'.
'It seems likely that classic off-track betting, such as betting on horses,
is going to find it more difficult to compete with all this new gaming,'
says George. 'It has been seen in Australia already, and also in France.
This would require a major re-think of Ladbroke's strategy.
'In addition, for the first time in many years, the British government will
soon have a direct and vested interest in promoting gambling, via the UK
national lottery.' (Ladbroke was a member of a consortium that applied to
operate the lottery, but lost out this week when the licence was allocated).
'In a way, the lottery will probably have a far smaller effect on general
betting than if UK betting were based on a pari-mutuel. Many pari-mutuel
bettors go strictly on numbers. It is the same with lotteries. And, in
Ireland, they launched an extremely successful national lottery which didn't
have a big impact on betting shop business.
'But there will be some impact on retail spending behaviour in Britain -
perhaps on confectionery sales, maybe on tobacco sales, and undoubtedly on
the football pools.' Ladbroke owns Vernons, Britain's No 2 pools operator.
Since Cyril Stein's exit and Peter George's promotion, Ladbroke has raised
its cruising speed. It has changed virtually all its top management and
thrown open its doors, abandoning the secrecy and cloak-and-dagger stuff
that used to infuriate the City.
As the millennium approaches, the international gambling business is likely
to mutate as speedily and as unpredictably - and possibly as profitably - as
any branch of the leisure trade. With a lifetime's experience of betting to
call upon, lofty Peter George will survey developments cagily. At 6ft 5in,
he is used to spotting the action.
