FT  24 MAR 94 / Five Arabs die in 18-hour Hebron siege
The Israeli army killed four Palestinians, allegedly members of the Hamas
Islamic resistance movement's military wing, during an 18-hour gunbattle in
Hebron that ended yesterday afternoon. A pregnant Palestinian woman also
died in the exchange of fire.
In clashes elsewhere in the town over the past 24 hours, another Palestinian
woman was killed and at least 50 other people injured, according to
Palestinian sources. In East Jerusalem an Israeli security guard died after
a lone assailant grabbed his gun and shot him in the head, before fleeing.
The Israeli army operation against the Hamas activists, which centred on a
building in southern Hebron, at one point threatened to cause the
cancellation of yesterday's Israeli-PLO talks in Cairo on resuming the peace
process, which has been suspended since last month's massacre in a Hebron
mosque.
Mr Yassir Arafat, PLO chairman, telephoned Mr Warren Christopher, the US
secretary of state, late on Tuesday to protest at the Israeli army
operation. Mr Yassir Abed-Rabbo, Mr Arafat's aide, then warned that PLO
delegates might not attend the Cairo talks because of the latest killings.
However, the talks proceeded on scheduled.
The main focus of the PLO protest was apparently a claim, backed up
yesterday by Palestinian hospital sources, that a 34-year-old pregnant
Palestinian woman, Majeda Zahdeh, had been killed by the Israeli troops in
the course of the battle. General Ehud Barak, the Israeli army chief of
staff, claimed yesterday that she was 'apparently killed by gunfire from
inside the house, fired by the terrorists'.
Palestinian sources said the Israelis fired 100 anti-tank missiles into the
building, before bursting in yesterday and killing the four Palest-inians.
Army bulldozers were last night demolishing the building.
General Barak issued the first official report of the operation in the
course of his testimony yesterday before the Israeli commission
invest-igating last month's massacre of Palestinians, in Hebron's Cave of
the Patriarchs, by Jewish settler Baruch Goldstein.
The latest operation, he said, underlined that the army's continuing top
priority in the occupied territories was the battle against Palestinian
terrorism. Its second most important task, he added, was securing the roads
for Israeli travellers.
While it was also the army's job to provide security for Palestinians, he
continued, there was no way to guard completely against a madman like
Goldstein on a suicide mission. Nevertheless, he concluded, 'if the proper
security precautions had been implemented, they might very probably have
prevented the massacre, or at least greatly reduced the extent of the
crime'.
