FT  21 JUL 94 / Economic Viewpoint: 'Wedge' versus 'social wage'
Theories about the causes and cure of unemployment arrive in every post. One
way to keep one's head above water is to examine together clusters of ideas
with a common core, even though this does less than justice to each
individual variant. A cluster, known for a long time but growing in
popularity, is called the 'wedge theory'.
The wedge is the gap between what the employer pays in wages and what the
worker takes home. In its simplest form it runs: there are so many add-ons
on top of the wage bill to pay for social benefits that labour has become
expensive to employ. Non-wage labour costs were estimated by a House of
Lords report1 to amount to 44 per cent of total labour costs as an EU
average, but 'only' 30 per cent in the UK. In Japan they were 24 per cent
and in the US 28 per cent. Businesses understandably seek to avoid these
add-ons by mechanisation, labour-saving drives, macho-management and so on.
As Anthony de Jasay2 has put it: 'Social protection costs more than it is
worth to at least some of those that it protects. The result is that, at the
margin, employment is taxed more than the subsidy is worth to workers . . .
and there is a net extra burden on the economy. Enterprises have to
restructure and unemployment is born of social protection.'
Why are these wedge theories so familiar? It is because they have been
previously promulgated in a very different political setting by leaders such
as Harold Wilson, UK Labour prime minister in the 1960s and part of the
1970s.
Wilson called the wedge the 'social wage'; and he used it to sell pay
restraint, arguing that real wages were much higher than take-home pay
because part of workers' remuneration took the form of welfare state
benefits, such as health, education, social security and so on. He used this
notion in his campaign for pay restraint.
One of the most numerically sophisticated recent attempts to stand up the
wedge doctrine has come from a US securities economist, John Mueller3. He
relates unemployment to what economists used to call 'efficiency wages',
that is pay adjusted for prices and productivity. He shows that, on
plausible assumptions, efficiency wages can be approximated by 'labour's
share of the national income'. To arrive at the latter he subtracts from
gross pay taxes on labour, such as payroll levies and a share of income tax.
He adds on domestic transfer payments, which are mainly for social security.
The adjusted series throws light on one paradox: why has UK unemployment
risen so much over the last decade and half when the combination of labour
market shakeout and Thatcherite policies has pressed down on pay relative to
profits? The accompanying chart suggests that although the employees' share
of the national income has fallen, labour's share, after making the fiscal
adjustments just described, has actually been 5 to 10 percentage points
higher than it was in the 1970s.
There are several points to clarify. It is not always realised that there is
little difference, apart from presentation, between social security
contributions levied on employers and those levied on employees. Both will
be passed forward into the cost of labour. For instance, the main impact of
UK mainstream National Insurance contributions derives from their total
weight of just over 20 per cent, rather than from the fact that they are
divided almost equally between employers and employees.
In some European countries with high payroll contributions, a shift from
payroll taxes to income taxes or indirect taxes such as VAT has been
discussed. But this would not solve the problem either. Income tax is - like
payroll taxes - an almost proportional levy on wages and salaries, with some
alleviation at the bottom of the scale. Indirect taxes are taxes on that
proportion of income (about 90 per cent) that is spent. If workers have the
market power to make employers recoup in higher pay the burden of payroll
taxes, they also have the power to recoup other taxes levied directly on
their incomes or expenditure.
The wedge theory was originally advanced not as an explanation for
unemployment, but as a warning about the distortions to the supply of effort
which too ambitious a welfare state could impose. This can be seen from the
earlier writings4 of Assar Lindbeck, the Swedish economist who pioneered the
wedge theory when Sweden still had full employment.
The wedge may nonetheless affect employment for three reasons:
Workers do not value the social wage as much as take-home pay, and at the
margin are less inclined to take jobs or more inclined to work shorter
hours. Unemployment of this kind is surely voluntary.
Union representatives do not fully take into account the social wage and
insist on higher settlements than they otherwise would, to recoup the tax
wedge. As a result, workers are priced out of jobs.
There are many factors other than the immediate state of the labour market
that determine employers' pay offers. These factors cover ideas of fairness
and a desire for labour goodwill. They discourage employers from trying to
recoup the wedge in lower pay, but they respond by cutting payrolls instead.
Other questions arise. Why should the size of the wedge be limited to
benefit expenditure? De Jasay includes all welfare expenditure - health and
education as well as benefits. But why stop even there? Surely taxes on
workers to pay for military expenditure, public administration or interest
on the national debt are just as much part of the wedge.
What then are the policy implications of the wedge theory? Many of the
academics who espouse it suggest that social security contributions should
be actuarially related to benefits. In other words, contributions to finance
the dole should be related to the chance of falling out of work in the
particular occupation; and social security rates should be sufficient to
finance state pensions on normal actuarial expectations.
In these circumstances, the argument goes, payroll levies would be for
defined benefits, for which workers would be prepared to pay without
recouping in wages. The view is plausible only if the actuarial
contributions are also voluntary - in which case a social security system
could hardly be said to exist. Moreover, the actuarial principle could not
realistically cover health and education, let alone non-welfare spending.
The whole focus on non-wage labour costs is open to suspicion. It appeals to
politicians because it looks less like union-bashing; and British ministers
can also feel self-satisfied because the burden of these costs is less in
the UK than in other EU countries.
But it is surely total labour costs per head which determine whether it is
worthwhile to employ an extra person. These include pay and non-pay
elements. Some of the latter escape measurement, such as restrictions on
hours or on adjusting pay fully to age, experience or skill. All these
things make workers expensive and it is arbitrary to pick on any one of
them. 'Pricing out of work' is still the best encompassing formula.
1 House of Lords Select Committee on European Communities, HL paper 43,
April 19 1994. 2 Anthony de Jasay, A Vicious Circle of Social Kindness,
Financial Times, April 29 1994. 3 J Mueller A Challenge to Conventional
Labour Market Wisdom, Lehrman, Ball, Mueller, Cannon,110 North Glebe Road,
Suite 1060, Arlington, VA 22201. 4 Assar Lindbeck, The Welfare State, Edward
Elgar, 1993.
