FT  04 FEB 94 / Audi chief expected to be forced out
The chairman of Volkswagen's up-market Audi subsidiary, Mr Franz-Josef
Kortum, is expected to be forced to resign today after only 13 months in the
job.
The 43-year-old marketing specialist has clashed on several occasions with
his predecessor, Mr Ferdinand Piech, the controversial VW group chairman.
His place is expected to be filled by Mr Herbert Demel, development chief,
who will act as 'spokesman' for the Audi board, but not as chairman. This is
likely to lead to more direct control by Mr Piech.
Mr Kortum's removal may also lead to further turmoil in the VW group,
already racked by unexpected losses last year of DM2.3bn (Pounds 870m), and
striving to reach break-even in 1994.
Meanwhile suspicions of theft and industrial espionage in the wake of the
appointment of General Motors' former global purchasing chief, Mr Jose
Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, who joined last March, remain.
Mr Kortum's first set-to with Mr Piech occurred before his appointment, when
he rejected the 'spokesman' role and insisted on taking full control.
The conflict leading to his downfall has focused on the autocratic group
chairman's demands that Audi, which made a pre-tax loss of more than DM200m
in 1993, must be turned round this year. Mr Kortum has frequently appeared
unwilling to bend to his chief, who has swept away swathes of the old VW
management within his first year.
The most recent departure was that of Mr Juan Antonio Daz Alvarez, chairman
of the Spanish subsidiary, Seat, who was sacked last September.
Mr Piech last month accused Mr Daz of deception over Seat's DM1.4bn losses
in 1993, and warned of possible 'penal consequences'. Others to go included
Mr Daniel Goedevert, the respected VW group deputy chairman, replaced by Mr
Lopez. The group purchasing chief was replaced by Mr Jose Manuel Gutierrez,
formerly Mr Lopez's closest associate at GM.
Meanwhile, Volkswagen yesterday withdrew a claim made on Wednesday quoting a
Frankfurt judge as saying charges that General Motors secret documents had
come into VW's possession 'could not be proved'.
More boardroom upheaval at VW, Page 23
