FT  17 DEC 94 / Travel: A journey to feed the body and soul - Paul Betts, in
Burgundy, tastes abbeys, basilicas and churches, and worships at the
region's heathen temples to gastronomy
The gastronomic pilgrimage started at L'Abbaye Saint-Michel. Overlooking the
town of Tonnerre, near the vineyards of Chablis, the Benedictine abbey had
long been a favourite stop for pilgrims on their way south during the Middle
Ages.
There are no monks left these days. Instead, the abbey has been converted
into a plush four-star Relais et Chateaux hotel with a two-star Michelin
restaurant.
On a sunny December Friday, the abbey, carefully restored by its owner
Daniel Cussac, a public works engineer, was hushed. We had arrived from
London on a long weekend tour of northern Burgundy to combine the best
tables of the region with its rich monastic culture. With Christmas
approaching, it seemed an appropriate cocktail: total unashamed gluttony
blended with spiritual meditation.
There has always been an affinity between food and religion, even though the
great Cistercian abbeys of Burgundy were built as a reaction to secular
excess. The Cistercian order was founded at the end of the 11th century as
an antidote to the sumptuous rituals and materialistic trappings of the
Benedictines. No Dom Perignon for them. They believed in simplicity and
nature.
'For God's sake. If men are not ashamed of these follies, why do they not
shrink at least from the expense,' wrote St Bernard, the guiding spirit of
the Cistercians. The same could apply today to the prices of top restaurants
in the area.
We were alone in the big dining room overlooking the cloister gardens where
two characters out of Clochemerle were trying to fix the drains. Christophe
Cussac, the son of Daniel, had prepared what was described as a light lunch:
Pot au Feu de Foie Gras Paysanne; Ailerons de Volaille aux Raviolis
d'Epoisses; Bar a la Peau au Cidre du Pays d'Othe; Rognonnade d'Agneau aux
Courgettes a la Grecque; Fromages; Gaufrettes a la Poudre de Miel;
Friandises.
Monsieur Cussac fils is a small, shy man who worked under Joel Robuchon,
arguably the best contemporary chef in France. Robuchon trained to be a
priest but found his true vocation in cooking. The religious connection was
taking deeper root.
We left Monsieur Cussac, worrying about filling his monastery in the
off-season in a region which has traditionally been a one-night stopover for
travellers heading to the Mediterranean or back north.
Lunch had only been an appetiser. We headed towards Joigny for the Cote
Saint Jacques: the first of the trinity of famous three-star Michelin
restaurant we were going to try.
In the hills, they were already pruning the vines, a job which, ideally,
should be done in March. But the vineyards in this northern part of Burgundy
have been expanding since the growers discovered techniques to overcome the
spring frosts. As the sun was setting, thin trails of smoke rose from the
hills from the small stacks of burning cut vines, as if the wine growers of
Chablis were electing a new Pope.
The Cote Saint Jacques sits on the main road running through the old town of
Joigny on the banks of the Yonne. It is a typical maison bourgeoise, which
was converted 40 years into a modest pension by Marie Lorain.
The youngest of her four children, Michel, who trained as a pastry chef,
took over the running of the roadside inn in 1958 with his wife, Jacqueline.
Over the years, they have transformed the Cote Saint Jacques, together with
their son, Jean-Michel, into one of the country's most prestigious
restaurants, where a typical menu costs about FFr600 (Pounds 71.34), and a
luxurious Relais et Chateaux hotel.
Inside, it is a slick, stylish establishment. Its modest burgundian roots
have been replaced by the Parisian idea of rustic chic. The Lorains are
equally slick: so polished and polite that you feel there is never a tantrum
in the kitchen.
The bedrooms are in another house on the other side of the road on the river
bank. To avoid guests being run over, or catching a cold in their evening
gowns, the huge rooms are reached through an underground tunnel. The result
is a sense of amnesia: stuck in the middle of nowhere surrounded by the sort
of luxury that would make a bank manager tremble.
We sat in the candlelit dining room, with waiters in black patent leather
shoes breezing around as they delivered the terrine of oysters, the scallops
in a cappucino froth, the lobster galette, the hare, a pineapple shaped like
a straw hat worn by a paddy field worker, more puddings, chocolates and
little sorbets.
Food at this level is an art form, at least it is venerated as such in
France. Michel Lorain appeared and gave a small audience to each table. He
told us he had composed an English menu for the Meridien hotel in
Piccadilly, London. 'I looked up some old English recipes in an old cook
book,' he said. 'I cooked steak, kidney and oyster pie, but each ingredient
separately to avoid confusing the tastes too much.' He was drooling a
little. His hands were slicing the imaginary products as he talked with the
movements of a skilled surgeon.
For a Friday night, the restaurant was not full. It was a bad time of year,
but the long recession in France has not helped just as the new motorways
have diverted travellers away from the traditional Burgundy staging posts.
It has made holding on to three stars all the more important because there
are people still prepared to scour the world to pay any price for a French
gastronomic experience. Two stars, forget it.
The three-star restaurateurs have also been forced to make concessions to
the modest no-star customers to maintain the necessary cashflow to support
the heavy costs and risks of running a top table. On the other side of the
river, the Lorain family have built a new hotel, Le Rive Gauche, with
affordable rooms and meals.
It was still sunny on Saturday and time to revive the spirits and the soul.
We stopped briefly at the Cistercian abbey of Pontigny, visited by Thomas
Becket in exile and resting place of St Edmund Rich, the Archbishop of
Canterbury who fell out with Henry III. These days, Potigny continues to
attract English pilgrims.
At Fontenay, about half an hour's drive away, Hubert Aynard was waiting. He
is the happy owner of probably the best preserved Cistercian abbey in the
world, which has been designated since 1981 as a 'universal heritage' site
by Unesco. Set in a valley of woods and streams, the abbey was founded by St
Bernard in 1118. It is a perfect example of his spiritual aesthetics. 'What
is God? He is length, width, height and depth,' he said. It is all there in
its utopian simplicity.
The abbey's more recent story is equally magnificent. After the French
Revolution, all religious life ceased at Fontenay and the Directory put the
property up for sale in 1791 for FFr78,000. It became a paper mill until
Edouard Aynard, a banker from Lyons, bought the place in 1906 from his
father in law, Raymond de Montgolfier. Sparing no expense, he set about
restoring the abbey. Subsequent generations have continued his work.
In the abbot's house, Hubert Aynard explained that industry in the case of
Fontenay had helped preserve, rather than destroy, the monastic complex. The
paper mill buildings had been added on to the original monastery. They had
acted as wrapping paper and when they were pulled down, the original stones
and structures were virtually all there.
We left Aynard, who lives at Fontenay and keeps the abbey open all year
round, for another shrine. St-Pere-sous-Vezelay is a little village nestling
at the foot of the monumental basilica of Vezelay, once one of the great
capitals of Christianity, visited by crowds of pilgrims to pray by the
relics of Mary Magdalene. More come these days to eat at Marc Meneau's
L'Esperance.
Meneau is a local boy from St-Pere, a self-taught cook who has come to be
regarded in France as one of the country's most unconventional gastronomic
giants. If Lorain has risen to three-star Michelin stardom thanks to his
inventive but safe cuisine, Meneau has done so by his extravagant, extrovert
and sensual approach to food. 'You either like what he does, or hate it,'
said one local connoisseur. 'But it is very sexy.'
Meneau converted his mother's village grocery store into a flashy restaurant
and hotel, with a whiff of decadence and a strange combination of kitsch and
good taste.
On Saturday night the restaurant was full. The staff was working overtime
and lacked the polish of the Cote Saint Jacques. There followed a sequence
of the most extraordinary culinary experiments: walnut soup; a spoon with a
lump of pan fried mash potatoes stuffed with caviar; a croquette filled with
what I think was foie gras diluted in Marc de Bourgogne; sensuous open
shellfish held on the big round plate by some gooey substance followed by a
cold shell fish cream with lobster jelly in the middle; turbot served with
hunks of bone marrow; and on and on.
Presidents and princes have regularly dined at L'Esperance to discover the
textures, aromas and flavours of the local countryside which Meneau blends
in his dishes.
Serge Gainsbourg, the enfant terrible who died of drink and cigarettes last
year, spent months at a time at L'Esperance. He would play on the piano late
in the night at the bar and, one year, organised a massive fireworks display
on New Year's Eve. He dropped FFr500 tips and has left fond memories in this
small corner of Burgundy. His epitaph could have read 'When you've lost all
hope you turn to L'Esperance.'
It was nearly 2am and Meneau, a strong, arresting man, was puffing a
bazooka-size cigar. I stupidly asked why you never get a decent portion of
vegetables in a three-star restaurant. 'It's not aesthetic,' he said
dismissively.
Like Lorain, Meneau has also expanded with a new annex and a lower-priced
restaurant. But the economic climate was improving. His indicator - Romanee
Conti, the prince of Burgundies, which sells for FFr4000 to FFr6000 a bottle
in the restaurant - was telling him so. 'We used to sell about one a month.
It went down to one every seven months. Now we are back to about one every
two months.'
We left Vezelay on Sunday, after high mass in the basilica, for Saulieu, our
last epicurian stop. La Cote d'Or has been a popular stopping place for more
than a century. But it became internationally famous in the 1950s when
Alexandre Dumaine turned it into a gastronomic milestone for the jet set of
the day travelling down the Nationale 6 from Paris to the Riviera.
Bernard Loiseau and his wife acquired the hotel in 1982 and at great expense
restablished its reputation as a French gastronomic landmark. For Loiseau
his three Michelin stars are a matter of life and death. 'Our business
virtually doubled over night when we won our third star,' explained Madame
Loiseau. 'It would be a disaster if we should lose one,' she added,
explaining that they have had to borrow heavily over the years to expand and
modernise the restaurant and hotel.
Bernard Loiseau is a perfectionist who as a teenager was already dreaming to
become a great chef. His restaurant was also a good choice to end our
gastronomic tour because Loiseau has created a light cuisine using
water-based and wine sauces and as little fat as possible. 'You won't find a
single pot of cream in the kitchen,' said Mme Loiseau.
We ate lentil soup, pike-perch on a bed of shallots in a wine sauce, a
pigeon, chocolate pudding. One would not have felt full if one had not spent
the last 48 hours eating.
On the motorway, rushing back to catch the evening flight from Orly to
London, I was asked by my other two companions which restaurant I preferred.
It was impossible to answer, but I suppose, I said, I would take my wife to
La Cote Saint Jacques, my mistress to L'Esperance, my mother to la Cote d'Or
and my mother in law at L'Abbaye Saint-Michel.
I dozed off and started thinking of Alfonse Daudet's lovely Christmas story
of the parish priest who raced through Midnight Mass to get to the party
traditionally held after the service as quickly as possible. He stuffed
himself silly that night and exploded. But that was a bit further down in
Chateau Neuf du Pape.
Information: I was a guest of the Comite Regional du Tourisme for Burgundy,
Relais et Chateaux hotels and Air France. L'Abbaye Saint-Michel, 89700
Tonnerre, tel 86 55 05 99. La Cote Saint Jacques, 89300 Joigny (86 62 09
70). L'Esperance, 89450 St-Pere-sous-Vezelay (86 33 39 10). La Cote d'Or,
21210 Saulieu (80 64 07 66).
