FT  11 NOV 94 / Arts: Suzuki's austere 'Tale of Lear' - Theatre in London
The Japanese often have a way with Shakespeare. One thinks particularly of
Ninagawa's stage production of Macbeth and Kurosawa's spectacular film Ran,
based on King Lear. Both combined grace with brutality to bring the plays
searingly to life.
Tadashi Suzuki's Tale of Lear (staged at the Barbican as part of the
Everybody's Shakespeare Festival) has the austere beauty you might expect,
but it is equally one of the bleakest versions of Shakespeare's tragedy I
have ever seen. It is cruel, cold and resolutely unmoving.
Suzuki takes as his cue Lear's piteous cry, 'O] let me not be mad, not mad,
sweet heaven', and extrapolates from this a production that draws on the
deep fear we all have of old age, loneliness and dementia. His Lear is not a
king, but a solitary old man in a sanatorium, who is reading the play. He
falls asleep and, as he dreams, the characters in the tragedy melt out of
the walls (literally, it appears, on the ingenious set of sliding doors) to
act the play and suck him into it.
Soon he and Lear are interchangeable and we are not certain whether the
characters are figments of his imagination or other inmates of the asylum.
Suzuki deliberately blurs this distinction by having Edgar creep past in the
background in his Poor Tom rags after the tragedy is over.
The play is distilled to under two hours, the all-male cast acting out only
the harshest points of the plot, and nearly every redeeming feature is cut
out. There is no Kent, and Cordelia makes only the most fleeting of
appearances, so that almost everyone on the stage is either mad or bad. Even
the fool is replaced by a nurse, a sinister, mocking body who seems to
derive a sadistic glee from her charge's distress.
In the confusion as to what is real and what is fantasy, Lear's tormented
rambling about the cruelty of his children expresses the terror and paranoia
that can afflict the elderly. Where Lear delivers his last speech about the
finality of death, staring desperately at the audience, it seems he is
chronicling his own demise and his fear of it, rather than that of his
daughter.
Suzuki infuses his production with traditional Japanese techniques,
perfectly executed. It is statuesque and beautifully lit and the actors,
clad in ornate robes, glide about the stage as though on invisible castors,
or scurry like leaves swept forward by a gust.
Uichiro Fueda as Lear himself moves with such slow, slow fluidity that he
seems pulled by some invisible force. His Lear is grim and grudging, so
unpleasant in his madness that he is not even pitiable. The heightened style
makes it hard to stay engaged at times, and both Goneril and Regan have a
disconcerting habit of cackling manically that puts you in mind of pantomime
villains. For the most part, though, this sombre production is mesmerising -
but it never moves you.
Suzuki has said that he sees the world as a hospital and all its inhabitants
as patients. On the evidence of this production, he holds out little hope
for a cure. As Lear dies on his own, agonised by his ravings and with no
kind words afterwards to take away the sting, Suzuki presents a cold,
comfortless world indeed.
