FT  07 FEB 94 / Leading Article: Greenspan's lead
Both in its timing and substance, Friday's announcement that the Federal
Reserve has tightened US monetary policy was good news for the world
economy. The strength of the recovery and historically low US rates meant
some policy tightening was inevitable, although few expected the Fed to move
so soon. But by combining an unusual public statement of intent with a
modest quarter-point rise in short-term rates, Mr Alan Greenspan, the
Federal Reserve chairman, appears simultaneously to have satisfied both the
inflation-hawks and the White House, and boosted his already substantial
reputation in the process.
Foresight in action combined with clarity of explanation are the twin keys
to effective central banking. On both counts, Mr Greenspan's handling of the
US recession and recovery has so far been exemplary. His willingness to cut
rates aggressively as the scale of the US banks' debt difficulties became
apparent now means that they are in a strong position to support recovery,
unlike their Japanese counterparts. Raising short-term rates back towards
their cyclical norm should reassure investors that inflation will not now be
allowed to accelerate.
Whether the move will affect Europe's recovery will depend on how German and
French central bankers respond. The recent D-Mark depreciation is one
oft-cited reason why the Bundesbank remains reluctant to cut German rates
further, despite the stagnant economy and falling inflation. The combination
of a US recovery and higher interest rates could well mean a period of
appreciation for the US dollar.
Yet to postpone rate cuts in case the D-Mark or French franc were to weaken
further against the dollar would be to draw exactly the wrong conclusions
from the Fed's success. Mr Greenspan has certainly not allowed US monetary
policy to be derailed as he agonised over charts of almost certainly
distorted and backward-looking monetary aggregates, or worried about
short-term dollar weakness.
Instead, he has remained consistently focused on the underlying objective of
monetary policy: to secure sustained growth with low and stable inflation
and inflationary expectations.
If Mr Greenspan were the governor of the Bundesbank or the Bank of France,
he would currently be doing nothing. The interest rate cuts that both
economies still badly need would have been delivered some time ago.
