FT  01 JAN 94 / Leading Article: Bulls, bears and bubbles
The Crash of '94 - the phrase does, you have to admit, have a certain ring
about it. The past 12 months have seen stock and bond markets around the
world respond with equal euphoria to news both good and bad. Stockbrokers
have repeatedly revised upwards their targets for equity markets, then
upgraded their corporate earnings forecasts to make sense of the new peaks
that they expect the markets to scale. The retail investor is back with a
vengeance on both sides of the Atlantic. And the scramble for shares in the
City this week was almost as frenetic as the sales in the West End
department stores.
When people appear to think that the supply of equities is about to run out,
at the end of a month in which Mr Vladimir Zhirinovsky has talked of
deploying Russia's nuclear arsenal, it is clearly time to ask whether the
whole financial house is about to come tumbling down.
The one part of the markets' thinking that is hard to argue with at this
point concerns the short-term case for bonds. After the inflationary
excesses of the 1960s and 1970s, and the financial liberalisation of the
1980s, the world is clearly changing financial gear. Disinflation, which is
what bond market euphoria is all about, is not merely a reflection of
cyclical factors like recession. Apart from Japan, which starts from a
position of budgetary strength, the leading industrialised countries have
all embarked on varying degrees of fiscal retrenchment.
Equally important, competition from low-wage developing countries is
imposing downward pressure on prices in the developed world. In the
tradeable goods sectors of the G7 nations, the ability of workers to demand
increased pay and of companies to increase profit margins is severely
constrained. The completion of the Uruguay Round of the Gatt will ensure
that the downward pressure on prices of tradeable goods will increase rather
than decrease over the rest of the decade.
Astonishing fall
These structural changes, taken against the background of a sluggish
recovery in which the world's economies have been moving in divergent
directions, provide the explanation for an astonishing fall in both nominal
and real bond yields. Over the past year, if British index-linked gilts are
any guide to the global trend (which seems plausible enough in an
increasingly global market), real bond yields have fallen by around a full
percentage point to just under 3 per cent - a figure that is back in line
with the kind of rates that used to prevail in the days of the gold
standard.
The story is undoubtedly a good one for bonds. But it is pretty long in the
tooth by now, especially in the US. There, economic growth has been
relatively strong and the gap between actual and potential output is
expected to disappear. That would point to inflationary bottlenecks - and a
red alert at the Fed.
Elsewhere, including the UK, the bond market surge probably has further to
run. But it is important to remember that inflation has not been abolished -
witness Russia's year-on-year inflation of close to 900 per cent. It has
only been stopped in countries with credible governments that the markets
trust. It remains to be seen whether those like Italy and Belgium, facing
great political challenges as well as huge historic burdens of debt, will
live up to market expectations. And as the rest of the world outside the US
starts to recover, the demand for global capital will increase, which could
bring upward pressure on real bond yields.
Depressing influence
The more puzzling part of the market equation concerns equities. Many of the
stories that have been good for bonds, such as fiscal retrenchment and the
downward pressure on corporate profit margins, ought to have had a
depressing influence on equity prices. But not in the event. The simplest
explanation is the practical one. When bank deposits yield a zero income in
real terms, as in the US, investors respond by stampeding into securities in
order to generate higher real returns. The risk with a money-driven market
of this kind is that it can lose touch with reality and turn into a bubble.
By historic standards, the yield on equities in the US and Europe is at the
very low end of the spectrum. Yet low dividend yields look less frightening
when measured against real bond yields. For a tax exempt investor in the UK,
a yield of 3.4 per cent, taken together with almost any assumption about
economic growth, does not look so demanding against a 2.9 per cent real bond
yield. A 2.7 per cent yield in US equities is another matter, especially as
the Federal Reserve will probably have to raise short-term interest rates
this year to deal with incipient inflationary pressure. This could frighten
the former depositors, who have helped create a bubble via mutual fund
investment in equities. The worry for European investors is that US capital
outflows have now become so important that European equities could be caught
in any backwash.
That is not to say that UK equities will not go higher in the New Year. But
it does mean that private investors should now be adopting a much more
cautious stance.
