FT  07 JAN 94 / NUT rebuffs Dearing call to end test boycott
The prospect of another summer of industrial unrest in schools increased
sharply yesterday as Britain's largest teachers' union called for this
year's national curriculum tests to be abandoned.
Mr John Patten, the education secretary, is unlikely to accept the request,
made by Mr Doug McAvoy, general secretary of the National Union of Teachers.
Sir Ron Dearing, who published a radical review of the curriculum earlier
this week, urged unions to administer the tests this year.
He said: 'I think the tests are a valuable part of the education system and
I urge teachers to carry them out this year.'
But Mr McAvoy, whose union last month voted by a 20-to-1 majority in favour
of continuing the boycott on the tests, said: 'Sir Ron's final report
recognises that there is still a need to slim down and simplify the
curriculum and its associated assessment and testing arrangements. Until
this is done an unnecessary workload remains.'
He said that Sir Ron's review of the content of each subject - which will
start next week - might recommend further cuts, but the whole of the present
curriculum is to be tested this year.
He said: 'If they change the curriculum for next year then the tests will
not be comparable and the whole exercise will be pointless.'
The NUT has asked the Electoral Reform Society to consult its members on the
action it should take over this year's tests if Mr Patten does not abandon
them. The results are expected early next month.
Ms Margaret Morrissey, an official of the National Confederation of Parent
Teacher Associations, told Sir Ron that he had 'won the battle with parents,
but not the war'.
She predicted that parents would support a continued boycott provided unions
left a decision on the tests to individual schools rather than taking
national action.
Mr Peter Smith, general secretary of the Association of Teachers and
Lecturers, has called for the boycott to be abandoned, saying that a
continued refusal to administer the tests could not be justified to parents.
However, he has not yet ballotted members, and his union's boycott remains
in place at least until they have voted.
The executive of the other big teachers' union, the National Association of
Schoolmasters/Union of Women Teachers, will decide on its attitude to the
boycott over the weekend.
