FT  23 JUL 94 / Fashion: A close-up shot of the catwalk couture - Avril
Groom examines the detail of the top designers' creations
Works of art have rarely attracted as much hype as the clothes in some of
this week's haute couture shows in Paris.
The celebrities with their entourages (Prince and Sylvester Stallone at
Versace, Joan Collins at Chanel and Valentino, Shakira Caine everywhere),
the gangs of heavies, the strange cult of supermodels who become global
personalities purely on the strength of their visual image - all this
creates an ambience more appropriate to the world of showbusiness than to
fashion.
It goes with the well-worn jibes about the unnecessary profligacy of couture
 -how it is expensive beyond the dreams of avarice, how it is worn by a mere
handful of women and how it only exists for publicity value.
This view does the clothes themselves no favours and neither does seeing
them on a remote catwalk. Only by examining them, getting as close to them
as the women who buy them, and by imbibing the atmosphere of a designer's
studio in the hectic weeks before a show does the logic behind this
apparently outrageous industry start to make sense.
I would have to quarrel with Coco Chanel's assertion that haute couture is
'a technique, a job, a commercial undertaking'.
The clothes themselves may be merely examples of high craft but the effort
of creation and co-ordination which a designer makes must give him a claim
to artistry equal to that of a conductor or composer.
Dior or Givenchy have the purest outline of a suit or shoulderline, Balmain
and Ungaro manage the most delicate conjunction of lace and chiffon, while
Versace, Lacroix and Chanel have the cut of the moment, one that makes the
most of female curves.
The couturier's art lies in flattering and glamorising the female body -
even those not shaped like supermodels - with clothes that are unique to
that woman. Along the way they keep alive artisan techniques that might
otherwise die out.
The Comite Colbert, which promotes the luxury goods industry, is so worried
about the possible demise of these skills that it has taken to running
courses introducing teenagers to manual crafts.
Even Chanel, despite its reputation under Karl Lagerfeld's designership, has
problems attracting young apprentices.
'It's a matter of attitude,' says Catherine Riviere, director of haute
couture. 'Karl expects everyone to feel the same commitment and love for
couture that he does. If they are happy to work for 200 hours on one blouse,
if they can go to a fitting and be proud of how their work looks, not
envious of the rich woman who is wearing it, then they are right for us.'
Cutting and sewing couture is, according to a future chef d'atelier at one
of Yves St Laurent's two tailoring workshops, 'a continual learning process.
You can never say your training is over. Similarly a garment is never
finished. You can always improve the detail.'
St Laurent's workrooms thrive on the quality of their handwork. Details such
as a hand-sewn, contrasting silk lining and the way a ruffle is set between
that lining and the outer fabric, or a simple-looking trim that is in fact a
complex confection of appliqued velvet and decorative stitching - these are
the private fruits of the contract between client and couture house.
And such details explain why St Laurent still has the biggest regular
clientele, said to number around 400, in spite of rumours that the designer
himself is now less creatively involved.
Here, shapes are traditional, though this season's experiments with both
very short skirts and the new knee-length bell shape, teamed with small
fitted jackets curvily seamed to the figure, and richly-brocaded Chinese
styles for evening, are an unqualified success, a collection that recalls
his glory days.
The St Laurent client still prefers contemporary quality to trend statements
but this new modernity may prove prophetic, as may Chanel's recruitment
difficulties because, by all accounts, couture is undergoing a small boom.
Dior reports sales up by 14 per cent last year while Lacroix and Versace
both claim a new clientele of young Europeans who want simpler but glamorous
'occasion' clothes which will work in their wardrobes for years and who
appreciate the handwork involved.
Christian Lacroix is the designer par excellence for decorative flourishes
and historical references yet his simpler draped chiffon Directoire dresses
have been his greatest success.
He is also very aware of couture's role as an ideas powerhouse, particularly
in the field of fabrics and technique. His new collection fuses
specially-invented ways of working fabric with revived design ideas such as
the puffed Edwardian shoulder, the hourglass corset and a knee-length A-line
skirt with fluid movement.
As the collection's orchestrator he persuades craftsmen to invent techniques
that give the effects he wants.
'He has a very clear idea in mind which he communicates to experts who then
try and deliver it,' says his assistant Laure du Pavillon.
'The whole show collection is produced in two months and the atmosphere in
the studio, as various elements come together, is fantastic.'
An example this season is the use of large, coloured paillettes which
Lacroix wanted to look fluid rather than 1960s-stiff. This meant sewing them
into an experimental underlying network of stretch silk handknit.
Opposing Chanel, he views such craftsmanship as 'not unlike an art' and so
complex and painstaking are his designs that his atelier of 40 workers can
make for clients no more than 120 pieces (and one outfit may contain 3
pieces) per season.
This is patently not an economic undertaking but is regarded as essential
for the house's creative develop-ment.
Versace is another noted fabric innovator. Like other couturiers, his
traditional decoration is done by the great Paris embroidery houses such as
Lesage, but he also works closely with German and French companies
specialising in metallic fabrics.
They have developed a fluid 'chainmail' at his behest, while other
handworked finishes - such as a fishscale-effect bodice, which on close
inspection turns out to be made of fine silver rings threaded on to
hand-turned ribbon - are made in his Milan workshops.
Even in couture Versace has an eye to commerce. He is a supremely flattering
and glamorising cutter and the impact made by actress Elizabeth Hurley
attending a London film premiere in one of his dresses apparently held
together only by safety pins has sparked many imitators.
Karl Lagerfeld at Chanel has sometimes completely subsumed couture tradition
and technique in headline-grabbing razmatazz, but not this time. Complex
technique is paramount though not always easily visible.
On the catwalk, precision-cut jackets, cinched and fluted like an hourglass,
look effortless. But in fact they contain up to 30 pieces and are shaped by
a profusion of curved, raised seams, each stitched to within a millimetre's
accuracy.
In ready-to-wear, the famous braid trim is sewn on; in couture, this season,
it is an edging of satin and an applique of velvet, or a mix of hand-plaited
fabrics, or tweed made into a fine bias rouleau and applied by hand.
The basic silhouette is a refined version of the tight-waisted, full-hipped
shape reviled when Vivienne West-wood showed it in March. In Chanel's mix of
subfusc shades with the occasional bright or pastel tweed it looks at once
nostalgic and sophisticated. Its craft is beyond reproach yet any general
fashion influence it has will be on overall shape.
In spite of the supremacy of couture technique, it is the bright, immediate
media image to which even the most cynical of us is susceptible.
Looking for a pair of shoes to replace ones ruined in the tropical downpours
which have plagued Paris this week, I found myself tempted by a pair with a
well-known designer label.
Were they really more attractive and wittier than any others, or did I just
imagine that that safety-pin trim would make some of the magic of Elizabeth
Hurley's dress rub off on me?
Detail pictures Ben Coster
Catwalk pictures Niall
McInerney and Ben Coster
