FT  06 JAN 94 / Arts: 'Sunset Boulevard' in Los Angeles / Review of the US
premiere of Lloyd Webber's musical
If you come to Los Angeles looking for the mansion at 10086 Sunset
Boulevard, you will be disappointed. That house, the setting of Billy
Wilder's classic 1950 film satire of Hollywood, never existed at that
location. It was a made-up address on a real street, just as Wilder's Sunset
Boulevard was an excoriating flight of fancy on a topic that is true-to-life
indeed - Hollywood's capacity to create images and destroy lives.
If you come to Los Angeles looking for satisfaction from Andrew Lloyd
Webber's new musicalisation of Wilder's film, you will be disappointed
again. Lloyd Webber's Sunset Boulevard, which had its American premiere at
the Shubert Theatre here last month, is to Wilder's original what a dirt
road is to a motorway. Its display of heartless spectacle degrades everyone
involved, most of all Glenn Close, who plays the faded silent movie star
Norma Desmond, the role Gloria Swanson played in the film.
The musical Sunset, which is also playing at the Adelphi Theatre in London,
features everything we have come to expect from Lloyd Webber and Co. -
lavish sets and costumes, a large cast, a bloated pseudo-operatic score -
but wholly lacks a consistent tone.
While Wilder's Sunset was an elegant fusing of sendup and homage, Lloyd
Webber's wavers between the celebratory impulses of musical theatre and the
ironic distance of satire, and Trevor Nunn's unassertive direction evens
nothing out.
The dialogue jolts between spoken lines, most taken from the film (all the
favourites are retained: 'I am big; it's the pictures that got small'; 'I'm
ready for my close-up, Mr. De Mille') - and recitative, sung by Joe Gillis
(Alan Campbell), the down-on-his-luck screenwriter whom Norma entraps to
stage her 'return'. For the music, Lloyd Webber largely recycles tunes from
his past work into a grab-bag of blowsy ballads and Big Group Numbers. It is
in the latter that librettist/lyricists Don Black and Christopher Hampton
make their most concerted stab at irony (studio wannabes singing 'Let's Have
Lunch', a gaggle of fey dressers exhorting Joe to buy more clothes because
'The Lady's Paying'), but their attempts at acidity clash with Lloyd
Webber's peppy tunes and Bob Avian's high-energy stagings.
Amidst it all stalks Close, a marvel of ill-employed concentration. Holding
her taloned hands like a surgeon leaving a scrub room, bedecked in Anthony
Powell's de luxe costumes - jungle-printed pyjamas, lame dusters and jeweled
turbans - she looks and behaves every inch a Norma Desmond, but she is an
island of high camp in a sea of humourless ineptitude, and ends up looking
foolish. An additional problem is her singing voice, which is thin and
over-amplified, and her songs fail to compel. There is no reason for Norma's
simple and ever-strengthening convictions to be driven home through four
solo and two shared numbers, except to show off a star's voice - a rationale
which made more sense in the London production, with belter Patti LuPone in
the role, than it does here.
It is Joe Gillis whose inner life needs revealing, for Sunset Boulevard is
the story of his journey from professional to personal desperation and
eventual destruction. Though the evolution of Joe's relationship with Norma
indicates a broad range of emotions towards her - pity, curiosity, awe,
disgust, admiration, greed, attraction - there is little in the dialogue or
lyrics to indicate his changes in attitude. It is left to the actor playing
Joe to communicate these transitions through his expressions and actions,
but Campbell's barking, abrasive demeanour remains the same throughout, and
he and Close do not develop any relationship on stage. Campbell's golden-boy
good looks do not fit the role, and he is only given one song with which to
show off his excellent singing voice - the bombastic title tune.
Another character marred by the show's inept musicalisation is Max von
Mayerling (George Hearn), Norma' ex-husband and former
director-turned-butler, who must step outside his taciturn demeanor to
inform Joe that Norma was 'The Greatest Star of All.' Standing stiffly and
orating overblown lyrics ('there was/a majaraha/who hanged himself with one
of her/discarded stockings/she's immortal'), Hearn, like Close, ends up with
Lloyd Webber's egg on his face.
Only Judy Kuhn as Betty Schaefer, the young writer who becomes Norma's rival
for Joe's affections, comes out with her reputation intact. Her songs and
dialogue plausible, and her singing clear and strong, she is a lovely
presence, and Campbell is at his best when he's playing opposite her.
As with all of Lloyd Webber's efforts, there is always a massive set to
marvel at. John Napier's rendering of Norma's rococo palace is indeed an
eerie wonder of dark wood and brass, but it has the distracting habit of
levitating at the least opportune moments. Lifting up Norma's house during a
New Year's Eve scene and slipping another set in underneath serves no
purpose other than to prove that it can be done. Worse still are the
hydraulic high jinks that accompany Joe's death scene. As the musical makes
its last attempt to draw the audience in, the set and the characters on it
move away from the audience for the sake of a sight gag - Joe taking a
header into Norma's pool, which has implausibly manifested itself in the
centre of her living room floor.
Lloyd Webber's musicals always fare well in spectacle-loving Los Angeles,
and the added frisson of a show about itself has set the city Sunset-crazy;
despite mixed local reviews, Sunset set a Shubert Theatre box-office record
(Dollars 512,130) the day after opening.
Meanwhile, the gossip about whether it will be LuPone or Close who plays
Norma when Sunset opens on Broadway this autumn rages on, but what does it
matter? Both are big stars, and this musical is too small for either of
them.
