FT  20 AUG 94 / Books: A quantum leap - AC Grayling discusses the beauties
of nature
THE QUARK AND THE JAGUAR by Murray Gell-Mann Little, Brown Pounds 18.99, 392
pages
BLACK HOLES AND TIME WARPS: EINSTEIN'S OUTRAGEOUS LEGACY by Kip Thorn
Picador Pounds 20, 619 pages
Imagine a medieval stonemason resting from his labours half way up a Gothic
cathedral spire. He gazes - if he is a man of sensibility, he marvels - at
the world spread around him. What does he see? Leaving aside details like
urban sprawl, factory chimneys and passing aircraft, he sees much the same
world as we now do. But in another sense of 'see' we see the world in a way
inconceivable for him, because the stories told then and now about the
nature and origins of the universe are vastly different. Both stories are
strange and in their way beautiful; but the one told by modern science is
infinitely stranger and more beautiful than any hitherto dreamt by mankind.
A swarm of popularising science books reaches the market each year, seeking
to give the general public an understanding of the latest developments. Most
are good, because most scientists and their commentators are an intelligent
crew who enjoy what they do. But these two additions to the swarm are
special: for their authors are extremely distinguished original contributers
to the scientific endeavours they describe. These are reports from the
cutting edge, and they are presented with eloquence and style.
Murray Gell-Mann won the Nobel prize for physics in 1969, and later helped
establish the Santa Fe Institute, an interdisciplinary foundation devoted to
the study of 'complex systems' as various as quantum mechanics, the human
body, and international economics. The key concepts which interest him are
simplicity and complexity. The fundamental units of matter - quarks and
leptons - are simple entities. Everything built out of them is complex; but
among the most interesting complex things are those possessing a capacity to
change in response to information about their surroundings. Gell-Mann's aim
is to understand these 'adaptive systems', of which biological entities are
a prime example, by tracing the chain of relationships between them and
simpler levels of the world.
Gell-Mann's main theme is the interaction between physics and chance. Our
present understanding of nature's fundamental laws, he says, promises that
we might soon have a unified theory of all particles and forces. Chance
enters the picture because these laws are quantum-mechanical; they offer
only probabilities. So nature is indeterministic, a feature magnified by the
phenomenon of 'chaos', in which small imprecisions in data about initial
conditions give rise to huge indeterminacies in prediction-as exemplified by
the difficulties of weather forecasting. But these factors mean that at
certain points in the universe's history conditions are right for the
emergence of complex adaptive systems. The same concepts that apply to the
phenomena of physics can be used here also, to explore evolution both in the
biological and cultural spheres.
Here Gell-Mann's ideas are at their most radical. They describe how the
evolution of adaptive systems works best in conditions poised between order
and disorder. There must, he says, be many places in the universe where the
chain of connections between simple and complex levels has produced
something similar to life on earth. But even so - and here, in the third
part of his book, he turns from science to politics - there remains an
urgent need to preserve as much of the biological diversity of the world as
possible; which will only happen, he says, if there is a major change in our
economic and technological lifestyles; for man and his world are ceasing to
be in adaptive relationship with each other, to the peril of both.
There is no environmental message in Kip Thorn's book, but it is equally
gripping. Thorn was one of the physicists who brought a weird and awesome
astronomical monster to the attention of an astonished world: the 'black
hole'. In his delightfully clear account he explains what black holes are
and relates the history of the scientific work which discovered them.
A black hole is a puncture in the universe exerting such a huge
gravitational attraction that it sucks in everything near it. Nothing that
slips over the 'horizon' of a black hole ever escapes, including light;
which explains the name. At the centre of a black hole is the remnant of a
star which died by imploding on itself. This tiny core is hugely massive;
space itself is warped by its gravitational pull, so even the nothingness
between the core of a black hole and its surrounding envelope of blackness
is a vast distorted twist of pure space.
The study of black holes is revolutionising scientific understanding of
nature. Thorn predicts that in coming years the results of investigations
into them will unlock the inner structure of matter - the same goal at which
Gell-Mann, from the different direction of nuclear physics, aimed in much of
his work.
Both these books give one the dizzying sense that science is poised on the
brink of a new world of discovery; a world stranger and still more beautiful
than anything imagined yet.
