FT  13 SEP 94 / Markets Report: UK rate rise lifts sterling
Sterling made good gains yesterday after the Bank of England's unexpected
decision to lift the minimum lending rate by 50 basis points to 5.75 per
cent, writes Philip Gawith.
The pound rose some two pfennigs, and more than a cent, on the news before
levelling out to close in London at DM2.4117 and Dollars 1.5626, from
DM2.3914 and Dollars 1.5509 on Friday. The trade weighted index finished at
79.1 from 78.6.
Analysts, however, stopped short of saying that sterling had managed to
detach itself from the downtow of the dollar. The rate move appears to have
put a floor under the currency, rather than to have necessarily given it any
significant upside momentum.
Sterling futures lost a lot of ground, the September contract trading 38,000
lots to close 40 points lower, at 94.07 from 94.47. The December contract
saw nearly 88,000 lots dealt and ended at 93.30, down 37 basis points from
Friday's close.
The rise in UK rates overshadowed activities in Europe, where most
currencies had a generally quieter day.
The dollar was slightly firmer against the D-Mark but weaker in terms of the
yen, ahead of today's release of the August US consumer price index. The
release will be closely watched following the dollar's two-pfennig drop last
Friday, on news that the August PPI rose 0.6 per cent.
The US currency finished in London at DM1.5435 from DM1.5419 and at Y98.985
from Y99.265. It ended in New York at DM1.5433 and Y99.15.
The decision to raise rates was widely, though not universally, welcomed.
Most saw it as a timely pre-emptive strike against inflation.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the UK chancellor, boosted his credibility through his
apparent willingness to place the economy above party politics.
The Bank of England's reputation was also enhanced, in the eyes of some. Mr
Jeremy Hawkins, chief economist in London at Bank of America, said: 'The
clear message is that the Bank of England has much more independence in
setting monetary policy than it has had in its history.' He added that this
had to be a plus factor for sterling, in the long term.
Although the decision to lift rates caught most offside, it did not come
entirely out of the blue. Mr Philip Shaw, economist at Union Discount, noted
that three-month sterling LIBOR had been above base rates since July. The
Bank had made no effort to protest, which suggested it was happy to leave
markets with the impression that rates would rise.
The handling, and timing, of the move was criticised by some money market
practitioners. Some felt that the Bank had misled the market by, in its
daily operations last Thursday, offering a repurchase agreement which gave
assistance at the established (lower) rate. Many took this as a clear signal
that rates were on hold.
But others supported the Bank on this count. Mr Nick Parsons, treasury
economist at CIBC, said: 'There have been several occasions in the past when
we have had a rate move with a repo outstanding.'
Mr Neil MacKinnon, chief economist at Citibank in London, also warned: 'My
experience in the money markets has been: never say never.'
Both, however, were critical of the handling of the move. 'The Bank has used
its discretion over the precise timing of a rate change in a way which
unsettles investors, destabilises traders and maximises uncertainty about
future changes,' added Mr Parsons.
Mr MacKinnon said it was easier to read the intentions of the Fed and
Bundesbank. 'With the Bank of England we still live in Smiley's world of
secrecy.' He said the fact that some highly respected economists had been
wrong-footed 'shows how the Bank has made confusing and misleading signals
to the market'.
Some money market operators were also critical that the Bank could have set
a 5.19688 per cent interest rate, on a Pounds 4.5bn floating rate gilt
issue, last Friday. Official sources pointed out, however, that the
quarterly date for changing the interest rate was inflexible, and set months
in advance.
The D-Mark finished weaker against most currencies. Analysts said markets
were beginning to worry whether Chancellor Kohl's governing coalition would
win an outright majority in the national elections in October. The German
unit closed at SKr4.853, from SKr4.902. Against the French franc it stood at
FFr3.425 from FFr3.427.
The Bank of England provided UK money markets with Pounds 180m late
assistance. Earlier it had supplied Pounds 624m liquidity at the new rate of
5 5/8 per cent, up from 5 1/8 per cent. Overnight money traded between 4 3/4
and 7 per cent.
Cash market rates moved up in line with the higher base rate. Three-month
LIBOR ended at 5 7/8 per cent from Friday's 5 7/16 . One-year LIBOR closed
at 7 1/8 per cent from 6 13/16 .
Analysts said the sharp move in short sterling was an over-reaction,
reflecting the extent to which the market had assumed rates would not be
moving. One source argued that if the Bank had moved on Thursday, losses
would have been much reduced.
