FT  15 FEB 94 / Eurostar train makes first journey
The Eurostar train service, which will run from London Waterloo through the
Channel tunnel to Paris and Brussels, expects one in five customers to be
business travellers.
The service, which was inaugurated yesterday with a trial run from south
London to the new Waterloo International terminal, is expected to provide
tough competition for airlines. Mr John MacGregor, transport secretary, made
the journey in the driver's cab of the 400-metre-long train.
Business travellers are expected to account for 18 per cent of all journeys;
independent leisure travellers will account for 64 per cent; and inclusive
tour travellers a further 18 per cent.
European Passenger Services, the British Rail subsidiary which will run the
trains, said that on the longer journeys from London to the Netherlands and
Germany, the absence of high-speed lines will extend journey times and
business travellers are expected to account for only 5 per cent of journeys.
Customs controls on day-time services will take place on the train while
night-time service controls will take place at the start of the journey.
Prices have yet to be announced while the starting date for the passenger
service, which is separate from the car passenger shuttle service between
Folkestone and Calais, is expected to be in the summer. Eurotunnel said last
week that starting dates for both freight and passenger services would be
delayed.
The trains will provide a three-hour journey time between London and Paris,
falling to two hours and a half hours in 2002 when the high-speed link
between London St Pancras and the tunnel is expected to open.
Services between London and Brussels will take three and a quarter hours.
Longer daytime journeys will be available in 1995 with an eight-hour journey
between Edinburgh and Paris, a five and three-quarter hour service between
Manchester and Paris and a five-hour service between Birmingham New Street
and Brussels.
A sleeper service between Glasgow, Swansea, Plymouth and continental
destinations will be launched next year. London to Amsterdam will take 10
hours while Glasgow to Paris will take 12 hours.
