FT  10 OCT 94 / Iraq Menaces Kuwait: Kuwait depends on US help
Iraq has deployed some 64,000 troops, including two of the seven divisions
of its much vaunted Republican Guards, in an area 20 to 40 miles north of
the Kuwait-Iraq border, according to US administration sources. Iraq has
also moved a mechanised infantry division and some 200 former Soviet T-72
tanks into the area.
An artillery battery is also reported to be within range of Kuwait and men
from another Republican Guard division are moving south from Mosul in
northern Iraq.
According to senior US military sources, Iraq had rebuilt its army in the
last three years to some 27 divisions, numbering 350,000 men backed up by
more than 2,000 main battle tanks. US sources say the Iraqi air force was
'cut in half' in the 1990-91 Gulf war and its navy is said to be
'negligible', but Iraq's military is still a 'formidable military force
relative to its neighbours'.
It is particularly formidable when contrasted with Kuwait's military
line-up. Kuwait has called up reservists and sent some 20,000 men - thought
to be its entire army - up near its border with Iraq, and moved up 50 tanks.
A critical report last March from the national assembly said arms purchases
of over Dollars 5bn (Pounds 3.1bn) since 1991 have been made more for
political reasons than for a sustainable military strategy.
The government has bought most of its weaponry from the US, and much of the
new equipment is so new that the army has yet to become familiar with it.
Kuwait is thus overwhelmingly dependent on US assistance. On Saturday the US
announced it was sending 4,000 troops to Kuwait to join other US forces in
or near the area. These include 11 US warships in the Gulf, including an
amphibious group led by the USS Tripoli with 2,000 marines. In all, the US
has some 12,500 forces in the Gulf area, backed up by some 200 fighter
aircraft, F-117 Stealth fighter bombers and Awacs reconnaissance planes
using bases in Saudi Arabia and the Gulf. Arabia also hosts the GCC
'Peninsula Shield' force, ground forces comprising 8,000 men.
Other US forces expected in the area soon include the aircraft carrier the
USS Washington, on its way from the Mediterranean to the Red Sea; a military
cargo ship sailed on Friday from Diego Garcia with more military equipment.
The US is the only country with which Kuwait has an agreement to preposition
military supplies. Warehouses at Camp Doha, west of Kuwait city, contain
enough equipment and housing to support a brigade of 5,000 troops.
In answer to a Kuwaiti request, the UK guides missile frigate HMS Cornwall
arrived in Kuwaiti waters yesterday.
Should the Iraqis try to invade Kuwait, the initial allied response would
come from sea and air power already in the area, on advancing Iraqi ground
forces. Judging from the experience of the Gulf war, the effect could be
devastating.
