FT  20 AUG 94 / The lost art of the grovel: Dominic Lawson was highly
impressed by Timothy Clifford's abject apology
It was suggested in this column last week that the government's peculiar
inability to reap political rewards from the economic good harvest was the
result of not saying sorry. Specifically, it had pretended that it was
wholly responsible for the transformation in our fortunes which followed on
its involuntary exit from the exchange rate mechanism.
The British people could see that this was, at best, bare-faced cheek. We
resented the complete lack of contrition for the hundreds of thousands of
jobs lost because of the previous policy.
Now, within days of advancing this theory, the extraordinary power of a good
old fashioned apology has been made manifest. Yesterday it was revealed that
John Paul Getty II, the British-resident American philanthropist had
confirmed his offer to donate Pounds 1m towards the fund to keep Canova's
Three Graces in Britain, rather than have it bought by the Getty museum,
established by his late father.
Two days earlier it seemed that Getty might withdraw his offer, after
Timothy Clifford, the director of the National Galleries of Scotland,
claimed on television that his kind offer was in fact motivated by a grudge
against his father.
'I think Mr Getty never got on at all well with his father. That is the
crucial point of it,' said Clifford, with an astonishing mixture of
presumption, impertinence, and foolishness.
The Times then published a letter in which Getty was reported as saying:
'The only way I can see to disprove the allegation is to withdraw my offer
and do everything I can to see the Getty (museum) gets it. This I propose to
do, unless you have any suggestions.'
Clifford had a suggestion all right. He apologised. He apologised epically.
He apologised in industrial quantities. He apologised to any newspaper which
would listen. He apologised in television studios, from morning to night. As
the Daily Telegraph remarked, 'not since Priam abased himself before
Achilles to secure the return of the body of his son Hector, has there been
an example of grovelling so profuse and spectacular.'
But the point was that Clifford, unlike the Conservative Party, has ended up
with a smile on his face, (if it could be seen under such a large
accumulation of egg). Getty, after such a gratifying barrage of apologies,
relented. It looks as though Canova's Three Graces - or rather Canova's copy
of his original, for that is what it is - will remain in Britain. And
Clifford - unlike Norman 'je ne regrette rien' Lamont - has kept his job, if
not his self-esteem.
It may be objected that such apologies as Clifford's are not motivated by a
sense of shame, but rather by a sense of self-preservation, or some other
ulterior motive. But that would miss the point.
An old-fashioned apology is social in its context: it is a way of letting
the wider society know that the normal bounds of behaviour have been
broached and that the breach has been acknowledged. That is why one
apologises after one has belched in public.
Unfortunately the great rise in the number of libel cases, and I suspect in
the prestige of libel lawyers - George Carman QC is the man for our times -
shows how far the prompt apology has gone out of fashion. Newspapers, more
than ever, shun the immediate retraction as an unendurable embarrassment,
and instead are prepared to spend hundreds of thousands of pounds of their
shareholders' money in the hope that the plaintiff will run out of either
patience or money, or both. And yet I have never come across a reader who
thinks less of his newspaper for publishing a speedy retraction.
So while Timothy Clifford is currently the laughing stock of the art world,
I have some hopes that his timely practice of the ancient and almost
forgotten art of crawling will encourage those with real power over our
affairs to rediscover the pragmatic merits of humility.
Dominic Lawson is editor of The Spectator.
