FT  03 OCT 94 / Survey of Building Services (1): Green conundrum for the
experts - Consumers have been reluctant to pay the price for efficient
service systems. But there are indications that the tide may be turning
Two groups of experts sitting down today at opposite ends of the UK will be
trying to solve the same conundrum.
If so much store needs to be placed on cutting costs and saving the
environment why is there so little interest in more efficient, 'greener'
buildings?
In Brighton, more than 50 construction professionals at the annual Chartered
Institution of Building Services Engineers' annual conference will be
exploring why low-energy buildings are so rare. Meanwhile, in Lancashire
builders will be meeting for an update on the fortunes of the National Home
Energy Rating Scheme.
One common factor is almost bound to emerge. Consumers are reluctant to pay
the price for future savings. Efficient systems for handling heating,
lighting, ventilation and the myriad other functions that keep commercial
buildings ticking over cost more.
Occupiers dislike service charges but refuse to accept the higher rents or
construction costs necessary to cut them. Homebuyers are little different,
opting for cheaper houses rather than those with better insulation and
materials.
But the tide may be turning. The government is committed to a 20 per cent
reduction in carbon dioxide emissions by the year 2005. Buildings in the UK
produce half the carbon dioxide pollution, and will be regulated more
rigorously when new construction regulations come into force next April.
VAT charges on fuel will make homebuyers more sensitive to running costs.
But commercial users are already aware of an energy bill which has soared
past Pounds 20bn a year for UK buildings and threatens to go further if the
expected carbon tax emerges later this decade.
Other worries are also crowding in. Modern buildings have begun to
demonstrate frightening side-effects. Electronics adopted to save costs
appear to require expensive servicing. Staff fall sick for no apparent
reason, and even passers-by can be struck down by invisible bugs.
Security takes on a new dimension. It must combat not only bomb threats in
the City of London but burglars hungry for desk-top computers. Even
hospitals now have to consider elaborate alarms to protect new-born babies.
Fire safety is another problem in sealed office blocks and shopping malls.
Overlaying all this is a drive to cut costs as businesses drag themselves
out of recession. While energy-saving is the main driving force, this
combination of factors has brought the whole range of building services into
prominence.
This is a leading industry worth more than Pounds 8.9bn in 1992: 20 per cent
of the total construction contractors' output, according to the Building
Services Research and Information Association. Mechanical and electrical
engineering alone was estimated at almost Pounds 7.5bn last year.
Many occupiers facing the task of trimming spending would be surprised to
discover the number of activities quietly going on in the background to keep
their building working. An average 10,000 sq ft office block costs more than
Pounds 60,000 a year to maintain, according to the annual Office Service
Charge Analysis (Oscar) of property consultants Jones Lang Wootton (JLW).
The cost includes energy, security, heating, air conditioning maintenance,
management, cleaning, repairs, wages, lifts, insurance and water.
It does not include buildings insurance and applies only to common parts
covered by landlords. Tenants pay extra for their own cleaning, lighting and
other services.
The lion's share goes on energy (Pounds 1.20 a sq ft) and heating/air
conditioning (Pounds 1.05), one reason why a fierce debate now rages over
the energy bill. A non-air-conditioned block costs 30 per cent less to run
than a block with air conditioning (Pounds 4.16 a sq ft instead of Pounds
6.03p), according to JLW.
Much of the debate in Brighton will centre on why air conditioning has
become almost universal over the past decade. Engineers blame this on
developers, who pass the buck to estate agents, who in turn insist this is
what occupiers demand.
The same chain of blame applies to electrical services. Designers vastly
overestimated the needs of modern technology during the 1980s, producing
over-expensive buildings equipped with air systems capable of extracting
vast amounts of heat from electronics and heavyweight electrical systems to
power them.
Many occupiers are paying a premium for ventilation systems that run below
capacity - and therefore inefficiently - plus extra charges to electricity
suppliers for not using up their contracted loads.
Service engineers say this is partly because of their lack of status. 'We
should be brought in earlier to advise on what is really required in
buildings,' says Mr David Lush, a consultant with Ove Arup and former
president of the Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers
(CIBSE).
Air conditioning is now under scrutiny, however. Manufacturers insist that
it is still necessary in town centres, where noise and dirt preclude opening
windows. They are producing systems which are both 'greener' and more
efficient. Chlorofluorocarbons will soon disappear and blanket use of
full-blown variable air volume (VAV) systems is giving way to partial air
conditioning.
The manufacturers have one eye over their shoulder on the government. Air
conditioning only escaped rigorous controls in next year's reforms of
building regulations because ministers were persuaded the controls would be
unworkable.
It had been suggested that builders justify every system with evidence from
occupiers that such technology was essential. They argued that buildings
were usually constructed long before anyone knew who would occupy them.
But the pressure for reform remains intense. The government expects a more
practicable solution and the British Property Federation and CIBSE are
trying to create either an energy scoring system or an environmental
'shopping list' that can be applied to commercial buildings.
Other pressures are coming from Brussels, where the European Union is
pouring out a stream of directives. 'The problem is that we are not being
consulted,' says Mr Kenneth Dale, president of REHVA, the Federation of
European Heating and Air Conditioning Associations. One rule demanding that
every electrical item had to be checked every year had to be revoked after
service engineers showed the crippling cost of such a task.
Little hard evidence has emerged that changes are taking place on the ground
 -mainly because so few buildings have gone up during the recession. But
some promising signs are looming on the horizon.
Shell-and-core techniques are creeping in, where developers wait for a
tenant before putting in all the services. This gives engineers a better
chance of influencing decisions.
Developers have always claimed that occupiers demand to see finished
buildings - even if that means expensive replacement of unsuitable services
later. But Coca-Cola has made an early claim on an unfinished 80,000 sq ft
block in Hammersmith because it saved having to throw out the developers'
fittings and gave better control over the end product, said Mr Stephen
Watkins, the company's property services manager.
This technique, common in other parts of the world, will become more common,
says Mr Chris Hiatt of JLW, particularly as computer advances allow agents
to take potential occupiers around 'virtual reality' buildings rather than
waiting for a finished one.
The most significant pressures for change over the next few years may come
from occupiers themselves rather than conferences and regulations. Soaring
energy bills, concern over the impact of 'sick' buildings on productivity
and potential legal responsibility for legionnaires' disease bugs in water
systems are all making tenants more aware of the services hidden in their
buildings.
Developers such as Norwich Union have taken up the challenge, offering to
produce blocks which are both greener and cheaper to run. If occupiers take
up the challenge, engineers will welcome it with open arms. In the meantime,
they face a long campaign to adjust the vast bulk of existing services
either upwards to meet modern demands for efficiency, or downwards from the
inflated ideas of the 1980s.
