FT  10 JAN 94 / Rail concession may boost privatisation
A private rail company planning a freight link to the channel tunnel has
been given the right to own its own track, in a key concession which could
reopen the debate over a central component of the government's plans for
rail privatisation.
The Department of Transport has allowed the Central Railway Group to
negotiate the purchase of the track it needs to set up a 180-mile link
between the Midlands and the tunnel.
The concession is a direct challenge to Railtrack, the company set up to own
and manage former British Rail lines from April. Railtrack is in the midst
of tense negotiations with the Treasury over the value of its assets.
The concession meets one of the main reservations expressed by potential
bidders for rail franchises. If it were extended to other potential private
rail operators, more might be attracted to bid for franchises.
Most of Central Railway's route runs along disused British Rail track or
alongside existing lines, but it crucially includes 40 miles of British
Rail's Chiltern lines.
Sea Containers, the shipping company which is a potential bidder for a
British Rail franchise, said the concession was 'very interesting and
encouraging to other bidders. But it depends on how far the government is
prepared to go with it'.
Mr Roger Freeman, the transport minister, in a letter dated July 15 1993,
gives permission to the Central Railway Group 'to negotiate with Railtrack
with a view to establishing the terms on which railway infrastructure and
operational land could be acquired'. The letter is reproduced in a
fund-raising prospectus published by the group.
The government has said most of the British Rail network will be owned by
Railtrack; the only previous exception allowed was the Isle of Wight's
railway network. But pressure is growing for Scotrail, the Scottish network,
to be sold off too.
The ban on owning the track has been criticised by several potential bidders
for BR franchises. The founder and chairman of the Central railway Group, Mr
Andrew Gritten, said ownership of the track was essential if the company was
to raise finance for the project, which is expected to cost Pounds 3bn.
The company is attempting to raise Pounds 6m from City institutions to
prepare the project for parliamentary approval. A second stage fund-raising
of Pounds 25m is planned to obtain a stock market listing which, it is
hoped, will raise nearly Pounds 1bn. At the time of listing Pounds 2.1bn of
debt would also be raised.
City's 'supertram', Page 6
