FT  07 DEC 94 / Shipping lines press for decision on BR sale
Twelve big international shipping lines will meet the government next week
to press for a rapid decision on the sale of Freightliner, the loss-making
British Rail subsidiary which moves containers.
The lines, which include Hapag-Lloyd of Germany, Evergreen of Taiwan, NYK
Line and Mitsui-OSK of Japan, T&amp;J Harrison of the UK and Lykes Lines of the
US, are concerned about the six-month delay in the privatisation plans.
They are also worried that Freightliner, which carries containers from
deep-sea ports to inland terminals, might be sold to a consortium partly
owned by rival shipping companies or ports. One of the bidding consortia
involves Maersk, a Danish shipping company, and another includes UK shipping
group P&amp;O and the Port of Felixstowe.
The sale of Freightliner was expected to be the first substantial sale of
part of BR since legislation authorising privatisation was passed in
November 1993. But delays on concluding a deal have highlighted the problems
of selling the loss-making parts of BR and angered the three consortia
bidding.
They complain that the cost of maintaining bid teams and advisers rises the
longer they have to wait.
The shipping lines are to meet transport minister Mr John Watts, his senior
civil servants and representatives of BR's vendor unit which is responsible
for handling sales. 'It is partly exasperation at the delay and partly
because we fear a monopoly being established by a port organisation or a
shipping line,' said Mr Keith Duggan, director of transport at Hapag-Lloyd.
But a spokesman for Project Freightliner, comprising P&amp;O Distribution,
Russell Davies, a distribution group, and the Port of Felixstowe, said: 'We
look to serve the main container ports. It would be daft to run only to
Felixstowe.'
The sale memorandum for Freightliner was published seven months later than
planned last May. Bids were made in June but were rejected by the government
as lacking in detail. More information was made available to the bidders and
they refiled their bids in October.
One reason for the delayed sale is the loss of Pounds 38m which Freightliner
made on sales of Pounds 78m last year which has made it difficult to
structure a satisfactory deal.
Some of the bidders want further government support if they are to maintain
the more heavily loss-making routes on which Freightliner operates. This
could come either in the form of a continued subsidy or a special
arrangement with Railtrack on the level of access fees for using the track.
The three bidders for Freightliner are MCB, a buy-out bid mounted by a team
of Freightliner managers; Project Freightliner; and FL2000 consisting of
former Freightliner managers, Maersk and - until it withdrew last month - CP
Rail Systems of Canada.
MCB makes much of the fact that its is the only bid which involves the
acquisition of locomotives and train crews who account for 1,500 of the
2,000 Freightliner employees. But the other two bidders say that it makes
more sense to hire in 'traction' from the other larger parts of BR's freight
activities.
The bid consortia hope that the government will make up its mind on the
successful bidder by Christmas though it is unlikely a sale could be
concluded before March or April.
