FT  02 FEB 94 / Business and the Environment: Profits from preservation - As
many US zoos are privatised, they are beginning to undergo an ecological
awakening
Hanging in the personnel offices of the Franklin Park Zoo in Boston is a
poster which reads: 'Extinction is forever.' At the hot dog stand, a message
has been taped to the napkin dispenser: 'Please conserve. Save a tree.' At
the African tropical rain forest exhibit, an entire wall is devoted to
explaining the ecological dangers facing rain forests in the world.
Welcome to the modern zoo, a hotbed of environmental activism.
Zoos and aquariums have come a long way since the dark days of cramped cages
and disregard for animals in the wild. While the image emanating from
Hollywood is still negative - the popular children's film Free Willy, about
a whale, caused an international furore last year when its decrepit
real-life living conditions in Mexico City were discovered - most US zoos
and aquariums today are highly sensitive to environmental concerns.
Zoos in the US are now seeking to redefine their ecological role in the face
of increasing fund shortages. Since many US zoos and aquariums have been
privatised, they are more dependent on their own revenue streams, and are
under pressure to set priorities. The challenge will be to continue
environmental programmes in a cost-effective way.
'Increased co-operation between international zoos will become more
important in the face of severe fund shortages,' says Michael Wallace,
curator of conservation at the Los Angeles Zoo. Animal conservation will
continue to be one of the mainstays of zoos' ecological efforts.
'Zoos went through an awakening on animal conservation,' says John Linehan,
general curator for the Franklin Park Zoo. 'In the past, we'd be happy if
the animals had a few babies now and then, to attract the public, but that
was the extent of our breeding efforts. Then we started noticing that
animals were getting harder to find and more expensive. We realised this
great resource we had, and that we could become a major player in animal
conservation.'
A number of species exist only in captivity, and zoos and aquaria breed
these species to prevent extinction. Reintroduction of the animals into the
wild is the ultimate goal in many cases, and some zoos have chalked up
stunning successes in this area.
The Arabian oryx, a large antelope, for example, was extinct in the wild
until zoos began to reintroduce the animal in the 1970s and 1980s. Today,
several hundred roam the deserts of Oman. Similarly, the black-footed ferret
was successfully reintroduced in Wyoming, and the Sumatra tiger in
Indonesia.
There are numerous pitfalls to reintroduction, however. The programmes are
extremely expensive to administer, so the number of targeted species must be
limited. Moreover, many involved in the industry complain that zoos and
aquariums are too often the last-ditch effort.
'Reintroduction from zoo populations is usually a last resort, an
after-thought,' says Michael Hutchins, director of conservation and science
at the American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums. 'Releasing
animals back into the wild would be more effective - and less expensive - if
we did it before numbers dwindled to a dangerous level. It's a lot easier to
boost the numbers of existing populations than to create a population from
scratch.'
Zoos hope to correct this problem by becoming increasingly involved in 'in
situ' conservation - that is, conservation in the wild.
Involving local people is the key to an effective reintroduction programme,
say conservationists. Poverty-stricken people understandably see
conservation as a luxury, and will often not hesitate to hunt endangered
species, or log forest areas necessary for the species' survival. Along the
Atlantic coast of Brazil, for instance, locals have been employed as guards
and monitors for the golden-eyed tamarin. 'The people who are dependent on
this animal's survival to make a living become staunch protectionists,' says
Benjamin Beck of the National Zoo.
Zoos and aquariums also see education as a priority in their preservation
efforts. According to AAZPA, whose members had a budget of Dollars 825m
(Pounds 557m) last year, 105m people visited a zoo or aquarium in the US
last year. 'That gives us a tremendous potential to reach the public,' says
Hutchins. As an added advantage, educational programmes are relatively
inexpensive to administer.
In addition, aquariums are especially good at incorporating animals into
their entertainment mix. Marine animal 'acts' often include environmental
messages. A sea lion at the New England Aquarium, for instance, makes a show
of tossing rubbish into the appropriate recycling containers.
While conservation efforts and education will continue, ecological
fund-raising at many zoos is likely to be curtailed over the next few years.
With limited resources, zoos say they cannot afford to raise money for
causes other than their own. So benefits for other wildlife organisations
are likely to be phased out. Research is also controversial, with many
institutions believing funds are too short to stretch themselves far in that
area.
Indeed, the availability of funds over the next few years will help
determine the number of environmental projects zoos and aquariums involve
themselves in. Environmentalism is important, say zoo officials and
managers, but they cannot afford to lose sight of their main function, which
is to provide entertainment.
'If people don't have fun, they will stop coming,' says Ronald Tilson,
director of conservation at the Minnesota Zoo, 'and that will be the end of
our ecological involvement. While we're worrying about environmental issues
we have to make sure that our visitors are having a good time with the
animals. In the end, that may be the most important message of all.'
