FT  25 FEB 94 / Can Europe Compete?: Flashes of opportunity amid the gloom -
Industry's performance
Europe's industrial performance varies across sectors, as illustrated below.
The picture is not one of unrelieved gloom. There are plenty of
opportunities as well as problems.
Cars: The EU is the world's largest car market and the world's largest car
producer. However, close to 30 per cent of European production is
foreign-owned, with the figure likely to rise to about a third as new
Japanese plants reach full production in the next few years. The European
industry is also more parochial than its US or Japanese rivals, though it is
striving to catch up. BMW and Mercedes are building their first plants in
the US. In China, European carmakers have established an early lead.
Europe is still at an early stage of a huge phase of rationalisation and
restructuring. There are six true volume car makers left: Volkswagen, Fiat,
Renault and Peugeot Citroen, plus Ford and General Motors of the US. Almost
all the smaller players have been absorbed. Though Volvo's merger with
Renault has fallen through, Rover is about to become part of BMW. Among the
big players, at least one further merger looks likely within the next few
years.
The industry is likely to emerge from this phase more competitive than
before. It also has the geographical advantage of a potentially enormous
market on its doorstep, in the form of eastern Europe and the former Soviet
Union.
Drugs: The pharmaceutical industry is a European success story. The EU is
the world's biggest producer of prescription drugs, and many of the world's
best-selling drugs have been invented and developed in Europe over the
years. Between 1987 and 1991, EU production grew by 36 per cent in real
terms, compared with 16 per cent for the US. This is also an industry in
which Japan has yet to make its mark.
The chief threat to Europe lies in the rise of biotechnology, which may
supplant much of the traditional chemistry-based drug industry. The US has a
substantial lead here, based largely on its entrepreneurial tradition and
huge pool of venture capital.
Electronics/telecommunications: The picture is mixed. In telecommunications,
Europe has a number of internationally successful equipment suppliers, such
as Siemens, Alcatel, Ericsson and Nokia. It has also struck lucky in mobile
phones, where the European GSM standard is now becoming a global standard
outside the US. This puts US suppliers at a significant disadvantage in an
important growth market.
In electronics, however, Europe is sandwiched between Japan's dominance in
consumer electronics and America's overwhelming strength in high-tech
hardware and software. Unlike the US, Europe has chosen to confront Japan in
consumer electronics, the result being heavy losses for companies such as
Thomson and Philips. Across the high-tech field of computer hardware,
software, semiconductors and micro-processors, Europe as a whole is weak and
risks getting weaker.
Aerospace/defence: Perhaps the EU's biggest industrial success in recent
years has been the establishment of the Airbus consortium as the world's
only real rival to Boeing in civil aircraft manufacture. The financial cost
has been heavy, though, and Airbus's eventual success as an independent
entity cannot be taken for granted.
In the defence industry, European contractors traditionally enjoyed
preferential treatment from their own governments, while the US government
was reluctant to allow sophisticated weaponry into foreign hands. With the
collapse of the Soviet Union, the picture has changed dramatically. Since
1989, US defence exports have risen from Dollars 6bn a year to Dollars 15bn,
while Europe's have halved to around Dollars 5bn. It is not clear that this
process is over. On the other hand, the European industry also lags the US
badly in terms of rationalisation. As in cars, this should make for greater
efficiency, provided it is undertaken in time.
Chemicals: The EU is still by a narrow margin the world's biggest producer
of basic chemicals, just ahead of the US and well ahead of Japan. The threat
comes in petrochemicals, more than half the sector.
Though Europe invented many of the basic plastics, it has some fundamental
handicaps. The US and Middle East have cheaper natural gas as raw material.
The Far East is the main growth market, and Far Eastern producers are
raising capacity accordingly. Several of Europe's leading producers see the
long-term outlook as bleak.
