FT  02 APR 94 / Cardinal warns Major against 'rubbishing' IRA ceasefire
Cardinal Cahal Daly yesterday challenged Mr John Major's scornful rejection
of the IRA's 72-hour post-Easter ceasefire. 'I believe the opportunity
should not be passed by,' Cardinal Daly said. 'It should not be rubbished.'
Speaking less than 24 hours after the prime minister denounced the IRA's
move as 'self-serving and cynical', the Primate of all Ireland said the
ceasefire raised 'significant hope', although it was 'disappointingly
short'.
'I am afraid, respectfully, I would not agree that this is a cynical
exercise on the part of the IRA,' he added. 'The significance is that for
the first time in 20 years they have initiated this cessation of violence.
Why not test it?'
As the leaders of the three main opposition parties in the Irish republic
issued a joint peace demand to the IRA, Archbishop Robin Eames, the
Protestant Primate of the Church of Ireland, responded to the ceasefire in a
more downbeat vein.
Although any cessation was to be welcomed, he said: 'The real Christian
agenda for Northern Ireland must be written by those who see that a complete
end to violence . . . will give us the opportunity to plan the way forward
in peace and justice.'
Yesterday's developments came as the British and Irish governments
reaffirmed that the ceasefire, starting at midnight on Tuesday, falls far
short of the permanent cessation required to admit Sinn Fein, the IRA's
political wing, to round-table talks. Sinn Fein has called for 'immediate
and direct talks' with the British government to obtain clarification of the
Downing Street declaration signed by London and Dublin last December.
Dublin has expressed 'extreme disappointment' with the IRA's response to the
declaration, with Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, urging Sinn
Fein to spell out what it means by its latest clarification demand.
Underlining Dublin's growing exasperation with Sinn Fein, Mr Reynolds has
departed for a week-long holiday in Cyprus.
Mr Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein president, has said he 'would not seek to
protract' any talks with the British government and emphasised that Sinn
Fein is not seek-ing negotiation, only clarification.
An IRA bomb containing 200lbs of explosives and shrapnel was made safe by
soldiers in Armagh yesterday after a day-long operation, police said.
