FT  12 MAR 94 / Survey of Residential Property (5): Cautious buyers are
hungry for more choice - What's on offer for eager homehunters / The state
of the market
The recovery in the housing market is as variable as in the rest of the
economy. Prime London prices - and rents - are up, and that is spilling over
into the home counties. The number of repossessions is coming down and
negative equity is disappearing. Agents have plenty of potential buyers on
their books but not enough houses to sell to them. When buyers compete, a
property sells for more than its guide price.
Buyers are still being circumspect. If a property price is set too high,
they will not even bother to look. Prices are still being cut on houses
which are in danger of becoming 'old chestnuts', or are so already.
Stockton House, in Wiltshire, is down from Pounds 1m to Pounds 700,000, and
Kingsmead House near Tetbury, Gloucestershire, from Pounds 1.2m to Pounds
950,000 (both with Savills). The old rectory at Chudleigh near Exeter,
Devon, priced at Pounds 285,000 in 1991, is on offer through Constables at
Pounds 199,950, but offers of Pounds 175,000 will be considered.
Set a sensible guide price for a good property, and people flock to view.
Even the houses that have stuck are moving, which is a good omen, as it
underpins the market for fresh properties.
The potential buyers are 'mainly people with a pent-up desire to move,' says
James Laing, of agents Strutt &amp; Parker. They are tired of living in
short-term, rented accommodation or waiting for their present house to lift
in value. However, in Guildford, Surrey, Tommy de Mallet Morgan, of Savills,
meets young City workers, with bonus, girlfriend and Porsche, who have the
cash for a six-bedroom house in the Pounds 700,000 to Pounds 1m range. 'It
is an equity-driven market. They want the best and have a sharp instinct for
what is new on the market, perhaps because their work is trading.'
Vendors have been reluctant because they want to secure their new place
first, or are waiting for price rises to bring their properties back to the
amount they paid a few years ago. But there are signs of more instructions,
notably in the north, north-west and Yorkshire.
Houses are selling quickly and only genuine cash buyers have a chance of
getting what they want. Buyers who agree terms have also stopped reneging on
completing their deals, notes Tim Blenkin, of Blenkin &amp; Co, Knight Frank &amp;
Rutley's associate in York.
With so little to buy, purchasers will consider a long-term let. Strutt &amp;
Parker's office in Newbury, Berkshire, reported a huge response when it
brought to market Buscot Manor - a National Trust property dating from 1691
near Faringdon in Oxfordshire - for rental on an assured shorthold tenancy
of an initial 10 years.
The terms were not cheap. The rent was to be around Pounds 1,300 a month,
and the tenant had to agree to spend at least Pounds 15,000 on the house in
the first six months of tenancy, to include refurbishing the kitchen. A
shortlist evolved of five prospective tenants who were happy with the terms;
that has been reduced to two between whom the trust is deciding.
James Laing expects a rise in prices in 1994, but not of the 20 per cent or
so predicted in December by Yolande Barnes, of Savills Residential Research.
Buyers remain cautious even though conditions for buying have not been so
good for many years, in terms of house prices, household incomes and low
interest rates, with the chance of locking into them through long-term fixed
rate mortgages.
It is hard to predict the impact of the April tax increases or of the
government's endless woes. And as more sellers gain the confidence to
instruct agents, the supply-demand imbalance will lessen and the pace of
price rises slow down.
London has led the recovery, thanks first to the overseas buyers who have
been at work since autumn 1992, and to the recipients of City bonuses.
Hamptons prime residential property index shows a 9.9 per cent rise in 1993,
the first increase in capital values for four years, and Cluttons London
Residential sees the average discount between asking price and selling price
now narrowed to 2.5 per cent.
Prices in central London have continued moving up by 6 to 7 per cent so far
this year, but they may drop back 2 to 3 per cent when more stock becomes
available. Winkworth reports properties coming under offer at the asking
price within a day. Foreign buyers are still very much in the market.
Outside London the rise has been strongest in areas such as Surrey, which
were first to fall in the slump. The London euphoria is starting to ripple
through the home counties - at least at the top end, where Ian Stewart, of
Savills, has sold six properties in the Pounds 1m-Pounds 3m range recently.
These include West Croft Park at Chobham in Surrey, and Harewood Park at
Ascot, which both went for near their asking prices of Pounds 3m and Pounds
2m respectively.
On the next rung down, the optimism has yet to become euphoria, but de
Mallet Morgan has underbidders regretting they did not offer more. Why?
Because they cannot find anything else. 'A good, free-standing five-bedroom
house, I could sell just like that.' Eventually, the rises will spread to
all parts of the country, he says.
With instructions starting to warm up, the building societies are the chief
problem, says Blenkin. Scarred by their losses on houses they repossessed,
they are now extra cautious about lending on older properties, which is
nerve-wracking for buyers and sellers.
In Norfolk, Bidwells' old chestnuts are starting to go after 'hanging
around' for 1 1/2 to two years. But Norfolk is not for commuters. Nor is
Shropshire, where too few properties are for sale, says Eddie Jenkins, of
John German, in Shrewsbury. The market has perked up since the end of the
year, but there is no surge. Bank managers are telling potential sellers,
'hold firm', he says.
In the west country, the number of buyers moving from the home counties fell
off after 1989, but they are now starting to return. Stags finds that
two-thirds of its buyers are from south of a line from the Cotswolds to the
Wash. More buyers now look for a home with some income, such as cash from
holiday rentals. The company sold Ellicombe Manor in Somerset, for more than
Pounds 300,000, with four letting units in gardens of two acres.
Agents across the country would agree. For Jackson-Stops and Staff, 1993 saw
a 20 to 30 per cent increase in deals but little price movement, says Andrew
Froude, chairman. This year he expects more of the same - more activity but
no dramatic price increases. 'They may average 5 per cent over the year,' he
says. More optimistic forecasts may be counterproductive. Vendors hanging on
may lead to price increases but, while buyers are re-establishing their
confidence, they will be cautious.
No-one wants a return to the 1980s, least of all farmers, who saw their
earnings increase 60 per cent last year, thanks to better EU payments from
the devaluation of the pound, and lower interest on their overdrafts. Laing
believes that farms look a good market for the next five or six years,
covering 1996, when the present Common Agricultural Policy has to be renewed
in line with Gatt.
Now that insurance companies and other institutions have been disinvesting,
it is increasingly a market governed by farmers - which is healthy. As for
big estates, Froude says: 'They always sell at a premium and always find a
buyer, because very few come up in a year. They are nice for journalists to
write about, but they are a special case.'
The last word goes to Ian Stewart. 'It is the healthiest market for quite
some time.'
