FT  20 MAY 94 / Letters to the Editor: World Bank support for the blind begs
many questions
Sir, Your report on World Bank support for the struggle against blindness is
welcome ('World Bank cash to help the blind', May 14). It may therefore seem
carping to ask questions.
If this is 'the first project supported by a multilateral agency
specifically aimed at combating blindness' why were the funds not channelled
to WHO's programme for the Prevention of Blindness, which has been combating
blindness on a shoestring now for decades?
What better expertise does the World Bank possess than WHO? Why select India
when similar conditions prevail, for example in Pakistan, as I discovered
last February?
Why is the Indian surgery backlog increasing when the Indian delegate to a
WHO meeting nine years ago said it was being contained, if not reduced?
What percentage of the loan is earmarked for overheads, and how will
expenditure be monitored?
Specific conditions in the Indian sub-continent make it unnecessarily hard
to grapple with the tragic situation of its blind millions.
It is the intention to train 360 surgeons and about 1,700 nurses and other
support staff to restore sight to more than 8m by the year 2000. But we are
in the middle of 1994. Medically qualified graduates, if found, take four
years to train.
In that part of the world it is generally only males coming from well-to-do
families who are thought to be sufficiently intelligent enough to
successfully pursue medical and specialist studies.
If second-tier specialists are to train with an abbreviated curriculum,
which candidates are going to volunteer for this, with reduced prospects in
private practice?
A more economically sound move to follow could be a policy pioneered in
Africa. Suitable medically non-qualified staff were trained in the skills
required for the successful removal of cataracts.
On the Indian sub-continent there is always the concern that non-medics will
set up practices in the souk. It is hard to decide which is the greater
concern - that for misled patients or for unfair competition.
It would be interesting to know what representations were made to the World
Bank in connection with any alternative schemes, and on what grounds they
proved unacceptable.
R A Weale,
Age Concern,
Institute of Gerontology,
King's College London,
London,
SE1 8TX
