FT  21 DEC 94 / Intel offers to replace Pentium microchips
Intel, the world's biggest computer chip maker, is offering to replace free
of charge the flawed Pentium microprocessors that are the 'brains' of
millions of high performance personal computers.
To cover the cost of the 'no questions asked' offer, which follows thousands
of customer complaints over the past month on the Internet global computer
network, the US group will take a 'material' reserve against earnings in the
current quarter.
About 5m Pentium chips have been shipped to date, but Intel said it had no
idea how many customers would request replacement. The company's reserve, to
be determined, will include the cost of new chips and some of the cost of
installing them. The company apologised for its handling of the controversy
over the flawed chips which can cause computers to produce errors in
division calculations.
Previously Intel had only agreed to replace chips in machines used by
customers with a proven need for accurate complex computations.
After yesterday's announcement, Intel's share price rose in New York from
Dollars 57 13/16 to close at Dollars 61 1/4 . Analysts said the decision
would help to end 'hysterical media coverage'.
Mr Andrew Grove, Intel's president and chief executive, said: 'Our previous
policy was to talk with (Pentium PC) users to determine whether their needs
required replacement of the processor. There was a resentment to our
approach - it appeared that we at Intel were arrogant, we were telling
customers what was good for them. Maybe we have been thick-headed. . . but
we finally figured it out.'
Wide publicity was drawn to the Pentium problem by an IBM announcement a
week ago that it was halting shipments of computers using Pentium chips. IBM
said the Pentium could produce an error every 24 days.
Intel, however, maintains that such errors were likely to occur only once in
every 9bn calculations, or once in every 27,000 years, and would not affect
most users. IBM's figures have also been rejected by several other PC
manufacturers, including Compaq, the world's largest.
Sales to individual and small businesses of computers containing Pentium
chips have remained strong despite the negative publicity, Intel said. The
company is, however, concerned that large company purchases planned for the
first quarter of 1995 could be delayed by the problem.
Intel is making new versions of the Pentium chip and expects to be able to
meet requests for replacements within 60 days. The company does not expect
any long-term impact on sales.
Customers wanting their chips replaced will be sent instructions on how to
do so themselves, or can take their computers to a service centre. The chip
replacement offer will remain in effect for the lifetime of the computer.
Intel's customer inquiry numbers are: 01793 696776 in the UK and
1-800-628-8686 in the US.
Editorial Comment, Page 15
Lex, Page 16
US stocks, Page 33
