FT  23 MAR 94 / IMF and Russians strike deal: Fund sets conditions for
release of new Dollars 1.5bn loan to Moscow
The Russian government and the International Monetary Fund struck a deal
late last night under which the IMF expects to release a new Dollars 1.5bn
(Pounds 1.02bn) loan soon. Under the deal, Moscow must take steps to
increase budget revenue this year and commit itself to tight monetary
policies to curb inflation.
The loan has already been held up for several months because of IMF concern
that promised economic reforms in Russia are not being carried out.
Mr Michel Camdessus, IMF managing director, said he had thrashed out a
conditional agreement with Mr Victor Chernomyrdin, the Russian premier. It
follows months of gruelling and often acrimonious negotiations.
Mr Camdessus said the Russian government and central bank must sign a
memorandum with the IMF committing Russia to tight monetary policies. The
memorandum - 'the thrust and detail of Russian economic policy for 1994' -
should be ready in a week.
The Russian government must follow through its pledges by signing
appropriate measures, notably covering the raising of revenue, and by
proposing any necessary legislation to parliament. But the IMF does not
appear to be insisting that legislation must be passed by parliament before
the Fund will give its formal agreement to the loan.
Mr Camdessus said 'all the measures requiring government signature are now
in place and we expect them to be done in the next few days and weeks'. Once
he was satisfied they were in place, he would recommend to the IMF board
that the Dollars 1.5bn be handed over.
The IMF would then continue talks with the government on provision of a
further stand-by loan of Dollars 4bn. This loan would probably not be paid
until next year.
News of the IMF loan deal came as allegations of a coup plot against Russian
President Boris Yeltsin, and of his failing health, were being vehemently
denied.
Mr Chernomyrdin missed a meeting with Mr Camdessus on Monday to fly to the
Black Sea resort of Sochi for unscheduled talks with Mr Yeltsin. The trip
coincided with allegations that a group of highly placed officials had been
preparing to strip Mr Yeltsin of power and name Mr Chernomyrdin as leader.
As he left Sochi yesterday morning, Mr Chernomyrdin said: 'Somebody is
interested in destabilising the situation.'
The Dollars 1.5bn IMF loan would be the second tranche of Dollars 3bn to
which Russia is entitled under the so-called Systemic Transformation
Facility, set up with loose conditions to help former communist countries
remake their economies. The IMF released the first Dollars 1.5bn tranche
last June.
Members of the Group of Seven leading industrial countries, especially the
US, have at times urged the IMF to be less particular in applying conditions
on the Russian loans.
