FT  24 MAY 94 / Nigerian election attracts few voters
A partial boycott and widespread public apathy led to a low turnout
yesterday in Nigerian elections for delegates to next month's constitutional
conference, which is to be the basis of the military government's political
programme.
It followed the annulment of a presidential election last June after it had
become clear that Mr Moshood Abiola, a businessman from the south-west, had
won.
Political parties and associations have been banned since Gen Sani Abacha
became head of state last November and no campaigning by contestants was
allowed before yesterday's vote. Mr Ken Saro-Wiwa, a well-known political
activist in Port Harcourt, was stopped from holding a pre-election rally and
was arrested at the weekend. The 270 elected delegates to the constitutional
conference will be joined by 90 government nominees.
Those who voted said that unless they took part they could not influence the
constitutional conference. But senior politicians around Nigeria say there
is no need for the conference because Nigeria's political problems lies not
with the constitution but the military elite who obstruct it. The Campaign
for Democracy has called the conference a ruse to buy time for a regime
which lacks direction.
Other critics of the conference say it will be subordinate to the will of
the military regime, that the government has not stated how long it intends
to stay in power and that the absence of any electoral law and lack of
preparations for polling make the polling invalid.
In the Yoruba homeland of Mr Abiola in the south-west, a coalition of
politicians led by two former state governors told its members not to stand
as delegates for the conference and called for a poll boycott.
Elsewhere two powerful groups have boycotted the whole process: leaders of
the large Ijaw tribe in the south-east, and a powerful alliance of retired
military officers from the central region.
All Nigerians over 18 years were entitled to vote by open ballot at more
than 100,000 polling stations in Nigeria, to choose five candidates for each
of 6,000 wards. No official figures are yet available but In Lagos and the
capital, Abuja, the turnout seemed as low as 10 per cent and many voters
admitted they were not certain what they were voting for.
Mr Bernard Mbah, who is the national organiser of the polls, told reporters
in Abuja that the polling was 'impressive'.
