FT  21 APR 94 / The Queen's Awards 1994: The key to innovation - The British
problem of progress
Britain has some of the most innovative companies in the world - as the
Queen's awards for technological achievement show.
Those companies which have succeeded technologically have been willing to
take risks or been forced to change when their markets were threatened. They
looked ahead and worked out where they wanted to be in a few year's time.
Then they invested the money and worked hard to get there.
Put like that, it sounds straightforward and obvious. But keeping up with
modern technologies, let alone leading the field, requires imagination and
vision as well as conventional management skills and proper financing.
Europe as a whole lags behind Japan and the US in high-technology
industries.
There is no obvious recipe for technological success, but those whose
companies have become innovative leaders stress the need to look wider than
the technology itself.
'Just having innovative technology is not enough to claim true innovation,'
Mr Akio Morita, chairman of Sony, the Japanese electronics giant, said at
the Royal Society in London where he gave the 1992 innovation lecture.
This year's lecture was delivered by Mr Lars Ramqvist, chief executive of
Ericsson, the Swedish telecommunications concern which has invested heavily
 -at the expense of dividends - to stay at the front of the mobile telephone
systems market.
This was a risk that Mr Ramqvist convinced managers and shareholders to
accept a few years ago. If it had failed in any area of the technology, the
market or the timing, 'we would have been a dead duck'.
Instead, Ericsson emerged stronger than ever, more than doubling profits
last year. Ahead of his innovation speech, he praised British innovation,
but criticised the common failure to make it a commercial success. 'You have
been too prudent, too logical, you've done everything step-by-step. But in
the end, the world has moved faster.'
The lecture's sponsors, including the Confederation of British Industry and
the Department of Trade and Industry, are well aware of this failing and the
need to put it right. Their joint programme to make UK industry more
innovative - right the way through from research to the final sale of a
product - is aimed at helping to make companies more competitive in today's
fast-changing and aggressive markets.
The 18 companies winning Queen's technology awards, seven fewer than last
year, make products ranging from the prosaic such as backhoe loaders (JC
Bamford) to the esoteric like acousto-optic modulators (Gooch and Housego).
They include big companies such as British Telecommunications and the UK
division of IBM of the US and small ones like Dunn Systems and Sonardyne.
Dunn is a prime example of a company which was forced to innovate when
staring disaster in the face. The UK miners' strike more or less put paid to
its traditional coal mining equipment business, so it switched its skills to
the retail sector. 'We are a creative company, but we had to look to other
markets to live,' says Mr Dennis Kirtland, the chairman.
In its small way, Dunn's example mirrors some of the lessons which
Ericsson's performance has highlighted. One is the need for strong
commitment to a new direction, whether in products, markets or both. Another
is the awareness that companies can rarely go it alone these days.
Ericsson co-operates with a variety of outside companies on key
technologies, such as Texas Instruments. Dunn turned to Loughborough
University for help in developing sophisticated electronic controls for its
conveyors.
Mr Ramqvist made the oft-quoted point about too many British companies being
run by accountants. Clearly, if accountants had had the final say, Ericsson
would probably not have doubled the pace of its R&amp;D spending in the 1990s.
The process of innovating to stay at the forefront of technological progress
will never be over. This lesson is one which many UK companies still have to
learn.
It was put sombrely by Paul Stoneman, a professor at Warwick Business
School: 'Unless the UK invests more heavily in new technology, it will not
be able to generate the extra productivity and new products that it needs to
compete successfully in international markets and will continue its relative
decline.'
