FT  31 JAN 94 / Survey of the World's Young People (9): Baby boom blues -
Unemployment in Poland has hit young people hard
Poland's young people make up one quarter of its population. Free market
reforms after 1989, and the opening of the country to the outside world,
created unparalleled career opportunities.
Suddenly, even first and second year students with a knowledge of foreign
languages found themselves courted by foreign companies desperate for local
employees without the ingrained work habits of the socialist past. The fast
liberalisation of retail and wholesale trade opened up more more jobs to the
young - many of them starting as street traders - while in the media they
took over key reporting posts as discredited and tired journalists faded
into the background.
But, at the same time, the collapse of CMEA (the Soviet-dominated common
market) and stringent policies backed up by the International Monetary Fund,
together with damaging competition from imports of western goods, brought in
their wake a 15 per unemployment rate which hit the mass of young people
even harder than other age groups.
More than one third of the 3m unemployed are aged 24 and under. In the
smaller towns and rural areas, where unemployment rates soar over the 30 per
cent mark, four fifths of school leavers register for unemployment benefit.
Maria Holzer, the head of the Polish Children and Youth Foundation (PCYF)
established in May 1992, and an International Youth Foundation partner,
knows the threats this brings. She has few means to bring about solutions.
'We are seeing a rise of juvenile delinquency and the development of
organised crime unthinkable a few years ago,' she says.
Ms Holzer adds that alcoholism and drug use is on the increase as Poland
becomes an important route for drug smugglers.
At the same time the health of young people - never good in Poland - is not
improving. Ms Holszer concludes that many kids are helpless in the face of
the competitive challenges of the new times.
The foundation is seeking to address these problems. The cheerful and
optimistic Ms Holzer - she is ideally suited to her task - has few illusions
that even the predicted 4 per cent GDP annual growth in coming years will
alleviate the worries without extra effort. 'Indeed, it's a pity that the
talk of Poland's economic success gives the impression that there are no
longer any needs.' They exist, she says, explaining that the late 1970s baby
boom, which lasted into the early 1980s and will start hitting the labour
market in 1995, will bring more of the same.
The PCYF approach is to help fund grass roots initiatives which, broadly
speaking, will help young people develop their initiative and independence,
teach tolerance towards others and improve their state of health.
Since 1990, before the PCYF was established, the 'islands' programme has
helped school children in Chorzow, in the heart of the desolate industrial
region of Silesia, to learn about democracy through a network of school
parliaments.
The programme is backed by another, teaching children to care for their
friends from broken homes. In Starachowice, an experimental programme
running since 1987, supported by the PCYF, helps primary school teachers to
deal with children with psychological problems and teaches the children
themselves to care for their health. Ms Holzer says it could soon be
introduced throughout the school system.
Last year the PCYF backed 107 different projects, covering a few dozen
children or teachers to several thousand, spending 7.1bn zlotys (Dollars
330,000). The approach is to stay clear of government - indeed, support for
non-governmental organisations is seen as a priority.
This has given the PCYF a measure of stability as governments have changed.
There may be controversy as PCYF programmes challenge old ways in a society
which can be authoritarian and conservative in its attitudes and remains
under the influence of the Catholic Church.
Ms Holzer denies that this has happened so far. 'The range of our activity
is so limited that we have yet to be noticed,' she admits.
