FT  17 NOV 94 / Games junkies hold out for a more powerful hit: A new format
is set to revive the market
Japan's computer games junkies have for months been awaiting the launch of
two products - the Sega Saturn and Sony PlayStation - which are about to
arrive in the shops as the first of the new generation of games.
The Saturn and PlayStation are examples of the 32-bit, compact disc-based
machines that the industry hopes will revitalise the Pounds 14bn video and
computer games market by replacing the 16-bit cartridge consoles that have
dominated for the past decade.
The games market, one of the fastest-growing consumer sectors of the late
1980s and early 1990s, has slowed sharply over the past year.
Sega, the Japanese company behind Sonic the Hedgehog and which vies with
Nintendo for leadership of the global games market, last week announced a
steep fall in interim profits. The industry is now waiting to see whether
the new 32-bit machines will reverse the decline and stimulate sales again.
Until last autumn the games industry had known nothing but growth. Sales of
games software rose rapidly from Pounds 4.5bn in 1989 to Pounds 13.2bn in
1993, according to Durlacher, the London securities house. Sega and Nintendo
saw their profits - and share prices - soar despite economic recession.
The industry's difficulties began last autumn when news broke that the
leading games makers were developing 32-bit and 64-bit hardware to deliver
more sophisticated sound and images than their old 16-bit cartridge
consoles.
Only one company, Atari of the US, was ready to launch the new format and it
did not have enough capital to market the machines effectively. Sega,
Nintendo and Sony admitted last autumn that their products would not be
ready for at least another year. The industry was left in limbo as games
enthusiasts were reluctant to buy new software for the 16-bit consoles that
they already considered obsolete.
Meanwhile, the rise of the yen against other currencies imposed intense
financial pressure on the Japanese games companies in their export markets,
notably in North America and Europe. Mr Frank Herman, deputy chairman of
Sega Europe, estimated that western European games sales have fallen 25 per
cent over the past year.
Sega and Nintendo both reported reduced net profits for their last full
financial years. Sega last week confirmed that it was on course for a
further profits fall this year after a 43 per cent decline to Y16.3bn for
the first half of 1994.
All the big games companies stepped up their product development plans to
try to rush out the new machines. Sega and Sony are now shipping the Saturn
and PlayStation to stores in Japan in time for Christmas. Neither product
will be available elsewhere until next year.
Nintendo this week unveiled the Virtual Boy, a 32-bit portable virtual
reality machine. It will be introduced to other countries next year.
Nintendo's most ambitious new product, the Ultra 64, a 64-bit machine, will
be launched next autumn.
Mr David Tabizel, multimedia analyst at Durlacher, is confident that the new
products will regenerate the market. He forecasts a modest increase in
software sales from Pounds 13.2m in 1993 to Pounds 13.5bn in 1994, with more
robust growth over the next few years to Pounds 20bn by 1998.
This rosy outlook has already attracted an influx of investment. Sega
earlier this autumn sought to strengthen its position by acquiring a
minority stake in Atari. Investors from other industries are also expanding
their games interests, notably Sony and Philips, the electronics groups.
The emergence of a new games format will herald a dramatic change in the
industry's finances. The new disc-based games will be much cheaper to
produce. It costs roughly 32p to manufacture a CD, against Pounds 10 for a
cartridge.
Conversely, development costs are soaring as games players become more
discerning and technology more complex. The first wave of 16-bit games were
developed in the early 1980s by amateur technology buffs. By contrast Rare,
the UK software house, employed a team of 48 graphic designers for 14 months
to develop Donkey Kong Country, Nintendo's new 16-bit game.
This means that publishing (or the development and ownership of games
software) has become an increasingly profitable part of the industry.
Durlacher estimates that publishing absorbs 37 per cent of the retail price
of a CD game, against 10 per cent for cartridges.
The increased importance, and profitability, of games publishing has already
triggered acquisitions including Sony's purchase of Psygnosis; the takeover
of Renegade by Time Warner, the US entertainment company; and the recent
deal whereby Pearson, the UK media group that owns the Financial Times, paid
Pounds 312m for Software Toolworks.
More acquisitions are in the pipeline as other companies position themselves
to take advantage of the anticipated revival in the games market.
Mr Tabizel suspects that 'the real beneficiaries of the new games boom will
be the publishers. Some of these guys are millionaires already, but there's
no shortage of suitors waiting to make them even richer.'
