FT  24 JUN 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Sugar industries respond to
adversity - Canute James reports on efforts to revive flagging productivity
in the Caribbean
Sugar producers in the Caribbean Community, whose major market is the
European Union, have been having a difficult time, and some have been forced
into financial and administrative restructuring to improve efficiency and
production.
The problems have raised questions about the ability of some regional
producers to meet their quota obligations to the EU and the US.
Regional industries have benefitted from new loans, others from the
cancellation of debts, the servicing of which had been a burden on their
operations. Elsewhere industries have called on new managements as part of
their restructuring.
These smaller producers in the Caribbean, unlike Cuba and the Dominican
Republic, have been forced to concentrate on satisfying their lucrative
markets in Europe, and some have been driven to import sugar for domestic
use.
Combined production in the Commonwealth Caribbean countries fell by 3 per
cent to 732,000 tonnes last year, with St Kitts-Nevis, the smallest
producer, the only one to record an increase. The problems facing the
region's industry are illustrated by the state of the sector in Barbados,
which is undergoing a USDollars 30m rehabilitation programme. The aim is to
improve the industry's efficiency, increase the level of mechanisation and
re-equip mills, to enable higher production.
The island will have to import sugar this year to meet domestic demand
because all output from the current harvest is being shipped to Europe to
fulfil the quota to the EU. The industry will achieve its production target
of 50,000 tonnes, but this is 4,000 tonnes less than the country's EU quota.
The additional sugar for Europe will come 'drawing down on carry-over stock
from last year,' industry officials say. They deny that sugar will be
imported for transhipment to Europe as 'it would be in contravention of our
legal agreement with the EU for supplying sugar'.
The prospects for an improvement rest on the planned restructuring of the
industry and the administrative skills of Booker Tate of the UK, which has
been contracted to manage the industry. The Barbadians are clearly hoping
that Booker Tate can emulate the success it has had in Guyana where
production last year was slightly below that of 1992 but 50 per cent more
than 1991.
The importation of management skills four years ago was followed by a World
Bank loan of USDollars 15m to the Guyanese industry for the rehabilitation
of aspects of the industry, and to improve productivity. There has also been
improvement of irrigation and drainage systems in the industry.
The growth in production, which was dramatically evident in 1992, is
continuing. Good weather and higher productivity lifted the country's sugar
production from the first of the industry's two harvests to 109,000 tonnes,
14,000 tonnes more than the first harvest of last year. The industry is
anticipating combined production from both harvests this year at 250,000
tonnes, and if this is achieved it will he the highest annual output in the
past nine years, officials say.
Guyana will be able to meet its export commitments this year to the EU and
the US, as well as satisfying domestic demand.
The financial restructuring of the industry in Trinidad and Tobago has also
contributed to improved production. The government recently assumed debts of
about USDollars 530m owed by the state-owned Caroni, the country's sole
producer. The company also recently received new funds of Dollars 21m for
financing pre-harvest operations.
This relief, and an improvement in the quality of canes and reduced labour
unrest, helped to lift the country's sugar production from the 1994 harvest
to 127,612 tonnes, 17,000 tonnes more than last year, and the highest in 20
years, according to industry spokesmen. This will allow the industry easily
to meet its export quotas to the EU and the US, and a further rise in
production is forecast for next year.
Jamaica's hopes for significantly higher output than last year's 224,000
tonnes have been set back by prolonged labour unrest and bad weather. A
strike by the industry's field and mill workers earlier this year to protest
at the slow pace of negotiations between their unions and mill owners, and
unseasonably heavy rains, have cut production by about 25,000 tonnes. The
industry had been forecasting output of 245,000 tonnes this year.
The expected improvement was based on improved efficiency in the industry
following the sale in January of four of five state-owned mills to local and
foreign investors. Planned retooling of the mills and improvements to
another four, which have always been in private hands, has led the industry
to forecast national output in the next two years at about 350,000 tonnes a
year.
