FT  26 MAR 94 / Outgoing parliament on trial in Italian election
It is rare to see a prime minister as a silent protagonist during a noisy
election campaign. Mr Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, the Italian premier, has stayed
aloof almost until the end. As the campaign for tomorrow's parliamentary
poll winds up today, he can look back on only one occasion when he broke his
silence.
This was to defend his government's record of economic management against
accusations by the media magnate Mr Silvio Berlusconi of falsifying the
public accounts. Though said during the heat of a television debate on
Wednesday and directed by Mr Berlusconi, leader of the Forza Italia party,
against his arch-rival Mr Achille Occhetto, the leader of the Party of the
Democratic Left (PDS), the accusation touched a raw nerve.
Since being called in last April to run the government after 14 years at the
helm of the Bank of Italy, the 73-year-old Mr Ciampi has concentrated on the
public accounts. A curt statement from his office on Thursday, without
naming Mr Berlusconi, said: 'As a result of this serious accusation, I am
obliged to drop the reserve I imposed on myself during the election
campaign.'
Mr Berlusconi yesterday was doing his best to beat an elegant retreat to
avoid any fall-out from the man judged by the polls to be the most popular
public figure.
The incident highlighted the curious nature of these elections for Italy's
12th post-war legislature. The elections involve no challenge to an
incumbent government, which in this case is essentially technocratic with a
non-politician premier.
Mr Ciampi, widely praised for his firm managerial style and for recouping
Italy's international credibility, has refused to stand because he does not
see himself as a politician linked to a particular party.
It is parliament, elected in April 1992, that has lost the confidence of the
electorate as a result of the corruption scandals and collapse of the ruling
parties. The outgoing parliament is on trial; and the electorate is being
asked to decide which of the old parties have been recycled convincingly and
which of the new show promise.
Perversely, Mr Berlusconi, whose Fininvest business empire was built up on
the back of close ties with the discredited Socialists, has succeeded in
portraying himself as the new with his Forza Italia movement. Mr Occhetto,
though representing a party historically opposed to the old order, has
failed to present the PDS as the new.
Rather, in seeking credibility for the PDS-led Progressive Alliance, he has
leaned heavily on Mr Ciampi. Several times he has said Mr Ciampi would be
the PDS's choice to head the next government.
It was the PDS's identification with the Ciampi administration that lay
behind Mr Berlusconi's outburst about the public accounts.
