FT  22 OCT 94 / Fashion: Suits are serious this season - Avril Groom has
been combing the catwalks and the high street for plain and simple clothes
A woman who went into German designer Jil Sander's new concession at Harrods
recently bought seven suits. Perhaps she needed one for each day of the
week, such is the pull of the serious suit on the modern woman.
It is the same story at the Sander shop which Browns has opened in South
Molton Street, W1. Amid the cool marble and glass, suits are sought after.
They cost Pounds 1,200 on average, their popularity reflecting their
importance in a well-planned wardrobe.
This season it should be your main buy. On almost every catwalk at the
autumn shows, behind the unwearable razzmatazz, was a suit which could rise
to any occasion. The jacket, leanly-cut or flared out from a neat waist, was
long enough to act as a coat over the new short, A-line skirt.
The majority had matching trousers, slim enough to go with new-glamour high
heels and to look smooth with an A-line tunic.
Sander's suits are plain to the point of severity, made from the finest of
drapable wool, cut with shoulders that are defined yet soft, and shaped with
gently arching seams that flatter but never constrict.
Feminine authority is a good description for fashion's U-turn towards a
dressed-up but still soft look. A good investment, they are impressively
minimal when worn alone but can form the ideal foil for a new season's
accessories.
Such plain suits profit from a little wit and whimsy. One lesson from the
muddled fashion of the 1990s is that individuality pays. The minimal-suit
clone is as boring as the gilt-button clone. So use your suit as background
material, making it your own with imaginative accessories - the mini-bags,
jewel-bright angoras and ankle-strapped high-heeled shoes that create a tone
of light-hearted glamour.
This is where the high street comes in. From designer diffusion ranges to
department stores and chains, mass market fashion now reacts so quickly in
interpreting catwalk ideas, and has improved its quality so much, that there
is little point in buying the expensive original of a one-season wonder.
There are just two areas this autumn where one might advise caution. A-line
skirts from youth-market chains are very short so you might prefer more
sophisticated sources. And the new influx of bright or metallic colour can
be very garish at the cheaper end.
Nevertheless the high street is well worth searching; Oasis fringed scarves
cost under Pounds 15 and French Connection's soft and dusky velvet A-line
tunic is Pounds 89. At Whistles' (strictly speaking more of a chic boutique
chain) there is a silk satin shirt in a particularly luscious muted pink,
redolent of 1930s glamour, at Pounds 110.
The main suit is one item where the rule of thumb is to buy the best you can
afford - it will make those high street accessories look classier. There are
good, plain suits at all levels. When clothes are shorn of detail, cut and
finish become paramount and need close examination before you buy. Dorothy
Perkins' newly revamped range, Jigsaw and Marks and Spencer easily pass the
quality test for young women on a budget.
With middle-range suits costing about Pounds 400 each, it is worthwhile, if
you can, going up a notch to a level where excellence of cut and finish,
plus proper design input, are taken for granted. It may seem a lot to pay
Pounds 600-Pounds 800 but designers are well aware that their customers want
lasting value. Rightly, you get more cut and less detail for your money.
Choose a dark, plain colour for maximum mileage. Black is obvious but less
versatile for a suit which must presumably go from day to night and town to
country. Charcoal, navy or deep taupe are better choices. Pinstripes are
hot, but think before you buy - will you still want them next year?
We have listed the best suits, all beautiful, versatile and useful in the
long term. The Alberta Ferretti style photographed here has all the
qualities of contemporary glamour - soft, matt fabric, a slim-waisted,
flattering shape and a chameleon ability to go with this season's
essentials.
Sketched here are just some of the clothes that will give your suit the
extra mileage to take it through the winter.
