FT  03 JUN 94 / Personal View: A framework for financial stability - Gerald
Corrigan outlines the risks inherent in derivatives and suggests how they
can be contained
In the wake of a period of extreme volatility in financial markets in recent
weeks, the flow of commentary has taken on extraordinary proportions. In
these circumstances, I am reminded of a comment I made in January 1992
during a discussion of financial derivatives. In my address I said: 'I hope
this sounds like a warning, because it is.'
Significant progress has been made in learning more about derivatives in
both private and official circles in the intervening two and a half years.
For example, in the private sector truly great progress has been, and is
being, made in developing the risk management, information and control
systems that are crucial for individual firms and the marketplace more
generally. At the same time, supervisory authorities are making important
gains in adapting prudential standards to the widespread use of derivatives.
Yet there are several reasons why the central thrust of my January 1992
warning should not be forgotten. Among them are that, while constructive
steps have been taken, they are hardly complete; markets have continued to
grow and are evolving very rapidly; and derivatives seem to entail an acute,
if not ironic, dilemma. This is that, although they unmistakably work to
reduce risk, including the risk of a systemic financial breakdown, the
implications of such a breakdown (admittedly a very unlikely event) are even
more difficult to contain and control.
Thus we face the vexing question of how to deal with such a contingency in a
manner which remains sensible and constructive in a broader and longer-term
perspective.
There are a number of steps which should be taken to contain risks
associated with financial derivatives in a manner that will not materially
impair the ability of these instruments and markets to perform their
necessary role.
First, all of the larger market participants, including non-financial firms
that are significant end-users of derivatives, need to redouble their
efforts to ensure that risk management, information and control systems are
up to state-of-the-art standards. Boards of directors and top managers
should insist that all such firms undertake a rigorous self-analysis
relative to the original recommendations made by the Washington-based Group
of 30 think-tank in July 1993 and relative to the findings of the recently
published G30 survey of industry practices.
Among other objectives should be implementation of accurate and timely
consolidated credit and market risk monitoring by all significant
institutions in these markets. In the longer term, these monitoring efforts
should be pushed to the limits of technology and practicalities in order to
achieve intra-day monitoring capabilities on a broad scale.
Second, individual firms, exchanges, clearing houses and central banks
should be even more aggressively pursuing ways to strengthen clearance,
settlement and payment systems.
These should focus on: shortening and standardising the gap between trade
date (and time) and final payment; the more widespread use of same-day
delivery against payment systems for securities transactions; moving towards
same-day final payment in clearing houses and exchanges; and further
strengthening the operational reliability of key processing systems.
While it may not be obvious to all, such improvements in the 'plumbing' of
the financial system can work towards enhancing market liquidity across a
wide spectrum of financial instruments. In turn, this would help strengthen
the capacity of markets to absorb more smoothly sudden shifts in market
psychology.
Third, we must move more aggressively to establish a standard set of
definitions applicable to financial disclosure and reporting requirements
for widely traded derivative instruments. This issue is at the heart of the
ability of firms and regulators to make consistent judgments on risks. At
present, the gaps in uniform definitions and disclosure standards are a
significant factor in explaining the considerable variation in firms'
responses to the 30 survey questions. It would be unfair not to acknowledge
that progress has been made in this area, but much remains to be done.
Fourth, larger market participants need to work with regulators and
supervisors to assure the legal enforceability of derivatives transactions,
both within and across jurisdictions. Particular attention should be paid to
enforceability of netting arrangements, both nationally and internationally.
Dealers and end users also should work together to establish greater
standardisation in documentation further to promote liquidity and stability
in these markets.
All of these steps, which are included in the G30's list of recommendations,
are critical to reducing risk and promoting certainty in the international
derivatives markets.
Fifth, consideration should be given to the establishment of voluntary
minimum standards for disclosure, credit and market risk controls, and
customer suitability that could apply broadly to all key market participants
in derivatives. This will be very difficult, but progress might be made by
such minimum standards being developed by a private sector group, such as
the G30. While such standards would have no binding authority, if applied by
prominent individual firms voluntarily and publicly, others would be under
great pressure to do so also.
Indeed, if some firms - acting on their own and in their own best interest -
refused to do business with firms that did not voluntarily comply with such
standards, the pressures would be very great. The obstacles to achieving
such a workable framework of voluntary minimum standards are formidable, but
the concept should not be rejected out of hand.
The above steps constitute a building block towards greater safety and
greater efficiency. Yet the international community of banking and
securities regulators - together with the appropriate European Union
officials - is still faced with the enormous challenge of achieving greater
cohesion and consistency as it applies to minimum capital standards.
Under any circumstances, this will take time. And, based on my experience as
chairman of the Basle Committee, I know it will not be easy. I believe,
though, that in the fullness of time the legitimate interests of individual
firms or groups of firms or individual regulators or groups of regulators
can be accommodated while allowing significant movement towards greater
consistency in prudential standards and greater harmony in market practices.
The above agenda is formidable but not insurmountable. It can be achieved
without new legislation, new regulatory structures and without the threat of
regulatory overkill.
That said, it should also be stressed that no such framework is fail-safe
and there can be no substitute for the time-honoured dictates of discipline,
conservatism and knowing your counterparty. In the current environment,
those dictates should take on a special premium of attention, because
neither the markets nor the regulatory and political communities will react
kindly to any large-scale surprises.
To coin a phrase: I hope this sounds like a warning, because it is. Much has
been accomplished, but more needs to be done.
The author is chairman, International Advisers, Goldman, Sachs, and a former
president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
