FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (7): Tough, candid, and rich - Profile of
a surprising entrepreneur
Ms Tiiu Silves, Tallinn's best-known private entrepreneur, first became
famous in the city as a rag and bone merchant. After graduating from selling
home-cooked waffles and flowers in the streets of the capital five years
ago, she started offering hard-to-come by video-recorders and other western
goods for every five tonnes of metal scrap brought to her scrapyard in the
Tallinn docks.
After sorting and baling, the scrap was exported for hard currency.
Today, she and her immediate family own and control Silves Enterprises, a
holding company with 22 operating divisions and subsidiaries in eight
countries, including the US where she is building a house. Reputedly the
richest woman in Estonia, she is guarded day and night by large, 're-cycled'
gentlemen who received their training in the KGB.
Much of her time is spent alternately wheedling and threatening recalcitrant
payers in Russia and other former Soviet states on behalf of foreign
companies which despair of getting payment through conventional channels.
She is tough, no question of that. But she is also humorous, resourceful and
refreshingly forthcoming about what it takes to do business in the former
Soviet world.
'Bribes?' she replies with a weary interrogative. 'No business is done in
Russia without bribes of some kind. When I need wagons and I'm told nelzya
('impossible'), then I don't mind if we have to slip something to the
badly-paid man on the ground to make sure he does what he is supposed to do
anyway. But it sticks in my throat when we have to pay off the senior
officials.'
She also has harsh words for many of the new-breed Russian entrepreneurs -
'they don't understand that many western companies approach Russia with a
genuine desire to be helpful.
'Many Russians just feel that westerners have come to exploit Russia and are
therefore fair game.'
Many of her companies are heavily involved in trucking and trading in
foodstuffs, vehicles, timber and fish, as well as metals and scrap.
'Less than 10 per cent of scrap comes from Estonia now,' she says. 'We've
cleaned-up Estonia. Now my people go as far afield as Kazakhstan. At that
distance the profit margins are really slim, once costs are covered.'
Competition is also fierce in the foodstuffs business, selling western
products into the kiosks and privatised retail food shops which have opened
up in Russia and beyond.
'While we are content with small margins, say five cents a can, the people
who buy our goods in Russia load 15 - 20 cents on top. That's why prices are
so high there,' she says.
'What they charge is their business. But I insist on getting paid. The
golden rule is never to pay roubles in advance.
'My main headache at present is trying to get back Dollars 250,000 I
foolishly agreed to extend on a three-day credit to an Armenian
'businessman' in Moscow. I found out too late that he enjoys the highest
protection.
'He drives a white Cadillac, lives in Kruschev's old villa in Moscow's Lenin
Hills and has 'friends' at the top of the central bank,' she says.
'I'd shoot him if I thought I'd get away with it, He's a creep - a nothing,'
she candidly adds with a grimace.
