FT  17 OCT 94 / This Week: Music
Those who cannot get enough of Cecilia Bartoli, the young Roman
mezzo-soprano who has risen to super-stardom with disarming ease, should
enjoy Mozart Portraits (Decca), her second selection of arias by the great
man, taken principally from Le Nozze di Figaro, Don Giovanni and Cosi Fan
Tutte. Her voice sounds as fresh as ever, and she is accompanied with great
assurance by Gyorgy Fischer and the Vienna Chamber Orchestra. No major
surprises, but more than enough to be getting on with.
'We have always been adamant about unreleased songs - leave them be', notes
Abba frontman Bjorn Ulvaeus in the publicity leaflet advertising ...a new
4-CD collectors' set of the group's greatest hits and unreleased material.
Thank You for the Music (Polydor) is a definitive 66-track collection of the
sounds which helped inspire the 1970s revival. At least Bjorn has the grace
to admit that 'if it wasn't for some of the stage outfits, these memories
would be almost unblemished ..'
It is a big week for confessions. That other heavyweight of the '70s scene,
Barry White, reveals: 'I believe that some people are children of destiny
 .my destiny has been music.' This is to prepare us for The Icon is Love
(A&amp;M): a solid enough collection of songs, preferable by far to the slight
sounds of Jamiroquai, whose The Return of the Space Cowboy (Sony S2) is a
telling illustration of the insipid nature of today's dance music. A UK tour
starts next Monday at Cardiff University.
The former Yes singer and pretentious lyric-writer Jon Anderson has teamed
up with the London Chamber Academy, directed by Christopher Warren Green,
for Change We Must (EMI), a collection of new 'cross-over' interpretations
of Yes and Vangelis numbers which is, in all honesty, unlikely to win him
any new followers.
Top of the classical album charts in Australia recently was that country's
leading soprano, Yvonne Kenny, with Simple Gifts (ABC), a cluster of
operatic arias and popular songs which has now been released in Britain.
