FT  02 FEB 94 / World Trade News: Western drug companies rushing into China
American, European and Japanese pharmaceuticals groups are rushing into
China to exploit what could become the world's largest drugs market and is
already one of the fastest growing.
As growth of the developed world's drugs markets decelerates, the Chinese
market continues to demonstrate healthy rates of expansion. With its massive
population, estimated at more than 1.2bn, and rapid economic growth, the
country is beginning to be able to afford western medicines.
RCI, an affiliate of IMS, the specialist market research company, estimates
the Chinese drugs market, excluding traditional remedies, was worth Yn19.3bn
in 1992, up 92 per cent compared with 1988. The group forecasts the market
will more than double by 1997 in local currency terms, although the
depreciation of the yuan will affect growth in dollar terms.
Most overseas groups are setting up joint ventures with Chinese state-owned
drugs factories which are seeking funding from abroad to improve
manufacturing facilities to international standards.
Initial ventures, such as Merck's giant antibiotics factory opened last
year, concentrated on relatively simple medicines. Similarly, Upjohn of the
US, which formed a joint venture in August last year, will make antibiotics
and steroids in southern China. The company is investing Dollars 30m (Pounds
20m) to build a factory in Suzhou, near Shanghai. Upjohn owns 75 per cent of
the venture, with Suzhou Pharmaceutical Factory No 4 owning the remainder.
However, when Takeda, Japan's largest drugs group, yesterday announced its
first joint venture in China, it revealed the new company will manufacture
not only cardiovascular, anti-cancer and anti-inflammatory drugs, but also
the latest anti-ulcer treatment Takepron, known in Europe as Losec.
Takeda plans to invest Dollars 14.4m to acquire 75 per cent in the joint
venture with Lisheng Pharmaceutical factory, its Chinese partner. The
agreement, which includes marketing and manufacturing, involves the
construction of a plant in Tianjin province. Raw materials will be imported
from Japan. Construction will begin in June and should be completed within
24 months. Takeda expects to generate sales of Y2bn (Pounds 12.2m) by 1997.
Others have already opened plants and are generating sales. Last month,
Ciba, the Swiss group, completed a Dollars 21m joint-venture factory with
Beijing Number 3 Pharmaceutical Factory and Beijing General Pharmaceutical
Corporation. The factory, in which Ciba holds a 60 per cent stake, makes
antidepressants and treatments for epilepsy, rheumatism and cardiovascular
disease. The company is also negotiating a Dollars 100m contract for a
joint-venture plant in Shanghai.
Runaway economy, Leader Page
