FT  20 OCT 94 / Arts: Talent in search of a signpost - Cinema
PULP FICTION (18) Quentin Tarantino
THE CLIENT (15) Joel Schumacher
L'ENFER (15) Claude Chabrol
THREESOME (18) Andrew Fleming
On some days a critic wonders if his head is wound on the right way. The
consensus among reviewers of Quentin Tarantino's Pulp Fiction seems to be
that the new film is even more violent than his Reservoir Dogs, 'but at
least it is funny.'
Pardon me while I clutch at comprehension. You mean: it is all right to
watch people being shot, stabbed, tortured, sodomised or drug-injected if we
laugh at it, but not if we take it seriously?
When Pulp Fiction won the Palme d'Or at Cannes this year, my shaking pen
recorded the view that this was 'another shameful crawl to Hollywood' from a
festival not for the first time thus grovelling. But the jury decision also
reflected popular response. The Palais audience roared happily -
frighteningly happily - as Pulp Fiction screeched and gear-shifted through
its 2 1/2 -hour, three-stories-in-one traffic of underworld hit men and
hoodlums.
It roared when gangster's moll Uma Thurman, having OD'd on heroin, has a
needleful of adrenalin stabbed into her chest by desperate escort-bodyguard
John Travolta, anxious that she should not die while he is on the job. It
roared when a kidnapped young black has his brains scattered over a car
thanks to Travolta's slippery trigger finger. And it giggled when boxer
Bruce Willis, running from his boss after refusing to throw an important
fight, is captured by a sodomitic, weapon-wielding pawnshop owner and
friend.
Let us be clear. Tarantino is a brilliant talent. Reservoir Dogs was scary
perfection as a thriller: disturbing in the right way, morally neutral in
the right way. (Film-makers should play artist and storyteller not judge or
jury.) And his screenplays for other directors  - True Romance, Natural Born
Killers - are piecing together an epic psychopathology of violence for
America, a country asking for one.
Pulp Fiction is brilliant too. But it is a different brilliance: a
dribbling, prolix, self-gratifying, one-handed brilliance. Tarantino's
dialogue is still the best in American cinema, wild with colloquialism,
non-sequitur and the shared references of a pop-culture generation. But in
earlier films this dialogue served a pressure-chamber exploration of
character as well as the mad lore and logic of the criminal mind.
In Pulp Fiction the verbal riffs - on everything from French names for
hamburgers to the sexual implications of a foot massage - are just that.
Swirls of pretty inanity: as disembodied from each other as are the film's
own sundered story-sections. It is daring to show one leading character's
death and then jump to another tale in which the same character is alive. It
says 'up yours' to the Aristotelian unities. But it also says 'up yours' to
an audience now so jaded that it is prostrate and giggling in the film's
back seat. It no longer cares where the vehicle is going so long as the
shootings and expletives happen.
The film opens and closes with a sequence in a diner in which Tim Roth and
Amanda Plummer play two debut crooks planning a hold-up. The diner setting
is a misfortune. It recalls another movie: it reminds us that Barry Levinson
in Diner pioneered this Daft Language Of The Young syndrome years ago and
also gave us characters who had minds, lives and feelings. Pulp Fiction is a
joyride from nowhere to nowhere, with a man at the wheel who could be the
director with the best sense of direction in America.
Should you see Pulp Fiction? Yes, you still should. It is 150 minutes of
talent in search of a signpost.
The Client, by contrast, is all signposts and no talent. Taking a John
Grisham bestseller about a frightened boy witness in a murder trial, who
tries to stay mum while being cajoled by the FBI and menaced by the Mafia,
director Joel Schumacher (Cousins, Flatliners) approaches the plot's twists
and turns like a first-time cab driver struggling with his A-to-Z.
This way for the boy's meeting with caring, motherly lawyer Susan Sarandon,
who agrees to take his case for the one crumpled dollar in his pocket. (Can
I have her business address?) This way for the first glimpse of the barking,
self-righteous FBI man played by Tommy Lee Jones: an actor who seems to be
spending his entire career (see The Fugitive, Natural Born Killers) stomping
down corridors spraying orders at people. And this way - into the lawyer's
car and off into the night  - for the climax in a boatshed where most of the
main cast meet over the dead body under the concrete.
Dr Johnson once said that if a play is set in the king's bedroom, then
everyone must have his business in the king's bedroom. I felt much the same
about this boatshed. But by this point in a sluggish, pedestrian thriller I
was glad for the company and the sense that everything was about to be over.
Claude Chabrol's L'Enfer, based on an uncompleted movie project by
Henri-Georges Clouzot of The Wages Of Fear (he died six days into shooting
in 1964), is brilliantly acted by Francois Cluzet. He plays a young husband
eaten up - almost literally to judge by the pale, thinning skin and
deepening facial faultlines - by irrational jealousy of his beautiful wife
(Emmanuelle Beart).
Cluzet, who was the young musician in Round Midnight, makes the
near-impossible role irresistible. He is required to hear voices, talk into
mirrors, throw tantrums at his guests (he runs a small country hotel) and do
physical damage to himself and his wife. Looking at my notes later, I saw
the comment: 'Clearly needs professional help.' But this refers to the
character, not Cluzet's performance. L'Enfer, 30 years after it was penned,
has fallen foul of an age when psychiatry would seem the answer to a clear
case of clinical disturbance.
Chabrol's direction does not help the suspension of disbelief. It is
nervously poised between sly naturalism - his favoured mode in masterworks
like Le Boucher and La Femme Infidele - and the half-hearted expressionism
that the material seems to solicit. A surreally stark hotel corridor (out of
1950s film noir); sudden blackouts between scenes; or the shot of a
chair-slumped Cluzet reflected in the rectangular mirror over a mantelpiece,
looking for all the world like a parody portrait-painting: 'Whistler's Mad
Uncle', perhaps.
What the film needed was a coherent visual strategy. Or even - given the
grim relentlessness of the subject - a telling subplot to provide variety as
well as an oblique second perspective on the theme.
But better Chabrol's Hell than the Hollywood Heaven of Andrew Fleming's
Threesome. This story's triangular complications - two college boys and the
girl accidentally assigned the second bedroom in their campus duplex - are
solved by some pathetic, sanitised stabs at bisexuality. Boy one (Stephen
Baldwin) fancies girl (Lara Flynn Boyle); girl fancies boy two (Josh
Charles); boy two fancies boy one.
Audience fancies exit door. While the gay boy gets the amatory short straw -
basically, of course, he is a mixed-up heterosexual - the others climb into
bed for much pawing, cooing and platitudinising, none of which would offend
Aunt Edna.
French classics are an option when all else fails. Bresson's 1974 Lancelot
Du Lac (PG, Everyman Hampstead) is an achingly beautiful film, despite some
clunk-clank combat scenes that may summon irreverent thought of Monty
Python. And Cocteau's 1950 Orphee (PG, National Film Theatre) is still the
greatest of all films that explore and proudly exhibit that illusionist
looking-glass we call cinema.
