FT  20 SEP 94 / Haiti: Stubborn Carter saves Clinton's bacon - With 15,000
troops in Haiti the US has the means to enforce the compact
It would take a great stretch of the political imagination even to suggest
that former President Jimmy Carter and his team of US negotiators in Haiti
have saved the current presidency. But they certainly seem to have helped to
give Mr Bill Clinton as optimal an outcome as he could reasonably have
expected well into an agonising Sunday afternoon.
Mr Clinton could certainly claim yesterday his order to begin the invasion
was the last straw that broke the back of the resistance of Lt Gen Raoul
Cedras and General Phillippe Biamby to agree to step down from power.
But it was Mr Carter's stubborn insistence to continue talking in
Port-au-Prince long after he was due to leave and even after the White House
advised him to get out that made possible the denouement.
Equally, it was Mr Carter's determination to obtain a Haitian political
imprimatur from acting president Emile Jonaissaint, a man whose legitimacy
the US government has not even recognised, that was in the final hour vital
to the accord. It was Mr Jonaissaint's emotional declaration 'we must have
peace not war' that helped persuade the military men not to disobey their
civilian leaders, according to Mr Carter.
In effect what the US team, which also included retired General Colin
Powell, previous head of the joint chiefs of staff, and Senator Sam Nunn,
chairman of the armed services committee, brought about was Governor's
Island Revisited - a close replica of the July, 1993 agreement under which
the military junta agreed to relinquish power.
The difference - and it is huge - is that the presence in Haiti of an
occupying force of 15,000 US troops means that the US has the means to
enforce Sunday's compact.
The agreement itself leaves some hostages to fortune. It does not require Lt
Gen Cedras or Gen Biamby to leave Haiti, as demanded by President Clinton.
Its promise of amnesty may leave members of the local military and
commercial elite free to make mischief on President Jean-Bertrand Aristide's
return.
Even Mr Carter conceded the agreement was not binding on junior officers or
'attaches', the freelance thugs with close ties to the military who have
replaced the dreaded Tonton Macoutes of the Duvalier regimes.
The agreement contained no reference to Fr Aristide, though perhaps it did
not need to. Initial reaction from his advisers - and on the streets in
Miami - was not favourable, mostly because of the prospect of the junta
getting off scot-free and, possibly, remaining in Haiti.
In a fascinating CNN interview yesterday morning, Mr Carter offered many
insights into his extraordinary two days in Port-au-Prince, demonstrating
yet again the strength of his independent streak and the remarkable rapport
he seems able to establish with the most improbable negotiating partners
(among them over the last year the late Kim Il-Sung, the North Korean
dictator, and Muhammed Farah Aideed, Somali warlord).
The US, the UN and countries beyond number have condemned the military junta
for their appalling violations of human rights in Haiti. But Mr Carter
countered that 'it's a serious violation of inherent human rights for a
citizen to be forced into exile'. General Powell reported, more practically,
that at no stage had Gen Cedras asked about the terms, financial and
otherwise, of exile.
Mr Carter was even dismissive of US government officials, including Mr
Warren Christopher, now secretary of state and the departmental number two
in his own administration, who have said there was no alternative but exile.
The Governor's Island agreement, he pointed out, was also signed by Fr
Aristide and would not have forced the junta physically to leave the island.
The US official attitude, Mr Carter said, failed to understand the mindset
of the junta as military men and self-perceived patriots. The former
president paid particular tribute to the arguments deployed by General
Powell in this respect. He also said that the wife of Gen Cedras ('one of
the strongest and most powerful women I've ever met') had played an
influential role after he had spoken to her at length on Sunday morning.
Throughout the interview, Mr Carter displayed considerable understanding of
the complexities of Haitian society and its fledgling political system. He
could not even guarantee parliament would pass the amnesty law, since 40
pro-Aristide members are themselves in exile in Miami. But the October 15
deadline could not be avoided by the junta.
The agreement - and yesterday's apparently trouble-free US military landing
 -should bring political relief to Mr Clinton at home, where the prospective
fully-fledged invasion remained unpopular.
The presence of General Powell in the delegation - another suggestion from
Mr Carter eagerly taken up by Mr Clinton - provides a degree of political
cover for the president against Republican criticism. The general's
political neutrality is legendary but Republicans increasingly claim him as
one of their own, largely because of his service under presidents Reagan and
Bush.
In the short term, the agreement and the US occupation also removes all
threat of a congressional vote of disapproval against US policies in Haiti.
The Democratic leadership immediately began moves to get both Houses to
approve the Sunday agreement and to express support for the US military
mission. This will pass.
It will not, however, subdue for long persistent reservations about Mr
Clinton's foreign policy decision-making processes, which, even over Haiti,
are widely seen more as crisis-driven than the product of a strategic plan.
There appear to have been some sharp divisions in the administration,
investigations of which are certain to feature in the media. The position of
Mr Anthony Lake as national security adviser seems most vulnerable.
Nor can Mr Clinton expect much lift from public relief at November's midterm
elections. In 1962, predicted steep Democratic losses were much reduced by
the resolution of the Cuban missile crisis but that happened only a week
before voting. A better comparison may be 1978 when Mr Carter's Middle East
peace accords produced instant political benefit that mostly faded by
polling day.
But, for the moment at least, Mr Clinton's agonies are less. He did take the
fateful step of ordering US servicemen into a combat mission for the first
time in his presidency but then was able to recall them before they landed.
That outcome seemed inconceivable four days ago; it was even in doubt on
Sunday evening.
