FT  25 JAN 94 / Tunnel route fails to end doubts: Decisions are awaited on
sections in north and mid Kent
The route for the Channel tunnel rail link announced by Mr John MacGregor,
transport secretary, will bring relief to hundreds of residents in London
and Kent but continuing uncertainty on two stretches of the line.
A two-mile extension of tunnelling in Islington, north London, will be
welcome on the most densely populated part of the route. The tunnel, which
starts at Barking in east London, will now extend to just east of the
Caledonian Road in Islington. Previously it was to have ended in Dalston.
Two Kent villages - Hollingbourne and Sandway - will also be spared the
worst effects by short tunnels.
But residents of Ashford and the surrounding villages face continued
uncertainty while the government decides whether to stick by its chosen
route, involving some tunnelling, to the north of the Kent town. The
alternative is to take the line above ground through the town centre,
linking directly with the new international station now being built.
But this route would adversely affect villages to the north-west where the
line rejoins the confirmed route. Mrs Rita Boyle of a local action group
said: 'This would require a completely new route through eight miles of
unspoiled countryside.'
Residents of Pepper Hill, on the edge of Northfleet in Kent, also face
continued uncertainty. The tentative plan takes the line in a shallow tunnel
under their homes, raising fears of vibration.
Three sites are still in the running for intermediate stations, although a
fourth, at Nashenden, has been dropped. The choice will be between Ebbsfleet
and Rainham, which are both near the M25 motorway, although on opposite
sides of the Thames, and Stratford, which would link in to local Underground
and British Rail routes.
A call from Kent County Council for a longer tunnel at Blue Bell Hill, where
the line passes under the North Downs, has not been accepted. Additional
tunnelling would have added to the cost of the project. As it is, the
planned extra tunnels will add Pounds 26m to the costs.
