FT  25 FEB 94 / World Trade News: US to reform export rules -
Non-proliferation of weapons to be main objective
The Clinton administration yesterday proposed the most comprehensive
overhaul of the US export licensing regime in 15 years and announced an
immediate liberalisation of controls on computers and supercomputers.
The main aim of the proposals, which would constitute a long overdue
revision of the Export Administration Act, the legal underpinnings for
export controls, is to curb the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. Past efforts have centred on efforts to keep high technology
out of the hands of the communist countries.
However, the Computer and Communications Industry Association yesterday said
the proposals did not go far enough. 'There will always be unfriendly
countries and dangerous individuals in the world, but the threat to our
security and survival has radically declined,' it said.
The new regime will eliminate the distinction between national security and
foreign policy controls, which the US imposes unilaterally, and focuses on
multilateral non-proliferation control regimes. The Paris-based
Co-ordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls (Cocom) is due to
be replaced by an expansion of multilateral groups, such as the current
nuclear supplier group and the missile technology control regime.
The Clinton administration and its allies are now discussing the
establishing of a third multilateral group to control trade in dual-use
technology and conventional weapons.
The US business community, while rarely satisfied with the incremental
relaxation of licensing rules since the end of the cold war, will make clear
gains if Congress accepts the administration's plan. A group set up to
settle disputes over controversial licences will be chaired by the Commerce
Department, instead of the National Security Council as in past
administrations.
The balance between the needs of high technology exporters and the claims of
national security will shift decisively in favour of business.
Unilateral controls will be subjected to annual review and will be
discontinued if they are found to be ineffective or put US companies at
severe competitive disadvantage.
The number of products for which licences are needed will be vastly reduced,
and the licensing process, which often delays sales until they are lost,
will be simplified. The administration is prepared to guarantee that all
licensing decisions be made within 90 days, with most decided at lower
levels in less time.
Under the current regime, the Commerce Department yesterday eased controls
on numerous items, including relaxing the definition of supercomputers, now
defined as achieving 1,500m theoretical operations per second instead of
195m.
Countries on the nuclear non-proliferation special country list - Algeria,
India, Iran, Iraq, Israel and others - will be allowed to buy more
sophisticated digital computers.
