FT  25 NOV 94 / World Trade News: Caribbean tourism promises an upturn -
Improved outlook in customer countries and marketing drive lift prospects
Caribbean tourism's high season, which begins in mid-December, promises to
be better than hoteliers were expecting. Consistently occupied hotel rooms
in Caribbean resorts please not only hoteliers, but also finance ministers.
Tourism brought Dollars 10bn to the region last year and Caribbean economies
have become increasingly dependent on tourism, particularly because of
uncertainty in traditional commodity markets.
Recession in the leading tourist markets, particularly in North America, was
blamed for a reduction in the growth rate of visitor arrivals. 'The economic
climate in these major markets has improved, and with it the fortunes of
Caribbean tourism,' said Mr Jean Holder, secretary general of the Caribbean
Tourism Organi-sation.
Hoteliers are now more confident as advance bookings for the forthcoming
season are high. In addition to the improved economic outlook in North
America and Europe, the Caribbean has launched a very intensive marketing
and promotion campaign.
Initial fears that US military intervention in Haiti would adversely affect
tourism have not materialised. The region was visited by 13m stayover
visitors last year, and by 8.8m others who came on cruise ships. The
tourists spent about Dollars 10bn last year, according to the Caribbean
Tourism Organisation. This represented a slight improvement in the number of
visitors and in expenditure over 1992.
Hoteliers, government ministers and other administrators of Caribbean
tourism are, however, frequently reminded of the fickle nature of the
tourism industry. Prospects have been enhanced by currency fluctuations;
Caribbean currencies are pegged to the US dollar, and the recent weakening
of the dollar makes the region a better bargain for European visitors. For
North Americans, a European holiday becomes more expensive than one in the
Caribbean and two out of every three tourists visiting the Caribbean come
from the US.
Competition for Caribbean tourism is coming not only from other established
resort regions, but also from the increasing efforts of several US states to
offer cheaper and safer holidays as an alternative to the Caribbean
following adverse publicity about crime in some Caribbean resorts, an issue
nagging the tourism industry.
Caribbean resort countries have implemented a multi-million dollar
advertising programme to market the region as a single destination to
potential visitors from North America. Prospective visitors make little
distinction between countries.
'Regrettably, geography is not a very strong subject,' said Mr Carlyle
Dunkley, Jamaica's tourism minister. 'Many people believe you can take a
stroll from Port of Spain (Trinidad) to Port-au-Prince (Haiti), and it is
not quite so.' Despite the joint marketing of the region, there is
increasing competition among several resorts which are seeking new markets.
Sir Colin Marshall, chairman of British Airways, recently warned of the
dangers of price cutting. Competing on price and price alone dilutes the
quality of the Caribbean tourism product, Sir Colin told a meeting of
tourism interests.
'Cut-price competition creates a spiral dive from which it is extremely
difficult to recover,' he said.
