FT  05 FEB 94 / UK Company News: Granada and Carlton can proceed with bids
Grana da's Pounds 650m hostile bid for LWT and Carlton's agreed Pounds 760m
acquisition of Central Independent Television were cleared by the Department
of Trade and Industry yesterday after the companies undertook to limit their
shares of the television advertising market.
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, said the bids would not
be referred to the Monopolies Commission having acceptedundertakings from
the companies that they would not control more than 25 per cent of all UK
tele-vision net advertising revenue after August 31 1995.
The clearance restarted the clock on the Granada-LWT bid and allowed
Carlton's offer for Central to be declared unconditional in all respects. If
Granada's acquisition of LWT succeeds the combined group would control about
40 per cent of theITV advertising revenue and around 30 per cent of the
total television advertising market. Mr Gerry Robinson, Granada chief
executive, said it was too soon to say how its share would be reduced but:
'The chances of sorting it out in a neat way are very high.'
LWT replied that Granada would be required to abandon its joint sales house
with Scottish Television or break LWT's five-year contract with
Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television.
Advertisers, who had feared that a concentration of advertising sales could
force up prices, gave the agreement a cautious welcome. However, Mr Ken
Miles, director general of the Incorporated Society of British Advertisers,
said: 'We would have preferred to see it dealt with more quickly. Given the
uncertainty it would cause we would encourage them to anticipate the
timetable if the takeover does go ahead.'
Central and Carlton together control a little less than 25 per cent of total
UK television advertising though Anglia, which has a joint sales house with
Central, controls a further 5 per cent.
LWT has until midnight tomorrow to put out any new information. Granada will
then have a week to improve its offer with the final closing date 14 days
after that.
