FT  31 MAR 94 / UK Company News: Johnston Press makes Pounds 29m buy -
Advertising upturn in final quarter behind 28% profits rise
Johnston Press, the Edinburgh-based local newspaper group, is making its
largest ever acquisition with the purchase of the family-owned Halifax
Courier group for Pounds 29.4m.
The company also announced profits up by 28 per cent to a record Pounds
12.5m in 1993 helped by a significant upturn in advertising in the last
quarter.
Mr Fred Johnston, chairman, said the acquisition was in line with the
group's strategy of extending its geographical coverage by acquiring titles
which are local market leaders.
He said the quality of the business was reflected in the 'relatively full
price'. But he added that there was 'a lot of mileage' for cost savings and
that the acquisition would enhance the group's earnings from the start.
Johnston is paying a total of Pounds 29.1m for the trading activities, which
made an operating profit of Pounds 1.66m (Pounds 1.55m) on turnover of
Pounds 9.97m last year. It is also paying Pounds 5.4m for investments and
surplus cash.
In addition to the Evening Courier in Halifax, the business has four small
titles in West Yorkshire and three papers in the Isle of Man where it is
also market leader.
Johnston shares added 2p to 667p yesterday, helped by the 1993 figures which
showed earnings per share up 19 per cent to 27p (22.7p). A final dividend of
4.5p gives a total payment of 7p (6.25p).
The main newspaper division increased operating profits by 31.5 per cent to
Pounds 9.1m helped by a full year from TR Beckett, the Sussex-based
newspaper group acquired for Pounds 12m at the end of 1992.
Mr Johnston said that the south of England economy 'still has a way to go'
but that there has been a good if 'patchy' recovery elsewhere. Advertising
volumes increased by 6 per cent last year, with over 9 per cent growth in
the second half.
He added: '1994 has started encouragingly with results in most of the
group's companies exceeding budgets.'
Strong cash generation resulted in year end net cash of more than Pounds 6m
and although, on a pro forma basis, the Halifax acquisition would have left
it with gearing of 31 per cent this should be down to 16 per cent when the
deal is completed in June.
The consideration for Halifax will be satisfied by the issue of up to 2.5m
new Johnston shares and the balance in cash.
COMMENT
Halifax Courier is a rather better managed company than most of Johnston's
recent targets. But last year's profits were depressed by a major investment
in the Isle of Man and there is scope for cost-savings to bring its healthy
margins up to the level of Johnston's best titles. Even Johnston's famously
cautious chairman allowed himself to be encouraged by the recent upturn in
advertising which should push group profits to Pounds 15m this year. But the
shares are starting to run away. At 667p they are now trading on 21 times
this year's earnings which is asking a lot even from Johnston.
