FT  16 FEB 94 / To Berlin or not to Berlin: That is the German question,
writes Judy Dempsey, who catalogues the worried debate about moving from
Bonn
The debate about when, how, at what cost, should, might, will, the
government seated in Bonn on the river Rhine move to Berlin on the river
Spree, is reminiscent of a play Czech President Vaclav Havel wrote when he
was free of the burdens of state duty but not free to have his plays
performed.
Vanek, a dissident, asks Stanek, a bureaucrat, to sign a petition seeking
the release of a dissident composer. If Stanek signs he risks exclusion from
the 'official' world, blessed with its perks for those who conform. He
dithers, makes up all sorts of excuses, prevaricates.
The tortuous debate taking place in Bonn about the move to Berlin would
appeal to Havel the playwright. After deciding in June 1991, by a free vote,
to move to Berlin by 1996, the government - pressed by officials who have
got used to the easy, uncomplicated, provincial life of 'A Small Town in
Germany' - postponed the move.
A debate was called. Then another. And another. Each put the back the date.
At last, to avoid looking utterly ridiculous, before Christmas the
government decided to move 'not later than the year 2000'. But then Mr Theo
Waigel, no keen supporter of the Umzug - move, or, in another translation,
pageant - said it would cost too much.
Last week, after another round of soul-searching, a date, of sorts, and a
move, of a kind, was agreed. But the Rhinelanders are still dissatisfied.
The latest compromise means that eight ministries will remain in Bonn, the
remainder moving to Berlin. But for the price of moving, the Beamte, or
civil servants on permanent contracts, are demanding more office space than
their current abode. For example, the foreign ministry wants an extra 5,000
sq m on their present 50,284 sq m. In practice, these officials want 34 sq m
each in Berlin instead of 26 sq m.
On top of that, the lobbyists, if they cannot stay in Bonn, are insisting on
the highest office standards. Recent estimates suggest that it would cost
between DM14,000 (Pounds 5,450) and DM17,000 a sq m - even though the
Treuhand privatisation agency, future home to the economics ministry,
managed to revamp Hermann Goring's gargantuan Luftfahrt, or Air/War Ministry
for DM100m.
As the costs soar - the latest estimate is DM20bn - Mr Waigel and the
bureaucracy want to hold back. 'If they put out the renovations to private
tender, they could easily halve the costs,' said Mr Mark Palmer, former US
ambassador to Hungary, who is building a business centre on the site of
Checkpoint Charlie. 'If these bureaucrats want to understand what
unification is all about, they should see how the other half - the
easterners - live and just come.'
But the Umzug debate is about much more than cost. It is about coming to
terms with a united Germany.
Officials in Bonn repeatedly claim that if the government moves to Berlin,
it will become more eastern, far from the borders of the Netherlands and
France. 'We just feel that we will be cut off from Europe,' one foreign
ministry civil servant said. 'In Berlin, we will be removed from the western
influences. We will be in the centre of Europe,' he added.
'Sometimes I think the Umzug debate is about Germany not wanting to come to
terms with dealing with unification in the psychological and social sense,'
said an aide to President Richard Von Weizsacker. 'It's as if west Germans
want to retain the status quo ante, that is, before the fall of the Berlin
Wall, as if unification never happened, or at least that it will not impinge
on their lives. The move to Berlin would help end the division of the two
Germanys,' he said. The president is already ensconced in Bellevue, not far
from the Brandenburg Gate.
But there is a lingering religious element as well. A Bavarian, a
Rhinelander and a Berliner, all joked about the fear of 'the Protestant
Prussians arguing with the Catholic Rhinelanders'.
'We are talking about a complex religious divide in our country,' said one.
'Somehow, a divided Germany also divided us on religious grounds, with the
west predominately Catholic and the east Lutheran and Protestant.'
For Berliners, and eastern Germans, the issue of the Umzug has assumed the
status of ridicule, few believing it will ever take place. The Berliners,
apart from the business community who believe Berlin's underdeveloped
financial services and good office amenities would benefit from the move,
are unsure and discontented since the collapse of the Wall.
A united Berlin has ended the subsidies provided by Bonn to make the western
half of the city a prosperous oasis, with its bright lights shining across
to the grey east. The west Berliners are only slowly coming to terms with
life without a Wall, never mind the Umzug.
But for the Saxons and other eastern states, support for the Umzug is
lukewarm. 'It would remind us of the old days when Berlin got bananas and
gas heating, and we made do with preservatives and brown coal heating,'
quipped a Saxon.
Indeed, the officials in Bonn might yet strike an alliance with the eastern
states to oppose the Umzug. That would represent a bizarre twist to the
Umzug debate, almost signalling a meeting of minds rare in the new Germany.
But this is unlikely.
Instead, the Umzug debate will eventually be resolved with all sides trying
not to lose face - like President Havel's Stanek. He did not sign. He was
let off the hook: the dissident was released.
