FT  29 AUG 94 / Waste shipments from Thorp plant 'could be cut'
BNFL, the fuels reprocessing company formerly known as British Nuclear
Fuels, could cut the number of shipments overseas of radioactive waste from
its Thorp reprocessing plant from 5,000 to 150, it says in evidence to the
government's Radioactive Waste Management Advisory Committee.
It says the reduction could be achieved by introducing a practice known as
substitution. Overseas customers would be given the option of taking an
additional quantity of high-level waste resulting from the reprocessing of
fuel in place of bulkier intermediate and low-level waste. Countries with
Thorp contracts signed since 1976 are required to take back waste which
results from reprocessing.
BNFL has made its evidence available to the public following the publication
earlier this month of the committee's study on substitution, which was
ordered by ministers to help its review of nuclear waste management.
The report supports BNFL's claim that the radiological impact on the
environment of substitution would be neutral. It says, however, that if BNFL
is to be given the option of offering substitution there is a case for a
'small additional quantum of vitrified (glass) waste to be returned over and
above that calculated on radiological grounds alone'.
BNFL said yesterday that it welcomed the committee's advice to the
government and said it should be possible to implement substitution in a way
that accommodated the committee's suggestions on additional waste being
returned abroad.
The government is likely to decide in the next few months, as part of its
review of the nuclear industry, whether to allow substitution.
It will face strong representations from environmental groups such as
Greenpeace which oppose Thorp's operation and the transportation of nuclear
waste materials.
They will be concerned about the increase in transportation of high-level
waste if substitution is implemented and will dispute claims of a neutral
effect on the environment.
BNFL started commissioning Thorp this year after a long legal battle. It
plans to start returning waste to overseas customers around 1998.
Desert Island Manager, Page 8
