FT  21 SEP 94 / Survey of Logistics (4): Today or tomorrow, please -
Customers press for faster parcels delivery
Parcels service operators initially made their mark during the 1980s by
developing a range of 'off the shelf' express delivery products.
In the UK, they introduced branded services providing delivery times ranging
from overnight to two or three days.
However, customers are now demanding greater flexibility from the operators.
Typical of this is the way Honda, the car, motor cycle and power equipment
manufacturer, uses NFC express delivery company Lynx to distribute parts
overnight to its 1,200 UK dealers.
The operation guarantees that 99 per cent of dealers' orders placed by 3.30
pm will be delivered by 10 o'clock the next morning. It entails collecting
parts by road from Honda's UK logistics centre in Swindon and using a
combination of road and air transport to bring in other parts from the
company's European centre at Ghent, Belgium.
Parts from both sources are then routed through the Lynx UK branch depot
network for final delivery to the dealers.
Flexibility is even more important on the international front where the
users are often large multinational corporations and the service operators
tend to be large express companies, or integrators as they are often known.
That point was highlighted at this year's World Express and Mail conference
in London by Mr John Parsons, director of logistics for Sony UK.
He said that when integrators talked about providing bespoke solutions, they
were relatively successful within very narrow confines. 'But if you, as a
customer, go along to an integrator and ask for a really flexible system you
basically get a situation where they really ask you to shoe-horn your system
into theirs rather than the other way round.'
Mr Parsons said the challenge for the integrators was to understand the
trade-off between costs and service and to be able to provide a menu of
tailored services at a cost which could be understood by the customer.
Mr Tony Walford, European logistics manager for United Parcel Service,
replied that in the last few years the integrated transport industry has
become very much more flexible in its core services. The difficulty, though,
was to reconcile the customer requirement for flexibility with the need to
keep down costs by using standardised systems.
Customers of the parcels service operators now increasingly regard next day
delivery as a standard service, certainly within the UK and Europe, and are
no longer prepared to pay premium prices for it.
At the same time, tough competition is continually forcing down parcel
service prices. Mr Paul Jackson, chief executive of freight and express
industry consultants Triangle Management Services, says that parcel volumes
are continuing to grow but that average yields in the market are down by an
average 25 per cent over the last three years. In that situation, 'the
low-cost operators are going to be the winners,' he says.
Another UK logistics industry consultancy, Davies &amp; Robson, says the rates
discount practices of many UK parcels carriers now 'often defy commercial
logic' and that this probably signals a further big shakeout in the
industry.
Mr Andrew Callaghan, managing director of Staffordshire-based UK domestic
parcels carrier ANC, says that an over-supply of service capacity during the
last couple of years has led to a number of key operators leaving the
industry. 'But while over-capacity still exists, such casualties have made
other parcel carriers more conscious of profit margins. This, combined with
the economic upturn, has led to a hardening of prices which have in some
cases risen during the last quarter.'
Other distributors believe that this could be avoided if general economic
conditions keep improving. ANC, for example, claims its parcels volumes are
currently 15 per cent up on last year.
However, other big changes are on the horizon - the privatisation of two
leading operators, Parcelforce and Red Star. News of the proposed
privatisation of Post Office parcels division Parcelforce has renewed
concern among rival private sector operators over possible increased
competition from the currently loss-making operation - for the year to March
31, Parcelforce recorded a loss of Pounds 19m. Private sector rival TNT
Express (UK) claims that Parcelforce enjoys a number of 'unfair' operational
and financial advantages 'merely because it is part of an organisation which
has a monopoly in the letter delivery market'.
To counter that advantage, TNT has renewed its earlier call for a duopoly
licence which would allow a private company to compete with existing postal
services.
Meanwhile, the much-delayed sale of British Rail parcels division Red Star
is scheduled to be completed by the end of September. The sameday/nextday
delivery business was first put up for sale last year but was withdrawn
after failing to attract any acceptable bids. Red Star then underwent a
substantial restructuring before being put back on the market.
In the international parcels service market, operators are increasingly
likely to work together to provide the wide-ranging global coverage demanded
by customers, particularly big multinational organisations.
Leading operators still like to talk about 'one stop shopping' - providing
every service their customers need - but in reality most are looking at
alliances and partnerships with other companies to achieve that coverage.
Internationally, for example, TNT Express Worldwide has a now
well-established joint venture with the five post offices belonging to GD
Net; DHL International has German airline Lufthansa and Japan Air Lines as
major shareholders; and Federal Express works with national express
companies as collection/delivery agents in Europe, for example, Securicor
Omega Express in the UK.
Similar trends are apparent among many European and domestic parcel service
operators. Securicor Omega Express has an alliance/partnership with German
operator Trans-o-flex covering most of the European Union, and Mayne
Nickless group company Parceline is in partnership with several leading
Continental parcels companies through an operation called Euroline.
Parceline has also just launched a new European overnight delivery service
called Skyline Next Day in conjunction with its parent company's worldwide
DPE (Document and Parcel Express) network. Elaborating on the reasons for
such moves, Triangle's Mr Jackson said that in the UK, for example, a recent
survey showed that 50-60 per cent of domestic parcels market customers had
European traffic.
So domestic operators needed to be able to offer European services - and the
answer for many was to work with overseas partners.
