FT  13 APR 94 / Opposition demands water chief 's dismissal
Labour MPs called last night for the resignation of Mr Ian Byatt,
director-general of Ofwat, the water industry regulator, after allegations
that he had appointed friends and business contacts to the industry's
customer protection groups.
Mr Nigel Griffiths, Labour consumer affairs spokesman, and 40 other Labour
MPs signed a Commons motion calling for Mr Byatt's dismissal and an
independent inquiry into the industry's treatment of customers.
The call followed claims made yesterday by the Yorkshire Post newspaper
about connections between Mr Byatt and some of the chairmen of the 10
regional Ofwat customer service committees which represent customer
interests.
Mr Byatt is likely to face questions on these alleged links today when he
appears before the Commons environment committee. The committee is also set
to ask whether customers are paying too much for water and whether
environmental standards are high enough.
According to the Yorkshire Post, those appointed as customer committee
chairmen included a school friend of Mr Byatt, a former non-executive
director of John Laing, the construction company which has contracts with
water companies, and the wife of a former close colleague at the Treasury.
Ofwat said that these personal details were accurate, but dismissed as
'pretty scurrilous' the allegation that the appointments were due to the
personal connections with Mr Byatt. 'Nobody has behaved improperly and Mr
Byatt has no intention of resigning,' it said.
The potential conflict of interest in the case of the John Laing director
was carefully considered at the time of his appointment, Ofwat said. It said
its recommended appointments are vetted by the environment and trade and
industry secretaries.
The National Consumer Council called yesterday for the committees to be
independent of Ofwat. 'We like the way that the Gas Consumer Council is
independent of Ofgas (the gas regulator),' it said.
Yesterday's claims come two months after Ofwat's decision not to reappoint
Ms Diana Scott as chairman of the Yorkshire committee.
Ms Helen Jackson, Labour MP for Sheffield Hillsborough, said last night:
'There is widespread anger in the region about this. She was very outspoken
on customers' behalf, but she was not in line with Mr Byatt's personal
opinions, particularly on metering.'
Ofwat has backed an increase in the use of household water meters, but
Labour says large families with low incomes will see bills rise.
