FT  30 NOV 94 / Budget 94 (Tax): Central London will be hardest hit - Rates
The central London property market is expected to suffer at the expense of
other regions following the chancellor's announcement of plans for phasing
in the new uniform business rate from March 1995.
The new rates will be based on property valuations at April 1993, whereas
current rates are on the basis of April 1988 valuations.
Changes in property prices between these dates means that many central
London offices should see their rateable value halve, whereas the rateable
value of buildings in areas such as the West Midlands will more than double.
However, the chancellor said these changes will be phased far more slowly
than the property market had expected.
Rates reductions next year for occupiers of larger buildings will be
restricted to a maximum of 5 per cent in real terms, and 10 per cent for
smaller premises.
This downward phasing will help subsidise regions where rates should rise.
For large properties, rates increases will be restricted to 10 per cent next
year and 7.5 per cent for smaller buildings.
Despite this subsidy, the chancellor said that phasing of rating increases
will cost the exchequer Pounds 605m in 1995-96.
Jones Lang Wootton, the surveyors, which expected top City of London rents
to rise to Pounds 50 per sq ft in three years, was looking again at its
forecast.
It had expected the chancellor to allow rates reductions of at least 20 per
cent next year.
Mr Rodney Clutton, joint managing director of Wates City of London
Properties, the property company, said: 'The chancellor's statement is not
encouraging and much less generous than we had been expecting.'
Mr Clutton added that slow downward phasing would increase the
attractiveness to tenants of new office buildings.
The chancellor also announced that the uniform business rate in England for
1995-2000 will be 43.2p, up slightly from 42.3p which applied this year.
Despite the wide regional fluctuations in property values since the last
rating revaluation was carried out, the average rateable value in England
has barely changed.
In Wales, where rateable values have generally increased, the business rate
will fall to 39p from 44.8p.
In Scotland, which moves to a uniform rate from a system of regional rates
for the first time, businesses will also pay 43.2p.
