FT  16 SEP 94 / UK Company News: Bond and equity losses leave Legal &amp; Gen
lower
An investment loss of Pounds 53m from the bond and equity markets left
pre-tax profits at Legal &amp; General Group, the life and general insurer,
lower at Pounds 58m for the first half of 1994, compared with Pounds 75m.
However if L&amp;G had adopted the same accounting method for such gains and
losses used by Prudential Corporation, it would have shown an increase to
Pounds 114.9m (Pounds 74.7m). The interim dividend rose by 6.9 per cent to
6.95p (6.5p).
Pre-tax profit in its core UK life and pensions business rose slightly to
Pounds 63m (Pounds 59.7m), but this was primarily related to business
already in force, where profits increased by Pounds 5.4m, rather than to new
business acquired.
Pre-tax profit from overseas life and pensions business totalled Pounds 19m
(Pounds 18.4m).
Mr David Prosser, chief executive, said he saw little prospect of short-term
improvement in the testing conditions of the UK market, and predicted
increased competition and narrower margins next year from the new regime
requiring insurers to volunteer more information about products and charges
to customers.
L&amp;G has already cut the number of its sales agents, who are self-employed
and paid by commission, from 2,300 at the start of the year to about 1,800
now. It expects this to fall to about 1,000 by the end of next year.
At the same time, it plans to expand its 100-strong employed and salaried
sales force to about 300, and strengthen its ability to sell through
independent financial advisers.
Mr Prosser said L&amp;G could halve the number of its self-employed sales force
and that this might reduce the amount of new business by only 15 per cent.
He insisted, however, that there was still a role for commission-based
advice.
While forecasting some rationalisation within the sector, he said that L&amp;G's
size and range of distribution methods left it well-placed for the future,
including opportunities to absorb smaller companies.
The UK general insurance business saw a turnround from an underwriting loss
of Pounds 17.7m to a profit of Pounds 23m. Mr Prosser said the business had
benefited from the decision to focus on personal lines as a key area.
He added, however, that there was some anecdotal evidence of price-cutting
in premium rates, and emphasised the need to ensure that policies were
priced to reflect exposure to risk.
