FT  30 APR 94 / Gardening: Poetic justice for recalcitrant roses
We are now into the season when booklets try to tell you how to solve your
garden's problems. You need slug killer round the hostas, which are emerging
bravely this week, and my hellibors have required slug-killer already, an
invisible reason for their poor performance.
On both, I use Growing Success, the granules of which are consumed like
blue-rinse caviar and send the enemy to an organic death. Emergent ground
elder is clouted with Roundup and the purple slugs of young bindweed are
attacked with the higher fire-power of SDK Brushwood Killer.
But no leaflet tells you how to deal with my most maddening problem: roses
which go backwards, not forwards. This week, I have invented my own solution
and tried poetic justice instead.
This has been needed where the auspices, at first, seemed perfect. Three
years ago, the July sun was rising on the old-fashioned roses and us
reptiles of Fleet Street were being feted in one of our finest rose gardens;
there was even a lady in cream silk to welcome us by playing a harp.
Escaping her harping, I turned left at an arbour of Constance Spry roses and
encountered Graham Thomas, the UK's greatest living expert on this flower.
With reptilian skill, I worked round to my question of the moment: what rose
would he choose to train on wires for a low rose hedge? Kathleen Harrop, he
replied, without hesitation.
She had crossed my mind already because she is a rose with everything. Her
stems are formless; her flowers are silvery pink; her season is long; and
her elegant leaves have a slight purple flush. Emboldened, I ordered a dozen
from Peter Beales in Norfolk. They were end-of-season plants but, I
reasoned, surely Kathleen's stems would take off from the long roots which
he searched out for me?
The years passed and the wires are rusting: progress has been negative.
Every March, the leaf buds open and there is a slight attempt at growth, but
the stems are as thin as pencils.
In their first year, they caught me out by getting Black Spot as early as
April; since then, I have moved back my preventive measures to early spring
and I am spraying - as you should also spray your roses - with Nimrod Thomas
as early as late February. Thanks to Nimrod, Kathleen still goes black and
yellow - but not until late May.
So why is Kathleen in such a sulk? I have concluded that it is either me or
the soil. And since I am not moving out for a rose bush, the soil has had to
go.
None of the endless books on roses discusses the idea but, if roses want
heavy clay, why not give them loads of it? Why not bus in a lump of
unworkable Essex if Kathleen Harrop luxuriates in the old Thatcherite
heartland? There are precedents, although you have to look for them.
In my mind's eye, I see an old archbishop of Pisa who plainly thought on the
right lines in the high Middle Ages. The benefactor class there wanted
privileges in return for gifts. The Italian church could not give them
birthday honours but the archbishop offered them an extra-special death
instead.
Through the city's network of crusading contacts, he arranged for a shipment
of sanctified compost, dug on site near the holiest places of the Holy Land.
Wheelbarrows had not been invented in the 13th century, but the compost
arrived on carts and was scattered into his church's cloister, the
present-day Campo Santo.
What is the equivalent of sanctified compost for today's Oxford atheist? A
barrow-load from Basildon lacks political correctness - but where else do
roses luxuriate?
I have watched new gardeners steal up on me in the past five years of
post-youth enterprise, but none has stolen further than my long-standing
friend of the Muses, the poet James Fenton. On May 14, all well-meaning
Oxford MAs will be bussing themselves to the university to vote in the new
Professor of Lower Poetry: why not declare the campaign open by bussing a
load of earth from his rose garden in my direction first?
The Fenton roses do not merely flower and proliferate: they beam with the
blessings of the sister Muses. Admittedly, they grow on foolproof grey-green
clay within sight of Matthew Arnold's poetic landscape. Where Poetry
alights, honey sweats from oak trees, brickbats burst into garlands of iris,
and even the brambles are supposed to go mad with roses.
This week, I have completed my poetic transplant. There have been no
wheelbarrows, either, and loads of appalling clay have been shifted in the
car boot. Do roses really like this awful sludge? Is this grey horticultural
plasticine really the answer to Kathleen Harrop? And what if the problem is
the nurserymen, not the flower bed?
Just to be sure, I have changed the roses, too. A new batch from Scotts of
Somerset is sitting in the sludge which they are said to like best and I
cannot help noting that the new Harrops are putting out leaflets already.
Unless I am blind, though, they have little black spots on their tips . .  .
