FT  17 JAN 94 / Taiwanese offer hope to west Belfast: A floppy disk factory
may help bring revival
In the next two months the government is expected to announce that a deal
has been reached with the Taiwanese company CIS Technology to establish a
floppy disk plant on the fringes of west Belfast.
The Pounds 13m-Pounds 14m venture will be the one of the largest foreign
investments in manufacturing in this republican stronghold since the
ill-fated De Lorean car factory in the late 1970s.
This unhappy comparison indicates how difficult it has been to attract
inward investment to the impoverished north and west of the city - the
epicentre of 'the troubles' - during the past 25 years.
It is inward investment in manufacturing that by and large has been the
missing ingredient in efforts by successive governments, and others, to
regenerate this densely populated inner-city area. Much of the once rotting
housing stock has been repaired or replaced in both predominantly Roman
Catholic and predominantly Protestant areas. Some impressive civic amenities
have been built. Bustling industrial estates have even sprung up, housing
small local companies in fields as diverse as silicon chips and beansprouts.
But prospective large-scale investors in manufacturing and industry have
generally stayed away, with the result that the employment problem spawned
by recession and the shrinkage or closure of traditional industries has
persisted.
According to the Phoenix West Belfast Development Trust - whose territory
includes the mainly Protestant Crumlin Road and Shankill Road, as well as
the mainly Catholic Falls Road - the area has an average unemployment rate
of 36.7 per cent 'rising to more than 60 per cent in some . . .
neighbourhoods'.
The looming hulks of disused linen mills - and the vacant lot behind the
Falls Road where a big bread plant used to be - symbolise the plight of an
area where the siege mentality generated by quarter of a century of
terrorism makes it harder for people to get on their bikes and look for work
than elsewhere in the country.
Seen in this context, the 200 or so jobs that the new floppy disk plant
should eventually create are the most significant sign yet that renewed
efforts to encourage industrial investment in the most troubled areas of the
city are beginning to bear fruit.
According to Dr Joe Hendron, the SDLP MP for West Belfast, it is a fair bet
that five years ago the Taiwanese company would not even have been shown the
site it is now expected to use.
Another indication of the seriousness of government efforts to revitalise
the area was last month's visit by Mr John Major, the prime minister. Still
another was the recent decision by the Department of Economic Development to
establish a working group aimed at focusing its collective attention on the
region.
Among the working group's initial tasks will be to consider an assessment of
industrial infrastructure to be carried out by the Industrial Development
Board. The group will aim to identify industrial sectors offering a 'fit'
with the area. The IDB is on record as saying that getting inward investment
into north and west Belfast is its number-one priority.
There will be large sums of public money tied up with the CIS project: it
will be in an area that qualifies for government grants of up to 50 per cent
on factory buildings.
But intensifying efforts to regenerate the area could pay significant
political dividends in the wake of the new UK-Irish peace initiative.
Dr Hendron unexpectedly won the West Belfast seat from Mr Gerry Adams, the
Sinn Fein president, by just 600 votes at the last general election in April
1992.
Projects like the floppy disk plant - which will employ many of Mr Hendron's
constituents, although the site is actually in Ulster Unionist leader Mr
James Molyneaux's Lagan Valley seat - will do nothing to harm the SDLP MP's
prospects of re-election.
This could be an important consideration, especially if the IRA declines to
grasp the olive branch it has been offered and end its campaign of violence.
The slums huddled by Black Mountain are a traditional breeding ground for
terrorists - republican and loyalist.
One inspiration is Londonderry, which has attracted more than its share of
inward investment - though unemployment remains high by UK standards. Dr
Hendron says: 'Jobs have been pouring into Derry as a result of the efforts
of John Hume (the SDLP leader). If he can do it for there, I don't see why
we shouldn't for Belfast.'
