FT  24 DEC 94 / The Power of Communications: United across the airwaves -
The hope given to Rwandan refugees by a radio station
In its broadcasts from the Rwandan refugee camps in Bukavu, Zaire, Radio
Agatashya proclaims that it is 'the humanitarian radio'. The claim is not a
redundant one, in a community that knows only too well the horrors that can
be initiated by radio.
For most of last summer, the river which marks the border between Rwanda and
Zaire on the southern tip of Lake Kivu was stained with blood. The rickety
wooden bridge at the frontier was blocked to Tutsis attempting to flee the
massacres inside Rwanda. On the Zairean bank, the residents of Bukavu
watched a killing frenzy unfold just metres from where they stood.
One private radio station - Radio Television Libre des Mille Collines -
whipped up the mass hysteria responsible for the extermination of more than
500,000 Tutsis. The mouthpiece of Hutu extremists, it urged Hutus to 'take
your spears, clubs, guns, swords, stones, everything. Sharpen them, hack
them, those enemies, those cockroaches . . .' Even educated Hutus believed
the blood-curdling accounts of alleged atrocities committed by Tutsi rebels
as they swept the country.
'Hunt out the Tutsi,' the radio commanded. 'Who will fill up the half-empty
graves? There is no way the rebels should find alive any of the people they
claim as their own.'
Even after the Tutsi-led Rwandan Patriotic Front drove the Hutu regime out
of Rwanda, Radio Mille Collines continued to broadcast from mobile stations
inside Zaire.
The Hutu extremists and their militias now rule over the teeming,
cholera-ridden refugee camps in Zaire, Tanzania and Burundi. Under pressure
from UN peacekeepers, however, Radio Mille Collines was dismantled in
August.
In the same month, a team of Swiss journalists from the Lausanne-based
Reporters sans Frontieres launched Radio Agatashya in the refugee camps in
Bukavu. They were determined to restore the refugees' faith in impartial
information.
The station's maiden transmission, on the morning of August 4, came from a
makeshift studio inside a container near the grounds of Bukavu's Jesuit
school. Agatashya means 'the swallow of hope' in Kinyarwanda, the language
chosen for the radio's broadcasts because only one in 10 refugees
understands French.
With time, programmes have been added in French, Kiswahili and English.
Seven Rwandan journalists - all active in human rights organisations during
the civil war - and three Zaireans have been recruited to the reporting
team. For the Swiss journalists, the most important task has been that of
guaranteeing the station's political impartiality and independence. They
carefully screen every programme before it goes on air for possible signs of
bias.
Establishing the radio's credibility with a community haunted by genocide
and saturated with hate propaganda has not been easy. In Rwanda, radio has
been the tool of one side or another. It has not been neutral.
'It has been difficult to win acceptance by both sides of the Rwandan
conflict,' says Mr Philippe Dahinden, the radio's project co-ordinator. 'If
we had based ourselves inside Rwanda, we would have been automatically
branded as pro-Tutsi. So we chose Bukavu, to reassure the 340,000 refugees
here that this radio is meant for them.'
Locating in Bukavu has generated other problems. Agatashya's journalists
were threatened by Hutu extremists for reporting on the acrimonious
departure of Medecins sans Frontieres from Bukavu's refugee camps last
month. The medical charity, shocked at the killings of refugees wanting to
return to Rwanda, pulled out of Bukavu, arguing that it had become
'ethically impossible for MSF to continue aiding and abetting the
perpetrators of the Rwandan genocide'.
But the threats against the radio station were only that. Mr Dahinden
believes Hutu leaders have refrained from harming Radio Agatashya or its
reporters because it is virtually the only source of independent information
available to them.
'Everyone listens to Radio Agatashya. We are recognised instantly in the
camps. Even if there are few radios among such a huge refugee population,
news is often passed on by word of mouth. And because we transmit in
Kinyarwanda, there is less risk of manipulation, because people are not
dependent on someone translating from French or English.'
The radio is also heard in south-western Rwanda and, with the expected
arrival of transmitters, will soon penetrate deeper into Rwanda and reach
the refugees in Goma, on the northern shores of Lake Kivu.
Much of Radio Agatashya's airtime is devoted to the provision of public
information services.
Lists of children in the care of the International Committee of the Red
Cross are read out regularly, helping many families to reunite. Parents also
put out search appeals for missing children or lost relatives.
There are programmes on how to prevent cholera and dysentery - which killed
tens of thousands when the refugees first flooded across the border - and on
how to improve hygiene in the overcrowded camps. There are also health
programmes for pregnant women, on the care of infants, and on the dangers of
Aids and other sexually transmitted diseases.
But it is the twice-daily news bulletins that pull in the listeners. The
refugees still do not trust Radio Rwanda - controlled by the new government
in Kigali - while Radio Zaire has little relevance to their lives. Radio
Agatashya, which has reporters working in Rwanda as well as Zaire, is the
only station capable of breaking the terrible isolation that engulfs them.
'The refugees are desperate to know what is happening in Rwanda,' says Mr
Dunia Hategekimanam, the Rwandan co-ordinator of Agatashya's bureau in
Kigali. 'We try to get out to the villages and interview those who have
returned; and say what state the crops are in, and what the security
situation is like in different districts.'
So far, Radio Agatashya has refrained from broadcasting appeals for the
refugees to return home. Rwanda has yet to restore its judicial system and a
civilian police force. Amid verifiable reports of arrests and summary
executions conducted by former Tutsi guerrillas, now known as the Rwandan
Patriotic Army, the Agatashya team believes it may be too early to disband
the refugee camps. As a result Radio Agatashya, which began life as a
six-month project, has been extended, with Swiss government aid, for another
year.
'National reconciliation will be difficult and it will take time,' Mr
Dahinden says. 'The criminals have still not been separated from the
ordinary Hutu refugees. But there are men and women of good faith who are
striving to overcome the fear between both communities. As journalists, the
best we can hope to achieve is to restore their faith in accurate and
non-partisan information.'
