FT  03 MAR 94 / Germany set to build 250mph 'whispering arrow' inter-city
train
The German government yesterday approved construction of the world's first
commercial magnetic-levitation train - nicknamed the 'whispering arrow' - to
run from Berlin to Hamburg at up to 250 miles an hour.
It is intended to cut the travelling time between the two cities from the
present 3 1/2 hours to less than an hour, and give German industry a big
technological advantage in the world market for high-speed rail travel.
The Transrapid project won the unanimous approval of the German cabinet
yesterday, in spite of a rising tide of protest on environmental and
financial grounds. It could still face a big battle for parliamentary
approval, because the opposition Social Democratic party (SPD) announced
yesterday that it wants the new system drastically scaled down.
The project will cost an estimated DM8.9bn (Pounds 3.5bn) in a
public-private joint venture, with the federal government building the
DM5.6bn monorail system.
A private consortium, involving AEG, Siemens and Thyssen Industrie, the
three initial project partners, as well as Lufthansa, the national airline,
and the German railways, will borrow DM3.3bn to set up the operating
company.
Mr Matthias Wissmann, transport minister, said the plan would give Germany a
clear technological advantage over its international rivals in Japan and the
US.
'We will not allow ourselves to be overtaken in this,' he said. 'Germany
urgently needs economic and technological symbols like the Transrapid. We
cannot allow it to happen - as so often in the past - that technology
developed in Germany is undermined by the doubters in the republic.'
Environmental groups have criticised the system as intrusive and far from
silent, urging the government instead to develop traditional rail
technology.
Transport analysts have argued that the passenger forecasts of up to 14.5m a
year - eight times the present number travelling by rail between Berlin and
Hamburg - are grossly optimistic.
Mr Wissmann yesterday dismissed the doubters, saying that the project would
create 10,000 new jobs. He insisted that the state was not providing any
financial guarantees to the private sector investors. 'The state will only
be responsible for the tracks.'
The 'maglev' train is based on technology originally developed in Germany
and granted a patent in 1933. A new push to make the technology viable has
been financed with government grants since 1977.
The trains are intended to run every 10 minutes between the two cities, and
would be held on a magnetic cushion above the monorail. It would make less
noise than a Volkswagen minibus, supporters said.
