FT  18 FEB 94 / S African right seeks improved ANC offer: Buthelezi attacks
concessions as 'cheap politicking'
The African National Congress was last night preparing to give more details
of its proposed constitutional concessions in an effort to avert a violent
boycott of South Africa's all-race elections in April.
Although rightwing leaders initially rejected the ANC offer as a 'publicity
stunt', they appeared to keep open the possibility of further talks.
Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, leader of the Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom party,
condemned the proposals unveiled on Wednesday night, saying they represented
no more than 'cheap politicking on life and death issues'.
However, he said later he would take part in elections if the ANC 'walks the
extra mile' to improve its offer. Mr Nelson Mandela, ANC leader, and
President FW de Klerk said they did not believe Chief Buthelezi's comments
were a final rejection.
The ANC is offering stronger powers for the country's provinces, and
separate ballots to elect provincial and national representatives. Mr
Mandela said it might give further concessions in an attempt to persuade
Chief Buthelezi and white rightwing leaders to drop their threat to boycott
the elections.
Speaking in The Hague before talks with Mr Ruud Lubbers, Dutch prime
minister, he took a conciliatory line. 'In a case where you are trying to
build a new country there can be no last concessions,' he said. 'We want an
inclusive process and we will do everything in our power to ensure that
everybody participates.'
Inkatha's main objection to the proposals is that they do not go far enough
to strengthen the powers of provincial governments, although they do
guarantee that the powers set out in the 1993 constitution will be protected
against future interference by an ANC-dominated constituent assembly.
The ANC was last night still drawing up detailed proposals, making it
difficult to judge the exact extent of the concessions offered. But
government and ANC officials admitted that Inkatha's demand for strengthened
provincial powers was only partly dealt with.
Political analysts said they believed the ANC was making a genuine effort to
accommodate Inkatha and the white right, but without compromising its
primary goal of ensuring that a strong central government is able to enforce
its economic plans throughout the country.
ANC officials hope that, even if Chief Buthelezi rejects the offer, they may
split the right and persuade moderate rightwingers, such as Gen Constand
Viljoen, an Afrikaner leader, to participate. Gen Viljoen has agreed to meet
the ANC today.
Mr Derek Keys, finance minister, said the South African economy could grow 3
to 4 per cent this year, after 1.1 per cent growth last year ended a
four-year recession.
Editorial Comment, Page 17
