FT  25 JUL 94 / Insurer told to test staff competence
The salesforce of Royal Insurance, one of the largest insurance companies,
will tomorrow sit examinations to assess their professional competence at
the request of Lautro, the industry's regulator.
Royal Insurance's decision to re-test its 1,000-strong salesforce on their
knowledge of products and the financial services market follows a visit by
Lautro in May, which found weaknesses in the company's training schemes.
Lautro, which will run further checks in the autumn, asked Royal Insurance
to re-assess its salesforce and strengthen its supervisory programmes.
Mr Don Shore, deputy managing director of Royal Life, the group's life arm,
said: 'They wanted us to get an up-to-date knowledge of the strengths and
weaknesses of the salesforce.'
He said that the request to speed up the company's reassessment programme
reflected weaknesses in the training scheme rather than problems with the
salesforce. There had been no suggestion of aggressive or misleading sales
practices, he said.
Mr Shore said that he did not expect many to fail the examinations as the
staff had all passed similar tests last year.
Royal Insurance's move highlights increased vigilance by regulators about
standards of selling in the life insurance and pensions industry. The
industry has been accused of using high-pressure sales techniques to
persuade customers to buy unsuitable products.
Barclays Life, the life insurance and pensions subsidiary of Barclays Bank,
was publicly rebuked last week by the Securities and Investments Board, the
City watchdog, for shortcomings in the training and management of its
salesforce.
Nationwide Building Society also announced last week that it was temporarily
withdrawing its financial services salesforce for retraining. The move
followed a routine visit by Lautro.
In March Norwich Union, one of the largest insurers, suspended its entire
life and pensions salesforce for a month after Lautro identified
shortcomings in management controls.
The controversy about the industry's standards of selling appears to have
affected sales. Recent figures from the Association of British Insurers
showed that sales of single-premium personal pensions dropped sharply in the
first quarter of the year.
