FT  07 MAR 94 / FT Guide to the Week
7 MONDAY
Kazakhstan holds elections
Kazakhstan's voters choose a federal parliament and local councils. The
former Soviet republic, almost half of whose population is Russian, has
steered a careful course under President Nursultan Nazarbayev (above). Rich
in energy, but yet to exploit its reserves, it has seen big falls in living
standards and a rise in ethnic tensions.
President Nazarbayev has called for votes for parties which 'have shown an
understanding of the real problems of the country and are striving to find a
solution', which means those backing him. They will probably win a solid
majority and support his so far benign authoritarianism.
Tuzla airport
Tuzla airport in north-central Bosnia is expected to re-open under United
Nations supervision. Agreement to open the airport, held by Bosnian Serbs,
who are also besieging the Moslem-held city, was secured by the UN and
Moscow last week. It will facilitate the delivery of food convoys.
BIS meeting
Central bank governors from the G10 countries gather in Basle to discuss
international monetary trends, under the auspices of the Bank for
International Settlements. They will discuss the current volatility of bond
and equity markets, and concerns about the activities of US hedge funds
which take bets on markets in the hope of making big short-term gains.
Foreign Affairs ministers of the European Union
Foreign Affairs ministers of the European Union, meeting in Brussels (to Mar
8), will discuss Greece's trade embargo against the former Yugoslav republic
of Macedonia. This will be a sensitive issue, as Greece is chairing the
meeting as EU president.
The European Parliament
The European Parliament begins a week-long plenary session.
Nordic Council
Finland and Sweden's agreement of terms to join the European Union and the
uncertainty of Norway's position will give edge to the meeting of Nordic
leaders when they gather for a regular get-together in Stockholm (to Mar
10).
Liberian civil war
Disarmament of warring factions under the supervision of the Economic
Community of West African States Cease-fire Monitoring Group is scheduled to
begin, but may run into trouble.
Romania's president Ion Iliescu
Romania's president Ion Iliescu begins a one-week visit to Lithuania, South
Korea and China, aiming to boost trade and foreign investment. In South
Korea he will visit Samsung and Goldstar as well as Daewoo which plans to
invest USDollars 400m in the Romanian car industry.
8 TUESDAY
Norway on the brink
European Union foreign ministers, meeting in Brussels, will be hoping they
can iron out the problems that prevented Norway settling terms by the March
1 deadline for an accession deal. Agreement is being held up by disputes
over fish. Spain wants access for its fishing fleet to Norwegian waters,
while Norway is insisting its fishermen be able to sell their catch
throughout the Union.
A deal with Norway would allow the EU to submit an outline agreement with
Finland, Sweden, Austria and Norway to the European Parliament by Thursday.
Accession would still depend on referendums in favour in all four countries.
UK output figures
Economists are looking for a January bounce-back in UK manufacturing output
and industrial production, after December falls in both measures raised
doubts about the strength of the UK recovery.
The consensus is for month-on-month rises of 0.3 and 0.4 per cent
respectively. If the figures are much weaker than that, expect renewed
speculation of further base rate cuts.
Geneva Motor show
Several key models for European vehicle makers will be unveiled at the
Geneva motor show. It has its Press preview today, followed by a trade and
industry day tomorrow. High on the list for attention will be the final
production version of Audi's A8 aluminium lightweight luxury car.
The Geneva show, traditionally one of the best-attended by manufacturers
from all around the world, runs until March 16 inclusive.
Swedish TV float
Applications for shares in the first public flotation by a Swedish
television company start today (to Mar 18). TV4, the country's only
commercial terrestrial channel, is to sell 20 per cent of the company for
SKr400m (Dollars 50m). The 4m shares are priced at SKr100 each and TV4 hopes
to attract 35,000 new investors.
International Women's Day
Holiday in Russia and Ukraine.
FT Survey
Credit Management. With the UK economy emerging from recession, the need for
good credit management is greater than ever.  Historically, a third of
companies that fail do so during recession, but two-thirds go bust as they
emerge from recession. Good credit management can ease the pressure on cash
flow.
Football
Scotland play The Netherlands at Hampden Park, Glasgow.
9 WEDNESDAY
Europe's regions in focus
The European Union's Committee of the Regions holds its inaugural meeting in
Brussels (to Mar 10). The Committee, created by the Maastricht treaty, is
intended to give a consultative voice to Europe's regions.
Its first task is to elect a president. The Belgian Luc van den Brande,
leader of the Flemish regional government, Jacques Blanc, from
Languedoc-Roussillon in France, and Charles Gray, former leader of
Strathclyde council in Scotland, have their hats in the ring. But rivalry
between the first two may bring forward a Catalan candidate, either Pasqual
Maragall, the mayor of Barcelona, or Jordi Pujol, president of the
autonomous government of Catalonia.
US-Japan trade
US secretary of state Warren Christopher (left) begins a visit to Japan (to
Mar 11). The main topic on the agenda will be trade. The atmosphere will be
tenser, following the decision of the Clinton administration to revive its
Super 301 trade weapon.
Cambodia
Cambodia's two prime ministers, Prince Norodom Ranariddh and his junior
partner Hun Sen, begin a visit to Japan to attend an international
conference on Cambodian economic reconstruction (to Mar 12). They will meet
prime minister Morihiro Hosokawa and representatives of the Keidanren
business federation.
Hong Kong
Hong Kong's government tables the second of Governor Chris Patten's
political reform bills. This bill, seen as the more contentious, seeks to
broaden the democratic franchise and relates to arrangements for the
colony's Legislative Council elections in 1995.
The European Parliament
The European Parliament votes on legislation to establish minimum European
Union standards for car emissions by 1996. The parliamentary environmental
committee is demanding tougher standards, which could delay the legislation.
The vote is expected to be close.
German pay talks
Some 3.5m public sector workers begin their next round of pay talks in
Stuttgart.
Off the peak
UK chatterboxes will be celebrating, as BT and Mercury, the two biggest
carriers, abolish their peak rate charges for calls between 9am and 1pm on
weekdays. Both companies will have a daytime rate from 8am to 6pm and an
off-peak rate from 6pm until 8am.
Football
England play Denmark at Wembley Stadium, London. Wales play Norway at Ninian
Park, Cardiff.
10 THURSDAY
China's Peoples' Congress
About 3,000 delegates gather in Beijing for the annual session of China's
National People's Congress, the country's closest equivalent to a
parliament. The Congress will endorse fundamental changes already under way
in the financial system, including tax and banking reform.
Two things, however, will not be far from delegates' minds: the frail
appearance last month of Deng Xiaoping, China's patriarch; and fears that
the economic boom might be getting out of hand. Beijing is trying to win
back financial and macro-economic control from provincial capitals after
several years of helter-skelter growth.
EU enlargement
The European Parliament has said it must receive by today details of the
membership deals the European Union has negotiated with Austria, Sweden,
Finland - and possibly Norway, if it manages to conclude negotiations in
time.
The draft acts of accession are due for discussion by the foreign affairs
committee before the parliament votes on their texts, probably in May.
Parliament must approve the package before the applicants can join the
Union.
Czech mate
Vaclav Klaus, prime minister of the Czech Republic, will sign a Partnership
for Peace at Nato headquarters in Brussels, forging closer military links
with the Atlantic alliance. The Czechs will be the 10th state from eastern
Europe and the former Soviet Union to sign up.
Macedonia embargo
Greek foreign minister, Carolos Papoulias, holds talks in Geneva with Cyrus
Vance, the UN mediator in Greece's dispute with Macedonia over its name.
Greece is under pressure both from the UN and its European Union partners to
drop a trade ban against the former Yugoslav republic and resume dialogue
with its neighbour.
Anglo-Irish intergovernmental conference
An Anglo-Irish intergovernmental conference takes place in London. Patrick
Mayhew, Britain's Northern Ireland secretary, and Dick Spring, the Irish
foreign minister, will meet to discuss the state of the peace initiative,
against the background of continuing prevarication by Sinn Fein and the
decision of the Ulster Unionists not to talk to the Irish government before
a devolved Northern Ireland assembly was set up.
Parade of pampered pooches
Dog lovers and breeders will be converging on the National Exhibition
Centre, Birmingham, for the start of Cruft's Dog Show, the UK's leading
judging competition. They can look forward to four days of comparing notes
and weighing up the finer points.
Holiday
South Korea (Labour Day).
11 FRIDAY
Frei takes over in Chile
Chile's long democratic tradition will be fully restored when President
Patricio Aylwin hands over power to fellow Christian Democrat Eduardo Frei,
elected last December. The changeover will end a painful period of Chilean
history which saw 17 years of military rule after a coup led by General
Augusto Pinochet in 1973.
President Aylwin has been credited with overseeing a remarkably smooth
four-year transition, during which the economy grew by 28 per cent.
Warren Christopher
Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, arrives in Beijing for an
official visit (to Mar 14). He will warn that billions of dollars in trade
are in jeopardy because of China's human rights record.
The Liberal Democrats
The Liberal Democrats, Britains' centre party, start their spring conference
in Cardiff (to Mar 13). With the ruling Tories unpopular and in disarray,
and the opposition Labour Party distrusted by many voters, the Lib-Dems can
hope to hold the balance of power in a hung parliament after the next
general election.
Holiday
Indonesian New Year.
12-13 WEEKEND
Lower Saxony votes
Germany's seven-month spate of elections begins on Sunday with the contest
for the state parliament of Lower Saxony. The leftwing SPD, currently ruling
in coalition with the Greens, hopes to win enough votes to rule on its own.
The main question for federal chancellor Helmut Kohl's rightwing CDU is how
badly it will fare. The liberal FDP, ruling in coalition with the CDU in the
federal government, may not reach the 5 per cent threshold needed to win
seats at all.
Austria's provinces
Austria's provinces of Carinthia, Tyrol and Salzburg hold elections for
their assemblies on Sunday. The vote will test the public reaction to the
county's accession deal with the European Union.
Women priests
Saturday sees the first ordination in Britain of women priests into the
Church of England. The ceremony takes place at Bristol Cathedral in presence
of visiting clergy from around world.
Sunday is Mothering Sunday.
Compiled by Patrick Stiles.
Fax: (+44) (0)71 873 3194.
