FT  31 MAY 94 / Technology: Pizza on a PC - The computer, rather than the
television, will become our 'window on the world'
As viewers await the impact of multimedia technology, they want to know what
sort of programmes and services they will be offered.
But equipment providers have another concern: which receivers will be used -
personal computers or televisions? One company with no doubt is Intel, the
world's largest semiconductor company and the leading supplier of
microprocessor chips to the PC industry.
'There are close to 8m interactive PCs, linked to on-line services, in US
homes today and precisely zero interactive TVs in US homes,' says Andrew
Grove, Intel chief executive. He believes the PC rather than the TV set will
be the primary receiver of new interactive services in the home.
While Grove expects the TV to remain the 'home theatre', the home PC will
become a 'window on to the world' bringing myriad interactive services into
the home.
Over the next 12 months, Intel will begin trials of technology developed
with General Instruments that links the home PC to cable TV networks. These
so-called PC-cable adapters will enable signals to be delivered to PCs at up
to 1,000 times the speed of today's fastest telephone line modems.
Intel and GI recently announced agreements with two of the biggest North
American cable TV companies, Telecommunications Inc and Rogers Cablesystems
of Canada, to develop cable to PC multimedia services. These follow similar
agreements with two smaller companies, Viacom and Comcast Cable.
Although the cable TV industry's efforts to develop interactive services
have been focused primarily on the TV set, there is a growing body of
opinion in the US high-tech industry that the interactive home PC market
will develop much faster than interactive TV.
'The cable television industry has recognised that there are two devices in
the home that can generate revenues - the TV and the PC,' says Avram Miller,
Intel's vice president of business development. The TV is clearly better
suited to 'video-on-demand' services that enable viewers to select from a
large library of films, Intel acknowledges. 'You are not going to watch
Casablanca on a PC,' says Grove.
However, the company is convinced that the PC has several advantages for
services that require higher levels of interaction, such as home shopping,
personal news on demand, multimedia games and information services.
One advantage of the PC is that it has a higher definition display so that
users see truer colours, texture and detail than on a TV screen. This is
critical for the display of text and may also prove important in home
shopping applications. 'You can't tell the mushrooms from the anchovy on a
TV screen' when ordering a pizza, complains Miller.
More importantly, perhaps, the superior data processing power of a PC
enables more sophisticated services such as personal financial and travel
planning, interactive catalogue shopping or access to the Internet's global
networks.
With its built-in processing power the PC also eliminates the need for
expensive new 'TV set top boxes' that consumers will have to buy or lease
from the cable TV company to use interactive TV services. 'The beauty of the
PC-cable technology is that most of the investment is already made; the PCs
are here, the cable is here and multimedia applications are being developed.
The connection of the PCs to the cable system will create a brand new medium
with applications and services for the whole family,' says Miller.
The US cable industry already has broadband networks reaching some 60m US
households, the Intel executives point out, and the proliferation of PCs in
US homes has created a market ripe for development of new services.
Some 24m US households own PCs and sales are booming. Home PC sales reached
a record 6.5m units in the US last year, about half going to first-time
buyers and close to 20 per cent to purchasers who want more than one PC in
their homes, according to Intel's market research.
Also, US home PC buyers are choosing high-performance machines well suited
to multimedia services in record numbers. Close to half the PCs containing
Intel's latest Pentium processors are going to home buyers.
The combination of 'a lightning-fast communications network, like cable,
connected to lightning-fast PCs, like those with Intel Pentium
microprocessors, will create a fertile environment for multimedia-rich
services and software for the PC,' says Grove.
The demographics of home computer owners make them an especially attractive
market for multimedia services. In US households with annual income of more
than Dollars 75,000, about 50 per cent own PCs and the average annual income
of home PC owners is more than Dollars 35,000. The overlap with the 60m US
homes that have cable TV service is also high.
Another factor giving PCs an edge over TV sets is that while traditional
'media' industries such as film and television producers are struggling to
come to terms with interactive technology, the computer software industry is
spawning dozens of entrepreneurial companies developing interactive
programming for the PC. Intel provides seed funds for a few such ventures.
To prime the PC-cable market, Intel has also reached agreements with several
computer on-line services, including Prodigy and America-On-Line, to deliver
new interactive services for PCs via cable networks. These companies will
begin testing their services on US cable systems in the next few months,
offering programs ranging from travel planning to catalogue shopping,
financial services and software distribution.
By 1998, interactive home computer services could be generating annual
revenues of up to Dollars 6bn in North America, Miller predicts. He sees
three sources of revenues for this nascent industry: consumer subscriptions,
fees from companies offering on-line transaction services, and advertisers,
who are expected to create 'infomercial' services such as travel guides.
Will the PC ever push the TV out of the living room? Probably not, says
Grove. If Intel has its way, however, the home PC will become almost as
ubiquitous as the TV set. The company expects about 50m PCs to be in use in
US homes in one to two years and world PC production to overtake TV
production by the end of 1995 or early 1996.
