FT  18 MAR 94 / 600 more jobs to go in retail shakeout
WH Smith, the UK retail and distribution group, expects to shed up to 600
staff as part of a restructuring plan in its stores that will cut the number
of management layers from four to two.
In a further example of the shift towards part-time working in the retail
sector, WH Smith will take on an extra 400 part-time sales staff under the
plan. The company said it hoped that the majority of the redundancies would
be voluntary.
The announcement is the latest in a series of job losses in the retail
sector, including 800 at Tesco, the UK's second-biggest grocery chain, and
650 at J. Sainsbury, Britain's biggest grocer.
WH Smith is halving the number of store management staff - cutting 954 jobs
 -by abolishing the positions of deputy, assistant and departmental manager
throughout its 500 stores.
They will be replaced by new customer service/support managers as the second
tier of management, and 600 non-management customer service leaders who will
be responsible for leading teams of sales assistants.
The company said that it hoped to redeploy and relocate many of the managers
involved, but it estimated that up to 600 were likely to take redundancy.
The group said: 'The structure of the business has not really changed for 10
years, although we have introduced many new systems in that time.
'A lot of job titles did not reflect the reality of life now. The really
urgent need was to get more pairs of hands onto the sales floor.'
WH Smith said it had consulted extensively with its staff on changes during
the past year, and the new structure aimed both to improve customer service
and to increase productivity.
Annual savings once the new structure is in place are estimated at Pounds
2.4m.
WH Smith will make a Pounds 6m provision to cover redundancy costs in its
1993-94 annual accounts.
The supermarket group Sainsbury, in addition to the 650 job losses announced
in its head and area offices last Friday, has a similar pilot programme
involving stripping out layers of management in 25 stores.
