FT  22 FEB 94 / Commons majority against hanging grows
MPs rejected a demand for the return of hanging for all murderers aged over
18 by a massive 244 majority (403-159)in a free vote in the Commons last
night.
It was the biggest setback suffered by the pro-hanging lobby since capital
punishment was abolished in 1965, and in effect removes the issue from the
political agenda at Westminster.
An attempt to amend the criminal justice and public order bill to provide
for the reintroduction of hanging for all murders of police officers was
defeated by a majority of 197 (383-186).
The votes followed a blunt warning by Mr Michael Howard, the home secretary,
that miscarriages of justice could result in innocent parties being hanged.
In a mainly low-key debate, advocates of the restoration of capital
punishment highlighted the growing number of elderly people being murdered
in their own homes.
They also cited the rise in the number of police officers killed while
investigating robberies and other crimes as further evidence that life
imprisonment was not an effective deterrent to murder.
Mr Howard, who had consistently voted for the return of the death penalty
until 1990, described how the overturning of the convictions for terrorist
pub-bombings of the so-called 'Birmingham six' had changed his mind.
He also quoted the case of Mr Stephan Kiszko, convicted when he confessed to
the murder of a schoolgirl and released after 15 years imprisonment when
forensic tests proved he could not have been her killer.
Mr Howard said miscarriages of justice were a 'blot on civilised society'.
He endorsed the view of Lord Taylor of Gosforth, the lord chief justice,
that it would be wrong for MPs to seek to require the judges of the court of
appeal to decide which types of murder should be punished by the death
penalty.
Mr Howard said 'I do not think it is right for parliament to hand over to
others this responsibility. The decision must be ours to take.'
Acknowledging that support among the police for the view that criminals were
now more ready to use firearms in pursuit of crime, he reaffirmed his
acceptance of the need for a strong deterrent for the murder of police
officers.
He stressed: 'Those responsible serve as a minimum 20 years in prison. Many
will serve much longer than that. Some will remain in prison for the rest of
their lives.'
Mr Tony Blair, shadow home secretary, agreed with Mr Howard that the most
powerful argument against restoration of the death penalty was the risk
'that we kill the innocent through a miscarriage of justice'.
