FT  04 MAY 94 / Survey of Greater Philadelphia (11): Best hope for replacing
lost jobs - Tourism is the centre-piece of a programme to stimulate the
economy
For many tourists, Philadelphia is just a sign on the motorway, a place to
drive by on their way to New York, Washington or Baltimore.
Even though more than 10m people from outside the area visited the city last
year, spending nearly Dollars 500m, local officials have recognised that
Philadelphia is falling well short of its potential as a holiday and
business destination.
The issue is not just a matter of civic pride. Mayor Edward Rendell wants to
bring in more visitors, because the travel and leisure industry represents
Philadelphia's best hope of replacing some of an estimated 11,000 jobs lost
every year as companies restructure or move elsewhere. Since 1970, the
city's employment base has contracted by 240,000.
To stem the tide, Mr Rendell has made tourism the centre-piece of an
ambitious economic stimulus programme unveiled earlier this year. In his
1994 budget proposal, he earmarked some Dollars 420m for projects to lure
more visitors to the city. He says he is committed to helping Philadelphia
take 'its place as one of America's premiere destination cities'.
'By necessity, tourism has to be one of the pillars of the city's economy,'
says Thomas Muldoon, head of the Philadelphia Convention &amp; Visitors Bureau.
'We have to figure out how to make people stay longer and spend more.'
There is nothing wrong with the basic product. Unlike Cleveland or
Pittsburgh, it is not perceived as a grimy industrial town on the wane.
Indeed, its downtown streets are lined with graceful 18th century townhouses
and arresting post-modern office towers, forming a sprawling showcase of
American architecture.
Unlike Detroit or Miami, the city of brotherly love does not suffer from a
image as a crime capital. Rather, it is perceived as a place of civility and
charm, a modern urban centre still tightly bound to its Quaker traditions.
Yet its sports fans are notorious for their irascibility. Whenever its four
professional sports teams fail to measure up, the home crowd is sure to boo
mercilessly. In baseball, the Phillies exemplified the city's scrappy
sporting tradition, going from worst to first in their league last season.
As a centre of history, the city has always stood top of the table. It is
bursting at the seams with landmarks. The Liberty Bell, the symbol of
America's fledgling democracy, and Independence Hall, where the Declaration
of Independence was adopted and the US constitution written, form the core
of 'America's most historic square mile'.
Philadelphia is also home of the country's third largest art museum, the
world's leading symphony orchestra in terms of record sales, and seven out
of 50 of the best restaurants in the US, according to a recent survey of
Conde Naste Traveler's readers.
In short, Philadelphia is one of the most interesting places on the east
coast. So where has it gone wrong? 'Philadelphia's basic problem is that it
suffers from a lack of image,' says Mr RC Staab, a senior tourism official.
'People don't necessarily know why they should come here.'
Mr Rendell intends to get the word out. The 'capstone' of his strategy is
already in place, with the opening last summer of the Dollars 500m
Philadelphia Convention Center, build with public and private funding. The
second phase of the complex, the restored Reading Terminal Train Shed, was
completed this spring. The huge, hangar-like structure, which stands
alongside the main convention hall, houses a grand ballroom and a bustling
farmers' market.
The centre itself, the second largest convention hall on the east coast, is
designed to serve two functions.
First, the city is confident it will become a magnet for conventioneers,
eventually attracting some 500,000 visitors a year. The economic impact of
this 'critical mass' of visitors will spill over into the entire leisure
industry, says Mr Staab. 'Historically, an increase in meetings and
conventions in a city leads to an increase in tourism.'
Bookings are already running well ahead of projections. Mr Muldoon says the
centre's early success in part reflects in its prime location two blocks
from the elaborate Victorian city hall, the geographic and commercial centre
of Philadelphia.
Therein lies the complex's second function. 'What this convention center
becomes is a focal point for the city,' Mr Muldoon says. 'The key was to put
it in the middle of the city,' in contrast to New York's Jacob Javits
Center, which is situated at the western fringe of Manhattan.
Blending warmly with the weathered brick and granite facades of central
Philadelphia, the complex stands at the crossroads linking all the city's
leading tourist sites, a 'loop' of attractions which the mayor hopes to bind
together in a package.
To the east, lies the downtown historical district. A few blocks west is a
parade of museums along the Benjamin Franklin Parkway.
A short walk to the south is the 'Avenue of the Arts', where the city has
embarked on a Dollars 300m programme to create a performing-arts complex
along a mile-long stretch of South Broad street. The idea is to build on an
existing base of cultural institutions along the corridor, including the
celebrated Philadelphia orchestra and the Pennsylvania ballet.
The scheme, to be financed by public and private money, involves the
construction of new concert halls and theatres, and the renovation of
others. Mr Rendell estimates the avenue, when completed, will double the
number of visitors along Broad street to 1.6n a year and create 1,600 jobs.
But the plan has raised some controversy. Two of the city's leading
philanthropists are opposing Mr Rendell's proposal to move the orchestra
into a new Dollars 140m concert hall. Its current home, the 137-year-old
Academy of Music, is to be used for opera and ballet performances after it
is restored.
Other aspects of the mayor's master plan have ruffled feathers as well,
especially his method of financing the construction of at least 800 new
hotel rooms. They are considered essential for the long-term success of the
convention center, and ultimately the future of the city's tourism industry.
Mr Rendell has pledged Dollars 90m in public funds for new hotels over the
next five years, with the aim of attracting another Dollars 100m in private
financing. The extra space would complement the 1,200-room Philadelphia
Marriott, the third phase of the convention complex, due to open next year.
The problem is that the mayor intends to pay for the hotels in part with
money generated by riverboat gambling, which the state legislature is
expected to approve this year.
Critics say the floating casinos would lead to more crime along the
waterfront and, more important, besmirch the city's image as 'the cradle of
democracy'.
But city officials are steadfast in their defence of the proposal. With
gaming restricted to riverboats, they argue, the social problems associated
with Las Vegas-style casinos would not develop. With a motorway separating
the waterfront from the historic old city, the presence of floating casinos
would not overwhelm the neighbouring districts.
'We don't think it will detract from the character of the area,' says
Stephen Mullin, Philadelphia's director of commerce. 'As a matter of fact,
we think it will add a new dimension, bringing another exciting activity to
the city.'
