FT  05 FEB 94 / Honda's technology controls threaten Rover deal
A tense poker game over the future of Rover Group was developing yesterday
between the company's Japanese partner, Honda, and BMW, the German carmaker
which has agreed to buy the British group for Pounds 800m.
New uncertainty over the controversial deal, which left Honda bitterly
angry, emerged as it became clear that the Japanese company retains a
stranglehold over some of Rover's key models, including the new 600.
Far frombeing an outraged but helpless bystander at the sale of the British
partner, with which it has developed close ties over 15 years, it is
understood that Honda has tight licensing agreements with Rover that place
strict limits on the use the British company may make of the technology used
in its most successful models.
Should Honda, which still retains 20 per cent of the British carmaker,
decide to end the partnership, Rover could be obliged to stop production of
the key 600 and 400 ranges as well as its own 2-litre engines within three
months, or at least until they could be expensively re-engineered to remove
licensed Honda components.
BMW, which carried out its inspection of the Rover groupbefore authorising
the Pounds 800m investment in an unusually short time by motor industry
standards, said yesterday it was aware of the potentially problematic
licensing agreements.
BMW executives also acknowledged that a Honda pull-outwould inflict enormous
damage on Rover. But the company is proceeding with the purchase in the
apparent belief that the loss to Honda of an estimated Pounds 400m annual
revenue from parts sales and other elements of the collaboration will
prevent the Japanese company from taking the step.
'If they think that, theyreally are gambling,' retorted a spokesman for
Honda Motor Europe.
BMWreceived some comfort from Honda yesterday when Mr Nobuhiko Kawamoto,
Honda's president, insisted that his company was not seeking to precipitate
an immediate crisis.
He brushed aside suggestions that Honda's relationship with Rover was over
and said the company would consider any proposals from BMW. However, he
believed Honda's relationship with Rover was unlikely to come to an end
overnight.
Both companies are still manoeuvring to gain the maximum advantage from this
latest shake-up in the motor industry.
Rumours that Honda was preparing a counter-offer to the BMW deal played a
part in the sharp rise yesterday in the shares of Rover's parent company,
BAe, helped by news ofa Pounds 250m decks-clearing write-off on its
turboprop leasing business. By last night Honda had denied any prospect of a
counter-offer.
'It is our principle that Rover, which is the last UK car company, should be
controlled mainly by British people,' Mr Kawamoto stressed in explaining why
Honda decided against buying outright the UK carmaker.
Mr Kawamoto, making Honda's first substantive response to the intended
takeover - which has still to be approved by BAe shareholders - said Honda
had been approached by BAe with the possibility of buying the company but
had turned down the offer.
'We are notin the position to take the initiative on Rover so we would like,
first of all,to hear what (BMW) have to say,' Mr Kawamoto noted. 'There are
so many possibilities, we cannot make any decisions about our relationship
with Rover until wehear from BMW.'
Takingthe rough with the smooth, Page 6
