FT  09 APR 94 / Defender of business interests tipped as Japan's next
premier: Reform crusader Tsutomu Hata seen as only option for top office
Mr Tsutomu Hata, 58, the man tipped last night as frontrunner to be Japan's
next prime minister, can be expected to steer the government slightly to the
right.
As finance minister for the previous Liberal Democratic party government,
for a year to December 1992, he won a reputation for being a solid defender
of business interests. For that reason, the financial markets would greet Mr
Hata's promotion to leadership with enthusiasm.
Mr Hata, currently foreign minister and deputy prime minister, was discreet
about his ambitions last night, saying he would prefer to be a
behind-the-scenes arbitrator in the seven-party coalition than lead it.
However, many coalition members, including the moderate wing of the
Socialist party, believe Mr Hata is the only option.
He could, however, become vulnerable to the suggestions of corruption that
brought down Mr Morihiro Hosokawa. He was once a member of the LDP faction
run by Mr Shin Kanemaru, the party's political godfather, who resigned two
years ago after admitting receiving illegal donations from Sagawa Kyubin,
the same trucking company said to have lent money to Mr Hosokawa.
Mr Hata is now dedicated to turning his back on the old LDP days and the old
style of politics, and is instead a prime mover of the campaign to banish
corruption and promote political reform.
He started his crusade in a spectacular manner, by leading an LDP
parliamentary revolt last June. His followers backed an opposition
no-confidence vote in the former government of Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, so
bringing down the LDP.
Mr Hata then left the LDP to form the Japan Renewal party - which sets the
tone for coalition economic policy and is its second-largest member  - with
Mr Ichiro Ozawa, another former Kanemaru faction member, who is now the
government's behind-the-scenes strategist. Both Mr Ozawa and Mr Hata believe
in increasing the power of the offices of prime minister and parliament, to
the detriment of Japan's influential bureaucracy.
They also want the present multiplicity of parties and political groups to
rationalise into two stable alliances of centre right and centre left,
similar to the US model of Republican and Democratic parties.
Mr Hata dubbed himself the 'salaried worker MP' to enhance his image as a
man of the people, though his family had a history of involvement in
politics. The original defection from the LDP was founded on his belief that
Japan would not be genuinely democratic until the political system became
more responsive to popular needs and less influenced by the whims of LDP
factions.
'Reform will help to nurture real political parties, and it will help Japan
to develop a more independent foreign policy and to take diplomatic
initiatives,' he said.
If Japan's coalition leaders do decide to put Mr Hata in the driving seat,
he has the edge over Mr John Major, the British premier, in one respect. Mr
Hata started his career as a bus conductor, a job for which Mr Major was
once rejected.
