FT  16 MAY 94 / China tries to cure stock market ills
China is postponing new stock listings in an attempt to ensure that
companies seeking investment from the public are sound, and it wants to
increase the role of investment funds to calm its volatile stock markets.
The official Xinhua news-agency reported that a considerable portion of the
stocks scheduled to be issued this year to local investors, known as
A-shares, will be postponed to 1995.
China had planned to issue about Yn5.5bn (Pounds 418m) of A-shares in 1994
to enliven its flagging securities markets, which have fallen sharply in the
last year. The postponement does not affect B-shares, denominated in dollars
for foreign investors.
Government authorities, who have also sought to impose stricter discipline
on the country's futures exchanges, are seeking to rebuild public confidence
in the stock market.
Disillusioned Chinese investors have been deserting the two stock exchanges,
in Shanghai and Shenzhen, in droves for bonds and other securities. The
shift has come as many newly listed companies have not met expectations.
The State Council Securities Committee said the development of China's stock
market should be conducted on a 'step by step basis'. It said that, in
future, companies planning public offerings would be obliged to accept
'six-month-long coaching by relevant departments'.
Meanwhile, stock issuing quotas allocated to local governments for this year
will be delayed until 1995, the committee said.
The government also plans to strengthen its supervision to 'prevent market
manipulation and insider trading'.
The authorities will encourage the development of investment funds and it is
hoped these will become the 'backbone of the future stock market'.
Lack of a strong institutional presence in the markets, which have been
dominated by individual investors, has contributed to their volatility.
China has not yet promulgated a national securities law which is presently
in its seventh draft. Market managers in the Shanghai and Shenzen exchanges
say a new national law is require urgently to help rebuild confidence.
Last week, the government announced that it would increase the number of
B-share listings to enhance activity in that market. At the end of 1993,
some 42 companies' B-shares were being traded.
