FT  19 JAN 94 / Switzerland catches no chill being out in the cold: The
benefits of staying outside the EEA have outweighed the disadvantages so
far,
one looking at the maps of western Europe published to mark the creation of
the European Economic Area on January 1 cannot help but notice an anomaly.
There it is - Switzerland - smack in the middle of western Europe, but the
only country in the region not to have joined the world's largest free trade
area.
A year ago, most economic pundits, both inside and outside the country,
warned that the arrogant Swiss would pay heavily for their rejection of EEA
membership in a December 1992 referendum.
Today, the Swiss appear to be having the last laugh. The country's role as a
financial haven has enjoyed a new lease on life in the past year and any
trade disadvantages arising from remaining outside the EEA may well be
offset by benefits from the Uruguay Round multilateral trade accord and the
planned introduction of value added tax.
Switzerland has avoided having to pay Ecu174m (Pounds 137m) to the European
Union's cohesion fund, its share of the donation the countries in the
European Free Trade Association agreed to make as a condition of forming the
EEA.
Moreover, current negative trends, such as low investment, rising
unemployment and weak exports, can be attributed to factors unrelated to EEA
membership, such as increasing competition from eastern European countries
or the depressed state of key export markets, especially Germany.
'I am not unhappy with the situation at all,' says Mr Hans Kaufmann, chief
economist at Bank Julius Baer in Zurich. Other economists acknowledge that
Switzerland has not suffered much yet, but believe the country faces a tough
future. Some 60 per cent of its exports are sent into the EEA.
'There are already signs of passive discrimination against Swiss exports to
EEA countries,' says Mr Alois Bischofberger, chief economist of Credit
Suisse, 'and it is becoming more difficult for Swiss to get work permits in
Germany.'
Mr Christophe Kollreuter, head of the Basle Business Cycle Research Group
(BAK), fears that when business investment recovers, Switzerland will fare
much worse than member countries. He believes Swiss manufacturers will
prefer to put their new plants inside the EEA.
Mr Kaufmann, however, argues that EEA-based companies may want to set up
offices in convenient, independent Switzerland so their international
activities are beyond EEA jurisdiction.
Certainly some international investors were relieved that the long arm of
Brussels would not soon be reaching into their Swiss bank accounts. It is
hard to assess the extent to which the EEA rejection influenced the huge
flow of foreign funds into safe-haven Swiss banks last year. The main causes
seem to have been the turbulence in the European monetary system, tax
increases in Germany and political tensions in Italy. But, whatever the
cause, the inflow allowed Swiss interest rates to fall more quickly than
those in Germany, helping to ease recessionary forces in the country.
Mr Kaufmann says that even if Switzerland's independence accounted for only
a tenth of the foreign private capital placed in the country, that would be
enough to add some SFr700m (Pounds 322m) of value to the economy: 'It would
not be easy to make that up elsewhere.'
The costs of new barriers to exporting to the EEA could also be largely
offset by the introduction of value added tax next year. VAT will replace a
turnover tax that has penalised exporters; Mr Kaufmann estimates it will add
1-2 per cent to manufacturers' export margins.
One fear arising from the EEA rejection was that the European Union would
refuse to negotiate bilateral trade deals with Switzerland. But last month,
the two concluded an agreement on rules of origin, giving Switzerland about
90 per cent of the advantages of EEA membership in the area of customs and
tariffs.
This agreement proves to some extent the argument of anti-EEA Swiss that the
Union has no interest in making life difficult for its second largest
trading partner. But Swiss trade officials point out that this was a case
that enabled both sides to avoid immense amounts of red tape.
They expect things will not be so easy over issues where Switzerland is the
supplicant, as in seeking equal rights for Swissair in EEA open skies.
Such potential problems, however, are not enough to create a sense of
urgency about reversing last year's momentous decision; opinion polls
indicate that a small majority would still vote to stay out.
In a recent foreign policy white paper, the government foresaw no new
initiatives in the near future. At the least, it would wait for referendums
on joining the EU expected in the next year or so in Austria, Sweden,
Finland and Norway. Depending on their outcomes, Switzerland might want to
try again to join the EEA or might apply directly for European Union
membership.
