FT  30 APR 94 / Leading Article: The high yen vice
As soon as a theory of exchange rate determination is generally accepted as
true, events prove it false. This seems to be an iron law of economic life.
Once upon a time changes in trade balances were thought to determine
movements in exchange rates. Then money supplies, prospective inflation and
relative interest rates were believed crucial. Thereupon, prospective
returns on real assets seemed decisive. Now the weakness of the US dollar
and strength of the yen suggest that trade flows are again the major factor.
Other explanations for why the yen has nudged its all-time record high
against the US dollar are not easy to find.
Unless investors have taken leave of their senses, a popular non-economic
explanation - shifts in political confidence - can be rejected. President
Clinton's administration may have had its rocky moments, notably over the
Whitewater affair. It will probably have such moments again. But Japan can
barely boast a government at all. Only this week the Social Democratic party
 -angered by their coalition partners' decision to form a new conservative
grouping, led by Mr Tsutomu Hata's Japan Renewal party - walked out of the
coalition. The socialists thereby deprived the government of a parliamentary
majority just hours after it had elected Mr Hata prime minister.
Changed views about the prospects for inflation may provide part of the
explanation for the recent strength of the yen. Japan has virtually no
consumer price inflation, while producer prices have been falling since
November 1992, by 2.2 per cent in the year to February 1994. Such price
declines are likely to continue, partly because of the strength of the yen,
but also because the latest data belie earlier hopes of recovery.
Industrial production
Japan's industrial production, for example, fell 3.1 per cent in the year to
March 1994. Output was up in March itself, but the Ministry of Trade and
Industry has argued it will fall once more in April and May. In March,
housing starts fell for the first time in 22 months, while unemployment rose
to the highest level in seven years. True, the rate stood at 2.6 per cent,
which demonstrates that Japan's economic problems are not quite like those
of anyone else.
Japan's inflation may turn out to be still lower than had earlier been
thought, but US inflation is unlikely to be much higher. The only thing
likely to frighten markets about prospects for US inflation would be foolish
pressure from the administration on the Federal Reserve. The nominations of
Mr Alan Blinder and Ms Janet Yellen, though self-proclaimed pragmatists on
inflation, are hardly likely to scare the horses that much. It may be
revealing, however, that a lower than expected growth rate in the first
quarter led to a small rise in long-term interest rates.
One reason why US prospects for inflation have hardly deteriorated have been
the increases in short-term interest rates imposed by the Federal Reserve
since early this year. Partly because of this and partly because Japanese
short rates fell in the second half of last year, short-term interest rate
differentials have moved in favour of the US dollar, by almost two
percentage points, since mid-1993 and by almost one percentage point since
the beginning of 1994. Yet since mid-1993, the US dollar has failed to
strengthen against the yen and has even weakened in the course of this year.
Fundamental fact
If changes in nominal returns on short-term securities fail to explain the
strength of the yen, those on longer-term assets are also unpersuasive.
Returns on long-term bonds have been negative everywhere, including in
Japan. Japanese equities did rise 19 per cent between early 1994 and
mid-March, while the US market went nowhere. But more recent news suggests
that economic prospects in Japan are deteriorating.
The fundamental fact underlying the relation between the US dollar and the
yen is the persistence and size of the Japanese current account surpluses,
at Dollars 131bn in 1993 and forecast by the International Monetary Fund at
virtually the same level this year and in 1995. Meanwhile, there has been a
pronounced decline in the willingness of Japanese investors to purchase
long-term foreign assets since the late 1980s. This puts the burden of
offsetting the current account surplus on more price sensitive short term
capital flows.
If the current account is the main factor driving the exchange rate, there
is reason to worry. Higher exchange rates have little medium-term effect on
the Japanese surplus. There is a danger of a vicious circle of stagnation,
high current account surpluses, a higher yen and then still more stagnation.
The best way out of the dilemma would be for the Bank of Japan to lower
interest rates and buy US dollars, driving down the yen and expanding the
economy. Unlike the Fed, which intervened yesterday, it could do this
without limit. In practice, it is too frightened by the experience of the
bubble economy to try. So while bureaucrats and politicians fiddle,
prospects for a strong Japanese recovery burn away.
