FT  14 SEP 94 / Toyota to boost vehicle output in N America
Toyota, Japan's largest car manufacturer, is to raise vehicle production in
North America by nearly 50 per cent.
The increase, announced yesterday, is the most dramatic indication yet by a
Japanese vehicle maker of the pressures the Japanese motor industry faces
from a sharply appreciated yen, trade friction with the US and growing
competition from US vehicle manufacturers in the world's biggest car market.
US and Japanese trade officials are holding last-minute negotiations over
how to increase foreign penetration of Japan's vehicle market. The US is
poised to take steps towards imposing sanctions against Japan at the end of
this month unless an agreement can be reached on several trade issues.
US carmakers reacted coolly to Toyota's announcement. Ford said: 'The
important thing is whether they're doing anything to improve the trade
deficit. What would interest us is whether they can increase the amount of
US-sourced material in the vehicles. Up to now, we feel they probably have
less than 50 per cent North American content.'
Toyota also intends to more than double US engine production and increase
vehicle exports from the US by 60 per cent by 1996.
In July, Honda, Japan's third-largest carmaker, announced that it would
spend Dollars 310m (Pounds 198m) on expanding its North American operations
to bolster car and engine manufacturing capacity as well as strengthening
its research and development and sales facilities.
Toyota said yesterday it would raise total North American vehicle production
to 790,000 in 1996, up from 533,000 last year. Eight years ago, production
in North America was only 14,000 vehicles. The boost in production will mean
that more than 60 per cent of the company's US sales will consist of North
American-built vehicles, compared with 46 per cent in 1993.
The increase will come from its manufacturing facility in Kentucky, Toyota
Motor Manufacturing USA (TMM), from New United Motor Manufacturing, its
joint venture with General Motors, and from Toyota Motor Manufacturing
Canada.
The company will not increase existing capacity in North America but will
achieve its target by using a second line at TMM, which came on stream in
March this year, and by raising productivity.
Annual production at TMM will increase from 234,000 last year to 400,000 in
1996.
Toyota's overall engine production in North America will more than double to
440,000 units from 207,000 last year.
Honda's UK output of Civic to double, Page 3
