FT  19 MAR 94 / Pressure for move on Tube deal
A 75-strong group of London companies yesterday launched a campaign to
persuade the Treasury to approve a Pounds 740m leasing deal for new trains
on London Underground's Northern Line.
As they did so Mr Michael Portillo, chief secretary to the Treasury and the
Conservative party's local election campaign co-ordinator for London, tried
to pass blame for uncertainty about the plans to London Underground's
management.
He was speaking after reports that spending ministers and the Treasury were
in disagreement over the proposals and that ministers believed Mr John Major
might have to intervene.
Mr Portilllo said the government had not taken a view on the proposal being
promoted by ABB Transportation, a rolling stock manufacturer. Mr Steven
Norris, transport minister, has told MPs that a decision could come within
days.
Derby-based ABB Transportation has been negotiating with London Underground
for the past five months to secure a deal to build, maintain and operate the
rolling stock. The trains would cost Pounds 440m with a 20-year maintenance
deal worth another Pounds 300m.
The Northern Line Coalition, co-ordinated by London First, a business
initiative to promote the capital, put its weight behind that of Tory MPs
whose constituencies border the line.
The coalition includes groups in banking, law, accountancy, surveying,
catering, health and construction.
Mr Tim Daniels, managing director of Selfridges and president of the Oxford
Street Association, said: 'This decision is vital for the heart of London's
shopping district.'
Pressure for more flexibility from the government on the terms of its
private finance initiative have also come from the leasing industry.
Mr Tony Jukes, managing director of Hill Samuel Asset Finance, said one way
to break the log-jam would be for the Treasury to ease the terms of leasing
deals progressively to allow the financial groups involved to gain
experience of the rolling stock market.
'At the moment they are asking us to make too much of a leap,' he said.
The issue has assumed a high profile in the approach to local elections in
May - with the government bracing itself for heavy losses in outer London
boroughs.
Mr Portillo said that London Underground was free to spend some of the
Pounds 1.5bn it was due to receive from the government in the next three
years on Northern Line trains but did not consider the investment enough of
a priority to do so.
He said that for the proposed deal to qualify for the government's private
finance initiative there had to be a transfer of risk to the private sector
'otherwise the government's commitment to public spending control would be
brought into doubt'. If the scheme did not qualify 'then obviously I would
oppose it'.
He said he had not seen a detailed proposition of the scheme.
