FT  29 MAR 94 / World Trade News: Tokyo package aims to head off trade war
The Japanese government today unveils a wide-ranging package of trade
liberalisation measures intended to defuse tension in its relations with the
US.
The programme will consist of measures to stimulate domestic demand,
policies aimed at removing non-tariff import barriers, and efforts to open
the Japanese telecommunications, medical equipment, insurance and car
markets to overseas competition.
Announcement of the measures follows threats by the US to prepare for
sanctions against Japan after Tokyo refused in bilateral trade talks to
adopt numerical targets for increasing imports. Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, the
prime minister, told US negotiators last month Japan would cut its surplus
through voluntary rather than forced measures.
Mr Hosokawa has faced severe domestic and US criticism for the failure of
the talks and is understood to be keen to demonstrate his administration can
voluntarily implement policies to reduce the trade surplus. The aim of the
macro-economic measures, details of which will be announced in June before
the Group of Seven summit, is to reduce the record current account surplus
by boosting the domestic economy and encouraging imports.
The government is thought to be aiming to cut the surplus from 3.1 per cent
of gross domestic product in 1993 to 2.8 per cent next year.
Other measures include plans to increase public works spending, beyond the
Y15,000bn (Pounds 95.5bn) already announced. The administration also intends
to extend beyond 12 months the period during which income tax cuts,
announced in February, will be implemented, in an attempt to boost consumer
spending. The policies aimed at increasing imports include deregulation,
measures to enforce competition laws more effectively, steps to promote
imports, and guidelines for improved transparency of state procurement.
The government intends to deregulate housing and land use,
telecommunications, distribution, and financial markets. The Fair Trade
Commission, the fledgling anti-monopoly watchdog, is expected to be
strengthed and its staff increased by up to 9 per cent. Import promotion
measures will include tax incentives for importers, improved customs
procedures, and more money for the Japan External Trade Organisation.
Particular attention is given to the four sectors seen as priorities by US
trade negotiators during the recent bilateral talks. Public procurement of
medical and telecommunications equipment will be more transparent and a
review mechanism will be put in place to measure past performance of foreign
groups in this sector.
The insurance market, the most tightly controlled financial sectors in
Japan, will be partly deregulated. In the car and components sectors, the
government will review the performance of overseas groups twice a year.
