FT  25 OCT 94 / Howard hits at claims on Fayeds: Home secretary denies
intervention in citizenship application
Mr Michael Howard, the home secretary, last night rejected claims that he
intervened in applications for British citizenship by Mr Mohamed Fayed and
his brother Ali, the owners of Harrods.
Mr Howard issued a statement after conferring with senior advisers to decide
whether to respond to press reports which suggested that he advised Mr
Charles Wardle, then the immigration minister, on how to handle Mr Ali
Fayed's application.
Labour said the statement failed to explain how the application came to Mr
Howard's attention, and suggested that it was in any case inappropriate for
Mr Wardle to have been the minister in charge.
Downing Street refused to comment on reports that Mr Howard's role had been
reviewed in an inquiry carried out by Sir Robin Butler, cabinet secretary.
Mr Howard's statement did not say when he was made aware of Mr Ali Fayed's
application, and by whom. But it said he 'had made it clear from the outset'
that Mr Wardle should decide whether it was approved.
The statement followed pressure from opposition MPs for a Commons debate on
Mr Howard's role in processing the brothers' applications.
Mr Jack Straw, shadow home secretary, said that Mr Howard's 'long-delayed
statement' raised fresh questions about the role of Mr Wardle, who had
previously criticised the Fayed brothers' acquisition of Harrods.
Mr Straw drew attention to a Commons speech by Mr Wardle in March 1990 which
was highly critical of the Department of Trade and Industry's failure to bar
the Fayeds from acting as company directors.
He said: 'Mr Howard says that the application was referred by officials to
his junior minister. How did he know this and what led him to make it clear
from the outset that the matter should be handled by Mr Wardle?'
Mr Straw added: 'In view of Mr Wardle's plain hostility to the Al-Fayeds,
has it ever been put to Mr Howard that it was inappropriate for Mr Wardle to
make a quasi-judicial decision in this case? That is the question I shall be
asking tomorrow in the Commons.'
The Liberal Democrats wrote to the government asking whether Mr Howard, then
corporate affairs minister, was involved in the DTI's 1987 decision to
examine the Fayeds' acquisition of Harrods.
Mr Howard yesterday obtained an extension of the interim high court
injunction he gained against the Financial Times on Friday preventing the
newspaper publishing 'certain allegations' about him.
Mr Andrew Gowers, the FT's deputy editor, said that the injunction
'apparently results from a misunderstanding of the line of inquiries the
paper was following on Friday. Its terms do not relate to any story we are
currently researching.'
The Home Office said Mr Howard had initiated the court action privately and
was responsible for his own legal fees.
Mr Mohamed Fayed last night accused the Home Office of 'slipping standards'
and 'discourtesy' by discussing his application with the media before
telling him its decision.
