FT  17 MAR 94 / Cambodia war goes on as UN winds up: Victor Mallet sees the
army prepare for dry season offensive on Khmer Rouge
Half way between the Cambodian capital, Phnom Penh, and the town of
Battambang, workers paid by the United Nations are filling in the road's
cavernous potholes and resurfacing it with tar and gravel; a little further
on, three government tanks on the way to the battle front are ripping up the
new surface with their tracks.
Half way between Battambang and the Thai border, hundreds of Cambodians paid
by foreign aid and commanded by ex-British army Ghurkas are painstakingly
clearing old minefields to make the land safe for farmers; a little further
on, government troops and Khmer Rouge guerrillas are laying new mines as
they prepare to fight.
The two-year, Dollars 2bn (Pounds 1.3bn) UN operation to bring peace and
democracy to Cambodia is being wound up, but the war is not yet over. The
coalition government of royalists and communists elected under UN auspices
last May is poised for a dry season offensive to seize Pailin, the
gem-mining town on the Thai border that is regarded as the main stronghold
of the Khmer Rouge.
Truckloads of troops, along with tanks, artillery pieces and multiple
rocket-launchers known as Stalin organs, can be seen on the move towards
Pailin. So many government soldiers  - 7,000 according to some estimates  -
have been deployed at the front that residents of Battambang fear they will
be without protection should Khmer Rouge guerrillas decide to attack the
town.
The government offensive was supposed to begin a week ago but was delayed,
probably because it would have clashed with an international donors'
conference in Tokyo which raised Dollars 773m for Cambodia last week, and
because the army was shaken by a humiliating defeat at Anlong Veng in
northern Cambodia.
Government forces captured Anlong Veng from the Khmer Rouge in early
February after suffering heavy casualties caused by mines and booby traps,
but lost it three weeks later and retreated in chaos, short of water and
ammunition, when the guerrillas counter-attacked.
The Khmer Rouge, which flouted a 1991 peace agreement by refusing to disarm
its guerrillas or participate in the election, is nevertheless in decline.
Guerrilla numbers have fallen to below 10,000 from as many as 25,000 in
1991, according to diplomats in Phnom Penh, and some Khmer Rouge officers
have defected to the government since the election.
A successful, three-week government offensive last year drove the Khmer
Rouge out of the territory it had taken in the previous 18 months, while the
increasing trade in logs, gems and other goods across the border with
Thailand is opening up the previously remote areas where the Khmer Rouge is
strongest.
It is becoming harder to make any ideological distinctions between the two
sides in the war as they fight  - or negotiate  - over lucrative trade
routes. Army officers planning the assault on Pailin talk openly about their
deals in logs or gems with their Khmer Rouge 'enemies', and important
logging roads in some areas of Cambodia have remained curiously free of
mines  - the result, it seems, of secret trade agreements between the
combatants.
Cambodia remains a lawless country. When buses or cars are attacked and
robbed by armed men on the Phnom Penh-Battambang road, it is often unclear
whether the assailants are Khmer Rouge guerrillas, unpaid government
soldiers or bandits.
A grenade planted under fuel tanks at a Battambang petrol station last week
was attributed by some residents to Khmer Rouge saboteurs; others blamed the
owners of rival petrol stations. The device was exploded harmlessly by a
British ordnance expert.
An army victory in the assault on Pailin would boost the government's
morale, would deprive the Khmer Rouge of border trade revenue and could push
the guerrillas one step closer to formal peace negotiations. But the
organisation's leaders are probably already in hiding in the hills north or
south of the town, and few Cambodians or foreign observers believe the
capture of Pailin would immediately end the war.
Residents of Battambang, accustomed to the depredations of drunken soldiers,
are bracing themselves for the aftermath of the offensive and the return of
the troops. 'It's going to be an unpleasant town whether they win or lose,'
said one foreign aid worker.
