FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of International Fund Management (13): Capital flows
abroad continue - US / international equities still attract investors
US investors seem to have passed the first test. Despite steadily rising
interest rates at home, the country's mutual and pension funds have
continued to channel capital into overseas equity markets through the first
three quarters of this year. International bond holdings have wobbled: but
the pessimists who predicted a quick reversal of capital flows as the US
interest rate cycle turned have been proved wrong.
The second test, though, could prove more challenging: what happens if the
dollar's long slide is reversed?
Figures for the first half of this year show that US investors have not lost
their appetite for international equities. US pension funds bought a net
Dollars 17bn of non-US shares in the first six months, compared with Dollars
35bn in all of 1993.
Mutual fund investors, meanwhile, had put a net Dollars 23bn into
international equity funds by the end of August, compared with Dollars 26bn
in 1993 as a whole (this does not include global funds, which, as the name
suggests, buy both US and non-US stocks). To be sure, the enthusiasm of
January has not been matched: in that month alone, international equity
funds attracted Dollars 6.3bn. However, the cash has continued to flow at a
steady rate.
It is not difficult to see what has drawn US investment abroad. In dollar
terms, the returns from investing in overseas markets have leapt ahead of
those available on US stocks. And with their domestic stock market still
bumping along close to its all-time high at the end of October, there seemed
little to change US investors' minds.
'Until the end of 1992, there were four consecutive years of
underperformance outside the US,' says Gavin Quill, vice-president of
marketing at Scudder Stevens &amp; Clark, a US investment group. In 1993, when
US stocks returned around 5 per cent, investors in equity markets elsewhere
in the developed world saw double-digit gains: 23 per cent in Japan, 32 per
cent in Germany and 19 per cent in the UK.
Emerging markets did much better - in part thanks to the flow of US money.
Fully a half of all US international equity investment, or some Dollars
30bn, is estimated to have been directed into emerging markets last year.
Higher returns on international investment have continued to flow this year,
most notably in Japan (up around 30 per cent in dollar terms by the end of
October, twice the rise in local currency terms).
Investment returns from international bond funds, meanwhile, have slipped.
The volatility in European fixed income markets in particular has made US
investors wary, and the appetite for international bonds has waned. Between
them, pension and mutual fund investors put only Dollars 2bn into
international fixed income securities during the first six months of this
year. With bond markets falling, the overall value of their non-US bond
holdings dropped by Dollars 5bn, to Dollars 84bn.
There seem to be two messages from all of this. First, US investors'
holdings of foreign securities look more like a core part of their holdings
than they did even a year ago. From 6 per cent early in 1993, the proportion
of US mutual fund assets invested overseas has climbed to just under 10 per
cent.
A second message is that it would take a smaller proportionate adjustment by
US investors of their overseas holdings to have a bigger impact, potentially
adding to volatility in some markets. 'You may see pull-backs that have an
impact in certain thin markets for short periods of time,' says Mr Quill.
What happens, though, when the dollar changes direction? The greenback's
weakness has underpinned the steady international diversification of the
past decade. According to calculations by Goldman Sachs, since the end of
1984, when the dollar was riding high, Japanese stocks have only returned 76
per cent in yen terms. But in dollar terms, the return is 342 per cent -
compared to a 180 per cent return on US stocks in the same period.
While foreign investments have been doing well, it has been easy for the
pundits to maintain that a sea change has taken place in the attitude of US
investors: that they now accept the diversification argument that a wider
spread of investments leads to higher returns with lower risk.
Losses on foreign investments from a stronger dollar might change all that.
'When they're down 10 per cent, then we'll see how globally diverse people
really are,' says John Hickling, a manager of international funds at
Fidelity, the US's biggest mutual fund group. 'Over the short term, there is
a pretty good correlation between flows into and out of (foreign) funds and
the dollar.'
It is no coincidence that, at a time when US investors have been buying
foreign securities, their international counterparts have shown little
interest in US stocks. The same factors have been at work, only in reverse -
principally the devaluation of the dollar. Over the past six years,
foreigners have been net buyers of US stocks in three years and net sellers
in three.
In some ways, the investment losses for US investors implied by a stronger
dollar could be mitigated by the lift it could give to foreign markets. A
Japanese car maker competing with General Motors both in the US and around
the world, for instance, would benefit from a weaker yen.
