FT  04 MAR 94 / Matrix case failings admitted
Whitehall's most senior lawyer yesterday admitted there were failings in the
way ministers and their advisers handled the prosecution of the Matrix
Churchill case.
Mr Gerald Hosker QC, the Treasury solicitor, said he had decided that the
law had not been adhered to 'strictly enough' in the use of public interest
immunity certificates after personally reappraising the way the prosecution
had been handled.
Speaking at the end of his two-day appearance before the Scott arms-for-Iraq
inquiry, Mr Hosker conceded that PII certificates had been used 'too widely'
in the Matrix Churchill case and backed any future recommendations from Lord
Justice Scott that might pave the way for a stricter, more limited use of
such certificates.
Mr Hosker's evidence represents a rare public admission of failure by a
witness to the inquiry. The lawyer's co-operation was acknowledged by Lord
Justice Scott last night when he paid tribute to the way the witness had
borne relentless cross-examination by the judge and his counsel Miss
Presiley Baxendale QC.
Earlier Lord Justice Scott, in a series of exchanges with Mr Hosker,
challenged the use of PII certificates to try to prevent disclosure of a
wealth of official papers, some of which were 'relatively mundane'.
The judge said the importance of disclosing the papers to the defence was
'so strong' as to make it 'unthinkable that anybody should use PII
(certificates) to cover documents of which no more could be said than that
they were confidential'.
Quoting from a series of previous legal rulings on PII certificates, the
judge repeatedly questioned the government's main legal argument that
ministers had a long-established duty to sign the certificates.
Mr Hosker suggested that ministers could refuse to include certain documents
in a PII certificate, but ultimately had to refer back to legal advisers
before taking a final decision.
The latest evidence to the Scott inquiry will put extra pressure on the
government over the arms-for-Iraq affair. However, in the Commons yesterday
Mr John Major, the prime minister, brushed off Labour attempts to exploit
divisions over the case between Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry
secretary, and Sir Nicholas Lyell, the attorney-general.
Mr Edward O'Hara, Labour MP for Knowsley South, asked the prime minister at
question time whether he shared Mr Heseltine's 'low opinion of the legal
advice given by the attorney general'.
The low-key exchanges underlined the widespread view at Westminster that Sir
Nicholas has successfully resisted calls for his resignation in the wake of
Mr Heseltine's comments.
