FT  27 MAY 94 / Survey of Relocation in the UK (10): The best place to live
 -The findings of countrywide researchers
Sea breezes. Lakes and mountains. Historic sites and buildings. Such
attractions feature prominently in advertising and marketing material as
Britain's cities and regions compete with each other for new industrial and
commercial investment.
It is an easy game to play, at least for advertising agencies. Britain's
compact nature and extensive motorway system ensure that no example of grim
industrial dereliction and urban decay is more than about an hour away from
glorious scenery.
This is, however, only the beginning. Companies considering relocating - and
their employees - are asking increasingly detailed questions about the
quality of life. Access to fresh air and outdoor amenities is indeed an
important consideration, but it will not sell a location that has a negative
reputation in other ways.
In Britain, many organisations considering a move, and local authorities
seeking to attract investment, make use of the researches of the Quality of
Life Group, a joint unit at Glasgow and Strathclyde universities. Since the
1980s, the group has tried to break through the inevitably impressionistic,
'beauty is in the eye of the beholder' approaches to finding a good place to
live, and develop a sound academic basis for measuring the quality of life.
Opinion surveys were constructed to establish the factors people regarded as
most important in a location, and the results then applied to amenities
available in particular cities and towns.
Living in a low crime area emerged as the most important priority, followed
by access to good public services and suitable housing. All these factors
were regarded as more important than employment prospects, which came fourth
in the order of priorities.
When the Glasgow-Strathclyde researchers applied the public priorities to
actual towns and cities, Edinburgh emerged as Britain's most desirable urban
location. Aberdeen was second with another Scottish location,
Motherwell-Hamilton, featuring in the top ten. Scotland's attraction was
further confirmed by a subsequent study of smaller towns, when the most
popular were headed by Perth.
Edinburgh's position as number one is untypical of big British cities in
general which, on the Quality of Life Group's criteria, tend to be seen as
less desirable places to live than smaller locations. And not all the most
popular locations share Edinburgh and Perth's strong tourist images.
Bradford, Stoke-on-Trent and Middlesbrough all featured in the top ten.
Sheffield came one place ahead of Oxford, and Birkenhead several ahead of
Bournemouth.
Regionally, the West Midlands fares particularly badly, with Wolverhampton,
Coventry and Birmingham all low on the list. Can a city improve its standing
in relocation league tables if some of the image factors that make it appear
unappealing to outsiders are, perhaps, out of date? Birmingham, of all
English cities, has recently made gigantic strides to develop its amenities
with a new convention centre, its world class Symphony Hall and nurturing of
arts institutions.
Members of the Quality of Life team believe it is possible to change an
image, although it will involve prolonged effort. Glasgow, which was
regarded in negative terms a decade ago, now enjoys a more positive
reputation after sustained campaigns. Research showed that impressions of
the city rose considerably during 1990 when it was European cultural
capital, although some - but not all - of the improvement was lost when
attention switched from the city afterwards.
growing number of households, meaning that employers must take account of
employment prospects for spouses when making relocation decisions. Living
costs are obviously another factor likely to feature in discussions about
locations.
The Staffordshire-based Reward Group, which conducts research and
consultancy on pay and benefits, carries out surveys on relative living
costs around the country. Its most recent found that all the most expensive
locations were in the south-east - London, Woking, Welwyn Garden City,
Slough and Berkhamsted - while the cheapest were Northern Ireland,
Billingham in Cleveland and Wolverhampton. Over the past five years,
however, living costs in the north have risen compared to the national
average while lower house prices have reduced the relative cost of living in
the south.
London scored badly on the Quality of Life Group's assessment of British
locations. Its powerful international image does, however, sometimes give it
advantages in attracting institutions from overseas. The government found
last year that the capital's reputation as an international city, its
worldwide air transport links and advanced telecommunications were all
strong factors in a successful campaign to attract the European Medicines
Evaluation Agency to London. It will open next year and, although initially
employing only about 300 staff, may indirectly create thousands more drug
industry jobs.
Britain remains a nation of rich regional variations. These include some
disturbing ones that should perhaps be taken into account when considering
relocation decisions, but often are not. Health differences, for example,
vary dramatically around the country. The most significant variations are
related to economic status and deprivation but, across all classes, there is
also a north-south divide. For reasons that are only partly understood, the
south is, generally speaking, a healthier place to live than the north.
By taking all available and often conflicting factors into account, it would
be possible to spend a lifetime researching the ideal place to live. East
Anglia has the greatest proportion of detached houses in the country - but
also the highest fatal and serious road accident rate.
However much relocation is turned into a precise science, part of any
decision will always be made on basic impressions, as the friendly rivalry
between neighbouring cities often illustrates. Edinburgh may win polls as
Britain's most desirable location but many citizens of Glasgow, proud of
their city's reputation for sociability, would rather move to an uninhabited
Scottish island than live there.
