FT  23 JUN 94 / Letters to the Editor: Lottery and fair competition
Sir, You reported in your story, 'EU seeks views on Cadbury link with
lottery' (June 15), on the European Commission's examination of the Camelot
joint venture agreements. The Commission wishes to ensure that the
agreements in no way contravene EU rules on free and fair competition. It
seems likely that Camelot will have taken great care to formulate its
agreements in such a way as to minimise the risk of their being overturned
by the EU.
I wonder, however, whether as much consideration has been given to
potentially serious competition issues by those who will be distributing the
proceeds of the National Lottery. Such issues could arise if the
distributing bodies grant funds to companies or other organisations which
compete in genuine markets. The lottery legislation may have excluded
private individuals and companies from receiving grants from the National
Heritage Memorial Fund, but I am not aware that any such exclusion applies,
for example, to Arts Council or Sports Council funds. Competition among
theatres and among sports venues, to name just two examples, could thus be
affected.
Companies which bid for grants and propose to co-finance the projects
concerned will surely be seeking some competitive advantage as a result. An
effective subsidy for a capital project provided to just one player in a
market but not other (potential) competitors, might constitute a significant
barrier to the competitors' entry or growth. Grants could directly or
indirectly support changes in pricing, investment or other competitive
behaviour.
I believe that such effects could well be thought of by some non-recipients
of grants as distortions of competition in their markets. The chances of
this are increased by the National Lottery's high profile and the
substantial funds likely to be distributed. Complaints to competition
authorities seem distinctly possible.
My experience is that they consider the disbursement of subsidies carefully.
Some of the distributing bodies may need to think equally carefully about
developing appropriate guidelines to deal with these issues if they are to
avoid the authorities' investigations.
Paul Rowe,
Coopers &amp; Lybrand,
1 Embankment Place,
London WC2N 6NN
