FT  15 JUL 94 / Digital shake-up to cut 20,000 jobs
Digital Equipment, the struggling US computer company, will restructure its
management, cut 20,000 jobs over the next 12 months and take a Dollars 1.2bn
charge in the current quarter.
The restructuring plan, announced yesterday, will reduce Digital's workforce
by about 20 per cent to 65,000.
Digital had been expected to take drastic actions to cut costs since the
company reported heavier than expected losses of Dollars 183m for its third
quarter, ending in March.
Digital has been struggling for several years to come to terms with
declining sales of its traditional minicomputer products and an
industry-wide trend toward lower profit margins and has recorded losses of
more than Dollars 3bn over the past three years despite substantial cost
cutting.
Mr Robert Palmer, chief executive, said that the actions announced yesterday
would further reduce annual costs by about Dollars 1.8bn. He expects Digital
to record profits from operations by the end of the calendar year.
The new restructuring plan will accelerate workforce reductions, which had
previously been expected to occur over a two-year period. Digital is also
expected to dispose of some of its business units. The company said further
announcements would be made on Monday.
Mr Palmer said that Digital's two plants in Scotland would not be
significantly affected by the restructuring.
Earlier this month the company revealed it was in talks with Quantum, a US
disc-drive manufacturer, about the sale of parts of Digital's data storage
business.
About 60 per cent of the Dollars 1.2bn fourth quarter restructuring charge
will be related to job cuts, with the balance covering facilities. The
company will also write off assets of Dollars 350m to Dollars 400m.
The management restructuring is Mr Palmer's third attempt to increase the
efficiency of Digital's operations.
The company has established two divisions; Computer Systems and Components,
plus an Advanced Technology Group to develop products and identify market
opportunities. Each business unit will include engineering, manufacturing,
marketing and sales operations and be responsible for its own financial
performance.
