FT  14 JUN 94 / European Elections '94: Occhetto decision sets up tough
leadership fight
Mr Achille Occhetto yesterday announced he was resigning from the leadership
of the former communist Party of the Democrat Left (PDS) in the wake of his
party's poor performance in the Euro elections.
His departure opens the way for a tough leadership contest to head Italy's
main opposition party at a time when the electorate has swung sharply
towards the centre-right.
The resignation of the 58 year-old founder of the PDS also offers an
unexpected filip to the Berlusconi government as it leaves the opposition
temporarily leaderless.
In a bitter resignation letter, Mr Occhetto attacked those within the PDS
who had been sniping at his leadership ever since the party's Progressive
Alliance failed to beat Mr Silvio Berlusconi's right-wing Freedom Alliance
in the March general elections.
He had no wish to stand in the way of new blood taking over. He said that it
would be wrong that the search for an innovative role of the left should be
side-tracked by arguments about the leadership.
Mr Occhetto was the first European communist leader to break with the past
following the collapse of the Berlin Wall.
He saw the need to steer the old Italian Communist party (PCI) inspired by
the marxist teachings of Gramsci and the moderate example of the late Enrico
Berlinguer towards a social democrat platform.
The PDS was formed in February 1991 under his aegis, carrying with it the
bulk of the PCI members. A hardline rump refused to join the new party and
subsequently formed Reconstructed Communism.
Mr Occhetto underestimated the appeal of Mr Berlusconi's anti-communism and
his own identification with the old political system.
Among those tipped for the leadership race are Mr Massimo D'Alema, Mr
Occhetto's long-standing heir who suffers from a humourless public image,
and Mr Walter Veltroni, the clever young editor of L'Unita, once the PCI
mouthpiece and now a daily of the left. An interesting outsider is Mr
Massimo Cacciari, the philosopher mayor of Venice and former deputy.
The Italian list of Euro-deputies was not available last night due to the
proportional system that has voters balloting for lists of candidates.
Twelve of the leading politicians were present on the lists in all five
electoral colleges.
