FT  05 APR 94 / Patten sees chance to teach union a lesson: John Authers
weighs the odds in the battle over school tests
Mr John Patten, the education secretary, has at last succeeded in dividing
the teachers' unions over national curriculum tests for children aged seven
and 14.
Last year the unions united against them and the tests became a humiliation
for the government.
It also seems unlikely that this year's tests will produce meaningful
results. The NUT, which concludes its conference in Scarborough, North
Yorkshire, today, is totally opposed to the tests, and has enough members to
ensure that they will not take place in thousands of schools.
This is bad news for the government because testing is integral to the
national curriculum which was introduced by the Education Reform Act of
1988. They are meant to diagnose children's difficulties and to enforce
accountability of schools to parents.
The NUT has also committed itself to an indefinite boycott of all national
curriculum tests, which delegates described as a 'government imposition'.
Not only will tests for those aged seven and 14, which the government
attempted to introduce last year, be barred, but also tests for pupils aged
11, due to start next year. No reforms of the tests will be enough to gain
NUT support.
NUT conference delegates are more leftwing than the union's general
membership, and defeated the moderate executive nine times during the first
three days of the conference. But the unanimous support it gave to extending
its action suggests that it can deliver a further firm boycott.
Yet this does not necessarily signal the end for Mr Patten's tests.
Teachers' unions are deeply split, and the NUT may have overplayed its hand.
Mr Nigel de Gruchy, general secretary of the NASUWT union, is bitterly
opposed to the NUT stance, which he describes as 'going from farce to
fiasco'.
The NASUWT has instructed its members to administer the tests this year and
they are likely to do so. It is satisfied that Sir Ron Dearing, the
government's chief adviser on the curriculum, has delivered sufficient cuts
in the workload caused by the tests.
A third union, the ATL, which is traditionally moderate and is not
affiliated to the Trades Union Congress, has also advised members to abandon
the boycott.
Baroness Blatch, the education minister, will address both the NASUWT and
ATL this week, and is expected to offer to have all tests marked externally.
Mr de Gruchy would favour such a move because it would reduce workloads.
Mr Doug McAvoy, NUT general secretary, dismisses this as 'snuggling up' to
ministers while Ms Marion Darke, a former NUT president, said the move would
reduce teachers to 'technician' status.
Legal objections could also thwart the NUT. The NASUWT was challenged in
court over the boycott last year but was successful because the dispute was
'solely or mainly' concerned with workload.
The NUT has always made clear that it objects to the tests on educational
grounds, which are not legal grounds for an industrial dispute. It might
lose a court case if it persisted when other unions had announced that the
workload issue was settled.
Ministers might also change the law to make the NUT action illegal. Primary
legislation might not be necessary because some union members believe they
could be legally forced to carry out the tests by changes to the small print
of the annual schoolteachers' pay and conditions review.
Mr Patten will find this much easier to achieve if he has public opinion on
his side. He failed disastrously in this last year, on one occasion branding
a parents' organisation 'neanderthal'.
But this year the NUT must oppose the emollient and widely respected Sir Ron
as well as Mr Patten. The union appears to be isolated and Mr Patten has a
chance to inflict an embarrassing defeat.
