FT  08 APR 94 / Alarm over low take-up of pensions
Almost a fifth of employees who could belong to an occupational scheme do
not do so, according to a survey published yesterday by the National
Association of Pension Funds.
The 1993 survey, which covers almost 900 pension schemes and 4.4m active
scheme members, also discloses that 1 per cent of the total - about 44,000
people - had left an occupational scheme during the year covered by the
questionnaire.
It also showed that someone was three times more likely to leave a
public-sector scheme than a private-sector employer's scheme, even though
public-sector schemes tended to offer inflation-proofing of benefits.
Mr Tom Ross, vice-chairman of the association, expressed dismay at the
number of people not joining schemes.
'Occupational pension schemes are not ideal for everybody, but I wouldn't
think for a minute that they were unsuitable for most of that 19 per cent,'
he said.
The association said not all the 40,000-plus people who decided to leave an
employers' pension scheme last year would have done so to take out a
personal pension, but that they might have done so simply to economise on
contributions during a time of financial difficulty.
However, the selling of personal pensions to people still in an employer's
scheme - known as opting out - has been an area of great concern to City
regulators working to raise standards in the sale of private pension plans.
Although the number of cases is thought to be much smaller than the number
of people who have transferred lump sums out of occupational schemes they
have left, the assumption is that in almost all cases it would have been bad
advice to opt out of a current employer's scheme.
'That 1 per cent is not a number we should ignore, because in the vast
majority of cases, it is an action they should not have taken,' Mr Ross
said.
The survey showed that more than a quarter of pension schemes did not allow
someone who had left the scheme while remaining an employee to be
re-admitted.
The association emphasised also the continuing role for final-salary schemes
rather than money-purchase schemes. A final-salary scheme relates benefits
to an employee's remuneration on retirement, while in a money-purchase
scheme the benefits are determined by the contributions paid by an
individual member and according to age and sex.
During the survey period, eight schemes switched from being based on defined
benefits to being based on defined contributions, and only one switched the
other way, but 85 per cent of schemes covered by the questionnaire are still
based on final salary.
Mr Ross acknowledged, however, that insurance companies involved in setting
up pension schemes for small companies reported far more money-purchase
schemes than those based on final salary.
