FT  09 JUL 94 / AT&amp;T to be granted telecoms licence
Competition in the UK telecommunications market is set to intensify
following an announcement by Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry
secretary, that he intends to grant a telecoms licence to AT&amp;T, the largest
US operator.
A draft licence will be issued next week, and is likely to be followed by a
full licence before the autumn, allowing AT&amp;T to provide services throughout
the UK.
The business sector, which last year accounted for more than half of the
telecom industry's Pounds 15bn revenue, will be the main beneficiary. AT&amp;T
said it would offer a service to the 450 large multinationals based in the
UK as soon as its licence permitted.
Mr Merrill Tutton, AT&amp;T's UK president, said: 'Our priority is the
multinationals, but we intend to reach small and medium-sized businesses
before long.'
The licence will allow AT&amp;T to build its own infrastructure, but with the
growth in infrastructure provision since the abolition of the British
Telecommunications/Mercury duopoly in 1991 it is thought unlikely that the
company will seek to construct its own dedicated network.
Mr Tutton said: 'There is a lot of high-quality capacity available, and we
have been in discussion with most of the operators.'
Mr Heseltine's decision follows a year-long consideration of AT&amp;T's
application by the Department of Trade and Industry. It turned largely on
reciprocal terms of access for UK operators seeking entry to the US market,
and follows the decision of US regulatory authorities last month to clear
the Dollars 5.3bn (Pounds 3.5bn) alliance between BT and MCI, the
second-largest US operator.
To allay concerns about AT&amp;T's equipment procurement policy - the US company
is an integrated equipment supplier and service operator - the draft licence
is believed to require it to show that its procurement is fair and open.
AT&amp;T already has a substantial presence in the UK, including more than 6,000
employees. Its Istel subsidiary supplies data communications and IT
services, with offices across Europe. The appointment to the UK last year of
Mr Tutton, formerly responsible for AT&amp;T's consumer services in the US,
signalled the company's desire to develop the UK market.
However, AT&amp;T has failed to forge an alliance with a leading UK telecoms
operator, which some analysts believe is essential if it is to make a rapid
impact. Talks with Energis, a subsidiary of the National Grid about to
launch a long-distance network, broke down earlier this year.
Mercury, the main competitor to BT, drew back last month from joining AT&amp;T's
Worldsource international venture, in spite of the decision of Unisource, a
joint venture of the Dutch, Swedish and Swiss national operators, to join.
A survey of more than 1,000 UK corporate telecoms users last November by the
Telecommunications Users Association rated AT&amp;T above BT as a supplier. The
users believed the US company had the 'strongest set of credentials' to
compete in the UK, and was rated above BT on three out of five performance
indicators. Although user perceptions depended to some extent on reputation
alone, the association said a large proportion of respondents had already
dealt with the US operator.
