FT  19 MAR 94 / Endgame at the beginning: Why hopes are rising for peace in
Bosnia
Never before in the war in the former Yugoslavia has the combination of
carrots and sticks been so finely balanced. Never before have military
strategists and diplomats believed that the combination could help tip the
balance in favour of peace.
'For the first time, I am hopeful. But it's not yet the time to put out the
flags yet. We still have a lot to do,' said Mr Charles Dick, head of the
Conflict Studies Research Centre based at Sandhurst Military Academy in the
UK.
Some of the building blocks for peace were put in place yesterday in
Washington when President Bill Clinton presided over the signing of an
agreement between Bosnian Croats and Bosnian Moslems.
The accord, forged by Mr Charles Redman, the US special envoy to the former
Yugoslavia, involves the Bosnian Croats and Moslems creating a power-sharing
federation in about a third of Bosnia's territory.
Observers believe it is only a matter of time before the federation will
form a loose union with Croatia.
President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia decided to sign up to this deal for
several reasons: Germany and the US had threatened to impose sanctions on
Croatia; Croatian-backed forces in western Hercegovina, eastern Bosnia, had
lost ground to Bosnian Moslem forces; a growing opposition to the war was
emerging within Croatia. Finally, in return for peace, the US and Germany
had held out prospects of financial assistance for rebuilding Croatia's
economy. Mr Tudjman would have found it difficult to resist such an even
division of carrots and sticks.
The predominantly Moslem Bosnian government signed on as well. Mr Haris
Silajdzic, prime minister, believes Washington will supply funds to underpin
the economic viability of the federation, as well as preserving its
territorial integrity.
'This federation is a kind of marriage of convenience. Neither side has won
the war. They believe peace is in their interests,' said Mr Dick.
Implementation of the deal will require three things: substantial extra
numbers of United Nations peacekeepers, above the 7,000 in place; consensus
on the federation's boundaries by the Croats and Moslems; and, crucially,
agreement to any redefined boundaries by the third participants in the war,
the Bosnian Serbs.
This latter requirement could undermine the deal fatally, because the
Bosnian Serbs and their patron, President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia,
control 70 per cent of Bosnia's territory and can consolidate their grip
over the gains. A Pentagon official said: 'The administration is giving the
semblance of preserving Bosnia. But we know we are witnessing a
sophisticated division of the Bosnian republic between Croatia and Serbia.'
Mr Redman, together with Mr Vitaly Churkin, Russia's special envoy to the
region, now have to turn their attention to wooing Serbia, again with a
combination of carrots and sticks.
The threat of air strikes, which forced Bosnian Serbs to withdraw their
heavy weapons from around the besieged city of Sarajevo, remains a powerful
stick.
But increasingly, US and Russian officials are beginning to talk about
turning the stick of sanctions against the Serbian state - in place since
June 1992 - into a carrot by promising gradually to lift them. Mr Stephen
Oxman, the assistant US secretary of state, this week said any moves to ease
sanctions would be linked to 'positive steps by the Serbs in the negotiating
process'. The ball is now in Serbia's court.
After waging a two-year war in the former Yugoslavia to defend Serbs living
outside Serbia, Mr Milosevic must decide if now is the time to sue for peace
even if it means turning his back on some of the Serbs outside Serbia.
Yesterday's Washington agreement helps him. He could argue that, since the
Bosnian Croat/Moslem agreement paves the way for an eventual creation of a
Greater Croatia, the Bosnian Serbs in eastern Bosnia should be allowed to
form a similar loose union with Serbia proper.
Such a union would require the Bosnian Serbs to give up some of the
territory they hold in Bosnia, as well as to reach agreement on the status
of the Moslem-held enclaves of Gorazde, Srebrenica and Zepa in eastern
Bosnia. Mr Milosevic might be able to persuade the Bosnian Serbs to cede
some land to the Moslems and thereby convince the US to accept a closer
relationship between eastern Bosnia and Serbia. The price for any
concessions would be the removal of sanctions.
But compromises in eastern Bosnia constitute only one element of a potential
overall settlement in the region. The linchpin is a peace treaty between
Croatia and Serbia. This, in turn, would be possible if Belgrade and Zagreb
could agree on the status of Krajina, in southwestern Croatia.
Nearly 350,000 Serbs live in Krajina on rugged limestone land which has no
economic worth. But its strategic location is vital: it splits Croatia in
half. Reasserting control over the territory is crucial for Mr Tudjman.
Without it, Croatia remains divided. The question is whether Mr Milosevic is
prepared to turn his back on the Krajina Serbs whom he used in 1991 to
foment war in Croatia.
'At one point, both Croatia and Serbia will have to trade land for peace,'
said a UN official involved in the Geneva peace talks on the former
Yugoslavia.
A deal would involve Mr Tudjman granting extensive autonomy to the
nationalist Krajina Serbs to persuade them to stay in Croatia. In return, he
might have to give up a swathe of Serb-held territory in Slavonia, eastern
Croatia, which forms a natural link to Serbia proper.
Mr Tudjman might be able to justify this compromise to the Croats on the
grounds that he would have won control of Krajina, and a potentially
enlarged republic through an alliance with the new federation of Bosnian
Croats and Moslems. Such an arrangement could be rewarded with the carrot of
economic aid from the west.
Similarly, by turning his back on Krajina, Mr Milosevic could turn
concession into victory because sanctions would gradually be lifted and his
fellow Serbs in eastern Croatia and eastern Bosnia would be placed under the
protection of Serbia.
'You can see the shape of this compromise,' a UN official said, adding that
there were many imponderables, including the question of whether the people
of Bosnia could ever live together again after such brutality.
'What we are seeing is the emergence of the endgame in which Croatia and
Serbia, in a strange and tragic twist of history, will get what they
originally set out to attain: a Greater Croatia and a Greater Serbia, with
the Moslems destined to live with Croatia, the lesser of the two devils.'
