FT  22 MAR 94 / Survey of Management Education &amp; Training (6): A maestro in
finance - Profile / Thomas Kaurich
When Thomas Kaurich, an American concert pianist, first moved to London in
1989, he used to jog in Regent Park near his home. As his route took him
past the majestic front of the London Business School(LBS), he would wonder,
'Who would want to go to business school?'
Three years later, Mr Kaurich, then 30, was struggling to distinguish a
creditor from a debtor in his first study group at LBS, where he is now in
his final year of the Masters in Business Administration(MBA) programme.
The MBA is a rather unusual course of study for a man who made his concert
debut at the age of 12. After more than 16 years of playing the professional
concert circuit throughout North America and Europe, Mr Kaurich sold his
piano in New York to buy a computer in London, and replaced hours of
Schumann and Mozart with balance sheets and annual reports.
Mr Kaurich's original intention at LBS was to acquire skills to transfer
back to the profession he grew up in. 'I saw the need in the arts for some
sort of business-directed thrust, and I was single-handedly going to deliver
it,' he says,
Small in build, and immaculately dressed and groomed, Mr Kaurich speaks in
precise rhythms, punctuating sentences with, 'Does that make sense?'. He
recalls with amusement learning the jargon of business. 'It was in many ways
like being in a foreign country and being surrounded by native speakers,' he
says. 'People were talking about topics such as equity markets and it took
me ages to figure it out.' He takes obvious delight in his current facility
with the business tongue. 'Now I can pick up financial reports and find what
I need very quickly. When someone says asset turnover I know what it means.'
Mr Kaurich has maintained his links with the musical world by giving
occasional concerts - last month he packed out Wigmore Hall in London with a
Music and Management programme of Schubert, Bach, Liszt and Schumann to
raise money for the Friends of London Business School scholarship fund - and
through his second-year project with the Barbican Centre. He is examining
ways of diversifying programming and audiences.
'It is interesting doing a project for the Barbican Centre in a business
capacity when I have been on the other side as well,' he says. 'I think that
it has given me an advantage.'
He is frustrated by classical musicians who 'expect people to come to
concerts just because they are performing 'great music''. According to Mr
Kaurich, that mindset is responsible for diminishing audiences.
Describing a typical orchestral concert, he says of the performers 'they are
all dressed as if it were the last century. When they finish and take a bow
they don't even look at the audience. They put up barriers between performer
and audience,' he claims.
The former concert performer offered one possible solution to musicians'
apathy toward audiences.
'If their salary depended on the number of tickets they sold then they would
have a vested interested in each performance,' he said.
His studies, however, have introduced other interests. 'Being in the MBA has
opened up so many new things to me that it is not necessary for me to be in
the arts. Business is business whether you are selling opera-singers or
circuit boards, though circuit boards certainly are not as temperamental as
opera singers.' he says.
Mr Kaurich has now joined his classmates at LBS in interview rounds for jobs
in corporate finance. 'What appeals to me about finance is the buzz of it.
It reminds me of the kind of energy generated by performing,' he said.
This convert to finance sees other similarities between music and business.
'Music is the perfect marriage of a structured intellect and intuition,'
said Mr Kaurich. 'I find that these two instincts transfer very well to the
business world.'
He believes that business schools are beginning to recognise that decisions
often are - and indeed should be - based on a sixth sense, rather than pure
facts and figures. 'I think it (the MBA) is moving away from trying to
quantify everything and allowing for gut feelings'
But does he miss music? Not yet, he said but he is not sure he wants to
return to the music industry, even just to apply his business skills. 'I
think ultimately maybe I could but I do not think I am prepared to enter
that world again just yet. I do not think I have got everything I want from
business.'
Still, he puts aside time - albeit only 15 to 20 minutes a day - to tinkle
the ivories (on a rented piano) when he needs a break from his studies. He
no longer feels the need for the constant buzz of performing. 'If I want to
perform I will find a hall and fill it with people I know. I cannot think of
anything more enjoyable than performing for an audience, everyone of whom I
know. That is how the past few concerts through LBS have been.'
