FT  28 NOV 94 / Survey of Pakistan (15): Islamic fervour still affects
public life - Religious observance has declined but fundamentalists continue
to wield influence
Qari Saeed-ur-Rahman, an Islamic scholar and preacher, shook his head sadly
and said: 'I am afraid Pakistan is becoming less Islamic by the day. People
have no image of Islamic society in their minds.'
Even as he spoke, earlier this month, in his mosque in Rawalpindi, another
preacher working a few hundred miles away was trying to make a reality of
his particular image of Islamic society. Armed militants acting in the name
of Maulana Soofi Mohammed had seized control of the district of Malakand in
the mountains of the north-west frontier and imposed Islamic law. It took
the security forces a week to recapture the territory.
While one mullah bemoans the decline of religious faith, another leads his
believers into battle. There could not be a greater contradiction over the
role of Islam in contemporary Pakistan.
In the country as a whole, the intensity of religious observance is almost
certainly on the decline - as Qari Saeed notes. But, on the margins,
fundamentalist fervour is almost as strong as it was at its peak in the
1980s during the Islamic jihad (holy war) against the Soviet occupation of
Afghanistan.
The arsenal of guns and ammunition left from the Afghanistan war has put
power into the hands of armed groups, some of them committed to a new jihad
in Pakistan. Radical preachers often take advantage of the country's
miserably low levels of education to fill young minds with ideas they are
unable to question.
Fundamentalism is a difficult challenge for Pakistan. As a country created
for Moslems, it must necessarily have a strong Islamic identity. Yet, it
also has to accommodate significant minorities of Hindus and Christians, and
cope with the competing demands of a Sunni Moslem majority and a Shia
minority.
Moreover, the government must pursue economic and social development without
alienating too many conservative Moslems who hold strong views over matters
like the social emancipation of women. Finally, Pakistan's two biggest
foreign policy issues - the long-running conflict with India over the
troubled region of Kashmir and the civil war in Afghanistan - are overlaid
by religious considerations.
While Moslems, Hindus and Christians have clashed for centuries in the
Indian sub-continent, the need to live together in close proximity also
brought long periods of peace.
Mohammed Ali Jinnah, Pakistan's founder, and the country's early leaders
showed little interest in rigidly enforcing Islamic codes. Often educated in
mission schools and in British universities, their views had little in
common with the faith of their people.
Yet as the euphoria of building a new country evaporated, religion became an
increasingly powerful force in public life. Ironically, it was Mr Zulfikar
Ali Bhutto, a western-educated prime minister, who in the 1970s was forced
by pressure from the mullahs to move the weekend from Saturday-Sunday to
Friday-Saturday. A connoisseur of whisky and fine wines, Mr Bhutto was also
persuaded to ban alcohol consumption.
However, it was left to General Zia-ul-Haq, the military dictator who
overthrew Mr Bhutto to pursue Islamicisation in earnest. Using the support
of the mullahs to give legitimacy to his undemocratic regime, he imposed
strict controls on public displays of art, films and theatre, extended the
teaching of Islam in schools and encouraged the strict observance of public
prayers, notably in government offices.
Cosmopolitan Pakistanis remember the 1980s as grim and repressive, but for
most mullahs it was a golden age, when the country's energy was focused on
the jihad in Afghanistan. Qari Saeed says: 'General Zia did not bring full
Islamic laws, but he made progress.'
General Zia's death has been followed by a moderate easing of pressures in
society to conform to Islamic codes of conduct. Among the elite, people
hosting parties at home have become less cautious about serving alcohol,
though public consumption remains illegal. Video recordings of western films
abound. Art galleries and theatres are broadening their offerings a little.
Jamaat-e-Islami and other Islamic parties, which held considerable influence
under General Zia, have seen their support slump - to just five seats in the
217-member National Assembly in last year's general election. The vociferous
condemnations of the Islamic clergy, who believe a woman cannot lead an
Islamic country, have failed to prevent Ms Benazir Bhutto winning two
general elections.
For Mr Altaf Gauhar, a veteran journalist and magazine editor, this is
evidence that talk of 'rising fundamentalism' in Pakistan is 'a huge hoax.
'Ordinary people saw the Islamic system in action under Zia. They don't want
it back,' he says. Yet, even if people are willing to dispute the clergy's
will at the ballot box, and to some extent in their private lives, they are
still cautious about making any kind of public challenge. The mullahs retain
the sole right to interpret the faith - and are apt to condemn any
challengers as heretics. For example, when Ms Bhutto visited France
recently, she intervened in the controversy over the protests of French
Moslems against a ban on their daughters wearing headscarves to school. Ms
Bhutto told them that it was enough to wear the veil in one's heart. Qari
Saeed, for one, was furious - 'she has no right to speak on this matter,' he
says.
An equally serious debate concerns the implementation of Islamic law, or
Sharia, in Pakistan. All political parties are agreed on the principle of
introducing Sharia. The debate centres on how to put it into practice.
In its purest form, Sharia prescribes only physical punishments for crimes -
from flogging to death - and fines play a very small part. But it would be
difficult for Pakistan to evolve a modern economy without financial
penalties for business-related offences. Also, many mullahs believe that
Islam invests in them the right to be judges. But the government would
prefer to introduce Sharia by overhauling existing laws and courts to give
them a more Islamic flavour.
This is not a theoretical argument. The uprising in Malakand followed a
supreme court decision in February striking down existing laws governing the
tribal areas in the north and north-west of Pakistan. The court declared the
laws unconstitutional on the grounds that the government's legal writ runs
only in the settled regions of Pakistan and not in the tribal areas, which
joined the country in 1947 under a special treaty between the government and
tribal leaders.
Islamabad was slow to react to the Supreme Court order. Mr Maulana Soofi, a
fundamentalist who refuses to have his photograph taken for fear of
offending God, took advantage of the delay to implement full Sharia law in
Malakand.
But even such an extreme development as an armed uprising generates only
muted protests from many Pakistanis. The fear of offending the mullahs
affects even politicians. As Mr Fateh Mohammed Khan, the senator for
Malakand, says: 'They (the insurgents) held me in my house (during the
uprising). But if I spoke out against them they would tear out my tongue.
They would kill me.'
Silence allows the mullahs to win arguments by default. Extremists in the
lawless tribal areas are free to establish and train armed bands. So the
religious fundamentalists are able to exert far more power than the people
are willing to give them at the ballot box.
