FT  18 OCT 94 / Survey of Fraud - Prevention and Detection (1): Focus on
financial crimes sharpens - The first national fraud forum this week comes
at a time when the incidence of this crime in business is rising steadily
The first national fraud forum, bringing together representatives of the
police, regulatory agencies, and private sector investigators, is being held
this week.
The three-day event, organised by the Association of Chief Police Officers
(Acpo), will bring together all groups interested in the fight against this
growing crime for the first time, to discuss how to improve prevention and
investigation procedures.
It comes, moreover, at a time when companies and the government are
increasingly aware of the penalties of failing to implement effective
procedures to prevent fraud.
The government has this year been considering introducing plastic identity
cards to replace benefit books, in an attempt to save some or all of the
hundreds of millions of pounds lost every year in social security fraud.
Meanwhile, a growing number of companies has implemented much tighter
internal auditing procedures, in a bid to detect possible frauds at a much
earlier stage.
Fraud comes in so many different forms - from the company director who uses
company funds to take his partner on holiday to the wholesale theft of
hundreds of millions by the corrupt Bank of Credit and Commerce
International - that it is notoriously difficult to define.
It is not explicitly described in criminal law, but in practice it is
treated by the authorities as a sophisticated form of theft, usually
involving deceit to obtain funds. Prosecution is normally carried out under
the 1968 Theft Act.
Detailed statistics on the national scale of fraud are equally elusive, but
Network Security Management, the fraud investigation business controlled by
the merchant bank Hambros, estimates that companies on average lose between
2 per cent and 5 per cent of their turnover as a result of fraud.
An attempt at obtaining more precise statistics has been made by the
investigation arm of accountants, Ernst &amp; Young. Its survey in 1992 of 100
companies, covering most industrial and commercial sectors, found that 24
per cent had reported a fraud costing more than Pounds 250,000 at least once
in the previous two years and that 30 per cent had reported a fraud
exceeding Pounds 50,000 in the same period. More than a third had suffered a
fraud but not notified the authorities.
Banks in particular have been particularly reluctant to report frauds,
fearing publicity would damage the confidence of their customers.
Ernst &amp; Young has recently completed another survey of these 100 companies:
98 per cent believed that there had either been no diminution, or a rise in
the incidence of fraud over the past two years.
In its assessment of reported frauds KPMG Peat Marwick's fraud investigation
unit identified 27 significant cases involving the attempted theft of Pounds
254m in the first six months of 1994, a larger number than in the whole of
1991.
These increases are perhaps surprising, since the level of fraud which comes
to light usually rises as the economy goes into recession, falling back
again as the economy recovers, as at present.
There are probably two reasons for the counter-cyclical trend. First, a
company hit by tougher trading conditions may resort to fraud to prop itself
up - the motive widely ascribed to the late Robert Maxwell for his decision
to plunder his companies' pension schemes. Second, honest companies facing
tough times may examine their costs more closely - and in the process detect
hitherto hidden frauds.
The specific types of fraud showing the greatest increases, according to
Detective Superintendent John Probert and other experts, are insurance,
mortgage and banking frauds, such as advance fee fraud.
All three are simple in concept. Mortgage fraud, for example, usually
involves overstatement of the purchase price of a property, so that a bank
or building society lends more than the actual price - with the difference
being pocketed. Earlier this year, charges alleging a Pounds 100m fraud were
brought against one group of development companies after a three-year
investigation.
The apparent abundance of work has led to a sharp increase in the number of
private sector firms involved in giving advice on prevention, as well as the
detection and recovery of lost funds. As a result, the market has become far
more competitive.
At the same time, the services offered by some less scrupulous firms - and
the methods they use - threatens to sully the image of all. Some agencies
advertise openly that they can obtain confidential details of bank accounts,
credit card records or medical information, for modest fees.
However, for police fraud squads the greatest challenge is how to do the job
effectively while having to compete against other policing priorities for
increasingly scarce resources.
There are 850 officers involved in fighting fraud throughout the UK, with
the biggest single unit, the London-based Metropolitan Fraud Squad,
employing 150 policemen and a further 40 people in support services.
The Metropolitan Police Fraud Squad, working in partnership with other
agencies, and with an annual budget of Pounds 10m last year, recovered more
than Pounds 20m in cash and securities obtained by fraudsters, compared with
Pounds 10.6m in the previous year.
The Met claims to have prevented frauds worth Pounds 6.57bn in the twelve
months to March 31, 1994. However, this figure is slightly misleading
because it includes one unusually big case: a Pounds 6.5bn attempted fraud
on the Agricultural Bank of China.
Persistent and widespread criticism of the Serious Fraud Office, which was
set up in 1988 to lead the battle against the most complex and substantial
forms of financial crime has to some extent undermined morale in the
official fraud agencies. The SFO was given large financial and staff
resources including lawyers and accountants as well as policemen.
Because the government believed that the fight against fraud presented very
different challenges from those presented by other kinds of crime, the SFO
was made independent of the Crown Prosecution Service, handling both
investigations and prosecutions. Detection has remained, however, the
responsibility of the police and City of London regulatory authorities, such
as the Stock Exchange and the Bank of England. The SFO was also given unique
powers in Section 2 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 to remove a suspect's
right to silence and compel witnesses to give evidence.
However, its handling of some high-profile cases - notably the Blue Arrow
trial and the prosecution of the financial services salesman, Roger Levitt -
has been clumsy, and its future is under review by the government. Officials
believe it could be merged with its less glamorous sister, the Fraud
Investigation Group, under the umbrella of the Crown Prosecution Service. An
announcement is likely before the end of the year.
The multi-disciplinary approach which the SFO applies - combining the skills
of police, accountants and lawyers - is likely to be increasingly adopted by
agencies and firms involved in the fight against fraud, whether they are
private sector or public sector.
Building those bridges between different institutions with their different
skills will be the focus of the forum this week.
According to some experts, such co-operation between the police and private
sector firms could one day lead to privatisation of some of the fraud
squads' activities.
