FT  21 APR 94 / International Company News: Strong sales growth helps boost
US drug groups
Pfizer and Bristol-Myers Squibb, two big US drug groups, said yesterday that
good performances by their most important products had boosted profits and
revenues in the first quarter.
The results were the latest in a series of earnings reports suggesting
steady growth in the sector in early 1994.
Of the two companies reporting yesterday, Pfizer was the most impressive.
The company's shares jumped Dollars 2 to close at Dollars 57 3/4 in New York
after it revealed a 13 per cent increase in net income, to Dollars 370.7m,
against Dollars 329m in the first quarter of 1993. Earnings per share were
up 17 per cent at Dollars 1.18.
The results were slightly ahead of most Wall Street forecasts. Mr Jonathan
Gelles, an analyst at Wertheim Schroder, expected earnings of Dollars 1.17 a
share. He said the result was particularly encouraging in view of a jump in
Pzifer's effective tax rate, to 30 per cent from 26 per cent last year.
Revenues were 6 per cent ahead at Dollars 1.98bn. Its four newest drugs, up
62 per cent, made a strong contribution. Procardia XL, a cardiovascular drug
which showed an 11 per cent decline in the fourth quarter, staged an
encouraging recovery. A sharp fall by Feldene, an arthritis treatment facing
generic competition, was an offsetting factor.
'The substantial increase in sales volume of our new products continues to
be the underlying strength of our company,' said Mr William Steere, chairman
and chief executive. He said revenue growth largely reflected higher
volumes, rather than price increases.
Bristol-Myers Squibb showed more modest gains, and Wall Street responded
accordingly.
The shares closed unchanged at Dollars 52 1/4 after the company posted net
income up 1 per cent at Dollars 580.9m, against Dollars 574.7m a year
earlier.
The scant improvement largely reflected higher taxes. At the pre-tax level,
earnings were 6 per cent better. The company said cost-cutting had helped to
lift margins.
Overall, revenues were up 3 per cent at Dollars 2.8bn. A 6 per cent advance
in pharmaceuticals sales was somewhat offset by a 9 per cent decline in
consumer products, which include Ban anti-perspirant and Excedrin
pain-reliever. Capoten, a cardiovascular drug which is the company's
best-seller, performed well, despite increased competition.
