FT  17 NOV 94 / US cruiser tracks Greek and Turkish contingents: Marine
rights row leads to fear of war between Nato neighbours
A US Navy cruiser was yesterday monitoring Greek and Turkish naval
activities in the Aegean, where fears of war have been triggered by the
start of a new international law.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea has been hailed in
Athens as a vindication of its long-standing argument that it has the right
to extend its territorial waters from 6 miles to 12.
Turkey has said that any such move by Athens would turn the Aegean into a
'Greek lake' and would be resisted by force. Greece says it has no plans to
extend its territorial waters, but it will not renounce the right to do so.
An opinion poll published this week showed that 79 per cent of Turks would
support war if Greece declared a 12-mile limit.
The quarrel dates from an offshore oil strike west of the Greek island of
Thasos more than 20 years ago. The Athens government rejects Turkish
proposals for joint oil exploration in the Aegean.
The Cape St George, a US cruiser equipped with the latest electronic
surveillance devices, was yesterday tracking Turkish warships and Greek
aircraft across the Aegean.
President Bill Clinton has written to the leaders of both countries urging
them to show restraint and avoid the risk of clashes.
Mr Mumtaz Soysal, the Turkish foreign minister, said Ankara has assured Mr
Clinton that it had taken all possible measures to avoid a clash. Mr Soysal
met Mr Karolos Papoulis, his Greek counterpart, in The Hague this week, but
there was little sign of a change in positions.
Turkey wants across-the-board negotiations on all the issues which it says
are in dispute. Greece says the only issue that needs discussing is that of
seabed mineral rights, which it wants settled by international arbitration.
Relations between Athens and Ankara have also been worsened by the war in
former Yugoslavia, where Turkey supports the Bosnian Moslems while Greece
has traditional links with the Serbs.
Turkey was the only European member of Nato to support the US withdrawal
from the arms embargo against Bosnia. Recently, Turkey gave a new thrust to
the old antagonisms by accusing Greece of harbouring guerrillas from the
separatist Kurdistan Workers party (PKK) fighting in eastern Turkey.
The US Navy, in this year's annual intelligence report, described the
Greek-Turkish standoff as one of the 'most worrisome situations developing
in Europe and the most dangerous to Nato as an institution'.
The report says tension in the Aegean has also been stoked by supplies to
both countries of new and secondhand ships from other Nato countries.
Diplomats said they were alarmed that a hot-line between the two countries,
set up after they came close to war in 1987, had ceased to function.
Turkey is conducting its manoeuvres this week in international waters in the
northern Aegean. About 100 miles to the south, the Greek navy is in charge
of a Nato exercise held every year involving ships and aircraft from the US,
France, Italy, Spain and the UK.
