FT  16 SEP 94 / Engineering industry shows surge in output and orders
Engineering is showing a strong upward trend in output levels, new orders
and capital investment although employment levels remain flat, the
Engineering Employers' Federation said yesterday.
The federation warns in its Budget submission, however, that in spite of the
recovery, the industry still needs policy support. The federation recommends
changes to the rules on corporation and capital gains taxes in order to
boost investment.
In a new business trends survey of 1,700 of the federation's members
throughout its 13 regional associations, the EEF aims to give a 'quick and
up-to-date' picture of the industry's fortunes to complement the
government's more detailed statistics.
In the three months to September the federation found growth rates in output
and new orders were comparable to those last seen in 1987 and 1988. Just
more than half of respondents said output had risen in the three months,
while 13 per cent said it had fallen. On new orders, 52 per cent of
companies reported an increase while 18 per cent reported a decrease.
The bulk of the companies surveyed - 61 per cent - reported unchanged
capital investment plans. But 31 per cent reported plans to increase
investment while only 8 per cent expected cuts.
The survey found 49 per cent of companies were not changing their employment
levels, with 32 per cent indicating an increase of employees, and 19 per
cent reporting a decrease.
However, the federation said companies reducing employment were primarily
bigger ones while companies that were increasing staff were mainly small
businesses.
In its Budget submission the federation asks for an inflation indexation of
existing capital allowances for plant and machinery, and 100 per cent
capital allowances for the initial annual Pounds 200,000 of plant and
machinery investment.
It is also requesting a tapered rate of capital gains tax and a low rate of
taxation on capital gains on assets held for six years or longer.
