FT  11 MAR 94 / Pilots' union hits out at Heathrow closure delay
Balpa, the pilots' union, yesterday demanded a full-scale inquiry into why
there was a 40-minute delay in closing the northern runway of London's
Heathrow airport after Wednesday's mortar-bomb attack.
The IRA yesterday admitted responsibility for the mortars, fired from the
car-park of the Excelsior Hotel, as police and BAA, which owns the airport,
launched a review of security and evacuation procedures.
Mr Chris Darke, general secretary of Balpa, said he was 'alarmed' that 24
aircraft took off during that time. 'It is intolerable that this incident
put the lives of pilots, their flight and cabin crews and their passengers
at risk,' he said.
Metropolitan Police Commissioner Paul Condon and Commander David Tucker,
head of Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist branch, defended the police decision
to keep the runway open. They refused to discuss the nature and extent of
the investigation into security procedures.
Commander Tucker said the decision to keep the runway open was made in
consultation between the police and BAA, based on an assessment of the
probable direction of the mortar bombs and the fact that at the time of the
car-park fire police had received no reports on impacts of any of the
mortars.
Police heard first reports of a fire in the Excelsior car-park just before
6pm, less than an hour after six coded messages warning of bombs at Heathrow
were received.
Within 10 minutes of the fire, police discovered the Nissan Micra car from
which the devices were fired. After the runway was cleared, police found two
mortars on it and two more nearby.
Police said they did not know why none of the mortars detonated. The
mortars, which travelled 700 yards from the car-park, did not land on the
part of the runway normally used by aircraft. Commander Tucker said 'there
was no danger at any time of an aircraft running over the debris before the
runway was closed'.
Commander Tucker said IRA warning calls tended to be 'dishonest', and there
was a danger that if police had evacuated the runway sooner up to 20,000
people may have been in the Excelsior car-park when the car carrying the
mortars exploded.
The commissioner said: 'We all share the responsibility for risk assessment.
We can minimise risk but we can never totally neutralise it.'
Mr Mike Roberts, managing director of Heathrow airport, supported the
decision not to close the runway immediately.
He said: 'Safety and security are our highest priority, I can assure you.
When entering into the decision-making process we take advice from the
police and take a decision to make sure everything is safe.'
Police said the airport was fully operational by 9.30am yesterday.
