FT  23 APR 94 / Almost the real thing: Brands look increasingly vulnerable
to competition from own-label products
It has not been a good week for grocery brands in the UK. On Monday
Sainsbury, the nation's biggest food retailer, launched its own version of
Coca-Cola, cheekily close to the real thing in appearance but roughly half
the price. On the same day, the House of Commons rejected pleas from branded
manufacturers to outlaw look-alike products of precisely the kind appearing
on Sainsbury's shelves. The result was a blizzard of free publicity which
Coca-Cola needed like a hole in the head; and sure enough, by the end of the
week, trade rumour had it that Sainsbury was selling more of its own version
of Coke than it was of the original.
Behind the hype lie some serious issues. In recent months, the war between
brands and own-label products in the UK has become increasingly vicious, and
increasingly based on price. According to the market researchers Nielsen,
the rate of inflation for own-label products last year averaged 1 percentage
point less than for equivalent brands. But from July onwards the pace hotted
up, so that by the year end the gap had stretched to 5 per cent. Meanwhile,
Nielsen says, own-label sales grew 3.5 per cent faster than the grocery
market as a whole.
A decade or two ago, this would have seemed perfectly obvious. Own-label was
supposed to be cheap and nasty, a mere substitute for those too poor to
afford the brand. These days, it is if anything the reverse. An analysis by
another market research firm, AGB, shows that buyers of own-label are most
heavily represented among the affluent middle class, living in the south of
England and shunning commercial television. Though most own-label products
are still a lot cheaper, not all are. Own-label kitchen towels have over
half the market, and the most expensive of them cost more than the brands.
This fits the pattern displayed by the retailers themselves. A really cheap
down-market chain like Kwik Save sells very little own-label. Further
up-market, Sainsbury sells more own-label than it does brands. Further
up-market again, Marks and Spencer sells own-label and nothing else.
Despite their new-found emphasis on price, the retailers have been careful
not to sacrifice their quality image. It is worth recalling that Sainsbury
has had an own-label cola on its shelves for years. But it was a relatively
poor-quality product, not worth pushing heavily. It now has a better
version, supplied by Cott Beverages of Canada. At an introductory 59p per
two-litre bottle, compared with 105p for Coca-Cola, the new Sainsbury Coke
is ferociously competitive on price. Of equal importance, though, is the
fact that it also tastes almost exactly like the real thing.
For the branded manufacturers, this combination of aggressive pricing and
high quality is the worst of both worlds. Their fight with the retailers,
after all, is not an equal one. Retailers do not have to carry the same
costs as the manufacturers do, especially in advertising and promotion. Mr
David Webster, deputy chairman of Argyll (owner of Safeway UK) is on record
as saying retailers can sell own-label products 15 per cent cheaper than
brands and still make the same cash return.
The fact that the manufacturers this week failed to stop the retailers
selling their products in look-alike packages gives the knife an extra
twist. The head of one big retailer, reflecting on the uncanny resemblance
between a leading brand of shampoo and his own version of it, privately
expresses astonishment that he is allowed to get away with it. This week's
vote in the Commons ensures he can still do so. As a result, every time the
branded manufacturer advertises his own product, he is giving a free ride to
an own-label competitor.
However, the contest may not stay so one-sided for ever. In forcing down
own-label prices, the retailers are playing a dangerous game. In an
international context, the industry giants like Sainsbury and Tesco are
high-cost, capital-intensive operations, which need high profit margins to
make their sums work. The more they educate their up-market customers to
expect lower prices, the more they risk opening the door to real cut-price
retailers like Aldi of Germany or Netto of Sweden.
No such thing, Sainsbury and Tesco would reply. They are safeguarded, they
say, precisely by the expectation of quality which they have so
painstakingly built up over the years. It is one thing for foreign
cost-cutters to set up their stalls in the UK. It is quite another for them
to lay their hands on the kind of quality own-label produce which the
British retailers have made their speciality.
Maybe so. But it is worth reflecting that, while the British retailers have
been educating their customers on the virtues of own-label, they have also
been educating their suppliers. If a manufacturer like Cott can make cola
for Sainsbury, it can do it for anyone else. Indeed, trade rumour has it
that Cott is talking to at least one other UK retailer already.
The same point can be illustrated in detergents, traditionally a market in
which own-label played little part. The UK is a battleground between two
giants of consumer branding, Unilever and Procter &amp; Gamble. The most hotly
contested area is concentrated powders, which in five years have come from
nowhere to take half the market.
But own-label has grabbed a much bigger share of the concentrates market -
some 15 per cent - than it has of detergents overall. This implies that the
specialist manufacturers which supply the retailers, such as Albright &amp;
Wilson of the UK and Tensia of Belgium, are at the leading edge of
technology. Again, if they can manufacture for Sainsbury and Tesco, they can
doubtless make detergents to the same specifications for anyone else.
For both branded manufacturers and retailers, the danger should not be
exaggerated. In some product categories, the share held by own-label is
still low: chocolate, soap and pet food, for instance. Vulnerability to
own-label may be inherent in the product, or in the technology used to make
it. According to AGB, most of the top own-label products in the UK are also
big own-label products in France and Germany.
But in almost every category, brands have given up ground over the past
decade. If anything, the process may be speeding up. It is telling that the
discount chain Kwik Save, which has traditionally shunned own-label, entered
the market for the first time last year and now reports it to be the
fastest-growing part of its business. In the long run, the chief
beneficiaries of all this may turn out to be the manufacturers of own-label
produce; besides, of course, the customers themselves.
Additional reporting by Diane Summers and Neil Buckley
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                       UK OWN LABEL MARKET SHARES
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                    1980                  1991
                              percent   rank        percent   rank
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Dairy products                   34       1            47       1
Paper goods                      32       2            46       2
Beverages                        28       3            33       3
Bakery foods                     24       4            35       4
Frozen foods                     22       5            44       5
Canned goods                     20       6            27       6
Household cleaners               18       7            22       7
Sauces &amp; ketchups                15       8            24       8
Packet foods                     14       9            21       9
Toiletries                       11      10            14      10
Soaps &amp; detergents                9      11             8      11
Pet food                          6      12             7      12
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
TOTAL                            22                    31
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
