FT  06 AUG 94 / How To Spend It: Why beautiful legs are so painful
Few of us are blessed with the legs of a thoroughbred and those whose legs
seem less than perfect might be comforted by looking back at how notions of
leggy pulchritude have changed through the ages. The pins of such legendary
icons as Betty Grable, Marilyn Monroe and Dorothy Lamour would not hold a
candle to those of the super-models of today. Nicely turned ankles were
their speciality. Nobody seemed to mind the dimpled knees and podgy thighs
that came with them.
But whether it be Betty Grable or Naomi Campbell, the real lesson about legs
 -which is equally true of sexual allure - is that confidence is all. We all
know femmes fatales who have little in the way of conventional beauty to
explain their success but who radiate an inner sense of who they are. So it
is with legs. There is no need to go around all summer swathed in long
skirts or floaty trousers - short skirts, a tan (preferably fake) and some
well-chosen tights and there are few legs that cannot be shown with pride.
But for those whose confidence is poor there is now a vast panoply of
palliatives, beautifiers, toners, exfoliators, creams, gadgets and therapies
all of which claim to help the quest for the streamlined pins.
No single pair of legs could find the time to test them all but the How To
Spend It team has been on a quest for the perfect pins and here, for those
heading for the beach and pool, are some of the conclusions.
The bad news is that the most successful treatments, the ones which showed a
measurable improvement, were the least pleasant - this may suit the puritans
who feel more psychologically at ease with the notion that il faut suffrir
pour etre belle but personally I would prefer a soothing aromatherapy any
day.
I started back in the spring with Fisiotron. This is not only aimed at legs
but claims to be a complete body contouring system which promises to achieve
a 'reduced body size'. I spent two lunch-hours a week for three weeks being
exfoliated, oiled, wrapped and shrunk in Erica Scott and Sue Douglas's
Health and Beauty basement at 28 Motcomb Street, Belgravia, London SW1X 8JU
(tel: 071-235 2228).
After the exfoliating treatment you are wrapped from neck to toe in warm,
damp bandages through which electronic pulses are regularly transmitted to
stimulate the muscles. This is not a pleasant sensation and at one stage I
got quite severe leg cramp but it did seem to work. After six treatments the
measurement chart revealed an overall loss of just over 7 inches, mainly
from the stomach and the top of the thighs and the general tone of the top
of the legs is much firmer.
It requires, however, a commitment of time and money - occasional treatments
are of no use and a proper course should ideally involve 10 visits with
batches of two being taken within 36 hours of each other. The full course of
10 treatments costs Pounds 280. For a local Fisiotron specialist ring
081-202 2264.
Even more unpleasant but certainly very effective is the G5 treatment for
legs. Also based on electric currents which stimulate and, it is claimed,
'educate' the muscles, this was not pleasant but it brought about an
immediate and evident firming effect after just one treatment. For those
wanting serious improvement G5 suggests six treatments in a row (daily or
weekly), followed by a single follow-up visit after three weeks. Many health
farms and beauty salons offer this treatment but for Londoners a truly
relaxing environment in which to have it is Harrods' revamped Health and
Beauty Salon. Six treatments of half an hour each cost Pounds 110.
Much more relaxing and enjoyable is Aromazone - legs are anointed with oil
and then encased in leggings through which moving impulses stimulate the
lymphatic system. The results are less dramatic than with either the
Fisiotron or the G5 but I do believe it improves the tone. Again Harrods, as
well as many other beauty salons, offer this treatment - a course of six is
Pounds 100.
Finding myself, most happily, in The Oriental Hotel in Bangkok what could be
more inviting than a bit of oriental massage? It is a long way to go (if you
start from London) and its real aim is less to pander to western notions of
pulchritude than to work on the inner being - 'The oriental path to the
well-being of mind and body' is nothing more nor less than its aim.
In the spa, across the river from the hotel, all is beauty, calm and quiet.
As you sip your lemon-grass tea you decide which of the treatments on offer
will be yours - stimulating leg treatment? Jet lag massage? Oriental
Massage? Here you can while away the time most deliciously, you are
pampered, massaged and powdered like a baby. Those who can stand the thought
of being checked for 'cellulite, water retention, skin elasticity, and
imperfections such as stretch marks and varicose veins' by a 20-year-old
beauty with not an imperfection in sight could have a complete Body Analysis
and body service.
I opted for an Oriental massage which reduced some of our party to yelps of
pain but which I felt had to be doing some good somewhere, and later a Body
Toning Treatment. I emerged feeling at peace with the world and planning my
return visit. As for the thighs, they remained resolutely the way they were.
If all these prices are beyond you, do not worry - the simplest and cheapest
of all the remedies, and one that every beauty editor in London recommends -
is to buy a body brush from The Body Shop for Pounds 4.95 and use it to
brush the skin daily. Start with the soles of the feet and brush gently
upwards and towards the heart.
