FT  05 MAY 94 / Arts: Cosi in concert - Opera
At 82, Sir Georg Solti conducted Mozart's Cosi fan tutte with unabated verve
on Tuesday at the Royal Festival Hall. For this concert performance
(repeated tonight), the musical circumstances were particularly happy: an
international cast of youngish singers with rich experience in their roles,
and a small band who could make Mozart's orchestral inspirations tell
without covering the voices.
The result was pretty much pure delight. Solti set a cracking pace, and
after the Royal Opera's recent Figaro, it was bracing to hear Mozart's
recitatives rattling along as they should. A pair of Italians in the cast
was an enormous help, and in the roles where it matters most: chattery
Despina and the cynical philosopher Don Alfonso.
Nothing sounded forced or hard-driven, because Solti's Cosi is coherently
swift - everything in due proportion, judged by one of the most seasoned
pairs of ears in the business. In fact speed was essential, for we were
hearing an unusually full text, and even then Cosi ran on to 11.15 pm.
There were stronger grounds for complaint about the programme-book (Pounds
2) for this costly event (best seats Pounds 42). At a BBC Prom, the full
libretto would have been printed. Here, besides lists of performers, long,
gushing CVs for the singers and a few adverts, we got only a
number-by-number synopsis written for some 1989 performance in which
Ferrando apparently sang only one of his three arias. The book needed urgent
checking against Solti's menu: customers would have liked to know which bits
of Cosi were on offer and there was no excuse for this tacky non-effort. One
had less complaint about hearing only four of the six principals originally
advertised: that is par for the course, and anyhow both the substitutes were
outstanding.
If Frank Lopardo's Ferrando sounded darker and heavier than European ears
expect from a Mozart tenor, he was faultlessly intelligent and stylish. As
for his compatriot Renee Fleming, her Fiordiligi is by current standards
already world-class: sensitive, gorgeously varied in tone and attack, rising
to a noble 'Per pieta'. Anne Sophie von Otter sings a delectable, resinous
Dorabella, skittish and funny.
The real Italians are Michele Pertusi's cultivated, saturnine philosopher,
and Adelina Scarabelli's bright Despina - in a slatternly little black
number, peasant-style: Northern European sopranos never hit that earthy
vein. Olaf Baer's knowingly winsome Guglielmo veers between two stools; when
intimate and velvety he falls short of operatic scale, but in virile
frustration he sounds brittle and dry.
The Chamber Orchestra of Europe fulfilled every expectation. They fielded
period-trumpets, which scored unexpectedly sharp and rewarding points; their
horns looked fairly battered too, but modern or not they delivered their
fearsome 'Per pieta' obbligati with credit. This Solti/COE collaboration is
going to stay in the mind for a long time.
