FT  13 APR 94 / Camdessus casts a line to Algiers: A Dollars 1bn IMF gamble
to save Algeria from 'creeping Afghanisation'
Mr Michel Camdessus, managing director of the International Monetary Fund,
has taken a huge gamble. So has General Liamine Zeroual, the Algerian head
of state. If they fail, neither the IMF nor the Algerian army will have
another chance to save north Africa's largest country from a fate which a
senior US official likened to one of 'creeping Afghanisation'.
Mr Camdessus has asked the board of the IMF to extend a Dollars 1bn (Pounds
680m) one-year standby loan to Algeria, which the board is expected to
approve by the end of the month. He has called on Algeria's foreign
creditors to follow the IMF and provide the country with a further Dollars
8bn-Dollars 9bn which it will need to pay its international way this year.
Of this total, Dollars 3.5bn would come from the rescheduling of the
principal repayments of debt owed to its sovereign creditors, who are due to
meet at a Paris Club meeting in mid-May; Dollars 1.5bn would come from the
World Bank, African Development Bank and Arab Monetary Fund loans; Dollars
1bn from the European Union; and the balance from export credits which would
be maintained at last year's level.
Algeria has already been asked to take its medicine. Three weeks ago the
price of nine staple foodstuffs - including flour, bread and milk - were
increased by between 25 and 100 per cent. This followed similar rises in the
cost of petrol and domestic fuel. Other increases are intended to follow.
The dinar has been devalued by 40 per cent and interest rates raised.
Measures to liberalise foreign trade are expected this week. A later stage
in the process will require state companies to shed excess labour.
Mr Redha Malek, the prime minister since last August, announced on Monday he
was resigning. Foreign observers do not agree on why. It may be that he
disagreed with the policy now openly pursued by Gen Zeroual of trying to
talk to those members of the banned fundamentalist Islamic Salvation Front
(FIS) who do not wish to see their country slide into total anarchy.
It may be that the head of state wanted to replace him with a technocrat who
carries no political weight and whose job is that of the surgeon, a man who
can be disposed of easily if the going gets rough.
Mr Mokdad Sifi, who is taking over, certainly fits that description. He
comes from Tebessa, a town close to the Tunisian border which has provided
many key figures to the Direction Generale de la Securite Nationale, the
fount of much power in Algeria over 30 years.
Days before Mr Malek's departure, Mr Camdessus had expressed, in an
interview with Algerian state television, much enthusiasm and hope about the
process of economic reform upon which he felt Algeria was embarking.
Many Algerians hope the IMF chief's judgment is better vindicated by events
than it was after the last agreement with the Fund. That accord, signed in
June 1991, was followed promptly by the dismissal of the then reformist
prime minister, Mr Mouloud Hamrouche. Mr Camdessus heaped praise on his
successor, Mr Sid Ahmed Ghozali, whose policies went on in effect to destroy
the economic reforms to which the IMF had just given its imprimatur.
The position today is incomparably worse. Some 4,000 Algerians have died
since elections, which the FIS was poised to win, were suspended in January
1992. Fierce repression has not prevented large areas of Algeria, including
some cities, from slipping out of the state's control, notably at night. The
hardline Islamic Armed Group is committing acts of terror on ordinary
Algerians and has targeted foreigners, many of whom have fled the country.
Although this has helped bring Algeria's economy to its current state of
semi-collapse, a main factor has been the fall in world prices of
hydrocarbons, which account for 90 per cent of the country's foreign income.
Foreign debt repayments would, in the absence of an agreement with the
country's western creditors, absorb virtually all Algeria's forecast Dollars
9bn income this year.
As they consider the possible fate of a reform package now being put
together, the country's foreign creditors are, in the words of one senior
European banker, 'functioning on a wing and a prayer'.
So are 26m Algerians. As one sardonically commented: 'The difference is that
we are risking our lives while western countries are only risking their
money.'
