FT  25 JUL 94 / Middle East peace process 'irreversible': Julian Ozanne
looks at today's historic meeting in Washington
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israeli prime minister, and King Hussein of Jordan are
expected to declare before the world the end of a 46-year state of war and
the irreversible nature of their peace process, at a meeting in Washington
today.
The meeting will signify the full return of Jordan to the western fold after
the king's support for Iraq during the Gulf crisis. Israelis believe the
peace process will also consolidate a realignment of forces in a Middle East
dominated no longer by the Arab-Israeli conflict but by the greater threat
of Iran and its export of Islamic fundamentalism.
The geo-political dimension is a significant factor, although probably more
so to Israel and the US. Much more important to Jordan are the economic
incentives which are driving peace efforts.
King Hussein has always been a moderate and pragmatist but he has waited
before signing a peace treaty with Israel in the interests of wider Arab
solidarity.
A formal peace treaty will still take several months to complete and will
give Syria and Lebanon a little more time to strike their own deals.
The king has decided to go ahead with normalising relations and implementing
joint projects ahead of a formal treaty, which is only a matter of time.
Some economic measures will be announced today as the first steps towards
integrating the economies of Jordan, Israel, Egypt and the Palestinians into
a Middle East common market.
Jordan and Israel share geographic and economic resources: the Jordan
Valley, the Dead Sea, the Arava desert, the water sources of the Jordan and
Yarmouk rivers and the Red Sea Gulf of Aqaba.
Last week's economic talks held on the Jordanian side of the Dead Sea
revealed the extent of economic co-operation which could develop well ahead
of the peace treaty.
At present it is even impossible to telephone Amman from Jerusalem or Tel
Aviv, as Jordan has blocked the lines. Opening phone lines and borders would
be an easy first step. Opening the borders would also fuel tourism.
The two sides also discussed other possible first steps such as establishing
commercial flights, reopening Jordanian banks which operated in the West
Bank before 1967, and establishing trade relations.
More difficult and expensive will be projects like a plan discussed last
week for a joint development strategy of the Jordan Valley and Arava desert
from Yarmouk in the north to Aqaba in the south. The scheme would encourage
tourism and preserve the environment, and includes a Dollars 3bn (Pounds
1.9bn) project to bring Red Sea water to the Dead Sea by constructing a
canal which would generate hydro-electricity and preserve the water levels
in the Dead Sea.
Apart from the joint projects, US President Bill Clinton has also promised
to ask Congress to relieve Dollars 950m of Jordanian debt and to supply
military equipment to modernise the king's outdated army.
Israel stands to benefit almost as much as Jordan. But Israel is driven much
more by the psychological dimension of peace, and today's Rabin-Hussein
handshake will signify the acceptance and increased security Israelis crave
in the Middle East.
Jordan has agreed to allow Israeli airliners to use its airspace for flights
to the Far East and India, the Israeli transport ministry said yesterday,
Reuter reports from Jerusalem. It said the US would ask Saudi Arabia to
grant similar airspace rights to El Al, Israel's national carrier.
