FT  07 SEP 94 / Letters to the Editor: Body Shop: a cowardly attack, and a
salutary experience
Sir, The Body Shop's commitment to environmental, animal welfare and
conservation issues is well established. Is it not remarkable that, in a
world so consumed by avarice and capricious self-interest, the US presumes
to enlighten us with a piece of such pure altruistic delight?
John Entine's cowardly attack on the achievement of Anita Roddick (and Co)
should be treated with contempt. The market has responded thus and rightly
so.
The critically endangered Siberian tiger would be one step closer to the
edge were it not for the brave foresight and initiative of the Body Shop. A
strange irony when a certain petroleum company of highly questionable
environmental pedigree has all but discarded its tiger mascot on to the
refuse tip of extinction.
Michael P Day,
chairman of the board of
trustees,
The Tiger Trust,
Chevington,
Bury St Edmunds,
Suffolk IP29 5RG
From Mr Rupert Pearson
Sir, I refer to the letter from Mr Robin Bines and others ('Allegations
against the Body Shop lack any real evidence', September 1). The letter
could well have been written by industry in response to the 'unproven
allegations and the facts blown out of all proportion' which are so often
levelled by the environmental movement against sectors of manufacturing
industry. It will perhaps be a salutary experience for the environmental
movement to be subjected to the sort of treatment which it so often metes
out to industry, frequently based on unproven allegations, selective 'facts'
and inaccurate information.
I congratulate you in having the courage to publish the reports on the Body
Shop which I have read with great interest. Perhaps it may lead to further
critical questioning and challenges to other organisations parading their
green credentials.
For too long, industry and others who contribute to the health, prosperity
and the well-being of society, have been on the receiving end of
unsubstantiated green claims without the green movement and its claims being
subjected to the same scrutiny.
Rupert Pearson.
43 Stag Green Avenue,
Hatfield,
Hertfordshire AL9 5EB
