FT  02 JUL 94 / The famous DNA double act: Forty years ago, James D. Watson
and Francis Crick made a discovery described as the greatest achievement of
science in the 20th century. Christian Tyler tells the story
The professor was galloping back and forth along the base line, returning
his coach's slamming serves with an aggressive, short-swinging stab. His
pursuit of the ball was single-minded, and impressively nimble for a
66-year-old.
A mile or so from this animated scene, scientists at the John Radcliffe
Hospital, in Oxford, were concluding a remarkable post mortem examination.
They reported that 'Otzi', a Tyrolean hiker overtaken by a blizzard and
frozen to death 5,000 years ago, has at least 88 relatives living in the
same Alpine region today and other kinsmen dotted round Germany and northern
Europe. Therefore Otzi could not be, as some have tried to claim, a Peruvian
mummy deposited on the mountain pass three years ago by a practical joker.
The professor had been bouncing about the tennis court for half an hour,
whooping and exclaiming. Now he collected up his things, thanked the coach,
complained that he had not been up to his best but said he was glad to have
shed another ounce or two.
Meanwhile, a few fields away, a controversy was raging over a cabbage patch.
Another group of scientists had been given permission to release on to their
test site a genetically-altered virus designed to kill the caterpillar of a
pest called the cabbage looper. But a local resident, a materials scientist,
had spotted the statutory announcement in the local paper and protested. Was
there any guarantee, he wanted to know, that the virus - which contains a
gene for scorpion venom - would not attack other kinds of insect or breed
with wild viruses? It was the biggest row of its kind yet seen in Britain.
The experiment was interrupted.
These two trials, like thousands more going on in medicine and agriculture
all over the world, are the results of a biological revolution started by
the leaping tennis player, James D. Watson, and his colleague Francis Crick.
Their discovery of the molecular structure of deoxyribonucleic acid, DNA,
the famous double helix, was made more than 40 years ago at the Cavendish
Laboratory in Cambridge. It was published in that annus mirabilis of 1953,
just before the Queen's coronation and the British team's conquest of
Everest.
It was a vital link in the chain of discoveries which the late Sir Peter
Medawar called in his book Pluto's Republic 'the greatest achievement of
science in the 20th century'. Not only did Crick and Watson share the Nobel
prize for it but, contrary to their own expectations at the time, lived to
see its extraordinary consequences.
They are both alive, and both still kicking. Francis Crick, now 78, holds a
specially-created research post at the Salk Institute in La Jolla,
California. On a visit to London last month to promote his new book he told
me: 'The general reaction of younger people - if they don't say it you can
see it in their eyes - is 'Good heavens] Are you still alive?'' He recounted
how a young woman was selling a car to him and his wife, Odile. On hearing
the name she looked suspiciously at Crick: 'Anything to do with DNA?' He
confirmed that he was and she exclaimed: 'But I've got a photo of you over
my bed]'
The former colleagues are a paradoxical pair. Both work in the US, but
Watson, the American, is very much an Anglophile. Crick, the Englishman,
loves the Californian lifestyle. Rather like the double helix itself, the
two spiral strands of which unwind and decouple for replication, their own
lives have diverged. Yet beneath the skin they are remarkably similar.
Jim Watson is the younger man but looks older. He confessed that he had
grown overweight during his long tenure at Cold Spring Harbor, the
laboratory on Long Island, New York, where he is director and responsible
for raising funds for young medical researchers. But the year he has been
spending as a visiting fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford, has allowed him
time to get fit and recover something of his former skinny profile. Behind
the old man's visage one can recognise the gawky, precocious youth with the
large eyes, crooked smile and self-mocking, slurping chuckle who arrived in
Cambridge in 1951.
Francis Crick's hair is white but the face below it is seamless and young,
for all that he has lived the past 18 years on the West Coast. He is still
the energetic talker described by Watson in his best-seller, The Double
Helix, but there is little trace today of the hyena laugh which so upset Sir
Lawrence Bragg, head of the Cavendish laboratory. Nor does he display that
characteristic which Watson noted in the famous first sentence of the book:
'I have never seen Francis Crick in a modest mood.' Crick says now: 'I think
he meant I was usually exuberant. He just used the wrong word.' Maybe.
Although their work separated them long ago, the two men meet occasionally.
When they talk about each other now it is with a critical but nostalgic
affection - with admiration, too. Watson, the precocious one (he went to the
university of Chicago at the age of 15), says Crick has the faster brain. He
still professes to be puzzled that the older man, so brimming with ideas,
should have taken as long as he did - he was in his mid-30s when they
discovered the double helix - to make his mark.
Watson has been described as the Boswell without whose book his collaborator
might not have become known to the public at all. 'Francis went to the
extremes of trying to avoid the press,' he said, 'which I think diminished
his importance in the world.' Watson once wrote that Crick would prove to be
as important a scientist as Rutherford or Bohr. Had he? 'I think so.'
And how does Crick describe his Boswell? 'He is still what you might call
the unAmerican boy. He doesn't conform very easily. But he has turned out to
be an extraordinarily good scientific administrator, for example, both at
raising money and at getting good people. He's very shrewd, in fact.'
Both say they owe their present elevated position to the fact that they are
Nobel laureates. They shared the prize in 1962 with Maurice Wilkins, a
friend of Crick's from the war years, whose X-ray diffraction work on the
DNA molecule at King's College, London, was vital to the discovery. There
were other benefits, said Crick, one of which was getting past bureaucrats.
He described how, scruffily dressed, he went to the US embassy in London for
a visa so that he could deliver a lecture in America. The woman behind the
desk asked him how he could support himself on one lecture alone and was
incredulous when told he was getting paid Dollars 1,000 for it (this was
some years ago), and transfigured when she learnt he was a Nobel
prizewinner.
'But it doesn't help socially,' said Crick, 'because people treat you as
some sort of strange animal. If they find themselves at dinner sitting next
to a Nobel prizewinner they worry about what their conversation is like.'
Neither man will say that the double helix was the climax of his career,
that the rest had been less interesting. Watson maintains that he has
derived more pleasure from his books in the long run - the textbooks as well
as the best-seller - 'because they were totally my own'. He is writing a
sequel to The Double Helix about his life after Cambridge, in which he
describes his pursuit of pretty girls and his eventual marriage, at the age
of 40, to Elizabeth Lewis. He wants to call the sequel Genes and Girls, if
his publisher will let him. 'First I found the perfect molecule and then the
perfect woman,' he laughed.
Watson returned to the US in 1953, still only 25 years old and feeling, as
he wrote later, 'too old to be unusual'. He worked with the distinguished
chemist Linus Pauling and taught at Harvard before being appointed to run
the Cold Spring Harbor laboratory. Crick stayed on at Cambridge finished his
PhD and helped crack the genetic code.
Through his research students, Watson is still interested in pursuing genes,
especially those which could account for medical disorders such as cancer,
Alzheimer's disease, or manic depression. He became part-time director of
the human genome project in Washington, DC, but was sacked by the parent
body, the US National Institutes of Health two years ago, allegedly for a
potential conflict of interest between his professional work and private
shareholdings in biotechnology companies.
But the real reason, he said, was a clash between his scientific opinion and
a bureaucrat's power game. In his characteristically blunt way, he had
publicly disagreed with the 'absurd' policy of patenting short sequences of
DNA, which he argued were commercially valueless.
These days he is interested in medical ethics. By this, he does not mean
what most people mean. Of course, he said, there is a problem in deciding
how far people should be warned of their genetic predisposition to
particular illnesses. 'But the major ethical problem - one which faces the
British government, for example - is whether it will spend the money to
ensure that its citizens have as healthy babies as possible. That's the
major one.' In other words, he is worried not that legislators will let
scientists interfere too much, but interfere too little.
'We have the wrong priorities,' he said. 'We tend to get stuck on something
about which you can argue for ever. But does a family want a child that
can't learn? Are we going to help people have functional families? It's just
common sense. I think the problem will disappear if we ask the right
questions.' Watson speaks with feeling: one of his own two sons was born
with a serious learning handicap.
And here the similarity of thinking between Crick and Watson, so productive
at the Cavendish all those years ago, becomes apparent. Both are frank and
passionate materialists who run a mile from the comfort of metaphysical
explanations. 'Are we similar types? Yes,' said Watson. 'I think we think in
the same way. Francis always thought much quicker and better than I do. But
we sort of have similar reactions to people.'
To the big questions also. Francis Crick's latest book, published in May, is
called The Astonishing Hypothesis. It is the product of his new career at
the Salk Institute as a neuroscientist specialising in visual perception.
(Watson has plans for similar research.)
Crick's hypothesis is simply that human consciousness, personality, the soul
 -whatever you will - are entirely explicable in terms of brain activity.
Approaching the mystery of consciousness with the same ruthlessness that the
pair applied to the secret of life, Crick argues that the only way we can
explain ourselves to ourselves is to get right inside, to the brain cells,
and look.
'To very religious people I say: we don't know which way this thing is
turning out. It may turn out there is something immaterial that we don't
know about.' For example there was a serious difficulty in accounting for
qualia - phenomena such as the 'redness' of red.
So human beings are machines? 'You mustn't call us machines,' said Crick. 'I
would put it the other way round. We should be saying 'Isn't it remarkable
that this thing inside my head does such wonderful things]' We won't destroy
the wonder. We are simply trying to remove the mystery.'
Crick's remark could be an appropriate epitaph, for one thing is certain.
The two old men of the double helix will not be around to see the results.
