FT  25 NOV 94 / Management (Health Check): Pitfalls of indulgence - Carol
Cooper looks at how best to survive the Christmas festivities
Thanks to classical experiments conducted by Holy Roman Emperor Frederick
II, it has been known since the 13th century that exercise inhibits
digestion.
Frederick made two slaves eat a big meal. Afterwards one rested while the
other was made to exercise vigorously. Both were then executed, which showed
that the one who had exercised still had a full stomach.
More research in this area seems unnecessary.
As the festive season approaches, more and more employees will get together
and indulge away from the office. One 'Christmas dinner' may be fun, but
there are often many such occasions every year.
Over-indulging in food has obvious consequences, and there can be more
immediate effects, especially if the food is different from one's usual
diet. Quantity matters, too. In company one tends to eat when not hungry,
and research confirms that the amount consumed increases with the number of
people at table.
In a business context this matters most at lunchtime. The early afternoon is
a soporific time of day anyway, and since the normal response to a heavy
meal is to sleep it off, a valiant struggle to get back to work may result
in little getting done.
A large lunch also potentiates the depressant effect of alcohol. After a
heavy meal, a short walk in the fresh air can help but, as Frederick's
experiments showed, brisk exercise, such as going to the gym or running to
catch a train, should be avoided.
Leaving aside its long-term risks, alcohol has well- documented effects on
attitudes, concentration, reaction times and co-ordination. The risk of road
traffic accidents is doubled by a blood alcohol concentration (BAC) of 80 mg
per millilitre and increases more or less exponentially at levels beyond
this. Those convicted of driving with a BAC of 200 mg per millilitre are
considered high-risk offenders.
One can often tell - if only with hindsight - how many drinks will loosen
inhibitions and result in saying or doing something regrettable. But it is
less easy to guess how much alcohol will raise BAC to a certain level. BAC
depends not only on the quantity imbibed but on personal characteristics
such as size, age, sex and the state of one's liver.
About 90 per cent of alcohol absorbed is metabolised by liver enzymes into
acetaldehyde, with the rest being excreted in breath, sweat and urine.
Acetaldehyde is then converted into carbon dioxide and water, and all one
can be reasonably sure about is that the normal adult takes about an hour to
eliminate each unit of alcohol (one unit corresponds roughly to one small
measure of spirits, one glass of wine, or half a pint of lager).
A BAC of 80 mg per cent is often known as the 'legal limit' because driving
with a level above this is a statutory offence. But a BAC as low as 30 mg
per millilitre can impair driving skills, and within the Road Traffic Act
there is a legal nicety worth knowing about. Section 4 warns that a person
who when driving or attempting to drive is unfit through drink or drugs, is
guilty of an offence.
With care, it is possible to enter into the spirit of the festivities
without adverse effects. Eating with drinks can help delay absorption of
alcohol. Diluting spirits (or even wine) and alternating alcohol drinks with
mineral water are other ways of reducing intake.
The usual pub measure is 1/6 gill in England and Wales, but drinks poured
outside pubs can be more generous. If, as in the case of punches, you are
unsure of how much or even what you're drinking, be cautious and stick to
something you know.
Extra-strength lager contains nearly three times as much alcohol as ordinary
lager, while low-alcohol drinks vary enormously. Some are almost
alcohol-free; others are up to half the strength of the average table wine.
If you're only thirsty, have soft drinks.
