FT  15 JAN 94 / The greatest person who ever lived . . . perhaps: Malcolm
Rutherford asked FT readers to nominate the most important figure from
history. The answers caught him by surprise. Here he sifts through the
replies
'Be not afraid of greatness: Some men are born great, some achieve
greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon them.' From Shakespeare's
Twelfth Night.
'Some village Hampden, that with dauntless breast The little Tyrant of the
fields withstood; Some mute inglorious Milton here may rest, Some Cromwell
guiltless of his country's blood.' From Gray's Elegy Written in a Country
Church-Yard.
I was about to write an article on why Shakespeare was the greatest person
who ever lived when some down-to-earth colleagues suggested that we should
pose the question in the Weekend FT. And what a brave new world we would
live in if it were peopled entirely by FT readers, especially those who
responded to the competition.
We would listen to Beethoven and Mozart, understand the principles of
Newtonian physics, have mutual respect for each other's religions and do a
great deal of reading. But we wouldn't be arrogant: we might even have a
sense of humour.
Economists, politicians, potentates and generals - with the possible
exception of Ghenghis Kahn, who is admired for his efficiency - would be
ignored. Our greatest living hero would be Mother Teresa.
When we set the competition, I remained convinced that there were only two
main runners: Shakespeare and Jesus Christ, with the Bard as the clear
favourite. That was because there have been other great religious leaders
apart from Christ and the paper's readership is very international.
Shakespeare, by contrast, is universal and uncontroversial, unchallenged as
a playwright and a lasting contributor to the English language. Above all,
he had the greatest understanding of the infinite variety of human nature.
Thus I thought that the religious vote would split, leaving Shakespeare out
in front.
On one part of the guess, I was completely wrong. Shakespeare, though
mentioned many times in passing, received rather fewer votes than Walt
Disney. In extenuation, I should add that Disney was praised for one of the
same reasons I would have given for the Bard: namely the capacity to give
the greatest pleasure to the greatest number of people. Times change: Bambi
not Hamlet.
On religion, I was nearer the truth. Jesus Christ was the clear winner but -
wait for it - Mohammed was a good second and Buddha a close third. The
striking point about practically all those answers, however, was the
tolerance and understanding of other people's beliefs.
Contributors were asked not only to name the greatest person who ever lived
and, if they liked, the second greatest as well, but to give their reasons.
Time and again, someone who put Jesus Christ first would put Mohammed or
Buddha second, and vice versa. Moreover, their answers stressed not divinity
or after-life, but common humanity.
In many cases, the admiration for religious leaders went hand in hand with a
respect for science. No-one expressed the view that religious beliefs were
incompatible with scientific research. It was taken as axiomatic that the
two go together. One contributor argued for Mohammed as the greatest on the
grounds of his all-round abilities as a teacher, administrator and leader,
then put Albert Einstein second for discovering E=MC2. Another put Moses
first for establishing the idea of one God and one set of universally
accepted 'Laws of Man'; he, too, put Einstein second.
Writing from Woodbridge in Suffolk, David Drumm summed up the mixture: 'The
two greatest influences on mankind have been religion and science.'
Drumm named three people: Jesus Christ in third place, Mohammed in second
and Sir Isaac Newton as the greatest because Newton (1642-1727) 'supplied
the unified theory that set modern science on the course which it has
followed ever since and which revolutionised the world'.
Essentially, says Drumm, daily life for the world's population remained
fairly similar between 1600 BC and 1600 AD. After Newton the world was
changed.
In terms of first and second choices Newton tied with Beethoven in receiving
more support than anyone except a religious leader. Yet the problem with
choosing scientists was identified by Newton himself: 'The reason I see so
far is because I stand on the shoulders of giants.' It is hard to attribute
breakthroughs to individuals.
There is also great ignorance about the past. We do not know who invented
the wheel or discovered the domestic and productive use of fire - the latter
surely the greatest breakthrough of all time. We don't know for certain
either who invented the alphabet or designed a system of numbers, though
there was a very FT contribution in favour of Fra Luca Pacioli who put the
two together in the form of double-entry bookkeeping in the early 16th
century. Pacioli was a great friend of Leonardo da Vinci.
Nor are advances in pure science the only criteria for greatness: there are
also the technological advances that stem from them. A very strong if
slightly ironical case was made for Thomas Crapper, a Yorkshireman who moved
to Chelsea and invented the modern water closet in the mid 19th century.
Thus he added to life expectancy, public health and private comfort around
the world. A reader in Taipei suggests that Crapper represented the high
point of the British Empire and the industrial revolution.
Still on technology, there were several votes for Johannes Gutenberg
(1400-1468) and anyone to do with the invention of printing, including Ts'
Ai Lun who invented paper in China around 100 AD. Yet it is a bit like
plumbing; the spin-offs were enormous but someone was bound to invent it in
the end.
On music, I confess to a slight prejudice. However wonderful, even at its
best it reminds me of higher mathematics with feeling. It lacks the range,
the depth and the articulate, spoken humanity of Shakespeare. Beethoven and
Mozart cannot touch him, though I was glad that as composers they came out
ahead of all others.
So we come back to religious leaders. The reason why Jesus Christ did not
come out on top even more convincingly is partly that his followers are
divided about the extent of his personal greatness. Unlike Buddha and
Mohammed, as many contributors pointed out, he was foreshadowed by Moses,
predicted by John the Baptist and proselytised by St Paul. Without Paul, as
several readers argued, Christianity might not have taken root.
In the cynical language of Richard Koch from London SW7, it was Paul who
made Christianity 'Rome-friendly'. Under Paul's guidance 'religion became
activist and expansionist, both for the state and the individual'. Thus Paul
paved the way for western imperialism and capitalism, and - Koch might have
added - for resistance to abuse of power on grounds of conscience.
Other tributes to Christ are more straightforward. Sheila Leach wrote from
Northampton: 'The words he spoke changed our moral perspective . . . His
life and teaching provided the inspiration for art, architecture, music and
literature in western Europe after the fall of Rome . . . The change he
imposed on our thinking and the fountain he became for our creativity did
not depend on belief in his divinity.'
Yet the case for Christ is perhaps excessively Eurocentric. Two important
criteria for greatness are that it should stand the tests of time and
geographical reach. Buddha (563-483 BC) had the advantage of being born
earlier, yet is still being discovered far away from Asia. It was his
influence on subsequent religions 'and spiritual movements not properly
regarded as religious', wrote AE Lundquist from Oxford, that made him the
greatest person who ever lived.
Mohammed came later (507-632). Yet his essential teaching is not vastly
different from Christ or Buddha. He was anti-idolatry, like Moses. He
believed in repentance, prayer and alms-giving like Christ. He also believed
in education. As a reader from Damascus puts it: he rejected superstitions
'by teaching that the natural world is governed by a strict cause and effect
order'.
The same reader, who says he left his native country, Iraq, for fear of
persecution, might have added that whatever may be done in the name of
Islamic fundamentalism today, Christianity has also had its darker side. And
as Muhammad Saleem wrote from New York, Mohammed 'inculcated a love for
learning among illiterate Arabs which paved the way for outstanding
intellectual achievements, ultimately making them pioneers in the domain of
science and arts during medieval times'.
I think Christ and Mohammed are on a par: they had much in common, and were
all sometimes betrayed by over-zealous followers. If Buddha wins, it is by
coming first.
***
There remain the foot soldiers and anti-heroes. Some readers nominated Joe
Bloggs for putting up with it all for so long. David Brown from Shenfield in
Essex chose Murphy, the man whose law seem to be responsible for so much yet
remains inexplicable: 'If anything can go wrong, it will go wrong.'
And our winning contributors: David Brown for nominating Murphy, and Mrs
Patricia Atkinson of Loughborough for her moving nomination of Elizabeth
Fry, the 19th century prison reformer. A third and equal prize goes to David
Drumm for his sense of perspective.
The prizes are magnums of champagne. In the politest possible way some
Moslem readers objected to this. But what can we offer that will appeal to
all without being unduly extravagant? Next time the Complete Works of
Shakespeare.
