FT  29 SEP 94 / The European Pensions Ruling: Court puts an end to four-year
wait - Employers fear backdated costs of Pounds 7bn / FT reporters analyse
yesterday's decisions of the European Court of Justice which are expected to
form a definitive framework under which employers and scheme trustees can
provide equal pensions for men and women
FT reporters analyse yesterday's decisions of the European Court of Justice
which are expected to form a definitive framework under which employers and
scheme trustees can provide equal pensions for men and women
Employers throughout Europe have been awaiting the definitive word on sex
equality in pensions for four years.
In May 1990 the European Court of Justice ruled in the landmark Barber v
Guardian Royal Exchange case that pensions are a form of deferred pay.
Article 119 of the Treaty of Rome, dealing with sex discrimination by
employers, says men may not be paid more than women, or vice versa. But
women's pension entitlements have traditionally been higher than men's
because they have usually been allowed to retire earlier - although women
are typically paid less than men.
But the court gave no guidance on how employers were to carry out its
judgments, and a series of cases came before it.
European employers, particularly those in northern Europe with big
occupational pension schemes, have waited for a series of decisions which
could cost them billions.
Yesterday the court put to rest most of the outstanding issues and, for the
most part, provided answers likely to limit the cost to employers of
equalising pension benefits.
But the court made one ruling that surprised pensions consultants, opening a
loophole allowing elements of inequality to continue in the calculation of
benefits.
In the Coloroll case the court ruled that employers could continue to rely
on 'sex-based actuarial rates' for the calculation of transfer values and
commutation values for those leaving the scheme. These take into account an
actuarial assumption that women outlive men and will give rise to lower
payments for men.
Mr Martin Miles, pensions consultant at the actuarial firm of Bacon and
Woodrow, said: 'To some extent, this would seem to make a mockery out of
equalisation.'
But commentators felt that in other respects women had not benefited from
yesterday's rulings. Mr John Cunliffe, partner at solicitors McKenna and Co
and lead lawyer for one of the cases, said the general effect of the sex
equality rulings had been detrimental to women. He said: 'These judgments
have had the effect of reducing benefits for that portion of the population
which is the lowest paid anyway.'
In the UK between 80 per cent and 90 per cent of pension payments are made
to men.
One element of the ruling has significant implications for employers,
particularly in the UK, Ireland and Germany.
The court ruled that employers will have to admit part-time workers to
pension schemes if barring them constitutes an indirect form of
discrimination. The court said employers had known since its judgment in
1976 that barring part-time workers from pension schemes is frequently sex
discrimination and should have ended it long ago.
The court ruled that part-time employees can claim retrospective benefits in
respect of periods of employment dating back to 1976.
That judgment has produced howls of outrage from employer groups. They say
that their provision of pension schemes is voluntary and that there is no
point in forcing them to bear higher costs.
But pensions lawyers and actuaries say the cost of the ruling may not be
nearly as much as might appear. Mr Cunliffe said: 'These cases will have to
be tested before the courts in each member country.'
The judgment says article 119 of the Treaty of Rome 'is contravened only if
the exclusion affects a much greater number of women than men, unless the
employer shows that it may be explained by the objectively justified factors
unrelated to any discrimination on grounds of sex'.
Thus, part-time workers will have to ask a court to determine whether the
employer has had an 'objective justification' for barring them from schemes.
In the 1976 case on which the court based its initial decision the employer
argued - and the court accepted - that part-timers were barred from the
scheme because they had less commitment to the company and the employer
wished to discourage hiring them.
Mr Cunliffe said: 'I think it will be very different as a practical matter
to convince UK courts of that.' However, the presence of large numbers of
full-time women in the pension scheme or large numbers of men among the
part-timers would certainly aid an employers' case.
Mr Cunliffe said it appeared unlikely that part-timers would take up the
option to participate in a contributory pension scheme, even if they were
offered it.
He said: 'Most part-timers are not going to want to join their pension
scheme because their pay is so low in the first place.'
Mr Roger Key, partner at consulting actuaries R. Watson and Co, said the
bill for retrospective benefits for part-timers could be as high as Pounds
10bn in the UK.
As a practical matter, however, most of that liability occurs in
contributory schemes and the court yesterday ruled that any employee wishing
to claim retrospective benefits would have to pay retrospective
contributions. Mr Key said part-time workers were unlikely to have the sums
necessary to buy retrospective benefits.
Without the contributory schemes, Mr Key estimates UK employers' liability
for retrospective benefits at Pounds 1bn to Pounds 2bn. He added: 'However,
that is concentrated among a relatively small number of employers.'
About 20 per cent of the UK workforce is part-time, concentrated in banking,
financial services and retailing. Many big UK supermarket chains have
started admitting part-timers since the key sex equality ruling in May 1990
but employers in those sectors could still be hit with a significant bill.
Mr Key said employers might be able to argue objective justification in
barring part-timers because of administrative costs. Part-timers, he noted,
had rapid job turnover and frequent changes in the numbers of hours worked
each week. The costs of administering pensions could be so great it would be
unreasonable to force employers to include them in a scheme.
