FT  11 APR 94 / Arts: The Sleeping Beauty - Ballet
Today a producer of The Sleeping Beauty must compensate for lavish amenities
which Tchaikovsky and Petipa enjoyed, long vanished in different mores and
austerities of budget, yet leave a mark on this iconic work that is at once
distinctive and reverent of the ballet's tradition.
Telling eternal verities again, flaunting perfect execution, and seeking
fresh expression beneath the burden of authority were the challenges facing
Anthony Dowell as he revived The Sleeping Beauty in a new production
sponsored by the Friends of Covent Garden, with financial and practical help
from the American Friends of Covent Garden, given its first performance at
the Kennedy Centre in Washington on Wednesday night.
Apart from Stephen Wicks's superior mime as Carabosse, the uninvited seventh
sister, the parable of good and evil in the new version has more the look of
duty than belief, running a long second to the visual splendor of the stage.
Maria Bjornson's arresting set for The Sleeping Beauty is an imposing swirl
of columns and windows - presented to us as if a long perspective had been
twisted and compressed. These symbols of a castle persist throughout the
ballet and frame a large oval centrepiece which changes motif with each act.
The disjunction between its distorted angles and curves and the realistic
lines and groupings among the dancers is jarring at first.
But with time the eye adjusts, and in the second act, set in winter, the
effect of the decoration would be magical - so in keeping in its season with
the metaphor of the sleeping kingdom - had we been spared a drop curtain of
crude icicles set against a bright rainbow.
Miss Bjornson's costumes are lavish, and run a gamut of increasing
brightness.
Yet the paleness of effect is telling in the prologue and first act, making
the set more intrusive and muting the effect of Aurora's entrance - her
costume in the Rose Adagio being hardly discernible in hue from the
ballerina's skin.
Far from flaunting perfection, the quality of execution was mixed at the
first performance. Darcey Bussell is a ravishing Aurora, dancing with
pliancy and grace throughout, showing excellent line and resplendent poise .
But even this wonderful artist was cautious in bringing off the prodigies of
balance required by the Rose Adagio, a caution which echoed through the
ranks of first soloists in slow tempi and slight mis-coordinations of
gesture and music.
Zoltan Solymosi is a commanding and elegant Prince Desire, who dazzled the
audience with his frenetic turns in the last act.
Fiona Chadwick is an elegant Lilac Fairy, though lacking the amplitude of
gesture that a taller dancer would bring to the part.
The ensemble dancing, after a spate of failed unisons in the prologue,
improved in the later acts, the polonaise and mazurka of Act III achieving
an effect of genuine panache, as befits a utopia.
Throughout the production, Anthony Dowell's concern for persuasive mime is
much in evidence; the artists acted with unabashed conviction.
Dealing with the weight of tradition is a dilemma, which Dowell resolved by
following the best of Marius Petipa's choreography while compensating for
its deficiencies.
These changes bring the work of later choreographers into the ballet but do
not create a stylistic disparity in the dances as conflicting as the clash
of decoration and movement.
Small but fussy changes have been made in the mise-en-scene supposedly to
enhance the coherence of the story for modern audiences.
In the dream entr'acte, for example - an actionless tableau in the original
production - Carabosse and the Lilac Fairy reappear on stage coincident with
their music in Dowell's production, making explicit the triumph of good over
evil.
For the purist, Dowell has preserved unmistakable accents of the 1890
production in St. Petersburg, as when the huntresses torment Desire's tutor
with little lances in Act II, and when, at the moment Desire kisses Aurora,
the vast cobwebs of a hundred years instantly fall away.
The new Sleeping Beauty is a production for the late twentieth century -
when even timeless parable is tinged with the material and the extrovert.
