FT  24 MAR 94 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Economists in the
salesforce - Drugs companies are focusing their sales efforts on the
financial implications of treatments
The world has changed. We used to market to pharmacists, physicians and
hospitals. Now it will be governments and companies. We must do more than
show that a drug is safe and works. We must demonstrate it has a good
economic outcome.'
These are the words of Jan Leschly, incoming chief executive of Anglo-US
drugs company SmithKline Beecham, at last month's annual results
presentation. He was outlining an important transformation in drugs company
marketing: the recruitment of economists.
The world's drugs companies spend at least Dollars 60bn (Pounds 34.2bn) a
year on sales and marketing, according to analysis by the stockbroker Lehman
Brothers. The figure represents about one-quarter of their total sales
revenue and more than twice as much as they devote to research and
development.
The money is devoured by fleets of sales executives - big names such as
Merck, Glaxo and Pfizer have more than 1,000 in the US alone - as well as by
large budgets to advertise in medical journals.
Making money in pharmaceuticals has long been about persuading doctors to
give up the tried and tested in favour of something new. But that is not
enough any longer. Government healthcare reforms around the world, designed
to tighten controls on spending, have already cut drug prices in Japan and
sales in Europe. Some drugs are no longer available on national health
services. Others have had price cuts imposed.
In the US, the world's biggest market with about one-third of global sales,
the pharmaceutical industry is not only learning to cope with deal-minded
hospital chains and insurance companies, it is bracing itself for the
Clinton administration's reforms.
Drug companies have concluded that they need to convince the organisations
which pay - governments, employers or insurance companies - that a
particular drug offers good financial value.
Sandoz, the Swiss company, for example, has formed a core group of three
economists at its Basel headquarters and several more are employed in
subsidiaries outside Switzerland. They write studies on the economics of
different courses of treatment. Sandoz publishes some of them, others are
submitted to learned journals.
'The pharmaceuticals industry is being increasingly forced to use the tools
of health economics,' says Bill Fulliger, head of corporate marketing at
Sandoz.
'Buyers increasingly require a demonstration of value for money. It is not
public relations, (it is applicable) anywhere there is a competing demand
for health sector funds such as (a decision between) a hip operation or a
kidney transplant,' he adds.
Fulliger argues that the work has already helped to persuade many healthcare
buyers that a kidney transplant, for instance, is cheaper than kidney
dialysis when costs are compared over the longer term. Sales of the
company's drug Sandimmun, which cuts the chances of a new kidney being
rejected, are worth more than SFr1.1bn (Pounds 500m) a year. It is now the
company's biggest selling product.
Glaxo, Europe's biggest drugs company, is using pharmacoeconomists slightly
differently. It first employed them in the US in 1989 and the idea is now
being transplanted to Europe. The company currently employs about 50 people
in the field.
The Glaxo pharmacoeconomists are part of its R&amp;D function: last year the
company split R&amp;D into basic research and 'commercial development'.
The economists work in both groups and the results are used to determine how
'sellable' to payers a drug under development is likely to be, and in the
selling process itself.
Glaxo says its economists are not trying to measure human health in cash
terms. Greg Boyer, a pharmacoeconomist on secondment from Glaxo in the US to
the UK operation, talks of persuading governments of the cost benefit and of
'the value to society' of a new drug.
'We want to be sure that we don't limit ourselves to pounds and dollars. We
want to study the whole patient outcome, to capture patients' ability to do
productive work,' says Boyer. This would mean examining the economic benefit
to a society of using drugs. Would, for example, the sick-pay bill be
reduced, as well as the more direct costs of nursing?
Involving the effect of drug prescribing on society as a whole is an
ambitious goal and not one to which buyers are necessarily sympathetic.
Governments such as Australia's, which requires an economic analysis of a
drug as well as clinical data to be submitted for approval, exclude
reference to the benefits for society. 'Governments are reluctant to allow
that kind of information to get to the negotiating table,' says Boyer. It is
easier to look at the bottom line of a hospital pharmaceuticals budget than
the cost to a country of a treatment, he says.
This has not stopped SmithKline Beecham going down the same route. Bob
Demarinis, head of outcome research and pharmacoeconomics at SmithKline's
Beecham's Pennsylvania offices, says evaluating the widest possible economic
impact is an essential part of his work. His team of eight people works at
all stages from R&amp;D through to the commercialisation of a drug.
Healthcare buyers increasingly demand to know what the effect on their
overall finances will be when they opt for one drug or another, he says.
SmithKline Beecham is recruiting more pharmacoeconomists where it can find
them. The task is not easy: at least one other large pharmaceuticals company
admits that the shortage of qualified people is such that it has to train
them inhouse.
