FT  24 AUG 94 / Ghost Towns: Merry Hill puts high street in shade - The
second in a series on urban centres examines the shopping complex's impact
on middle England
The heart of Stourbridge beats slower in the 1990s than it did in the 1980s.
The arrival of the Merry Hill shopping centre two miles away threatened
commercial seizure, but the worst fears for the town's health have not been
realised.
'We've learned to live with it,' said Mr Terry Pigott, a Stourbridge butcher
and president of the local chamber of trade. 'In some ways you've had to
change and get your act right to survive.'
The presence of one of the largest shopping centres in Europe - now drawing
to it an office population and a small entertainment quarter including
cinemas, restaurants, wine bars and a hotel - has nevertheless led to
significant change in the economic scenery of the Black Country.
Stourbridge used to act as a market town for north-west Worcestershire and
south Staffordshire. Its south side was upmarket residential, its north more
industrial. Gradually it was embraced by the sprawling Black Country to
become the affluent south-western edge of the Birmingham-Black Country
conurbation.
The town sends a Conservative, Mr Warren Hawksley, to Westminster with a
comfortable 9,582 majority, and has one Tory councillor and one Labour on
the local borough council. It has an unemployment rate below the average for
the conurbation, the region and the nation. Stourbridge is prosperous middle
England.
But two miles from the town centre, in an area of defeated industry and
redevelopment concessions, shopping started to appear. On the site of what
was once the Round Oak steelworks Merry Hill shopping centre and its
adjacent developments cover an area the size of Coventry city centre.
Roger Tym, consultants, calculate in a report for the government that
between 1989 and 1993 Stourbridge lost 43 per cent of its West Midlands
market share for comparison shopping - items such as clothing and footwear.
The overweening presence of Merry Hill intensified the problems retailers
faced from recession.
Investment has dried up. The Owen Owen department store closed in 1990 and
no other operator has been interested enough to take the space. Between 1989
and 1992 shop rents fell an average 26 per cent, according to Tym.
Mr Pigott - whose shop is in the Crown Centre in the middle of town - said:
'Merry Hill has probably stopped people investing and moving into a town
like Stourbridge - you'd move where you haven't got competition on your
doorstep.'
Mr John Mainwaring, assistant chief planning officer at Dudley Borough
Council, whose area embraces both Merry Hill and Stourbridge, said the town
had been affected 'because it is an area of high mobility and wealth.
Instead of driving to Stourbridge, people have been driving to Merry Hill.'
Stourbridge retailers were incensed last year when the borough council
introduced car parking charges - a modest 30p an hour in a multi-storey.
Parking is free at Merry Hill.
The next squabble with the council will be over pedestrianisation in the
town centre, a frequent response by planners to the diminished popularity of
a shopping area. Noting surveys of shoppers' attitudes, Mr Mainwaring said:
'The majority wanted extended pedestrianisation but the retailers fought
against it. They want people to be able to park outside the shops.'
But the interests of the retailers are not necessarily paramount. Mr
Hawksley said: 'There must be a balance between those who benefit from Merry
Hill and the traders who lose out.'
The expansion of Merry Hill has provided new recreational facilities. The
cinemas in Stourbridge closed long ago.
Still, amateur dramatics can be seen at the town hall, and Mr Graham Hart,
deputy editor of the Stourbridge News, said: 'Stourbridge has a live music
scene. There are a lot of pubs. If you walk through at night they're
normally very well supported. But there is nothing for the young to do
except the pubs - and Merry Hill.'
Yet this shift in the pattern of consumer spending from a traditional centre
to a new complex, not unlike the malls in the US, does not spell the end of
Stourbridge. It will remain what Mr Mainwaring said it had been for the last
two decades, 'a well-heeled commuter town'.
The Tym report says that 'at the local level much can be achieved to
alleviate the worst of the adverse effects of major developments such as
Merry Hill by means of local town-centre management and environmental
improvements'.
For Stourbridge that means easing the throttling tightness of the ring road
with its three lanes of speeding traffic. Resuscitation presupposes the
ability to breathe.
Merry Hill Impact Study by Roger Tym and Partners in association with
Colquhoun Transportation Planning, 1993. HMSO Publications Centre, PO Box
276, London SW8 5DT. Pounds 15.
