FT  18 JAN 94 / Major distances himself from Iraq arms sales
Mr John Major yesterday followed his predecessor Lady Thatcher in publicly
distancing himself from any responsibility in the arms-for-Iraq affair.
In a generally assured performance before the Scott inquiry which his
officials hoped would help restore some of his political authority, Mr Major
said that at no stage either as a cabinet minister nor as prime minister had
he played any role in setting guidelines on defence exports to Iraq or in
relaxing them.
He also denied that he had played any role in the decision by his ministers
and the attorney general Sir Nicholas Lyell to issue public immunity
certificates withholding information in the trial of three businessmen from
the Midlands machine tool company, Matrix Churchill.
Mr Major's appearance before the inquiry, which he agreed to in November
1992 under intense political pressure following the collapse of the Matrix
Churchill trial, marked the first time that a serving British prime minister
has given evidence to a judge in public.
But yesterday's low-key public hearing before a packed audience of
journalists, members of the public, Whitehall officials, and some opposition
MPs, contrasted with the drama of some previous encounters between Lord
Justice Scott and witnesses.
Mr Major said the first time he saw an official document referring to more
'flexible' government guidelines was in July 1989 while he was foreign
secretary, but said he did not consider this to amount to any important
change of policy.
'Neither at that stage, nor later, was I involved in the formulation of the
guidelines, consideration of the guidelines, amendment of the guidelines or
interpretation of the guidelines,' Mr Major said.
Exchanges between the prime minister and the inquiry's counsel, Miss
Presiley Baxendale QC remained polite and mutually respectful, in stark
contrast to the sharp words exchanged when Lady Thatcher gave evidence.
Only once did he seem rattled, when he was referred to his correspondence
with Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, in October 1992 confirming that
junior ministers had secretly agreed to the export of machine-tools which
they knew could be arguably in breach of government guidelines.
Questioned about ministerial accountability, Mr Major agreed that ministers
were responsible to parliament for the conduct of their departments and were
accountable for the organisation of their departments. He identified Sir
Robin Butler, the cabinet secretary, as the man who should put right any
failings in the dissemination of intelligence.
That statement may haunt ministers who have given evidence to the inquiry,
and those yet to appear, including Sir Robin.
Mr Major seemed to draw strength from the inquiry's reference showing him
opposing the sale of Hawk jets to Iraq on financial and moral grounds, as
well as making agonising efforts behind the scenes to ensure that replies to
parliament at the height of the Matrix Churchill furore were accurate.
Both Mr Major and Lord Justice Scott steered clear of reference to last
week's attack on the inquiry by Lord Howe, the former foreign secretary.
Mr Major's confident performance reduces the potential for the Scott inquiry
to destabilise his leadership.
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, said the prime
minister's performance showed that he was still capable of providing the
strong leadership being demanded by backbench critics.
Mr Major's assertion that he did not know about the government's internal
debate over the guidelines for arms-related exports was ridiculed by Labour.
Mr Robin Cook, the shadow trade and industry secretary, said the prime
minister's evidence was clear but discreditable.
Tory blood off menu, Page 7
