FT  14 NOV 94 / FT Guide To The Week
Review of Iraq sanctions
The four-year-old sanctions against Iraq come under review at the United
Nations, with pressure mounting from Russia, China, Turkey and other
Security Council members to ease the oil embargo following Iraq's formal
recognition of Kuwait last week. The US and Britain have indicated they
oppose taking any such measures yet.
Western European Union, the fledgling defence arm of the European Union,
meets in Noordwijk in the Netherlands, along with associated partners from
central and eastern Europe. Delegates will approve a document setting out
the bones of a common European defence policy, covering ties with Nato, and
co-operation on arms and operations.
Channel Tunnel: Regular Eurostar passenger train services are due to start,
linking London, Paris and Brussels. There will be two cross-channel trains a
day to each destination. The three-hour journey to Paris (3 1/4 hours to
Brussels) costs between Pounds 95 return for journeys booked up to two weeks
in advance and Pounds 195 for first class travel.
The Nordic Council, representing Norway, Finland, Sweden, Denmark and
Iceland, begins its annual meeting in Tromsoe, northern Norway (to Nov 15).
The gathering will be preoccupied with Sweden's vote by a clear margin to
join the European Union. Yesterday's result showed 52.2 per cent in favour
of membership. Norway will be hard-pressed to gain support for membership
from its reluctant electorate in its referendum on November 28.
Turkish trial: Akin Birdal, president of Turkey's Human Rights Association,
goes before a state security court in Ankara, charged with infringing
security laws. He is accused of advocating separatism and terrorism. If
convicted, Birdal faces a 2 to 5 year jail sentence on each count.
The European Parliament begins a four-day plenary session in Strasbourg.
Highlights include a debate on the European Commission's plans for closer
co-operation with the southern Mediterranean and Mercosur, the Latin America
trade grouping.
UK national lottery:
Tickets go on sale nationwide from 7am for Britain's first state lottery
since its predecessor folded igno miniously in 1826. The first draw will
take place on November 19.
FT Surveys: Greece and French Finance and Investment.
Holidays: Indonesia, Jordan.
Summit of Apec leaders
Bogor, Indonesia: Informal summit of APEC leaders; US President Bill Clinton
and other leaders give news conferences later in the day in Jakarta. After
the summit, Japan takes over from Indonesia as chair of the 18-member trade
grouping.
US economy: The Federal Open Markets Committee, which sets interest rate
policy for the Federal Reserve, meets in Washington for the first time since
September. The FOMC is widely expected to raise interest rates by half a
percentage point to cool down an economy growing at an annual rate well
above 3 per cent.
Gatt ruling: The European Court of Justice rules in a dispute between the
European Commission and EU member states over which has the power to
negotiate in certain trade areas to be co-ordinated by Gatt's successor
body, the World Trade Organisation.
Germany's Bundestag holds a formal vote to elect a chancellor for the next
four years. Incumbent Helmut Kohl is the only candidate, but as his
three-party coalition has a majority of just 10, it would take only five
stray votes to knock him off course.
Nepal holds parliamentary elections two years early, after rebel MPs brought
down the Nepali Congress Party government of Girija Prasad Koirala in July.
The 36 rebels and Mr Koirala have since made up, but a hung parliament is
likely.
Brazil holds second-round run-off elections for governor in 18 of its 27
states, the remaining nine races having been decided outright in the first
round last month. The states up for grabs include Sao Paulo and Rio de
Janeiro.
Angola's president, Jose Eduardo dos Santos, and Unita rebel leader Jonas
Savimbi, are due to sign a peace accord to end the country's 19-year civil
war. A ceasefire should follow two days later.
The government has promised to halt its assault on the rebel stronghold of
Huambo to avoid jeopardising the peace accord, but doubts persist on whether
both sides are willing to put a permanent end to the conflict.
Hungary's foreign minister Laszlo Kovacs and defence minister Gyorgy Keleti
visit Nato headquarters in Belgium to sign Hungary's bi-lateral Partnership
for Peace agreement.
UK-Argentine relations: Britain's Prince Andrew starts an official visit to
Argentina, marking further progress in efforts to normalise relations. Ties
were severed after the 1982 Falklands war but restored in 1990.
FT Surveys: European Airports and Computers in Finance.
Holidays: Brazil (Republic Day), Indonesia.
International Seabed Law
The inaugural meeting of the International Seabed Authority in Jamaica will
establish the latest specialised agency of the United Nations. Its birth
follows almost 20 years of contentious negotiations between industrialised
and developing countries. The Authority will monitor the exploitation of
billions of dollars worth of several metals on the international seabed,
outside the economic zone of any country.
Britain's parliament reopens with the Queen's Speech, outlining the
government's legislative plans. A pensions reform bill equalising the
pension age at 65, measures to establish an allowance for job-seekers, and
moves to deregulate the domestic gas market are expected. The government has
dropped plans to privatise the Post Office.
UK economy: Today's inflation figures are expected to show a small rise in
the annual rate. Some analysts think September's 2 per cent underlying
increase, the lowest for 27 years, will have been the trough of the current
cycle. Economists expect the headline figure, boosted by the recent rise in
mortgage rates, to jump to 2.6 per cent in October, with the underlying rate
edging up to 2.2 per cent.
Somalia: International donors and humanitarian agencies meet in Geneva (to
Nov 17) to discuss aid to strife-torn Somalia after United Nations
peacekeepers pull out next March. The UN Development Programme, the
meeting's sponsor, hopes governments will go on funding rehabilitation and
reconstruction programmes.
Saleroom:
The Winter Egg, made by the jeweller Carl Faberge for Tsar Nicholas II to
give to his mother, the Dowager Empress at Easter 1913, comes up for sale at
Christie's in Geneva. Inside a frosty exterior is the original 'surprise', a
basket of spring flowers, made of crystal and rose diamonds. This Imperial
Egg, one of only 47 known to have survived, is expected to make between
Dollars 2.5m-Dollars 4.5m.
The straight-sided 'Balkenkreuz' insignia, cut from 'The Red Baron' von
Richthofen's triplane when it was brought down behind Allied lines in April
1918, goes on sale at Phillips in London. Bids of up to Pounds 50,000 are
expected for this rare relic. The Baron, credited with shooting down 80
Allied aircraft, was killed in the crash.
FT Surveys: Derivatives and Denmark.
Holidays: Germany (Day of Penance).
EU telecoms liberalisation
Telecommunications ministers from European Union member states meet in
Brussels to push for further liberalisation of the sector. High on the
agenda is discussion of a European Commission green paper on the
deregulation of telecoms infrastructure and cable television networks.
The commission is eager to shake up so-called alternative infrastructures,
such as energy and transport networks to allow competition in all but basic
voice telephone services.
Kenya's president, Daniel arap Moi, will open an investors' conference in
London. The Kenyan government is hoping to attract new foreign investors,
following the recent introduction of economic reforms which have
substantially improved the business environment.
De nos caves:
The first consignment of Beaujolais Nouveau wine is scheduled to arrive in
Britain, making its way for the first time through the Channel Tunnel.
FT Survey: Massachusetts.
Holidays: Sri Lanka.
Finnish vote on EU treaty
The delayed parliamentary vote on Finland's plans to join the European Union
is due today. In a referendum last month, 56.9 per cent of Finns backed
membership. A few anti-EU MPs still hope to thwart the move which requires a
two-thirds majority in the 200-seat legislature.
Franco-German summit: UK prime minister John Major and six ministers fly to
the French cathedral town of Chartres to meet President Francois Mitterrand,
prime minister, Edouard Balladur and French counterparts.
The one-day summit will touch on economic and transport issues, including
the row over access to Orly airport, but is expected to be dominated by
defence and security issues where the two countries are far more in tune.
Their air forces are to set up a planning cell for speedy joint responses to
crises outside Europe.
Northern Ireland's moderate nationalist Social Democratic and Labour party,
whose leader John Hume has played a pivotal role in the peace process, open
a three-day annual conference in Cookstown, amid signs of moves towards a
political settlement despite last week's republican murder of a postal
worker in Newry.
FT Survey: Latvia.
Holidays: India (Bombay only), Latvia (Independence Day), Morocco
(Independence Day).
Chernomyrdin visits Gulf
Russian prime minister Victor Chernomyrdin is scheduled to begin a trip
through the Persian Gulf states. Mr Chernomyrdin, who, as the former head of
Gasprom, Russia's gas monopoly, plays a major role in the development of
Russia's oil and gas sectors, plans to visit Saudi Arabia, the United Arab
Emirates, Kuwait and Oman.
The visit to Kuwait could reignite the controversy begun last week when
Russian diplomacy helped to facilitate Iraq's decision to drop all
territorial claims to Kuwait. Western countries have remained sceptical
about Iraq's declaration.
Japan-EU trade: Three European commissioners are to discuss trade with the
Japanese government on Saturday. They want to ensure that the European Union
is not cut out of trade advantages accorded to the US during the latest
trade negotiations between Washington and Tokyo.
Ukraine's president, Leonid Kuchma, is due to leave for a trip to the US on
Saturday, during which he will hold talks with President Bill Clinton. Mr
Kuchma will be trying to encourage US investment in the hope that this
will prompt other countries to follow suit.
Rugby: Scotland play South Africa at Murrayfield, Edinburgh.
Compiled by Patrick Stiles.
Fax: (+44) (0)171 873 3194.
