FT  20 JUN 94 / Government pressed to step up Ulster security: Reprisals
feared after loyalist gunmen kill six in village bar
The British government was yesterday under pressure to step up security in
Northern Ireland after loyalist gunmen shot dead six Roman Catholic men in a
bar.
The gunmen opened fire with automatic weapons as customers at the crowded
bar in the largely Catholic village of Loughinisland in Co Down watched the
Republic of Ireland's opening World Cup soccer match on television. Five
people were wounded.
The Ulster Volunteer Force claimed responsibility for Saturday night's
attack, saying it was in retaliation for last week's shooting of two
Protestant men in Belfast. Police were last night braced for further
sectarian violence.
Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland secretary, condemned the killings
as 'inhuman savagery' and said the gunmen would achieve 'no political
purpose'. He pledged the RUC would never give up the hunt for the attackers.
Mr Dick Spring, the Irish foreign minister, said the incident had brought
him close to despair.
The attack prompted calls from Tory MPs for the introduction of internment
as part of a security clampdown.
Mr Andrew Hunter, chairman of the Conservative backbench Northern Ireland
committee, urged the government to 'lift' 30-40 republican and loyalist
terrorist ringleaders. He also called for the deployment of more troops on
the province's streets.
The attack came less than 48 hours after Mr Spring warned that a framework
agreement on new constitutional arrangements for Northern Ireland was
unlikely to be ready for next month's Anglo-Irish summit.
However, Mr John Major, the prime minister, and Mr Albert Reynolds, his
Irish counterpart, are expected to try to give new impetus to the peace
effort when they meet at the European Union's summit in Corfu later this
week.
Mr Eddie McGrady, the Social Democratic and Labour party MP for South Down,
said he hoped there would be no reprisal of any kind for the shootings. He
said anyone attempting retaliation would be 'disowned by all our community
and will not be acting on anybody's behalf'.
Mr Kevin McNamara, shadow Northern Ireland secretary, cautioned against the
reintroduction of internment, likening such a move to 'putting a lid on the
cauldron' and saying it would end any prospect of constructive peace talks.
The RUC Deputy Chief Constable Blair Wallace said: 'We are in the middle of
a series of tit-for-tat killings. They started on Thursday and Friday and
this was undoubtedly one of that series.'
He said that but for the activities of the security forces there could have
been more attacks 'because it is quite clear the terrorists are endeavouring
to out-do the other in the enormity of their bloodlust'.
