FT  02 MAR 94 / Leading Article: The Scott inquisition
Britain's Conservatives are nervous. They rightly fear the outcome of Lord
Justice Scott's inquiry into the sale to Iraq of equipment that could make
armaments. The affair has an uncomfortable feel to it, bringing on
forebodings of the disquieting effects of a long period in office. There are
unhappy parallels. Italy's Christian Democrats were suspected of links with
organised crime. Japan's Liberal Democrats fell into disrepute because,
after a period in which they seemed destined to rule forever, they became
complacent and corrupt.
Now the spotlight is on Westminster. The charges laid against certain
ministers and officials are peculiarly British. None of them is accused of
seeking financial advantage. Yet if the gathering storm does break it could
be more damaging to Mr John Major's administration than other recent
scandals and resignations. The reputations of leading Tories, not excluding
the prime minister himself, are at issue. Some have promised to resign if
found to have acted improperly. The essence of the indictment against them
is that, in the absence of a written constitution, they have been guilty of
the unthinking misuse of power.
Ministerial connivance
The first charge relates to 'public interest immunity' (PII) certificates,
which invite judges to excuse the presentation of named documents in court.
PIIs were signed by five Conservative ministers to protect papers demanded
at the Matrix Churchill trial. Executives of the company were accused of
evading restrictions on exports. Yet ministries, and the security services,
were aware of what Matrix Churchill was doing, and connived at it. The trial
judge did not accept the PIIs. The defendants were released. Other judges
might have acted otherwise. It looks, despite protestations to the contrary,
as if Whitehall might have allowed the accused to be jailed in the interest
of protecting certain documents, although many of them were not likely to
damage the public interest. They were merely embarrassing.
Faced with this, ministerial witnesses have told different stories. The
defence secretary said he was obliged to sign the PIIs; the chancellor that
he had a degree of discretion; the social security secretary that he doubted
that the defendants would be found guilty. On Monday the trade secretary, Mr
Michael Heseltine, said that he at first declined to sign, but agreed after
the wording was amended. He stated that the attorney general, Sir Nicholas
Lyell, had advised him that he must do so, but had given contradictory
advice in a subsequent case. Sir Nicholas said afterwards that his advice
had been consistent. It is rare for two senior members of the same
government to be in such open conflict.
Altered guidelines
The second charge is that while Lady Thatcher was in office the government
secretly altered the export guidelines in Iraq's favour, but hid this from
parliament. It was in relation to this accusation that Sir Robin Butler,
Britain's most senior civil servant, made his celebrated remarks about the
necessity for governments to divide the truth into fractions, only some of
which need be revealed. To outsiders, this seemed like Whitehall taking its
omniscience more seriously than its competence might justify.
The inquiry has now run for nine months. Many distinguished witnesses have
given evidence, including Mr Major, Lady Thatcher, other colleagues, and
many officials. All are well able to look after themselves. None requires
the protection of professional advocacy as suggested by Lord Howe, a former
foreign secretary and chancellor. Yet the view that heads must roll is
gathering force. Sir Nicholas is the current favourite candidate for the
tumbrils. Before deciding his future he will have his say at the inquiry.
Unless he is unconvincing then, he should await Lord Justice Scott's report.
The judge cannot design a constitution for Britain, but he can call for a
clear statement of published rules, perhaps involving some external form of
appeal. Depending on his findings, a judgment will have to be made whether a
change of rules, plus the possible sacrifice of one attorney general's
career, is a sufficient response.
