FT  05 AUG 94 / Altman clings on after hearings: Deputy Treasury secretary
defies demands that he be sacked
Mr Roger Altman's position as deputy secretary of the Treasury may best be
described as shaky but not stirred. That, if anything, is an improvement on
the start of this week, when the main question in Washington was not whether
he would resign but how soon.
In over 15 hours of testimony covering two days, he frequently said he would
not resign because he had misled Congress or for any actions concerning the
investigation of Madison Guaranty, the Arkansas savings bank owned by a
partner of the Clinton family in the Whitewater land development.
On Wednesday night he heard President Bill Clinton express confidence,
though the president conceded has was 'upset' to discover that Mr Altman had
removed himself from overseeing the Madison case. Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the
Treasury secretary, also found 'no intent to harm' though, with hindsight,
he would have preferred Mr Altman to have excused himself because of his
friendship with the Clintons.
On the other hand, two Democratic senators - Don Riegle of Michigan and
Richard Shelby of Alabama - have as good as joined the Republican chorus
demanding his resignation. Senator Kit Bond of Missouri came very close on
Wednesday to accusing Mr Altman of perjury in front of Congress.
The thrust of Republican questioning at committee hearings late Wednesday
and yesterday remained to try to find harder evidence of Mr Altman's
intervention in the Madison case. In grilling Ms Margaret Williams, chief of
staff to Mrs Hillary Clinton, they also sought to implicate the first lady.
But, in the absence of damaging revelations, it may make more political
sense for the White House to stick with Mr Altman in spite of his tarnished
credibility with Congress. This is because the presidential record of not
standing by those he has nominated or appointed is already too long for
comfort.
The most prominent case was that of Ms Lani Guinier, dropped last summer as
nominee to run the civil rights division of the Justice Department. Little
inclination to fight for Zoe Baird and Kimba Wood, under consideration to be
attorney general, was shown when their 'nannygate' problems emerged.
Some Washington experts think Mr Altman was aware of this factor and that
his defiance was, if only in part, calculated to dare the White House to
pull the plug. But his presumed goal of succeeding Mr Bentsen is long
abandoned.
