FT  16 FEB 94 / Congress forces mobilise over balanced budget
Battle opened in Congress yesterday over a constitutional amendment
requiring the US government to balance its budget each year.
If passed, the amendment could have sweeping effects on the US government
and economy, forcing Dollars 600bn of spending cuts over the next five years
beyond the savings already mapped out in the current budget of President
Bill Clinton's administration.
Nonetheless, the amendment has built up a strong coalition of supporters
ranging from liberal Democrats such as Senator Paul Simon of Illinois to
conservatives such as Republican Senator Robert Dole of Kansas.
Mr Dole said yesterday he believed the sponsors of the balanced budget
amendment now had 65 solid votes in the Senate, just two short of the
two-thirds majority it would require. The measure could, however, face a
filibuster, making it difficult to force a vote.
If the amendment is approved by the Senate later this month, it would be
expected to win the support of two-thirds of the House of Representatives,
and would then need to be ratified by three-quarters of the state
legislatures before taking effect.
The wording of the resolution that will be debated later this month would
require that total government outlays should not exceed total receipts for
any fiscal year, unless a three-fifths majority of Congress voted a waiver.
In the event of war, only a normal majority would be needed.
It would also require a three-fifths majority to raise the statutory ceiling
on total government debt.
Heavy opposition was mounted yesterday, however, by Senator Robert Byrd of
West Virginia, who as chairman of the appropriations committee controls the
purse strings for every senator's favourite project.
In a carefully orchestrated hearing yesterday, Mr Byrd paraded cabinet
secretary after cabinet secretary to explain the dire consequences that the
amendment would have on their departments.
While Attorney General Janet Reno warned that the Federal Bureau of
Investigations and the Drug Enforcement Agency would have to close field
offices, Ms Donna Shalala, the Health and Human Services secretary,
complained that the measure would 'shred the safety net we hold for our
disadvantaged' and force 1.5m older US citizens into poverty.
Mr Leon Panetta, the White House budget director, said the amendment was a
gimmick favoured by 'those who seek to avoid making the tough budget
decisions'.
It would turn recessions into depressions, he said, create a feast of
litigation and prompt a host of accounting gimmicks.
'The constitution ought not to be a book-keeping manual,' he thundered. Mr
Simon retorted that if the balanced budget amendment was a gimmick, Congress
would have passed it long ago.
'There were so many heroes at the Alamo because there was no back door. What
we need is a constitutional amendment that doesn't give a back door to
members of Congress so we can duck,' he said.
