FT  15 JUL 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (10): Yesterday's
panic has helped to cool tomorrow's expectations - Homes / Houses may be
cheap. But John Plender explains why ownership is unlikely to be such a
rewarding investment in the foreseeable future as it was for those who got
their timing right in the 1960s and 1970s
The golden rule for investors in the British housing market is no different
from the golden rule in any other market. Although in the long run house
prices tend to rise broadly in line with earnings, timing is all-important
for those who hope for significant appreciation in the value of their home.
There have been three crashes in the housing market since 1973. The first
two, in the mid-1970s and the early 1980s, appeared relatively painless,
because nominal house prices did not actually fall. Yet there were big
declines in real terms, after adjusting for inflation, especially in the
1970s.
Between the peak of the boom in 1973 and the depth of the market in the
latest crash, house prices showed negligible real growth. If, on the other
hand, you take the period from early 1970 to mid-1989, the increase in value
would have been more than 100 per cent. For most people that return would
have been further enhanced, because they financed the outlay largely with
borrowed money.
In terms of affordability, houses are now historically cheap in relation to
earnings. That is a good reason for anyone whose first consideration is not
investment performance to consider buying. But there is a fair chance that
housing will continue to look cheap. The factors that made it such a good
investment for so many people in the post-war period are no longer working
uniformly in its favour.
Superficially, the short-term outlook might seem conducive to a fillip. The
economy is, after all, in its third year of recovery; unemployment is coming
down at a much earlier stage than in the previous economic cycle; and real
earnings have recently been rising at an annual rate of close to 4 per cent.
A big overhang of supply has been reduced to more normal levels.
Because over a million of those who bought for the first time in the late
1980s still have negative equity - borrowings in excess of the value of
their home - the housing ladder has broken down. There is no demand from
these people for the homes of those on the higher rungs of the ladder. Nor
can they sell to the next batch of first-time buyers. One result is an
abnormally low volume of transactions for the stage of the cycle. Another is
that prices are underpinned by a shortage of supply. But there are now a
number of powerful factors militating against another boom, starting with
demography.
The number of first-time buyers is always a crucial determinant of the level
of demand in the housing market. Yet there is very little pent-up demand
from this source, because of the distortions created by the last boom. So
frenetic was the house-price spiral in the 1980s that the younger age groups
bought in a panic. UBS Global Research points out that, between 1982 and
1988, the proportion of 18-24 year olds buying their first home grew by 103
per cent, whereas the proportion of the 30-34 age group buying first homes
grew by only 35 per cent. In other words, young people brought forward their
purchases. Demand that might normally have been expected to emerge now has
already been unleashed.
Demographics will also act as a damper on the market in the longer run.
After hitting its peak in 1964, the baby boom tailed off sharply. This
implies that the number of people in their twenties will shrink through the
rest of the decade, thereby further reducing the pressure of demand.
A second constraint on price rises stems from changes in the tax system. Tax
relief for mortgage interest was a political shibboleth in the Thatcher era,
and, since the value of the relief was capitalised in house prices, it
operated as a subsidy for existing home owners at the expense of first-time
buyers. In the 1990s the level of mortgage on which the relief is available
has been capped at Pounds 30,000, causing its value to fall in real terms
with inflation, while the relief itself was reduced in April from 25 to 20
per cent, and will shrink to 15 per cent in April 1995.
Yet it is not just the specific tax arrangements for home ownership that
matter. Any general reduction in post-tax incomes is important, since
lenders relate the size of their mortgage advance to the post-tax incomes of
the borrower. Ian Shepherdson, of Midland Global Markets, has estimated that
the reduction in mortgage interest relief is equivalent to a  1/4 per cent
rise in the mortgage rate; and that the more general decline in homebuyers'
mortgage servicing capacity, due to the latest bout of fiscal tightening, is
equivalent to a total increase in interest rates of 1 3/4 per cent.
When taken together with the rising cost of fixed-interest mortgages, which
have responded to the upward pull of yields in the gilt-edged market since
February, this acts as a powerful restraining influence on prices. So, too,
does the renewed caution of building societies and banks. Having been burned
in the boom, they are lending on a lower percentage of the value of houses
than in the 1980s.
In London, admittedly, where City bonuses are finding their way into
investment in housing, prices in some areas have risen sharply. Yet the City
is now caught in a squall, as interest rates rise again, and building
societies have been revising downwards their assumptions about house-price
increases across the country. Meanwhile, a more active market in private
rented accommodation has emerged.
For the moment, the speculative investment premium has gone out of the
housing market. That may not mean that the British psyche has been fully
purged of the urge to own. But short of another general bout of inflation,
which can never be ruled out, home ownership is unlikely to be such a
rewarding investment in the foreseeable future as it was for those who got
their timing right in the 1960s and 1970s.
