FT  12 FEB 94 / Industrial users to gain most from 7% reduction
All electricity consumers should benefit from yesterday's agreement, but big
industrial users will see the greatest gains. For smaller companies and
households, the difference will be small or negligible.
The agreement will reduce average pool prices by 7 per cent, but this saving
will go directly only to large companies, such as ICI and Blue Circle, that
buy electricity straight from the wholesale market and have been badgering
the government to force power prices down. There will also be savings for
companies that have contracts with distributors whose price is based on the
pool price.
The saving will be diluted for the great majority of smaller industrial
users, which buy their power from electricity distributors. In this market,
the pool price only accounts for about half the final price because other
distribution costs are added. However, from April 1995, smaller companies
will be able to negotiate their own terms with electricity distributors, so
they may be able to wrest some of this saving for themselves.
For private households, the pool price accounts for less than a third of the
quarterly bill, so a cut of 7 per cent would translate into a saving of
about 2 per cent.
However even this is unlikely because regional electricity distributors buy
their power from the generators under long-term contracts whose prices have
already been fixed.
Britain's electricity prices are about average for Europe, according to the
Electricity Association, the trade group, though its figures have often been
challenged by user groups. And yesterday's agreement will not alter the
ranking dramatically.
With an average industrial electricity price of 5.3p per unit, the UK is
well behind Germany with 7.6p but well above Denmark with 4.2p. Household
electricity is below the EU average at 9.3p in a range extending from
Belgium with 13p to Greece with 7.7p.
Even so, electricity distributors are under mounting pressure both from
politicians and from Prof Stephen Littlechild, their regulator, to reduce
electricity bills. Last week the National Consumer Council accused the
electricity industry of making 'unjustified' price increases of 13 per cent
between 1990 and 1993.
The Electricity Association's own figures show that while prices levelled
out in the 1980s, they closely tracked the rising retail price index once
privatisation was on the cards.
While the distribution companies have not cut their prices, they have tried
to woo customers with price freezes and rebates. On Monday, Eastern
Electricity, the largest of them, announced Pounds 50m of rebates. Eastern
claimed that its customers had seen a rise of 6.1 per cent, including
rebates, since privatisation against an increase of 15.4 per cent in the RPI
over the same period.
