FT  17 MAY 94 / Foreign dairy groups see Britain as potential cash cow: The
likely effects of the planned free market in milk
Trains loaded with fresh milk could be running through the Channel tunnel
next year, says Mr Andrew Smith, managing director of the UK offshoot of
Besnier of France.
Besnier - one of the largest dairy companies in Europe - hopes to triple its
dairy sales in the UK during the next three years to Pounds 100m.
Britain is the latest battleground for Europe's large dairy companies. In
November the government plans to abolish the Milk Marketing Board's 60-year
monopoly on the wholesale purchase and sale of milk in England and Wales,
unleashing a free market in the Pounds 3.3bn fresh milk business.
The liberalisation of the milk market will leave dairies to buy their supply
direct from farmers or through Milk Marque, the milk board's successor,
which is being organised as a farmers' co-operative.
Mr Rory O'Mahony, chief executive of the dairy group at the Irish Republic's
Avonmore Foods, said: 'We've got a great deal of experience of buying milk
directly in our other markets which gives us a competitive advantage.'
Avonmore invested Pounds 20m last year in expanding its foothold in the UK
market.
Opening up the market will not eliminate the shortfall in milk production
because European Union quotas restrict output to 85 per cent of UK needs.
The rest of the EU produces a dairy surplus of 15 per cent.
Some European dairies hope to import raw milk from countries such as Denmark
and the Irish Republic which produce up to three times their own
requirements.
'European dairy companies are under pressure from falling product prices and
cuts in European Union intervention,' said Mr Michael Landymore, food
analyst at Henderson Crosthwaite Institutional brokers. 'They are targeting
the UK in the hope of a higher return.'
The introduction of the European single market and the interests of some
retailers in expanding overseas have further fuelled the
internationalisation of Britain's dairy business.
'We can follow the UK retailers as they expand across Europe,' said Mr Roger
Clarke, commercial director of MD Foods, the British offshoot of Denmark's
large dairy company which is partly owned by a farmers' co-operative.
MD Foods has spent Pounds 150m on an acquisition programme in the UK in the
past three years, gaining a 10 per cent share of the milk supply market.
The company, best known internationally for copying brands of cheese such as
feta, is looking to match its success in milk with a drive to boost its
share of the UK cheese and dairy products sectors.
Innovation in the fresh dairy product sector has been led by European
players who hope to see margins for their products improve as a result of
the scramble for milk in November.
Germany's Muller rapidly gained a large slice of the British yoghurt market
and has set up a production plant in the UK.
Mr Smith says the privately-owned Besnier group plans to launch a large
marketing campaign to push some of its cheese, butter and other dairy
products in Britain. In March it consolidated its UK operations into one
company.
Cheese and buttermakers have been a low priority in the arcane system for
allocating supplies and have had to run their plants at well below capacity
because of the problem of obtaining milk. 'Now, efficient producers will be
able to go out and pitch for it,' said Mr O'Mahony.
The abolition of the pricing and supply system will also remove production
constraints from dairy processors enabling them to cut costs. MD Foods plans
to cut its costs by 20 per cent during the next three years. Last month the
company split its UK operations to form two units, one of which will
concentrate on doorstep service.
Doorstep delivery, and the British consumer's appetite for fresh milk, makes
the UK market very different from the rest of Europe. Northern Foods, one of
the biggest domestic suppliers, believes competition will remain restricted
by the limited milk pool.
'Even with the Channel tunnel, transport costs will probably make it
prohibitively expensive to bring in a lot of raw milk from the continent,'
said Mr Neil Davidson, group executive at Northern Foods.
Northern is taking a different approach from some of its European
competitors. It is threatening to invest Pounds 50m in a dairy products
plant on the continent if the government does not ensure there is enough
competition in the milk sales market in the UK.
