FT  03 OCT 94 / Personal View: Challenge of change
When the Bretton Woods institutions were organised 50 years ago, their task
of helping rebuild a ravaged Europe and bringing order to the global
economic system was clear. Though probably the tallest order of its kind in
modern times, they did the job and did it well.
Today, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund face different
challenges. Fifty years ago we were dealing with less than a quarter of the
world's economy. Today, the developing world and transition economies
account for nearly half of global output.
Today the challenge is development and transition, to spread prosperity. The
price of failure is just as high, perhaps higher. But the benefits of
success have never been greater.
Both the IMF and World Bank need to look anew at how they can contribute.
For the IMF, it is a matter of maximising the economic reform it can
support. The Bank must focus on bringing more people into the development
process - as participants in planning and as beneficiaries of progress.
The IMF is achieving real results in helping Russia and the other transition
economies reform and rebuild. The carrot of financial support has a
tremendous impact. But there is still much to be achieved.
We have asked the IMF to go one step further to support the kind of
comprehensive reforms needed for full transition. Increasing access to IMF
resources for countries committed to strong reform measures - in eastern
Europe, the former Soviet Union and around the developing world  - can
increase the incentive to take the difficult steps toward productive
market-based economies. Extending the Structural Transformation Facility is
also critical to reinforcing this process.
To make their participation in the world economy and monetary system
complete, all member countries should have the rights and benefits of
membership of the IMF. The US has proposed bringing equity to the allocation
of Special Drawing Rights. Completing this issue, along with enhancement of
support for reform, will be central both to our meetings in Madrid and to
the future of the IMF.
Stability in the world economy is important to the prospects for the
developing, transition, and industrialised economies. The Group of Seven
finance ministers are committed to strengthening their policy co-ordination
efforts. There is a crucial role for the IMF in this process. Nevertheless
it is our view that a flexible process of co-operation, not fixed exchange
rates or target zones, is the best way forward.
Just as we have learned that austerity is no substitute for careful
adjustment, we also know that broad policy changes are not enough for
sustained and sustainable development and growth. At the heart of economic
activity and productivity are more basic questions. Are workers educated?
Are they healthy? Is the population growing too fast for the economy to ever
catch up?
There are no easy answers. But with 1bn people in the world existing on less
than a dollar a day, we must start somewhere. This is the World Bank's
challenge.
The Bank should start by putting people first, with more attention to
health, population control and education, particularly for women. It must
begin to utilise the private sector better, supporting and not supplanting
the strongest available force for development. And it must support bottom-up
development. Micro-enterprises, for instance, can be a remarkable tool for
driving development.
The Bank is turning in this direction. More information about Bank loans and
operations is available to the public. More concern has been focused on the
resettlement implications of large projects. Loan quality is being addressed
by strengthening oversight and concentrating on coherent approaches to
development in each country. These changes must be deepened and become part
of the Bank culture.
In addition, the changes being implemented at the Bank must be adopted by
the regional development banks.
The upcoming 11th replenishment of the International Development Association
offers the opportunity to strengthen the development impact of the new
direction in Bank practices.
Our national security institutions are changing to face the new challenges.
But our economic institutions are only just beginning and must now commit
themselves to making these new approaches a way of life.
The author is US Secretary of the Treasury
