FT  09 FEB 94 / International Company News: US brewer woos Czech bride-to-be
 -Anheuser-Busch's courtship of Budejovicky Budvar
Anheuser-Busch, the world's largest brewer, has come a step closer to
winning the bride it always wanted - Budejovicky Budvar, Czech brewers of
the famous Budweiser Budvar beer. The two had been kept apart by communism
and a long and bitter trademark dispute.
The US company's courtship was made official last month with a Czech
government announcement that Anheuser-Busch had been selected as exclusive
negotiating partner for the sale of a minority stake in Budvar.
The Czech company makes what many consider the best Czech beer, and one of
the world's top quality brands. Since the overthrow of communism in 1989,
and Prague's privatisation of state companies, more than 30 brewers
including leading European groups have showed an interest in taking a stake
in Budvar.
The US company, which claims a 9 per cent share of the world beer market, is
hoping to buy up to 34 per cent of the Czech brewer. Mr Jack Purnell,
Anheuser-Busch International (ABI) chairman and chief executive, said:
'We've had a very promising first session (of talks) with the government.'
If negotiations succeed, ABI, the international arm of Anheuser-Busch, will
have won one of the most famous Czech corporate names. Decades of legal
feuding over the use of the Budweiser trademark will come to an end.
Budweiser, or Budejovicky in Czech, was chosen as the name for his beer by
Adolphus Busch, the US company's founder more than a century ago. Later, the
use of the same brand name brought the Czech and US brewers into conflict,
with two agreements in 1911 and 1939 only partially resolving the dispute
which has limited the two companies' access to foreign markets. The American
Budweiser can only be sold under the name of Bud in large parts of Europe,
while Budvar cannot sell its beer in north and central America.
Mr Purnell said negotiations would deal simultaneously with the trademark
dispute and the purchase of a stake in Budvar.
In recent years, ABI has rapidly expanded its activities outside the US with
ventures and partnerships in Japan, Britain, Italy, Canada, Ireland and
Korea. Last year it bought a 17.7 per cent stake in Grupo Modelo, Mexico's
largest brewer for Dollars 477m, and a 5 per cent stake in Tsingtao Brewery,
China's largest brewer, for Dollars 16.4m. In 1992, Anheuser-Busch beer
sales reached Dollars 7.6bn.
The Budvar brewery is small, producing about 570,000 hectolitres
representing about 3 per cent of total Czech beer production in 1992. But
with exports of 362,000 hectolitres representing almost 38 per cent of total
Czech beer exports, it is the country's leading beer exporter.
With Budvar and a trademark agreement, ABI could expand its penetration of
the European market on two separate fronts: by being able to market its own
Budweiser without legal obstacles, and by building up Budvar's share of the
market among mature drinkers.
The products would not compete. 'Bud has a distinctively fresh taste
attractive to the young. Budvar has another taste profile. (Drinkers of
each) tend not to be the same people. The brands don't conflict with one
another at all,' Mr Purnell said.
Critics say Budvar will be swallowed up by ABI, which wants to expand
markets for its own brands. Others say Budvar should remain in Czech hands.
The Czech republic has the world's highest per capita beer consumption. Beer
drinking is a popular custom cutting across classes, and the Czechs are
proud of their local brands.
So what if the deal doesn't go through. 'Well, we haven't been brought to a
standstill because of the dispute. Both sides are harassed by it, and both
would gain (from a deal). We've been persistent and peaceful, but the
biggest problem is some bad perceptions of our company,' Mr Purnell said.
ABI has been wooing the Czech public and government stressing the company's
record as an employer and its philanthropic works with donations of Dollars
500,000 to the US Business School in Prague, Dollars 50,000 to the south
Bohemian University in Ceske Budejovice, along with scholarships and
training grants.
In full-page advertisements in the Czech press, ABI argued a deal would
secure Budvar's future. The Czech Republic would become the centre for ABI's
European beer operations. ABI would take a stake in breweries in southern
Bohemia if the government merged them. 'But Budvar will never be changed,'
stressed Mr Purnell.
