FT  14 FEB 94 / The enigma of the UK output gap
Inflation may be a monetary phenomenon. But bank notes do not rush off on
their own account into the shops to bid up prices and wages. Some
transmission mechanism is required.
One of the most important of such mechanisms works through the gap between
actual output and productive capacity. A small gap means the economy is
working flat out and that firms are willing to pay more to attract workers
and are able to edge up profit margins. When the gap is large, wage
inflation will decelerate and margins will come under pressure.
In the 1950s and 60s, available labour was regarded as the main constraint
on output, and the gap was estimated from the difference between actual
unemployment and some definition of reasonably full employment.
Since then, there have been two big changes in how the capacity gap is
viewed. First, the proximate constraint on output is now plant and business
capacity, rather than labour. Secondly the size of the gap which
policymakers have to tolerate can no longer be determined by some view of
desirable output or employment levels. The gap is too low when inflation
begins to accelerate; and something then has to be done to ease demand.
How much effective spare capacity is there in the UK in that case? The Bank
of England has given a range of 3 to 7 per cent and the Treasury suspects
that the true figure is nearer the top of that range. Indeed, a gap of
nearly 6 per cent emerges from projecting the trend rate of economic growth
of 2 1/4 per cent per annum from the end of 1990, when the economy appeared
to be in balance with neither too much nor too little pressure of demand.
David Walton argues in the February Goldman Sachs Economics Analyst that the
true gap is much smaller - between 1 1/2 and 3 per cent. This could have
great practical importance, if it meant that growth could not continue for
much longer above trend without the government having to put on the brakes.
Walton reaches this conclusion by using the Central Statistical Office index
of cyclical indicators, a method he admits to be highly unreliable, with
biases which he tries to correct. The Bank of England makes a case in its
new inflation report that there is more unused capacity than City analysts
suppose. There are signs that the scrapping of capital has been less than in
the last recession. Moreover, the recession was concentrated in areas such
as services and contracting, where fixed capital is less important. It will,
therefore, have done less than past downturns to reduce supply potential.
Walton in fact doubles back on himself by arguing that his own very modest
estimate of excess capacity is not a reason for holding down economic
growth. As he remarks, firms which say they are working near capacity can
often still make use of extra workers - and, indeed, install new capacity.
Thus, in the end we come back to the labour market and the question of the
minimum rate of unemployment consistent with non-accelerating inflation (our
old friend the Nairu). Econometric estimates are not much use here if they
vary, as the Bank of England tells us, from one million - which allows
plenty of headroom for above-trend growth - to near the current 2.8m, which
would not leave much gap to fill.
Amidst this welter of concepts without good numerical estimates, there is
one thing we do know. This is that, whatever the output gap, it is narrowing
smartly. We know this from the combination of the unexpectedly sharp fall in
unemployment and other labour market indicators, and from business survey
evidence.
We can also be reasonably confident of one theoretical point. This is that
underlying inflation depends not only on the size of the output gap but on
the rate at which that gap is changing. When the gap is already shrinking -
and there is thus no real need to worry about the strength of the recovery -
why take risks with a clumsy base rate cut? Forecasts about the effects of
tax increases in a financial year which has not even started cannot be a
sufficient reason.
No doubt, many of the financial market operators who responded badly to the
base rate cut had never heard of the output gap or the Nairu. And by last
Friday they had a more familiar misleading knee-jerk indicator to react to,
in the shape of one month's trade figures. But, abstracting from all the
froth, they did have deeper reason to worry that there was something not
quite right about the way the base rate decision had been taken.
