FT  30 APR 94 / Travel: Cold comfort in Iceland - Help is not at hand when
injury strikes on David Nissan's frozen adventure
It was about 4am, at the end of the first day of the journey, that my mind
began to dwell on a throw-away remark by my host, Asgier Heidar, that
'Iceland is tough'. We were in a convoy of three off-road vehicles but two
of them, including mine, had gone through the ice at the edge of a frozen
river.
Attempts to tow them out failed because the bank was steep and, as the rear
wheels sank in the water, the snow underneath the vehicles compacted.
Digging caused the wheels to sink further. The temperature was -15'C as we
went to sleep in our seats aware that, if the third vehicle were to get
stuck, we would have to sit tight and wait for the rescue service to find
us.
Crossing Iceland's interior in winter has become popular, at least with
Icelanders. Heidar proposed this journey after we had met on a summer
fishing trip. An enigmatic character, he makes his living entirely from
hunting and related activities.
He lives and breathes the wilderness, spending the late autumn months
roaming snow-covered mountains as a guide or on his own, shooting birds and,
occasionally, reindeer. The winter treks are purely for pleasure. I could
scarcely resist his invitation - nor its implicit challenge.
There are no long journeys in Iceland: it is scarcely 300 miles across at
its widest. But almost no one lives inland where sweeping plains, strewn
with boulders of lava, are bordered by low granite mountains. When all is
covered with deep powder snow and ice, customised four-wheel drives are
needed.
Even then, you need luck with the weather. Two systems compete: the
temperate Gulf Stream and chilling winds from the Arctic. At its best,
winter brings cloudless blue skies and a sun that provides comfort even when
the shade temperature is well below freezing. But a fierce and unbearable
wind can whip up without warning.
We set off from Reykjavik on our own. The plan was to start along the coast
road before seeing the famous geyser and nearby waterfalls at Gullfoss, 40
miles inland. Then we would head for the weather station at Hveravellir,
close to Iceland's heart, meeting the other vehicles en route. Finally, we
would aim to cross the Langjokull glacier before turning north again to fish
for Arctic char through ice holes.
We aimed to be away for three or four nights and sit out any storms in the
wooden shelters that pepper the wilderness. But the road from Gullfoss was
marked on the map as crossable by 4WD vehicles only in summer, and we soon
faced virgin snow. Within minutes, my vehicle's wheels were spinning
helplessly.
After extricating ourselves, we inched towards the highlands. Snow had
buried the moss-covered lava boulders that are the main feature of the
summer landscape, turning the plain into a smooth, white desert and
softening the distant mountains.
There is next to no life: a few ponies and ravens near the coast, then just
occasional tracks from Arctic fox or ptarmigan - a snow-white bird somewhat
like a grouse - spotted by Heidar's sharp eyes. At one point we had to turn
back: the 4ft flags that marked the edge of the road had disappeared under
the snow and we became stuck repeatedly as we sought a new path.
Then we reached the first rendezvous point and stopped on top of a hill in
the dark to await the last of Heidar's friends. As we sat, a lace-like
ribbon of light wove through the sky, then another and a third. The Northern
Lights are still a mystery but at their best, I was told, energy
concentrates in a luminous sphere that explodes, sending colours streaming
in all directions. This night, showers of light cascaded like spirits over
our heads in shades of vivid pink and green.
From here on, we used a satellite navigation system to chart our course in
the darkness. This was how we arrived, mistakenly, on the frozen river
Jokulfall.
The morning brought luck. The third vehicle found a safe route on to the ice
and managed to haul us up. Thereafter, we coasted easily on hard snow,
reaching the weather station by mid-morning. A journey of around 90 miles
had taken 22 hours.
The weather station is built next to a geyser. Near-boiling sulphurous water
runs from open craters and collects in a pool just below the visitors' hut.
A pipe feeds an ice-cold spring into the pool and you pick your spot in it
for the temperature you want.
This climate is most dangerous when you relax. Heidar slipped on the ice
while running back to the hut and fractured his cheek and eye socket in four
places. The emergency services refused to send a helicopter; for that,
injuries need to be life-threatening.
He took the wheel for the drive back to Reykjavik the next day so that he
would have some control over the bumpiness of the ride. Other vehicles laid
tracks ahead to speed our journey. But the doctors who eventually operated
for three hours said his injuries had been worsened by the way he gritted
his teeth all the way back. Very much the Viking, he never once complained.
Yes, Iceland is tough. But for the two hours before Heidar fell, we had been
luxuriating in the hot pool watching the Northern Lights as ice crystals
made crowns in our hair.
Many Reykjavik hotels will arrange winter expeditions taking from six hours
to two days. Asgier Heidar: tel: 354-1-676 350.
