FT  17 DEC 94 / World Stock Markets: Financials lead decline in German share
prices - But there are recovery hopes
The German stock market has moved sideways and back this year, but analysts
have hopes for 1995 as the economy continues to recover - supported by
exports rather than consumer spending - and interest rates stabilise on bond
markets.
The biggest market losers of 1994 have been bank and insurance stocks. This
is where the sharp rise in bond yields has hit hardest, as shown by the
latest set of fairly dismal results from the big banks. The investment
portfolios of insurance companies will also show the effects of securities
write-downs necessitated by weaker bond prices.
Of the top five stocks in the Dax index of 30 leading shares, two are from
the banking and insurance sector. The biggest component in the index,
Allianz - Europe's largest insurance concern - accounts for about 11 per
cent of the Dax capitalisation.
Many investors buy Allianz as a proxy for the German market, since nearly 70
per cent of its total investment portfolio of more than DM200bn is invested
in German companies; it owns sizeable minority stakes in companies such as
BASF, Dresdner Bank and Veba. But investors in German insurance stocks have
not had the brightest of years. According to Commerzbank, the sector at
mid-week was down by nearly 20 per cent this year. Allianz's shares had
fallen by 18 per cent to around DM2,420.
The banks had not fared much better, with an overall fall of around 16 per
cent. The big three Frankfurt-based banks - Deutsche Bank, Dresdner Bank and
Commerzbank - have just reported falls of between 15 per cent and 27 per
cent in their 10-month operating profits. Deutsche and Dresdner are also in
the Dax top 10.
Showing the smallest declines, in a stock market year which Commerzbank
described as disappointing, were chemicals, engineering, steel and energy
shares. These have clearly benefited from the economy's faster than expected
recovery. The worst performer was the department store sector, which is
hardly surprising since German 1994 retail sales are likely to be down for
the first time since records began in 1965.
Nor is 1995, a year of renewed income tax surcharges to help pay for
reunification, expected to bring much improvement on the consumer side. One
foreign bank which holds a different view, however, is Societe Generale. 'We
think that household consumption is likely to bring some good news in the
second half of this year,' says the French bank in its latest strategy
report.
In support of its case it cites the upturn in the consumer confidence index
produced by the Munich-based Ifo economic research institute. The bank
recommends Kaufhof as its preferred department store stock in continental
Europe, although other analysts have downgraded their earnings estimates for
the company in view of the sluggish retail scene.
For the German market overall, Societe Generale is not too optimistic. It
has increased the market's weighting in its international portfolio strategy
to neutral from underweight. On the positive side, it points out the virtues
of political stability after October's narrow general election victory of
Chancellor Helmut Kohl and of economic recovery. On the minus side, it still
regards the German market as expensive in spite of its decline this year,
and as relatively over-exposed to the risk of a US downturn late in 1995.
Commerzbank takes a more positive line. Its analysts expect the Dax to move
up to around 2,400 - a rise of at least 15 per cent over the current level -
on the back of further improvements in corporate earnings and more stable
bond markets. This year to date it has shed nearly 9 per cent to around
2,070, after gaining 48 per cent in 1993.
The bank reckons on average earnings growth of nearly 30 per cent next year,
led by industrial companies, after a similar outcome in 1994. Further profit
rises in 1996 are also on the cards, with the corporate earnings peak likely
to be reached a year later.
Mr Ingo Mainert of Commerzbank's equities team favours shares of big
chemical companies, which have been producing sharp profit rises, and banks,
now in a position to benefit from a more favourable interest rate climate
and the economic upswing.
Analysts at Schroder Munchmeyer Hengst also favour construction stocks as
likely to profit from future growth in European economies. Its overall
stance is more cautious, however. The bank advises investors to be
'increasingly defensive'. It sees risks for the strength of the economic
upturn in the behaviour of consumers and in the limited ability of companies
to increase profit margins.
Making the point that the German stock market does not represent the German
economy very effectively - much of manufacturing and service industry is in
private hands - Kleinwort Benson expects a 'not hugely inspiring' 1995, with
the Dax pushing above 2,300 towards the year-end.
Mr Glen Liddy, a German market analyst at the UK bank, favours blue chip
capital goods and chemical companies, as well as banks. But he says the
German market does not have enough consumer-oriented stocks, such as Wella
(haircare), to take advantage of international spending power.
