FT  19 MAY 94 / Thomas Cook's self-service travel kiosk goes on trial
Thomas Cook, the travel agent, is today launching what it claims is the
world's first self-service, screen-based holiday booking system.
If successful, it could allow holidaymakers to book their trips through
hole-in-the-wall machines or at screens in banks or department stores.
The system, called Travel Kiosk, allows customers to watch videos of their
intended destination - Amsterdam's canals or children shaking hands with
Mickey Mouse at EuroDisney. A Thomas Cook representative can appear live in
a corner of the screen to answer questions via a video telephone link.
By pressing an on-screen map of a city, customers can indicate which hotel
they wish to stay in and receive price information. If they want to book a
holiday, they press a 'book it' button, insert a credit card and receive a
printed confirmation and receipt.
Travel Kiosk will be tested in Thomas Cook's Marble Arch branch in London
for four months. Travel Kiosk currently offers two holiday programmes: the
EuroDisney resort outside Paris and Thomas Cook's city breaks programme.
Mr Tony Bennett, European strategic marketing and development director, said
Thomas Cook would use the trial to decide how the system could best be
employed. 'We expect to get a much clearer understanding of how this type of
advanced technology can complement the activities of our existing high
street travel shops and telephone holiday booking services.'
If Thomas Cook does decide to install hole-in-the-wall holiday booking
machines, these could either be outside its own branches or elsewhere. The
company said it had not yet begun discussions with banking or retail
partners in the project, but might do so in the future.
It said it did not believe the machines would replace its 385 high street
shops. It plans to raise the number of retail outlets to 500 over the next
two years.
However, the large travel groups have been watching the high street banks'
plans to reduce the number of their branches. While the large travel
retailers insist they intend to stay in the high street, they are also
believed to be studying alternative ways of selling holidays.
