FT  18 MAY 94 / Survey of Toulouse and the Midi-Pyrenees (4): The mayor's
strategy / Profile of Dominique Baudis of Toulouse
Mr Dominique Baudis, mayor of Toulouse, puts the emphasis on quality rather
than quantity. 'It is not my vision for the city to grow to millions of
people,' he says. 'What I want is to create a pole of excellence, not a
gigantic town.'
It is a strategy which, so far, has worked rather smoothly. Although only
Europe's 50th city in terms of population size, Toulouse has drawn some of
the biggest names in leading edge industries. Airbus, Aerospatiale and
Motorola are just some of the companies which, drawn by the city's strength
in research and development, have established headquarters or substantial
operations there.
But Toulouse has not been spared a bout of the turbulence which has shaken
France in the past few years. 'Like every town, we have been hit by the
crisis. Since 1991, we have lost jobs,' says Mr Baudis, pointing out that
the unemployment rate has risen to the national average of just over 12 per
cent of the workforce.
In Toulouse, the downturn has been exacerbated by the depression in the
international aerospace industry. Mr Baudis describes the sector as the
'engine of the economy', but rejects criticism that it is too dominant in
the city's economic structure.
'It is fashionable to say that we are too concentrated on aerospace. But
even today we produce 15 aircraft a month compared with seven 10 years ago,'
he says. 'In 1995 to 1997 we will see another increase,' he predicts, adding
that, unlike steel or cars, the problems afflicting aerospace are cyclical
rather than structural.
Mr Baudis is also keen to emphasise that Toulouse is not a one-industry
town. He points to the rapidly growing electronics sector, the rise in
biotechnology industries and the importance of service activities to
demonstrate the degree of diversity in the local economy. 'We are the second
centre in France for software development,' he says, citing the decision by
Storagetek of the US to site a large operation there.
The arrival of the US group is the latest step in a familiar pattern. Much
of the rise of Toulouse, from industrial backwater to high-tech
manufacturing centre, can be explained by its ability to attract capital
from the rest of France or abroad. France Meteo, the meteorological
institute, and Air France are just two of the scalps collected by Toulouse
over the past year in its drive for inward investment. To maintain the
process, Mr Baudis sees a need for 'balanced development' - the promotion of
cultural, scientific and urban projects to strengthen what he calls the
'quality of life aspect' of Toulouse.
Such 'balanced development' allows Mr Baudis to aim for several targets at
once. The urban renovation projects also provide a Keynesian boost to the
economy to help it through its current problems. 'We are working now to
intervene to support economic activity by big investment projects,' says Mr
Baudis, citing the decision to bring forward the FFr3bn project to construct
the second line of the city's metro.
Fiscal stimulus, however, is not to be achieved at the expense of the
budget. Mr Baudis has reduced the city's debts from FFr2.9bn five years ago
to about FFr600m today. This has been achieved despite a policy of
maintaining local taxes at their current rate for the past six years - a
strategy regarded as necessary to encourage corporate investment.
The future prospects of the city, however, need a broader perspective than
its budget situation and the list of public works under way. Critics of the
development of Toulouse, and there are many in the city's universities,
believe that it remains an artificial creation, built through the
decentralisation of research centres and industry and lacking deep roots in
the surrounding region. The criticism is repeated by representatives of
neighbouring towns who say the region's economy is dangerously centred on
Toulouse.
Mr Baudis accepts that more must be done to increase economic links with the
rest of the region. 'There is an important gap and we must reduce it.' He
says the construction of autoroutes from Toulouse to Albi and Tarbes is a
step in the right direction and should be followed by an expansion of the
regional railway network. He points out, however, that the development of
Toulouse is in the interests of the neighbouring cities. 'There are many
indirect effects,' he says, adding that he favours the growth of regional
centres, rather than curbs on Toulouse.
The need for extended communications, however, spreads well beyond the
neighbouring towns of the Midi-Pyrenees. Of particular significance is the
development of commercial and social ties with Spain.
Various initiatives are under way. The C6, for example, which groups
Toulouse, Montpellier, Barcelona, Saragoza, Palma-Majorca and Valencia, is
designed to promote economic co-operation among these cities. For Mr Baudis,
the main target is Barcelona, which he describes as the 'motor of Spain.' He
hopes for a high speed train link which will bypass Bordeaux from northern
France on its way to Toulouse and down to Barcelona.
Given the financial situation of SNCF, the French railways system, such a
project is not likely in the near term. But once built, it would put Mr
Baudis' town still more firmly on Europe's economic map.
