FT  07 JUL 94 / International Company News: Viag forecasts surge in earnings
Viag, the diversified metals packaging and trading group, said yesterday it
hoped to triple its profits to around DM900m (Dollars 569.6m) this year. The
upbeat forecast came as it prepared to become one of Germany's biggest
companies, with shareholders expected to approve its takeover of the utility
Bayernwerk.
Mr Georg Obermeier, finance director, told the annual meeting the company
would significantly increase its dividend, which stayed unchanged at DM9
this year.
Viag, whose core activities extend from aluminium and metal packaging to
trading, had earnings last year of DM302m, down 19 per cent on the year
before. However, it recently said first-quarter 1994 profits had risen 33
per cent, and that figures for the first five months had also improved.
The purchase of 97 per cent of Bayernwerk, Germany's third-largest utility,
will increase Viag's turnover to around DM40bn from DM24bn in 1993, and make
it one of Germany's top 15 companies in terms of turnover. Senior
executives, however, still found themselves having to justify the DM5.515bn
purchase price.
Some analysts and shareholders have said Viag paid too much, and a Berlin
court recently upheld a complaint by a Viag shareholder that the company had
not properly informed investors about the the Bayernwerk takeover.
The company, however, insisted the takeover had been worthwhile. 'Bayernwerk
is a pearl which money cannot buy in Europe any more,' Mr Jochen Holzer,
chairman of the Viag supervisory board, told shareholders.
Bayernwerk had annual pre-tax profits of about DM1bn last year. It is
regarded as a particularly attractive asset because of the high liquidity of
the electricity generating business.
Viag, which has been progressively privatised since 1986, said recently it
would still consider acquisitions to supplement its chemicals business, but
that these would have to wait until the Bayernwerk takeover was complete.
The state of Bavaria will receive a 25.1 per cent stake in Viag in return
for the sale of the Bayernwerk equity.
Reuter adds: Viag plans to wind down its involvement in aluminium production
over the next few years.
