FT  15 JUL 94 / World Cup '94: Brazilians ready for 'battle of the big dogs'
Shot after shot failed to pierce Sweden's armour. But then the smallest man
on the field rose above it all to head the goal that nudged Brazil into
Sunday's World Cup final against Italy.
A header by Romario in the 80th minute of Brazil's semi-final against Sweden
in Los Angeles gave them a 1-0 victory and a chance to erase the
disappointments of the last five World Cups.
Earlier, Italy beat Bulgaria 2-1 in New Jersey in the other semi-final,
thanks to two inspired goals in quick order by Roberto Baggio.
'I haven't made many of those,' said Romario later, recalling the perfect
downwards-headed goal that dashed Sweden's hopes. 'I can probably count them
all on the fingers of one hand.'
The 5ft 6in Brazilian striker was the most visible man on the field all
afternoon, but for 79 minutes the spotlight shone cruelly on the goals he
was missing - including an open net in the 25th minute.
Branco fed Romario at the edge of the penalty area, where he split two
defenders and then fooled Ravelli, the eccentric but resourceful Swedish
goalkeeper. But the striker pushed the ball a shade too wide. When he
regained possession, Romario hit a weak shot that Andersson, the Swedish
full-back, zoomed in to clear off the line.
'I'm still trying to figure out where that guy came from,' said Romario.
However, the game was not as close as the score indicated. In the view of
most neutrals, Brazil overwhelmed their opponents.
'Technically, tactically and physically we controlled the whole game,'
Carlos Alberto Parreira, Brazil's coach, said, relieved that criticisms of
their scrappy style and lack of menace in the earlier stages of the
tournament had been deflected if not silenced.
'We took the initiative from the beginning, and 1-0 doesn't (reflect)
Brazil's supremacy. The only difficulty was putting the ball in the goal.'
Brazil repelled the Swedes with outstanding defence - a word not always
associated with the heights of Brazilian art-house soccer. But Romario had
said before the game that Brazil were at present playing 'modern and
efficient' soccer that might not be pretty but was at least producing
success.
Having studied the Swedes closely, Brazil shut them down. There always
seemed to be swarms of Brazilian blue shirts surrounding every white Swedish
jersey.
'We annulled their air game, and that is the only way they know how to
play,' Brazilian 'keeper Taffarel said.
But the Brazilian front-line missed chance after chance. Zinho fluffed an
excellent opportunity in the 13th minute. Romario fed Bebeto on the left,
who one-touched it to Zinho racing in uncovered, but he shot into the side
netting.
Then Andersson denied Romario. 'I'm here to make goals and to miss them,'
the Brazilian reflected. 'I prefer to talk about the ones that go in.'
Seven minutes after that, Romario blew another one. Bebeto streaked up the
left on a counter-attack and fed Romario in the middle, a play they had
rehearsed all week in training. But Romario stepped on the ball, stumbled
and managed only a weak shot that Ravelli knocked away.
Brazil out-shot Sweden 15-1 in the first half and 26-3 overall.
Brazil's victory means that the winner of Sunday's final in Los Angeles  -
'a battle of big dogs,' according to Brazilian mid-fielder Mazinho - will
become the first four-time winner of the World Cup.
The last time Italy and Brazil met in the final - in Mexico City in 1970 -
Pele led an inspired Brazilian team to a 4-1 win.
Brazil probably benefited from a day's more rest than Sweden, after the
quarter-finals. 'We had too short a time to reload our batteries after
running them down against Romania last Sunday. We did not come up to the
same class as we did before,' said Swedish coach Tommy Svensson.
