FT  30 SEP 94 / Markets Report: Trade talk nervousness
Strong US economic statistics and the Bundesbank's decision to leave
interest rates unchanged failed to lift the foreign exchange markets out of
their pre-weekend torpor yesterday, writes Philip Coggan.
Trade was thin ahead of the weekend's expected announcement on US-Japan
trade talks and the meeting of G7 finance ministers.
The US has set today as the deadline for a trade deal, after which it will
impose sanctions. A failure of the talks is expected to be bad news for the
dollar. But even a success-ful outcome may not necessarily prove a boost for
the US currency.
Mr Julian Simmons, managing director, foreign exchange and money markets
(Europe) at Citibank, said: 'My personal view is that whatever is agreed
will be seen as a compromise and I do not expect the dollar to rally too
much. I think the upside for the dollar against the yen is really quite
limited.'
Mr Adrian Cunningham, senior currency economist at UBS, commented: 'The US
and Japan have to convince the market that the issue is now dead. If they do
not do that, the dollar is going to be vul-nerable.'
Analysts did not expect the markets to show signs of life until the result
of the US-Japan talks was known. 'No-one wants to take a position ahead of
the outcome,' said one trader.
Mr Rob Hayward, economic adviser at Bank of America, said the meeting of G7
finance ministers this weekend had created the background fear that the
authorities might try to help the dollar. 'But I do not think that is a
credible idea,' he added.
The dollar closed in London at Y98.505, down slightly from Y98.720 on
Wednesday, and also finished lower at DM1.5458 from Wednesday's DM1.5467. It
ended New York trading at Y98.600 and DM1.5487.
A series of statistics indicating that US economic growth continued to be
strong had an adverse effect on the bond market, but appeared to have little
impact on the dollar.
US second-quarter gross domestic product growth was revised upwards from 3.8
per cent to 4.1 per cent. The main cause of upward revision was the largest
rise in inventories in 6 1/2 years. However, this figure is now largely a
matter of historical interest and the key number will be the rate of
third-quarter growth.
More significant may have been the announcement that jobless claims in the
week to September 24 were 310,000, the lowest figure this year and down from
a revised 321,000 in the previous week.
Mr Cunningham said the 'further decline in initial claims figures may cause
some to revise upwards their forecasts of non-farm payrolls', which will be
announced a week from today. A strong payroll number will put pressure on
the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates, which it declined to do earlier
this week.
Further signs of US economic strength were shown when August homes sales
were reported to have risen by 9.7 per cent.
The Bundesbank kept official rates unchanged yesterday and announced another
two fixed rate repos at 4.85 per cent. The German bank's inaction did not
come as a surprise to foreign exchange markets.
'The Bundesbank is attempting to paint a picture of stab-ility ahead of the
election,' said UBS's Mr Cunningham. But analysts fear that the D-Mark could
suffer in the run-up to the October elections, with doubts about the
electoral prospects of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's coalition partner, the FDP.
Three-month German interest rates are now below those in the US, having
started the year with a gap of more than 250 basis points in the D-Mark's
favour, but this shift has done little for the health of the dollar.
The Italian lira gained slightly on the back of a statement from Mr Umberto
Bossi, the leader of the Northern League party, who described the 1995
Budget as 'fair and strong', thereby increasing the chance of its passage
through parliament. The lira closed in London at L1,005/DM, from L1,007 on
Wednesday.
Sterling was on the sidelines for most of the day but ended marginally ahead
against both the D-Mark and dollar. Against the German currency, its close
of DM2.4443 led analysts to hope that it could make an attempt on the DM2.45
level. Against the dollar it edged up to Dollars 1.5810 from Dollars 1.5784.
South Africa's Reserve Bank governor Mr Chris Stals said in an interview
that market conditions had become more favourable for the abolition of the
financial rand.
In London, the financial rand finished at R4.22/Dollars , compared with
R4.225 on Wednesday, while the commercial rand fell back to R3.5673/Dollars
from Wednesday's R3.5548.
In the UK money markets, the Bank of England said it provided help in two
tranches of Pounds 20m and Pounds 440m. That compared with a forecast
shortage of Pounds 500m, revised down from earlier estimates of Pounds 600m
and Pounds 700m. Overnight rates moved within a range of 6 1/4 per cent to 4
7/8 per cent.
