FT  24 MAR 94 / International Company News: RH Macy reveals scheme to emerge
from Chapter 11
RH Macy, the US department store group, has revealed details of a plan
designed to lead it out of Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection by January.
The package, agreed by Macy's board a day earlier and submitted for review
by Mr Cyrus Vance, the court-appointed mediator, is a compromise between
secured and unsecured creditors, who clashed over the terms of the proposal.
However, the future of the New York-based retailer remains uncertain.
Federated Department Stores, a long-time rival of Macy's and one of its
biggest secured creditors, has proposed a merger between the two groups.
Fidelity Investments, which holds Dollars 490m in Macy's debt, suggested
that it was dissatisfied with the proposed reorganisation plan, which may
lead it to abandon its support for Macy's independence.
Under the proposals, Macy's creditors would initially receive a total return
of Dollars 3.6bn on their claims, including Dollars 2.1bn in cash and debt,
and Dollars 1.5bn in equity in the reorganised company. However, the plan
also calls for an additional Dollars 500m to be distributed in July 1997 if
the value of Macy's stock appreciates to at least Dollars 2.2bn, or by about
47 per cent, before that date.
The two-stage valuation was a concession by Macy chairman, Mr Myron Ullman,
to a dissent faction on its 11-member board. Mr Ullman, supported by two of
Macy's biggest secured creditors, Fidelity Investments and GE Capital, had
originally proposed a Dollars 3.5bn value on the company.
A second board group, led by Mr Laurence Tisch, chairman of Loews and CBS
and one of Macy's biggest bond holders, had backed a plan which suggested a
valuation of at least Dollars 3.8bn.
The higher valuation would provide a greater return on the claims of
unsecured creditors, including public bondholders and trade suppliers, which
would be paid only after claims secured against real estate and other Macy's
assets were satisfied. The more senior class of creditors is owed Dollars
2.4bn, plus interest.
