FT  28 OCT 94 / International Company News: Samsung consolidation cuts units
to 24
Samsung, South Korea's biggest conglomerate, yesterday said it would
consolidate its operations by cutting the number of its subsidiaries to 24
from 50 through mergers and disposals. It is the third large-scale
reorganisation to be announced by Samsung in the last three years.
The latest shake-up follows the introduction of management reforms last year
to promote autonomy among the group's main business areas, including
electronics, machinery, chemicals, and trade and finance.
The reorganisation signals the group's intention to focus on these core
industries and rationalise their operations. But some analysts said the
consolidation hardly represented a significant change in the group's
corporate structure, since many of the subsidiaries to be sold are of minor
importance to Samsung's operations.
Moreover, domestic investors fear the planned mergers among some of
Samsung's main subsidiaries could depress profits for the enlarged units.
Share prices for 11 of Samsung's 12 listed affiliates fell sharply after the
reorganisation was announced. Only the Samsung Aerospace share price
increased, due to the perceived benefits from its merger with Samsung Heavy
Industries, a manufacturer of ships and trucks.
The corporate restructuring may have as much a political purpose as a
business one, as Samsung tries to curry favour with the government and win
its approval for the group's plans to enter the passenger car industry.
Samsung claims the reorganisation meets many of the government's goals for
the reform of Korea's leading conglomerates, including business
specialisation and the dilution of ownership by the group's founding family.
Ten subsidiaries will be merged. Samsung Corporation, the group's trading
arm, will take over several construction units, including Samsung
Engineering and Construction, Samsung Engineering and Samtech, and Cheil
Industries, the textile company.
Samsung Heavy Industries, which specialises in transport equipment and
construction machinery, will absorb Samsung Aerospace, Samsung Forklift and
Samsung Kloeckner Machinery. The recently-acquired Korea Fertiliser and
Chemicals will be merged with Samsung General Chemicals, the petrochemicals
unit.
The property group Joong-ang Development will take over Yonpo Leisure, while
Kwangjoo Electronics becomes part of Samsung Electronics.
Samsung Watch will change its name to Samsung Precision, with semi-conductor
manufacturing equipment to be added to its activities.
Sixteen subsidiaries, which are mainly in the labour-intensive textile, food
and service sectors, will be sold because their profitability is being
eroded by higher wage costs.
The companies to be sold include Cheil Food &amp; Chemicals, Cheil Synthetics,
Hicreation, Cheil-Bozell Advertising, Daekyung Building, Korea-Alaska
Development, Cheil Frozen Food, Chosun Hotel, Taejon Station Business and
Cheil Futures.
Others companies that will be spun off include Samsung Emerson and Korea
Information Group in electronics, and Shin-etsu-silicone Korea, Cheil
Ciba-Geigy and Daehan Precision in chemicals. The Joong-ang Daily News, one
of the country's main newspapers, will also be sold by 2000.
Although the sale of these units will reduce the group's annual sales by
Won3,000bn to Won40,000bn (Dollars 50bn), based on last year's sales
performance, they could help raise funds for the Samsung car project, which
is expected to cost at least Dollars 5bn.
