FT  06 MAY 94 / Snooker for the voters
The phantom race for Mr John Major's job is sheer entertainment. Consider
the friskiest three runners. Mr Michael Portillo, the loyal chief secretary
to the Treasury, has made it plain that he wants to be prime minister when
he grows up. We should be safe until the next century.
Mr Michael Heseltine, the loyal president of the board of trade, studiously
avoids opportunities to deny that if asked he would move into No 10 Downing
Street. The request had better come soon if he is to get his chance while he
is young enough to enjoy it. Mr Kenneth Clarke, the loyal chancellor,
delivered the Mais lecture on Wednesday. The what? Never mind. It came
across as an advertisement for the candidacy of Clarke, K, willing and able,
ready to start tomorrow morning. The talk had the flavour of those 'why I
think I would be good at this' affirmations commonly found at the tail-end
of job applications. It lacked only '. . . and I know it would be an
exciting opportunity . . .'
These three pretenders differ from one another in age, ideology, experience,
subtlety and skill. Fortunately we are spared the task of sifting them out.
When it comes to the essential qualification they are equally deficient.
None of them has the stature, the magic, necessary to restore life to the
Conservative coalition, beyond the fleeting moments that would follow
victory. None is so magnificent that he can be trusted to lead the
unleadable. Mr Portillo, whose support in the parliamentary party is
concentrated within the Europhobic/xenophobic faction, is an unlikely
unifier. Mr Heseltine, still unforgiven by some for the downfall of Lady
Thatcher, could not both pacify Mr Portillo's platoon and remain true to his
previously stated convictions. Mr Clarke, whose Mais lecture is the single
visible piece of serious work he has produced since last November's Budget,
is a known Europhile and self-confessed spender on welfare.
If the Conservatives had a majority of 100-plus, as Lady Thatcher did, any
one of the three could play the game her way. First win the leadership,
then, in reshuffle after reshuffle, steadily cull the cabinet of opponents.
Those were the days. They are long gone. This year such surgery might
destroy the Tories, not unify them. A prime minister with a majority of 17
and falling must weigh every decision with extreme care. This makes steady,
efficient ad-ministration of the country's affairs extreme-ly difficult.
Sackings that did not preserve the balance in the party might render the
task impossible.
In short, it could be that whatever the results of yesterday's local
election, the prime minister is safer than conventional wisdom suggests. He
could even survive heavy defeats in next month's elections to the European
parliament. Who knows? Who cares? Whether Mr Major stays or goes has become
one of the terminally boring questions of British politics. The prime
minister might hold on, or he might not. Either way, the Conservatives are
saddled with the same problem. They must find a way of settling their
differences, particularly over Europe. If they do not, they will be
unwelcome under any leader - even the loyal Mr Douglas Hurd, who is not
actively campaigning for the post.
There is a second proposition that should give potential Tory assassins
pause for thought. If they do force Mr Major out, his successor will be
under strong moral pressure to call an immediate general election. This is
the position taken, both in public and in private, by Mr John Smith. The
leader of the Labour party does not imagine that there would be a fresh
contest, a re-run of April 1992 which he would win. He merely regards the
prospect of taunting a hypothetical new opponent as too good an opportunity
to be missed. He is right. A second defenestration of a Conservative leader
within less than four years would leave the electorate bemused. The Tories'
reputation as the natural party of government would be sunk. The legitimacy
of the new prime minister would be questioned from the start. The new
cabinet would be born destabilised. Labour could pile on the misery. Mr
Smith beams when he pictures the scene.
His motives may not be particularly high-minded, but he does have a point. A
new prime minister appointed by disgruntled Conservatives because they could
not unite under the old one should seek a fresh mandate for his or her
party. This is not a matter of law. It is more important than that. It is
what would feel right. There are plenty of precedents for a change of prime
minister within the lifetime of an elected parliament. The voters were not
immediately consulted when the then Mr Harold Wilson made way for the then
Mr Jim Callaghan. Against that the British constitution is unwritten. It is
famously plastic. It is only a slight exaggeration to say that it is
whatever the principal political players choose to make of it at any given
time. Their choice is heavily influenced by public opinion.
In the circumstances here envisaged, it would be proper to ask the
electorate to endorse the change of prime minister, or choose another. A
leadership contest this autumn would, if Mr Major's court is to be believed,
be hard-fought. The incumbent would not go easily. The proceedings would
necessarily be nasty. The purpose would be self-preservation - the
maintenance in office of a deeply unpopular government. Tory MPs with
marginal seats would be fighting to save their parliamentary careers. The
national interest would not be considered.
This is not to say that we would be better off with Mr Smith. The time to
decide about that will come when - if - the Labour leader enlightens us
about Labour's proposed policies. Indeed, if he does not he might get a rude
shock. He might force Mr Major's successor to call an early election, and
then fall out of history as Labour loses. Unlikely? Try this: Mr Heseltine
becomes prime minister in November. He makes the happy discovery that the
budget deficit is likely to be lower than previous projections indicated. A
strong-looking cabinet, a quick tax cut, a promise of a referendum before
joining any European single currency, a brilliant early spring campaign, and
Labour could once again be snookered. The Tories would then resume their
internal battles, having won themselves a breathing-space. Only the country
would lose.
