FT  23 DEC 94 / Leading Article: Mr Yeltsin's weakness
Russia has got itself into a terrible and bloody tangle in its latest
attempt to hold itself together: the confrontation with the people of
Chechnya in the northern Caucasus. It is a battle from which no one is
likely to emerge the winner, and which could severely undermine the position
of President Boris Yeltsin back in Moscow.
Using columns of tanks against a warrior nation of mountain people can never
be sensible, as one might think the Russians would have learnt in
Afghanistan. President Yeltsin can have had only one good reason for
forgetting that lesson: the need to keep the Russian army quiet, and to
appease the increasingly vocal nationalist lobby in Moscow.
In the event, the use of regular soldiers and heavy armour in Chechnya in
the largest Russian military operation since the invasion of Afghanistan has
had the opposite effect. It has split the army down the middle, and
obviously alienated significant numbers of very senior officers. The morale
of the troops is rotten. They are no longer prepared to lay down their lives
for the empire. And Mr Yeltsin is looking more foolish, not more decisive.
He has failed to woo most conservatives, while horrifying most liberals.
This is not to say that the government of Chechnya has right on its side.
The so-called independent republic is recognised by the outside world as a
constituent part of Russia. Its declaration of independence had no legal
basis, and its government, under General Dzhokar Dudayev, is strongly
suspected of having links to organised crime. It is no myth that Chechen
gangs play a big part in Moscow's rising lawlessness.
Yet by throwing his tanks into the fray, Mr Yeltsin runs the risk of
alienating the entire 18m-strong Moslem population of Russia. He has united
most of the extraordinarily disparate peoples of the Caucasus against him,
bringing back ominous memories of the interminable wars fought by the Tsars
of old to force those same warring tribes into their empire.
The Russian leadership has not grasped that it is still in the midst of a
process of decolonisation, the unravelling of that empire. Mr Yeltsin
started that process, to overthrow Mr Mikhail Gorbachev, and now he cannot
stop it. So far the outside world has sought to ignore the problem. It
cannot continue to do so indefinitely. It is not up to the west to seek to
maintain the borders of today's Russian federation precisely where they are
 -nor, on the other hand, to encourage a continuing process of
disintegration. But it is in the western interest to have a stable Russia,
not chaos.
Mr Yeltsin must be urged to provide a constitutional framework to handle
those questions of decolonisation which are not going to go away. He should
pay attention to the lessons - good and bad - of the end of the British and
French empires. He needs an independent body of arbiters to settle disputes
 -perhaps an oversight body of republican leaders from all over the Russian
federation as proposed by the president of Ingushetia, Chechnya's neighbour.
Moscow is simply not trusted by its subjects, and the use of excessive
force, or the threat of such force, can only have aggravated that
perception. Mr Yeltsin is not proving his strength by using his tanks. He is
proving his weakness.
