FT  18 FEB 94 / Survey of Malta (1): Islands start to talk big - Buoyant
growth has led the Maltese to embark on ambitious infrastructural projects
and seek membership of the European Union. But they may be kept waiting at
the door
The Maltese can be forgiven for being a trifle smug these days.
When much of Europe remains depressed by recession, Malta enjoys buoyant
growth and low unemployment. After seven years' annual average growth of 5
per cent, the Maltese boast a per capita income higher than that of Greece
and Portugal, and throughout the islands there is a pervasive air of genteel
prosperity.
The shops in Republic Street, Valletta, have smartened up. The stock of
ageing Bedford buses gleams with highly polished chrome. Even the old red
British telephone booths have been given a new coat of paint.
The Phoenicia Hotel, long the central meeting point in Valletta, has
reopened after refurbishment with an extra floor. The airport boasts a large
new terminal and there are now direct flights to such distant destinations
as Dubai and Montevideo. During the weekend, nearby Sliema is snarled up
with late-night traffic jams as crowds flock to the sea-front bars and
discos.
Businessmen are beginning to talk big. The most ambitious project is the
LM150m development of Manoel Island, the sprawling tongue of land with a
marina and dilapidated fortifications on the other side of Grand Harbour.
Attempts to develop this magnificent site have been in the air for ages but
for the first time a scheme stands a chance of getting off the ground.
Another sign of the times is the decision by the government to obtain an
international credit rating for the Republic of Malta. Mr John Dalli, the
finance minister, discussed the matter last month in the US with both
Moody's and Standard and Poor's, the ratings agencies.
'The Maltese at last have a smile back on their faces,' says Mr Maurice
Mizzi, one of the islands' leading businessmen.
By this, he means that Malta has put behind it the grey period of the 1970s
and early 1980s, when the government of Mr Dom Mintoff, then Labour prime
minister, dabbled in socialist rhetoric and courted a place in the third
world. In contrast to the days when Mr Mintoff fostered close ties, air
connections with Libya have been cut because of the United Nations Lockerbie
embargo and relations are at best correct, with an unresolved dispute over
territorial waters.
With the cold war buried, Malta is now looking firmly towards Europe and
seeking full membership of the European Union. Already fiscal reforms are in
hand and VAT will be introduced next year. The Nationalist government of Mr
Eddie Fenech Adami is also committed to meeting Brussels' economic
convergence criteria, which will involve a shake-up of long-standing
protectionist practices and a reduction in the overblown public sector.
Mr Fenech Adami has moved cautiously but always with a clear vision about
Malta's future. He wants to see Malta make the best of its strategic
location in the Mediterranean and achieve international credibility as a
full partner of the EU. His central idea for sustaining economic growth and
future prosperity is the development of Malta as a financial services
centre.
The premier believes tourism, the traditional cash mainstay, is close to
reaching saturation point and alternative sources of income and employment
have to be found. The three islands now host over 1m visitors a year. Even
if the authorities were willing to see more space on the cramped islands
covered by concrete, this would almost be counter-productive in terms of
attracting more tourists.
There are also infrastructural limits to the islands' welcoming more people
 -not least the question of water. Already 25 per cent of electricity is
generated to produce water. Furthermore, the population density is high,
with 1,130 inhabitants per square kilometre.
Tourist policy can move in only one direction: the industry must lessen its
dependence on the traditional 'fish-and-chips' end of the market and attract
higher spending brackets. Only in this way can the current LM200m earned
from tourism, almost a quarter of GDP, be boosted without a substantial
increase in overall numbers.
Equally, there are clear limits to Malta's manufacturing base. The
authorities do not wish to compete in manufacturing as a low wage economy;
but it is not easy to obtain added value when so many raw and semi-finished
materials are imported. The islands' size, plus constraints of space, also
limit the scale of industrial operations. As it is, the export-oriented
electronic components and textiles manufacturing will have to fight hard to
survive. The famous dockyards, despite their strategic location in the
Mediterranean, are struggling to stay competitive.
Maltese industry will thus be lucky to sustain its quarter-share of
employment in the future. Last year's slight rise in unemployment to 4.2 per
cent of the workforce, or 5,800 people, was primarily due to job losses in
this sector. Indeed, the impressive average growth rates since the late
1980s mask a slowing down in the past two years - precisely because both
manufacturing and tourism have been affected by recession in Europe.
The present government is ideologically disinclined to force-feed growth
through deficit spending. Even so, the public sector deficit has been
discreetly rising. That the deficit has remained below 4 per cent of GDP is
due in good measure to generous funding from Italy. Under the terms of the
third financial protocol with Italy, Rome will have provided LM35m in grants
and almost another LM10m in loans during the period 1992-94.
This Italian assistance has covered nearly a third of the budget deficit.
Although a fresh protocol is under negotiation, the Italians are unlikely to
be so generous in the future. Such deals reflected the largesse of the now
discredited Andreotti era. Thus, it is questionable whether the Nationalist
government will be able to sustain the current levels of spending without
either cuts in the public sector or raising new taxes - or raising the
borrowing requirement.
If the state payroll is pruned, even more pressure is placed on the services
sector as the main source of future jobs. Last year, for the first time,
employment in services overtook that of private direct production. The
government believes some 6,000 jobs can be created over the next five years
following the establishment of the Malta International Business Authority.
Legislation is due to be approved by parliament next month. It will
establish the regulatory framework and fiscal regime to transform the modest
four-year-old Malta Financial Services Centre into a fully developed
financial centre.
The prime minister and his advisers are convinced Malta can create a niche
for itself as a small but reputable financial centre. 'A good reputation is
vital,' says Mr Fenech Adami. On conservative estimates, financial services
could account for 10 per cent of GDP within five years.
Thus, much rides on the success of the plan, not least the fate of graduate
employment. University enrolment has been boosted so that the Maltese
economy can take advantage of upgraded educational levels. If the job
potential from financial services fails to materialise, there will be a lot
of disgruntled graduates.
The other central pillar of the government's strategy is to secure
membership of the EU. The avis (legal opinion) on Malta's application issued
by Brussels last October was encouraging. It recognised Malta's European
vocation and accepted the need to send a 'positive' signal to the Maltese,
indicating the EU's willingness to negotiate.
However, Brussels made it clear that many major reforms would be needed  -
from cutting state subsidies to removing protective tariffs and ending
monopolies. Because of Malta's size, these do not pose insurmountable
problems. The real problem is that the EU itself cannot seriously address
Maltese membership until the broader institutional issues of enlargement are
settled among existing Union countries. In crude terms, Malta risks being
kept waiting at the door.
Under these circumstances, Mr Fenech Adami will need to produce positive
results from the accession negotiations. The degree of progress could well
turn into a controversial issue at the next elections, scheduled for 1997.
The Labour party remains critical of the idea of membership; and if joining
the EU promises limited extra aid flows, places jobs at risk and exposes
many small Maltese companies to the fierce winds of competition, then
membership may not be such a popular option.
