FT  06 APR 94 / Survey of Business in Dorset (1): County at a crossroads -
The recession, coinciding with cutbacks in defence spending, caused a shock
to the system in Dorset
The Tolpuddle martyrs, the six farm labourers from the village near
Dorchester who were sentenced in 1834 to seven years' transportation to
Australia for trying to form a union, were fortunate not to have been
accused of vandalism.
A plaque dating from 1828, now in the Dorchester museum, warns that anyone
'wilfully injuring any part of this county bridge' could be whipped and
transported for life.
Dorset still has its landowning legacy but its image of a rural county,
known for Thomas Hardy, Corfe Castle, seaside resorts and sailing in Poole
harbour, is much less than the full picture.
Agriculture and fishing employ only 2 per cent of the workforce. While
tourism and leisure remain leading industries, employment in banking and
insurance in the south-east Dorset conurbation of Bournemouth, Poole and
Christchurch grew by 82 per cent in the 1980s. The diversified manufacturing
base ranges from high-tech defence contractors to builders of luxury motor
yachts and the breweries of Eldridge Pope and Hall &amp; Woodhouse. Onshore oil
is produced at Wytch Farm by British Petroleum.
During the 1980s, overall employment in the county grew by nearly 16 per
cent. The advantages were obvious: Bournemouth is only 100 miles from
London; Poole and Weymouth ports provide access to the European continent;
the workforce is skilled and stable and the countryside fosters a pleasant
way of life.
In 1990, unemployment was only 3.2 per cent and Dorset's population had
become one of the fastest growing in the UK. Whereas in 1981 the population
was just under 600,000, it is now about 670,000 and projected to reach more
than 730,000 by 2001. Most of the increase is due to migration from
south-east England and, although that includes many retired people, the
working-age population grew in the 1980s by 14 per cent, compared with only
4 per cent for England and Wales.
Dorset in that decade gave the impression of being laisser faire - no one
needed to be persuaded to come. The recession, coinciding with cutbacks in
defence spending, caused a shock to the system.
Mr Rex Symons, chairman of Dorset Training and Enterprise Council, says:
'We've seen in the recession something which never happened before in
Dorset. It affected all sectors - tourism, financial services and
manufacturing - and the change in the defence industry has been profound.'
'We were the soft underbelly,' comments Mrs Beryl Kite, chief executive of
Dorset Chamber of Commerce &amp; Industry. 'Had we known it, all the components
were against us. It absolutely socked us - we had no experience of this in
Dorset.'
Dorset is now at a crossroads. In one sense, this is almost literal. It has
fast road and rail links towards Southampton and London, but suffers from
poor connections between the coast and north and to the west. Dorchester, in
the west, remains the county town but the economic heart is the south-east
conurbation, which has 410,000 people within its travel-to-work area. The
county tends to split, therefore, between west and east - with the
conurbation looking more towards the central southern region, rather than
south-west England.
The economy, too, is at a crossroads. There is a cognisance of the
implications of high unemployment - 10.1 per cent in February - combined
with a rising population and the certainty of further defence retrenchment.
Describing the state of the local economy, Mr Peter Harvey, chief executive
of the county council, says: 'I don't think desperate is overstating it. We
are caught two ways - there are more jobs to find but fewer opportunities.'
In response, public and private sector initiatives have been launched to
regenerate the economy. 'It is very encouraging to see the sectors working
together rather than going down parallel tracks,' Mr Harvey says. 'Instead
of bickering, we are all facing in the same direction.'
A county-wide forum, Partners for Prosperity, has been established to
develop a strategy, encourage inward investment and press the county's case
with the UK government and in Europe. Mr Tony Ward, its chief executive,
says: 'There was a realisation that being smug about Dorset was no longer
good enough.' Another forum, South Dorset Economic Partnership, has been set
up to counter the problems caused by the defence rundown in Weymouth and
Portland, where the naval base is to close in 1996.
A further grouping, South Coast Metropole, has been formed by the local
authorities of Bournemouth and Poole with Portsmouth and Southampton, which
together call themselves 'the urban focus of the south coast.' Its purpose
is to promote the region's interests within Europe and to form a
'transmanche region' with the similar Normandie Metropole of Le Havre, Rouen
and Caen.
'There is a complete change in attitude to economic development,' says Mrs
Kite. 'The county is still a bit shell-shocked - but we've picked ourselves
up and dusted ourselves down. We hope the worst is over now. We are leaner
and meaner.'
This month, a one-stop Business Link advice service opens to assist
indigenous growth. Small enterprises are the mainstay in Dorset: only a
handful of quoted companies are headquartered there, such as McCarthy &amp;
Stone, the retirement homes builder, and Bridport-Gundry, the netting group.
Mr Harvey says: 'Dorset is not a county where you have major manufacturers -
we need to facilitate the opportunities to enable the small existing
businesses to expand.'
Some official recognition that Dorset faces difficulties has come with the
designation last year of Weymouth and Poole as an intermediate assisted
area, the winning of European Konver funding - intended to aid areas
suffering from the rundown in defence spending - for south Dorset, and an
expansion this month of the rural development area to include much of the
county. But a setback was that Dorset failed last December to win European
Objective 2 status which would have helped fund infrastructure improvements.
Mr Bryan Cassidy, MEP for Dorset East and Hampshire West, stresses that the
county can re-apply. 'It is a commonly held belief,' he says, 'that an area
like Dorset doesn't qualify for any European funding. Substantial European
funding comes in directly and indirectly, but mainly through collaborative
programmes such as at the AEA at Winfrith.'
In political terms, Dorset is also at a crossroads. Last year, the
Conservatives lost control of the county council, with the Liberal Democrats
becoming the largest party, and suffered a by-election defeat at
Christchurch. The county now faces the expense and upheaval of local
government reorganisation with various options being touted and no consensus
among the county and eight district councils. The county backs an option
under which it would survive in large part as a single unitary authority and
Bournemouth and Poole would form two others. Business opinion, as elsewhere
in England, wants new councils to be big enough to address strategic issues.
Such issues, of course, include road building, a highly contentious matter
in Dorset because of the splendour of its countryside, already under
pressure from housing land demand and industries such as gravel extraction.
South West Regional Planning Conference, in strategy advice to the
Department of the Environment, describes an efficient transport system as
crucial to the county, but the aim must be 'to balance a prosperous local
economy with the protection and enhancement of the environment.' For Dorset,
more than ever, that is a difficult balancing act.
