FT  26 MAY 94 / Survey of International Capital Markets (3): Rates rise
takes its toll - In April, there was a sharp drop in issuance by US
companies / Patrick Harverson looks at the US corporate and junk bond
markets
Three years after steep declines in interest rates sparked a prolonged boom
in debt issuance by US companies, the recent turnaround in interest rates
has begun to take its toll on the corporate bond market.
The latest figures from Securities Data, the New Jersey-based financial
information firm, show that in April, US companies issued Dollars 10.8bn of
debt (both investment grade and junk). That was almost half the Dollars
20.8bn they issued in April 1993, and well below the average Dollars 24bn
issued over the first quarter of the year. It was also the lowest monthly
total since January 1991. Yet, no one on Wall Street was particularly
surprised by the sharp drop in issuance during April.
Between early February and mid-April, the Federal Reserve tightened monetary
policy three times, in the process pushing up short-term interest rates
three quarters of a percentage point to 3.75 per cent. The rate increases -
which the Fed hoped would prevent the rapidly-growing economy feeding a
revival of inflation - sparked heavy selling of government bonds. Investors
were selling bonds because they feared that, in spite of the Fed's actions,
inflation would rear its ugly head again and undermine the value of their
fixed-income assets.
The end result was a sharp rise in bond market yields, and - after a brief
lag - a slowdown in corporate bond issuance. Having feasted for three years
on cheap credit, companies quickly became wary of selling their bonds in a
less favourable interest rate environment. Similarly, investors were wary
about buying corporate paper if interest rates were going to keep on rising.
Although the April data confirmed that the new issues market was weakening,
the first signs of a reversal were evident in the opening quarter of the
year, when companies sold Dollars 72.1bn of new debt, down from Dollars
97.9bn in the same period of 1993. While the totals were still impressive by
historical standards, investment bankers noted a deterioration in market
sentiment in the latter half of the three-month period, and on into April.
Mr James Forese, the head of the fixed-income syndicate desk at Salomon
Brothers in New York described market conditions during April and early May
as extremely volatile. 'Sentiment has been very fickle. One day markets are
rallying, and people feel good about long rates. The next day, markets are
selling off, and people are pessimistic on rates.'
The deterioration in market conditions manifested itself in a widening of
spreads, and a drop in demand from investors, which quickly scared many
issuers away. Investment bankers say that whereas they could offer issuers
tight spreads over 6 per cent Treasury rates last year, by the end of the
first quarter they were talking about significantly wider spreads over 7 per
cent Treasuries. It was the kind of talk that issuers did not want to hear.
Once the market began to decline, demand quickly shrank, although interest
in high quality paper held up reasonably well. 'Investors have been going to
higher quality, but for the most part they are going to the sidelines,' said
Mr Forese. 'They are not buying much of anything, and are keeping their
money in short-term and other defensive instruments.' The one product that
was in demand was floating-rate debt, which always appeals to investors
looking to protect the value of their capital in a market where interest
rates are rising.
As for junk bonds, they have generally fared better than their investment
grade counterparts during the recent turmoil afflicting fixed-income
markets. This is partly because the accelerating pace of economic activity
is good for junk bonds because it reduces the risk that low-rated issuers
will default. In times of economic growth, junk bonds traditionally do well.
Also, the phenomenon that has sustained the junk bond market for the past
few years - low interest rates chasing yield-hungry investors into higher
interest-bearing assets such as junk bonds - did not begin to be seriously
undermined by the rise in interest rates until relatively recently,
primarily because rates remained low by historical standards. Thus, until
April, the motivation to invest in junk was still quite strong. With
sufficient demand from investors to mop up the new supply, junk bond
issuance in the first quarter was 4 per cent higher than the year before at
Dollars 14.7bn.
After March, however, there was a noticeable fall off in demand, so much so
that in April, only Dollars 2.2bn of junk bonds were issued in the US, down
from Dollars 3.6bn in the same month a year ago and well below the average
monthly volume of Dollars 4.9bn recorded during the first quarter.
Issuance dropped sharply after March because investors became more choosy
about which paper to buy, and began searching for ever-higher yields as
interest rates on government and investment grade bonds climbed. As one junk
bond analyst at a large US bank explained: 'It's become a buyer's market.
With new issues, prices had to be increased by 100 basis points, 150 basis
points, sometimes even more, to induce the buyers to come in.' It was not
long before companies started refusing to pay the yields investors were
asking.
Companies were also reluctant to come to the market because junk bond mutual
funds - traditionally a large source of demand for low-rated issuers - were
confronted with suddenly high rates of redemptions as investors chose to
move their money elsewhere while the storm in the bond markets was raging.
For both the investment grade and junk bond markets, the outlook for the
rest of the year depends greatly on what happens to US interest rates. As of
early May, the Fed had raised rates three times, and most analysts were
predicting that there was more to come, especially with the weakening dollar
requiring support.
Yet, what the corporate bond market needs above all now is some certainty
about the outlook for interest rates. Investors need to be confident about
where rates will be in the next three, six and 12 months, before they can
start making reasoned judgments about where to put their money.
