FT  14 JUL 94 / Brussels fines carton-board price-fixers a record Pounds
104m
The European Commission yesterday imposed record fines on 19 carton-board
producers which had allegedly formed what it described as Europe's 'most
pernicious' price-fixing cartel.
Suppliers of carton-board in western Europe face fines totalling Ecu132.15m
(Pounds 104.27m) with the cartel's 'ringleaders' bearing the brunt.
Iggesund, the packaging unit of the Swedish forestry products group MoDo,
will pay the biggest single sum of Ecu22.75m. All 19 companies must pay the
fines within the next three months.
Mr Karel Van Miert, competition commissioner, said 'the massive cartel'
flagrantly violated European laws. The commission described how participants
met in luxury Swiss hotels to agree price rises and concealed their
activities by drawing up bogus minutes of their meetings.
Exercising strict discipline and making virtually no written notes, the
companies were said to have carefully orchestrated price increases every six
months. Having decided what the market could bear, one company would lift
prices, followed on agreed dates by the others.
On each occasion, between 1987 and 1990, prices rose by 6-10 per cent. The
commission said that often the increases were forced through against
'determined customer resistance' and in spite of a fall in raw materials
prices.
The companies involved are: Buchmann, Europa Carton, Gruber &amp; Weber,
Laakmann and Moritz J Weig of Germany, Cascades and Papeteries de Lancey of
France, Enso-Gutzeit and Finnboard of Finland, Fyskeby, MoDo and Stora of
Sweden, BPB De Eendracht and KNP BT of the Netherlands, Mayr-Melnhof of
Austria, Rena of Norway, Sarrio of Italy, SCA Holding of the UK, and Enso
Espanola of Spain.
The cartel was uncovered in a series of unannounced inspections carried out
simultaneously by the commission in April 1991 after complaints by British
and French carton users' trade associations. In August, Stora, which had
recently taken over the German producer of carton-board Feldmuhle - a
ringleader of the cartel - came clean with the commission.
The case is the third incident in which a cartel has been fined by the
European Commission this year for distorting competition in the single
market.
In February, Brussels fined 14 steel producers more than Ecu100m for price
fixing and market sharing.
