FT  13 APR 94 / Markets Report: Sterling moves higher
Sterling had a better day on the foreign exchanges yesterday, helped by a
stronger dollar and a weaker D-Mark, writes Philip Gawith.
Continuing the recovery off a low of DM2.48 before Easter, the UK currency
finished nearly two pfennigs higher in London at DM2.5356, from DM2.517 on
Monday.
The dollar strengthened to DM1.7188 from DM1.708. In New York it ended at
DM1.7168. There was little response to the 0.2 per cent rise in the US
producer price index in March.
The weakness of the D-Mark stems from anticipation of a further reduction in
the repo rate this week, and market rumours about a possible cut in the
Lombard rate.
Elsewhere, UK money markets witnessed the unusual spectacle of a Pounds 400m
daily surplus. Normally the Bank of England exerts control over short-term
interest rates by engineering a market shortage. The last surplus was on
March 8 last year.
The sterling index closed at 80.1, from 79.7 on Monday. Analysts said the UK
currency's strength was more a reflection of what was happening with the
dollar/D-Mark than any change in outlook for the pound.
Mr Neil MacKinnon, chief currency strategist at Citibank, commented: 'There
is nothing in terms of the UK economic scene that would suggest a reason for
buying sterling.' He said the D-Mark's weakness was overdone and sterling
strength will not continue.
Mr Chris Turner, currency strategist at BZW, noted that sterling remained
below its 50-day moving average against the D-Mark, showing that it was
still fairly weak. The dollar, by comparison, has been above the 50-day
moving average against the D-Mark for about a week.
Mr MacKinnon said the market was hoping that a good retail price index
number on Friday might open the way for a 25 basis-point cut in interest
rates. This optimism was reflected for a while in the short sterling market,
with the June contract up, at one stage, by four basis points, before
falling back to close only one point ahead at 94.57.
The December future finished at 94.04, off recent lows but still discounting
short-term rates at 6 per cent at the end of the year. Mr MacKinnon said the
market was 'off its collective rocker' suggesting such high rates.
In the money markets, there was widespread surprise at the rarity of a daily
surplus. Analysts were at a loss to attribute it to any specific event, but
said it needed to be seen against the background of the daily shortage
recently averaging below Pounds 1bn.
Mr David Coleman, treasury adviser at CIBC, said the institution of a
twice-monthly repo appeared to have helped lower the daily shortage on an
ongoing basis. A likely seasonal factor affecting liquidity was tax payments
associated with the end of the fiscal year.
With overnight rates consistently soft recently, around 4 per cent,
three-month money has fallen below the 5.25 per cent base rate. Yesterday it
was offered at 5 3/16 per cent.
Mr Philip Shaw, group economist at Union Discount, stressed that the lower
rates were technically driven, rather than the outcome of any reassessment
of the outlook. 'I do not think it has reversed the market's nervousness
about the potential for rates rising this year,' said Mr Shaw.
Mr MacKinnon at Citibank said the message from the US March PPI report was
that there was no pressing need for an immediate tightening of credit
policy. He predicted that the Fed would wait until the meeting of the policy
making Federal Open Market Committee on May 17 before changing policy.
Today the market will be watching the release of the March CPI figure. BZW's
Mr Turner argues that a low inflation figure will help the dollar because it
will bolster the US bond market and have a spillover effect into the
currency. Others argue the contrary: that a high inflation number will be
dollar supportive because it will hasten the prospect of higher interest
rates.
The D-Mark was weaker against most European currencies amid expectations of
a further trimming of the repo rate and talk of a symbolic cut in the
Lombard rate when the Bundesbank council meets tomorrow.
Call money continued to soften and was quoted at 5.75/5.80 per cent from
5.75/5.85 per cent on Monday. The June Euromark future finished slightly
firmer at 94.59 from 94.56.
The German currency closed at FFr3.419 against the French franc from
FFr3.425 on Monday. The rise in the franc followed the release of a very
good inflation figure. French consumer prices rose 0.2 per cent in March
from February, for a year-on-year increase of 1.5 per cent. Mr Turner said
this figure gave the Bank of France room 'to cut interest rates more
aggressively without having a negative impact on the currency'.
The lira fell back on profit-taking from a recent post-election high of L945
against the D-Mark. It finished at L952.7 from L950.3.
