FT  08 JUN 94 / Survey of New Zealand (9): Asia discovers the south -
Improved air links are helping tourism to take off
After many false starts, New Zealand's tourist industry believes it has a
winning formula - a view reinforced by the rapidly rising number of
visitors.
Even 150 years ago, settlers from Europe spotted the country's leisure
potential. One relatively small country seemed to offer just about
everything: hundreds of miles of warm, sandy beaches in the sub-tropical
north, remarkable volcanic geysers, mountain-climbing, skiing, wilderness
bush walks, ample fish and game hunting.
From the 1870s, tourist hotels began to appear in the most popular
destinations, and later the government added its support.
Visitor numbers ebbed and flowed, distance always being a problem.
Initially, only wealthy tourists from the US and Europe had the time for
long sea voyages. Closer to home, as air links developed, Australians might
enjoy visiting New Zealand, three hours away, for an annual skiing holiday.
Now, mass air travel is changing perceptions. New Zealand is today served by
24 international airlines that link it to most parts of the world. Tourist
numbers are climbing, helped by the economic recovery. Between January and
March, 400,000 visitors arrived, 17 per cent more than in the same period of
last year.
March alone saw a 21 per cent increase (to 139,000) over the same month last
year. Visitors from the UK represented the strongest growth (up 26 per
cent), followed by the Netherlands (up 22 per cent). In the year to March
31, visitor numbers grew by 12 per cent, to 1,213,318, the strongest growth
this decade.
Norman Geary, chairman of the New Zealand Tourism Board, says the recovery
has been startling. Between 1988 and 1991, annual arrivals had risen by an
average of 3.8 per cent, compared with the world average growth rate of 5.2
per cent. But since 1992 visitor numbers have been growing by an average 10
per cent a year, substantially ahead of the world's average growth of 3.8
per cent projected for the 1990s by the World Tourism Organisation.
The industry is encouraged by the increase, because, for much of the period,
most of the countries from which visitors came - Australia, North America,
Britain, Japan and Germany - were coping with recession. Mr Geary is
confident that the industry's goal of 2m tourists a year by 2000 will be
met.
Its strategy is one of sustained promotion in target countries, and a
reasonable level of government support. Assisting the drive are independent
operators, including Air New Zealand, which has extended its services to
much of Asia during the past 18 months.
The South Korean market has developed strongly. Koreans' interest in New
Zealand is high, because they have become one of the largest migrant groups;
and in the year to March, 40,000 visited, compared with a few hundred in
1990.
Taiwanese numbers have also risen. Nearly 50,000 visited New Zealand in the
year to March, up from 10,000 in 1991. The recession in Japan has impeded
growth, although numbers have continued to climb (145,000 in the same
period, compared with 100,000 a year earlier).
Numbers like these are forcing New Zealand to improve facilities. One
regular complaint from Asian tourists is that, while there is plenty to do
during the day, there are insufficient attractions at night. Two
international-standard casinos are being built, in Auckland and
Christchurch, and others will follow in major towns. Relaxed migration
policies, which open the door to anyone who meets the criteria, have led to
the opening of hundreds of ethnic restaurants and night clubs.
However, Mr Geary acknowledges that much still needs to be done. More hotels
must be built, involving substantial investment. Asian developers,
especially from Singapore and Hong Kong, have invested heavily in the sector
during the past three years, but have concentrated on buying existing
hotels.
Despite new labour laws, which have substantially cut wage bills,
profitability remains low in the hotel industry. Mr Geary and others fear
that, unless new hotels are built in Christchurch, Auckland and the major
destination of Queenstown, tourist numbers will not increase - already it is
often difficult to get a room.
Mr Geary believes improved profitability is essential if the industry's
potential is to be maximised. He says government support is vital, and
points out that foreign exchange earnings from visitors is 21 per cent ahead
of 1991 levels, and that the industry is a major employer of labour.
