FT  03 FEB 94 / Mayhew plans fresh Ulster move: Downing Street to bring
forward new ideas for devolved government in the province
The British government will within the next two weeks bring forward fresh
proposals for a new political settlement in Northern Ireland in a move
calculated to wrest back the initiative from Sinn Fein.
As the government stepped up its efforts to limit the impact of this week's
highly publicised visit to the US by Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president,
Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, said he would put forward
fresh ideas for devolved government in the province and formal mechanisms
for enhancing cross-border co-operation.
Sir Patrick repeated the invitation to Sinn Fein to enter exploratory
discussions within three months of a permanent end to violence.
But he strongly rejected accusations from some Ulster politicians that the
government was dragging its feet on the parallel search for a political
settlement. He said the talks process was 'alive and well' and ready to move
into higher gear.
His remarks came amid growing signs of impatience over Sinn Fein's position
from Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister. Mr Reynolds said
yesterday: 'I have spent some time now in giving out an abundance of
clarifications and I think the time is coming when I expect to get some
clarification in return.'
Sir Patrick emphasised the planned framework for a political settlement
would simultaneously involve both the so-called 'strand one' discussions -
on internal political arrangements for the province - and 'strand two' - the
relationships between the province and the Irish Republic.
The province's constitutional parties now wanted to see 'focus and
direction' given to talks which so far had been exploratory and disparate,
he said. They would continue on the same bilateral basis as the discussions
suspended at the end of 1992. Round-table talks, he added, were not yet
wanted by any of the participants.
The hard-line Democratic Unionist party, led by the Rev Ian Paisley, has
said it will not rejoin bilateral or round-table discussions if meetings
continue between Sinn Fein and the Social Democratic and Labour party.
The devolution plans embrace proposals for a new assembly, which has already
attracted some measure of agreement between the parties. Sir Patrick
emphasised both governments were anxious for a return to devolved government
in the province.
But he also moved to reassure unionists that talks about cross-border
co-operation, including the possible establishment of new executive boards,
would not involve any joint authority. He said: 'Joint authority over
Northern Ireland is not on at all. Nobody is going to pretend that the
majority of people living in Northern Ireland are going to agree to joint
authority.'
But he emphasised there were many opportunities for joint action in areas
such as tourism and the environment.
Winding up his US tour, Mr Adams promised he would make 'concrete' decisions
soon on his party's role in the peace process.
Earlier, Downing Street accused him of laying a 'smokescreen of evasions and
falsehoods'. It welcomed President Bill Clinton's call for Sinn Fein to
support the joint declaration, which it said showed the US administration
was not going to be 'sidetracked' by Sinn Fein.
Major masks fury with US, Page 8
Long haul across Ulster's quagmire, Page 14
