FT  07 SEP 94 / World Trade News: UK calls for commercial ships to carry
identification technology
The world's commercial shipping fleet could be fitted with automatic
identification systems by 2002, allowing coastguard and rescue services to
identify vessels and trace ships causing pollution or accidents.
The British government, with the backing of many other shipping nations, has
urged that ships be required to carry transponders - automatic electronic
identification systems - under a proposal to the United Nations'
International Maritime Organisation.
The proposal put forward yesterday may run into opposition from shipowners
concerned at the cost of installing the equipment required and at what they
regard as an infringement of their freedom of the seas.
The equipment could be read from the shore to establish the identity,
position, course and cargo of any vessel within range. Although ships are
presently required to carry their name and home port on their hulls, many
vessels are in effect anonymous while at sea.
Aircraft have carried automatic identification equipment for the past 50
years.
The initiative has been prompted by the sinking of a fishing vessel, the
Ocean Hound, by an unidentified merchant ship in the English Channel in 1991
and by a recommendation of the UK's Donaldson Inquiry into ship safety
earlier this year.
The inquiry said ships should be required to install identification systems
which could be read by coastguards at any time without the intervention of
the crew. At present the coastguard can call up a ship by radio but some
captains refuse to answer.
Growing pressure from governments and public opinion concerned at oil spills
and other maritime accidents has led to calls for ships to made more
traceable at sea.
Of the 400-450 ships which pass through the Strait of Dover each day, only
20 per cent can be identified from the shore.
The UK Department of Transport has submitted proposals to a meeting in
London this week of the IMO's safety of navigation sub-committee. If it
approves the proposal it would then go to the IMO's maritime safety
committee in December.
But even if the idea obtains IMO backing it could take several years for
member governments to ratify it.
The department said it hoped that transponders would be required on ships of
at least 5,000 tons gross tonnage carrying oil, gas or other hazardous
liquids from 1999.
It would be extended to ships of 500 tons or more in 2001 and to all other
ships of more than 300 tons by 2002.
