FT  06 APR 94 / Business and the Environment: Conservation conflict - A look
at the issues behind Richard Leakey's stormy exit from the Kenya Wildlife
Service
It takes an unconventional man to rescue a nation's wildlife from the
clutches of ivory poachers, smuggling syndicates and real estate barons. But
last month, Richard Leakey broke with all convention by doing something
unheard of in Africa. He resigned from a government post on a point of
principle, and he did so publicly, challenging the wisdom of new
presidential directives on wildlife management in Kenya.
Leakey's stormy exit from the Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS) dismayed
conservationists at home and abroad. It has also shaken the Kenyan
establishment, which had been trying to project a cleaner international
image after the corruption scandals of recent years.
To foreign donors, Leakey represented the new face of public service in
Kenya. He was a man who had taken over a corrupt and dispirited government
department in 1989 and transformed it into a dynamic entity, with the
freedom to cut through red tape and resist political interference. Leakey
sacked 1,640 staff, re-introduced a shoot-to-kill policy against game
poachers, and campaigned for an international ban on ivory.
Pictures of President Daniel arap Moi setting fire to pyres of captured
elephant tusks broadcast to the world Kenya's renewed commitment to the
protection of wild animals. Leakey believed Kenya's rich wildlife, which
underpins a tourist industry worth Dollars 450m (Pounds 308m) a year, could
be managed in a profitable and sustainable manner. Donors, including the
World Bank and Britain's Overseas Development Agency, backed his plans by
pledging Dollars 300m for KWS projects over the next 10 years.
Leakey's acrimonious departure has left Moi's government with a public
relations disaster. Noah Katana Ngala, the tourism and wildlife minister,
called Leakey's resignation a 'criminal act by a senior civil servant'.
Donors must unravel a knottier issue: they must decide whether the funds
pledged for conservation are safe from political predators. The omens are
not good. Over the past four years, Leakey says, he withstood the attempts
of 'land-grabbing' politicians to appropriate chunks of Kenya's wildlife
sanctuaries to develop hotels or mining concessions. He believes their
failure led to a smear campaign.
In January, Leakey stood accused of racism, arrogance and corruption, and he
faced a secret government probe into the workings of KWS. He left his post
in January, was recalled by the president in March, and resigned again two
weeks later, saying the government had placed impossible restrictions on the
director's job. He cited only two of the new directives. Armed rangers of
KWS anti-poaching units were to be placed under the authority of the
Commissioner of Police. 'I foresaw problems,' Leakey says. 'If you have two
units carrying arms, patrolling an area the size of Northern Ireland, who is
the boss?'
Leakey also says he was ordered to spend 75 per cent of KWS resources
outside national parks, on the novel reasoning that three-quarters of
Kenya's animals live outside protected areas. 'Our aim was to manage
wildlife in key tourist destinations because tourism is the biggest foreign
exchange earner in Kenya,' he says. Leakey concluded that the KWS dream of a
'self-financing, efficient, and effective, publicly owned, but independent
conservation authority' was not viable under the new directives.
However, Hilary Ng'weno, chairman of the KWS board of trustees, insists
there has been no change in KWS policy. He says the board is discussing the
recommendations of the government's probe committee - more than 100 of them
 -not all of which might prove feasible.
Ng'weno does not appear to lament Leakey's departure. The chairman
conspicuously failed to come to Leakey's defence when he was under attack
for racism and indifference to the needs of communities bordering game
reserves. 'If one man wants to take credit for everything KWS does, he
should be prepared to take the blame for its failures,' Ng'weno says.
The rift between the two men appears to have become deeper after an air
crash in September which cost Leakey both his legs. Ng'weno says the board
played a more active role during Leakey's convalescence abroad. They were
unhappy with the high salaries of certain senior managers, who nevertheless
appeared unable to act without their mentor. 'Leakey's stewardship was
faulty in that it didn't distinguish the captain from the ship,' Ng'weno
says.
Yet this fusion of identity worked to the government's advantage while
Leakey was fund-raising abroad. With Dollars 300m pledged towards
conservation in Kenya, it appears that Leakey had outlived his use. Like
others before him, he was discarded by Moi. The World Bank, which had
earmarked Dollars 60m for wildlife management in Kenya, is concerned about
the upheaval at KWS. 'We felt the projects were progressing well under
Leakey's stewardship,' says Agi Kiss, a World Bank official.
It is, however, difficult for donors to side openly with Leakey, a white
Kenyan with 25 years of public service, without incurring charges of
favouritism or racial bias. Kenyans are sensitive to statements that might
imply that black Africans are more susceptible to corruption or ineptitude
than whites. Leakey's successor, however, is a white Kenyan. David Western
has solid credentials in the field of conservation and is reported to be on
good terms with William ole Ntimama, the minister for local government who
led the attacks against Leakey.
Conservation will be the least of Western's worries at KWS. New policies are
needed to curb the growing conflict between people living and farming near
sanctuary areas and the wildlife - a need Leakey admits he was slow to
address. Local councils, starved of central government funds and short of
patronage, are also eager to wrestle game park revenues from KWS - gate fees
alone earn Dollars 1m a month.
Western, who inherits an army of game wardens, vehicles and surveillance
aircraft, will have to avoid the charges of empire-building that hounded his
predecessor from office. 'Will the new director be able to resist the
political pressures on KWS?' asks Leakey. He wishes him luck.
