FT  17 SEP 94 / FT Guide for the Serious Investor (19): Somewhere special
and secure - Investing in a house / Even serious investors need homes.
Gerald Cadogan offers some suggestions
The serious investor's choice is straightforward: a smart house in London, a
smart house in the country or a sporting or farming estate - or a
combination of any or all of these.
Look after any of these blue-chip options properly, and the security of your
money is sure, because there are always others eager to buy.
For those rich enough to afford a house that all agree is special, the hunt
starts in Chelsea. The grandest house on the London market is the Old
Rectory (56 Old Church Street, SW3), for sale through Knight Frank &amp; Rutley
with a guide price of Pounds 25m.
Why so much? Because it is a private palace in a garden of more than two
acres in the middle of London. It would make a fine ambassador's residence.
For a private person, it would be a triumph.
The rector of Chelsea lived in this 18th century house until about 10 years
ago. Developer TMC has now rebuilt it, making it three times as large. I
particularly like its two-storey drawing room - more at home in Paris or
Vienna than in London - which opens on to the part-formal, part-wild garden.
And the detailing of the glass-roofed swimming pool, parquet floors and
cedar drawers and shelves in the clothes cupboards is a joy.
TMC has also rebuilt the house next door, nicknamed 'The Garage', which
recently sold for a reputed Pounds 7m before coming formally to market. The
buyer is Elliott Bernerd, of property firm Chelsfield.
Hanover Lodge, in Regent's Park, NW1, is fresh on the market. The Crown
Estate is offering this villa designed by John Nash and Decimus Burton, with
alterations by Edwin Lutyens, through KFR on a 99-year lease for Pounds 6m.
Recently it has housed the French ambassador, while his house was being
restored. Now it needs a long-term incumbent, who must expect to carry out
renovations under the supervision of the Crown Estate's architect.
In outer London, the biggest surprise is another Old Rectory, in Church
Road, Wimbledon, SW19. It has the same amount of grounds as its Chelsea
counterpart, but is far older, going back to around 1500 when it had links
with the Cecil family, Archbishop Cranmer and Henry VIII.
Life was different then in Wimbledon. The king is said to have slept in the
downstairs hall not long before he died, as his 'bloated' body was too heavy
to carry upstairs.
The present owner, Basil Suleiman Faidhi, has restored the grade II* house
superbly. Its ace point is being only 100 yards from the All England Lawn
Tennis and Croquet Club (which would mean a fat rent during the
championships). The price from KFR's Sloane Street office is Pounds 4m.
A nearby alternative in the same grade is a late 17th century stylish brick
box. Petersham House, near Richmond, has views to the river Thames and 1710
wall paintings of classical myths along its grand staircase. Savills is
selling for Pounds 3.5m.
North of London, Wyddial Hall, in north Hertfordshire, is conveniently
equidistant between Cambridge and Stevenage. Bidwells asks for offers over
Pounds 550,000. It is an 18th century white stuccoed house, with park and
gardens designed by Humphry Repton in 1795-98.
For a Manchester businessman, Coggshall Hall, near Northwich, in Cheshire,
is ideal. Built around 1830 and sitting in 58 acres of park and paddocks, it
is 30 minutes' drive from the city. The hall has a smart red-brick facade
with stone porticoes, and inside fine plasterwork, plenty of marble
fireplaces and a swimming pool. Its listing particulars (grade II*) call it
'a good and complete example of a late Georgian country house', which
Jackson-Stops and Meller Braggins offer for Pounds 1.25m.
On the other side of the Pennines, Leyburn Hall is priced at an attractive
Pounds 450,000 from Jackson-Stops in Darlington, and straddles town and
country. It is just off the Market Place in Leyburn, North Yorkshire, but
its south front has a glorious open view across Wensleydale.
The house is mid-18th century, and the main with Corinthian columns is its
finest feature. It would make a good base for grouse shooting, perhaps on
the Askrigg where only the sporting rights and a keeper's cottage are for
sale. The price of Pounds 825,000 from Lowther Scott-Harden works out at
around Pounds 1,700 a brace on a five-year average of 493 brace shot.
If you wish to live right beside the grouse, the ideal must be the
Gunnerside estate in Swaledale, with some of the most exciting beats in the
country. The heather on its 26,485 acres was disappearing thanks to
overgrazing by sheep. Lord Peel, the owner, has worked hard and successfully
to regenerate it, but a new, enthusiastic owner who loved shooting would
find that there was still plenty to do. Savills is looking for substantial
offers.
Or become a farmer. Buy a farming estate and, if you farm it for two years
(which can include contract farming on your behalf), you - or rather your
heirs - now qualify for 100 per cent inheritance tax relief. For let
farmland, it is 50 per cent. But it is unclear - and will remain so until
enough owners have died to create a case law - how the Inland Revenue will
balance the big house against the farming: one must be using the land to
make a profit. Even a sporting estate, if it is not for your fun alone, may
be exempt. So the more the land, the less the Revenue can say that the
farming is a tax ploy.
An estate that fits the bill admirably is Kingerby Hall, near Market Rasen,
in Lincolnshire. Around a white-painted 18th century big house, with lake
and stables, are 1,362 acres for arable farming and pigs. Bidwells' price of
Pounds 2.4m also includes three farmhouses, five cottages and the farm
buildings. It is too large a proposition to be mere tax avoidance.
Bidwells, Cambridge 0223-841 842; Carter Jonas, York 0904- 627 436;
Jackson-Stops, Chester 0244-328 361, and Darlington 0325-489 948; Knight
Frank &amp; Rutley, head office 071-629 8171, and Sloane Street 071-824 8171;
Lowther Scott-Harden, Croft-on-Tees 0325-720 976; Meller Braggins, Knutsford
0565- 632 618; Savills, 071-499 8644.
