FT  05 MAY 94 / Leading Article: What Palestine needs now
It has taken eight months, since their historic handshake in Washnington
last September, for Mr Yitzhak Rabin and Mr Yassir Arafat to reach the point
where they could actually sign an agreement yesterday, giving limited
self-rule to the Palestinians in two small areas of Palestine. During those
months euphoria has dissipated.
Israelis are bitterly divided, between those who are eager to get rid of the
Gaza Strip and other densely populated Arab areas at almost any price, and
those who regard withdrawal from any part of the 'Land of Israel' as close
to sacrilege. Palestinians are even more bitterly divided, between those who
see the 'liberation' of even a small area as an essential first step towards
an independent state, and those who regard the agreement as installing Mr
Arafat in a quisling role, with the job of suppressing Palestinian
resistance and so indirectly protecting the Israeli settlements which remain
on Palestinian soil.
The delay has strengthened the opponents of compromise in both camps. The
massacre in Hebron last February revealed the extreme vulnerability of the
Palestinians. The fact that even after that Mr Rabin was unwilling or unable
to remove the handful of settlers based in the town centre of Hebron, let
alone any of the larger concentrations, hardly inspires confidence. The
momentum of events has been unfavourable. Those who have signed the
agreement, and those who support it on both sides, need to work very fast to
reverse that trend.
Tangible benefits
Israeli leaders have made it clear they regard the agreement as a test,
implying that further progress towards a final settlement depends on the
success of the new arrangement in enhancing rather than diminishing Israeli
security. But Mr Arafat's chances of keeping the peace will depend in large
part on his ability to demonstrate that the agreement is bringing real and
tangible benefits to Palestinians.
Those who live in Gaza and Jericho will not long be grateful for the removal
of Israeli soldiers if they find themselves harassed with an even more
brutal hand by the Palestinian police and Mr Arafat's 'Fatah hawks'. Mr
Arafat cannot afford to be indulgent towards those who seek to sabotage the
agreement by carrying on acts of violence against Israelis. But he should be
careful to avoid the appearance of confiding power only to his own
supporters.
His legitimacy as a historic resistance leader has virtually run its course.
To rule over Gaza and Jericho he needs democratic authority. Elections
should not be postponed longer than absolutely necessary. The risk that
Hamas, the Islamic resistance movement, will win many posts has to be
accepted.
Economic prospects
Equally important is the need to provide the population with some economic
prospects, especially in Gaza where annual per capita income is Dollars 850,
40-50 per cent of the workforce is unemployed, and the population is growing
at 4.6 per cent per year. The World Bank has just announced a Dollars 1.2bn
three-year emergency aid package - which at Dollars 200 per person per year
is certainly generous, but will not in itself create a viable economy.
Indeed, it could do more harm than good if much of it sticks to the fingers
of corrupt administrators, or if the PLO uses it mainly as a political tool
for rewarding supporters and entrenching its own power. That has tended to
be the pattern in the past.
What the Palestinian economy needs, like any other, is free trade and free
movement of labour, and large flows of inward investment. This is much more
likely to generate sustainable improvements in living standards than
dependence on mere handouts. The most important element in the agreement may
be the access to the Israeli market which it offers to Palestinian producers
 -something ironically denied them during 27 years of Israeli occupation. In
time, this should enable Palestinian industry and agriculture to absorb a
larger share of the work force.
But in the short term the best hope is for Israel to readmit Palestinian
migrant labour to its own economy. That does involve some security risks,
but the risk of continuing to bottle up the Palestinian work force inside
the territories is even greater.
