FT  08 JAN 94 / Finance and the Family: Keep your eye on small companies -
Diary of a Private Investor
Now that professional pundits, City gurus, newspaper columnists, astrologers
and others have revealed their thoughts and forecasts for 1994, I feel much
happier. Between them, there are enough variations to ensure that at least
one will be as wrong as I was last year.
Making my 1993 predictions in December 1992, I was right in believing that
interest rates would fall; some insurance companies would slash their bonus
rates; the Conservatives would incur losses in the county elections;
unemployment would remain high; and that while the government would show the
economy was improving, 'troubles' would break out in unexpected places
overseas. I also hoped Taurus, the London stock market's electronic share
settlement system, would be aborted - and it was.
But I was completely wrong in adopting a cautious stance towards the stock
market. Although I expected people to seek havens for their money other than
low-yielding bank and building society accounts, I failed to foresee the
heights to which markets around the world (including the UK) would be pushed
by the weight of money seeking large returns.
My stupidest comment of all was: 'There will be many pitfalls for private
investors in 1993 - including avoiding the shares of those ITV companies
which have bid too high for their franchises and will have start paying for
those bids.' Yorkshire TV was 110p in January 1993 - but had risen to 156p
by the end of the year, largely because of investors anticipating a shake-up
in the television industry.
I also said that making significant profits would 'depend largely on
monitoring shares in small companies carefully, and taking advantage of any
further major upheavals in currencies.' While some small companies achieved
spectacular returns in 1993, many major companies, which I had thought to be
at optimum levels in 1992, still powered ahead to produce very attractive
gains.
In an early draft of that article, I had included the comment: 'Backing
shrewd individuals, like Peter Buckley of Caledonia Investments, could also
prove profitable in 1993.' Unfortunately, I revised the article to exclude
that (and other) comments and did not even take my own advice.
Caledonia Investments, 448p in January 1993, had risen to 624p by the end of
the year. Buckley is also on the boards of Amber Industrial (which rose from
345p to 725p), English and Scottish Investors (up from 88p to 124p),
Sterling Industries (126p to 200p) and the Telegraph publishing group (345p
to 495p).
With such personal fallibility in mind, my expectations for 1994 undoubtedly
will undergo much revision as the year progresses. At the moment, though, I
believe there are still likely to be some bargains among small companies.
Many years ago, when first I took an interest in this sector, there were no
hordes of unit trusts specialising in small companies. I could invest
knowing that my fellow investors were, largely, other private investors
(including board members of the companies concerned) and perhaps one or two
pension funds (such as the Mars confectionery firm). Many of the
shareholders were prepared to be patient and hold for the long term. But
increased unit trust interest has changed my perception of many small
companies.
Unit trusts are driven by what their investors want. If they decide suddenly
that trusts specialising in, say, emerging markets are more interesting than
small UK companies, then they will switch to these. The only way trust
managers can repay those switching investors (apart from attracting new ones
to replace them) is to sell some of the trusts' small company holdings.
Share dealings in a number of small companies are not exactly easy at the
best of times: share liquidity can be difficult, as some of them are not
traded actively. If a unit trust has to sell a holding of 1 or 2 per cent
(or more) of a small company, this could have a disproportionate effect on
its share price, as the shares might have to be marked down substantially
before buyers could be found for most of them. I intend to watch for any
such sharp mark-downs; they could reveal excellent buying opportunities.
In 1993, some of the emerging markets' unit trusts achieved massive gains,
and I expect many more people to be attracted towards such trusts early this
year as those gains become known more widely. In some of those countries,
however, 'share ramping' is not uncommon.
Several people combine to push up a share price in the expectation that
others, believing the company has excellent prospects, will invest and drive
the price still higher. The original group then sells its shares at a fat
profit before serious doubts can be raised about the relative worth of the
company and its price falls back.
Although there has been much recent comment about the UK emerging from
recession and January sales setting records at certain shops, I am not
rushing to buy shares in the store sector. Sales may well be up - but what
about profit margins?
The recession has made many more people seek value for money. It has also
led a number to discover a social conscience. In the main, conspicuous
consumption is no longer fashionable, apart from some of the newly-rich in
Hong Kong. Even there, as 1997 approaches, more people may start to think
about the parallels with Shanghai in the 1920s and some of the events that
followed.
I shall, therefore, seek out those companies world-wide which provide goods
and services that are seen to offer value for money, as their shares ought
to perform better than others.
I will also be searching for companies that provide something new and
exciting. What will be the latest technological innovation - the useful
something that people feel they must have?
This year could be full of surprises. I hope I will be daring enough to
profit from them.
