FT  01 SEP 94 / The IRA Ceasefire: Limits of republican patience may soon be
tested - Nationalists
When the 'troubles' began in Northern Ireland 25 years ago, graffiti
appeared on walls in nationalist areas in Belfast and Derry saying 'IRA = I
Ran Away'.
That taunt against the old IRA, which did not want to be drawn into
sectarian conflict with Protestants, provided the rallying cry for a new
generation of republicans who wanted to revive the armed struggle, largely
dormant since the 1950s. The Provisional IRA split with the Official IRA and
has been at the forefront of the conflict ever since.
That new generation is today's old generation, which yesterday announced an
end to its 25-year campaign with a view to joining a purely political battle
for the goal of a united Ireland.
But if Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing, is unable to make political
headway there can be little doubt that hardliners will begin to question the
value of the ceasefire. And, if it collapses, the position of Mr Gerry Adams
as Sinn Fein leader and prime mover of its 'peace strategy' will inevitably
fall into question.
If loyalist paramilitaries think that an eventual participation of Sinn Fein
in negotiations is leading to significant political concessions to
nationalists, they may well decide to escalate their own military actions to
undermine the ceasefire, rather than respond in kind to it, as they are
being urged to do.
The 'I Ran Away' taunt could then return to haunt the leaders of Sinn Fein
and the IRA, and create pressure for action in defence of nationalist
communities - or in the worst of scenarios, a replay of the 1970s split that
saw the 'Officials' enter mainstream politics and the young militants carry
on the war.
There is little doubt in the minds of the security forces that the IRA is a
tightly disciplined organisation. Its 'active service units' operate in
small cells. Their weapons are controlled through a separate quartermaster
division, and bunkered in secret sites in the republic and Ulster. The
quartermasters are controlled by the IRA's ruling body, its Army Council.
The possibility of 'maverick' units rejecting the ceasefire and operating
independently of the Army Council is minimal - although not impossible if
weaponry exists outside the control of the leadership.
The IRA is believed to have some 700 automatic rifles, a considerable stock
of machine-guns, millions of rounds of ammunition, two to three tons of
Semtex explosive, plus copious supplies of home-made fertiliser-based
explosive as well as its own-design mortars.
Senior republican officials have repeatedly stressed that the IRA and Sinn
Fein leaderships are moving in tandem on the peace process, and that the
possibility of a rupture will not arise, either between the organisations or
within them.
Some councillors from the Catholic community in Belfast, however, believe
the IRA leadership is prepared to call off the ceasefire if loyalist
killings escalate and the security forces are unable to contain them. Some
200 republicans are said to have been warned by the RUC that loyalists have
details of them.
Sinn Fein blames this leakage of intelligence information on renegade
elements within the security forces sympathetic to the loyalist
paramilitaries. The IRA's commitment to the ceasefire is, therefore, likely
to be in part determined by how the security forces respond to any upsurge
in loyalist violence.
Attempts by armed republican splinter groups - such as the INLA and the IPLO
 -to pick up hardline support from within the IRA by continuing the war are
considered to be limited because of their shortage of weaponry and the
debilitation of their leadership by internal feuding.
The IRA has also been willing to act ruthlessly against its rivals, if it
felt its own territory was being invaded or its leading role threatened. It
is thought that its recent killing of a gangland boss in Dublin may be
linked to the IRA asserting its authority and discipline within the armed
republican movement.
There was a firm belief in political circles in Dublin yesterday that the
IRA is committed to a permanent cessation of violence. But the rapidity with
which the Irish government has moved to reassure Sinn Fein that it will be
quickly incorporated into political talks indicates Dublin's appreciation
that IRA patience has its limits.
