FT  06 JAN 94 / Defenders of the franc
The nine-member council which was yesterday entrusted with the management of
France's monetary policy brings together an assortment of individuals from
the worlds of politics and business to academia and journalism.
Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, the governor of the central bank, and his two
deputies, Mr Herve Hannoun and Mr Denis Ferman, will be joined by six
members who span political and occupational lines.
The best-known of the council members is Mr Michel Albert, 63, who for the
past 10 years has been chairman of Assurances Generales de France (AGF), the
third largest French insurance group. Mr Albert is as renowned for his
writing on economic issues as for his work in the insurance industry.
His 1991 book, Capitalisme Contre Capitalisme, which analysed the structural
differences between the French, German and Anglo-Saxon models of capitalism,
has been highly influential in France.
Mr Albert, a devout Europhile, has long been committed to the Balladur
government's policy of maintaining a strong franc. Those views are shared by
the left's representative on the council, Mr Michel Sapin, finance minister
in the former Socialist government. Mr Sapin, who at 41 is the youngest
member of the committee, demonstrated his commitment to a strong franc
during his 11-month tenure as finance minister.
His appointment was the subject of a dispute between the Socialist
president, Mr Francois Mitterrand, and Mr Balladur. The prime minister,
concerned about the appointment of a politician close to Mr Michel Rocard,
the Socialist leader, finally agreed to the appointment on Tuesday night.
Also contested was the appointment of Mrs Denise Flouzat, an economics
professor, who has worked at several universities including the Sorbonne in
Paris. She fought off a challenge for the final place on the committee from
Mr Alexis Gourvennec, head of Brittany Ferries.
In laying out his plans for an independent Bank of France last summer, Mr
Edmond Alphandery, the economy minister, said he did not want the monetary
policy council to be dominated by the 'Parisian monetary intelligentsia'.
But Mrs Flouzat, who is 65 and the only woman on the council, ensures that
there will be one representative of this group.
The voice of industry is expected to come from Mr Jean-Pierre Gerard, head
of France's national standards testing laboratories. An engineer, Mr Gerard
was chairman of Thomson Jeumont, the cables group, in 1980-1984.
Mr Balladur can expect support for the franc fort from Mr Jean Boissonat,
the media's representative on the council. Mr Boissonat, 65, an economics
commentator, has long advocated monetary stability.
The ninth member of the council is another financial heavyweight, Mr Bruno
de Maulde, 59, chairman of the Conseil des Bourses de Valeurs, the stock
market watchdog, and a former chairman of Credit du Nord, a retail banking
subsidiary of the Paribas group.
