FT  08 JUN 94 / Major urges his supporters to vote
Mr John Major issued a last-minute plea to traditional Tory voters to oppose
a centralised federal Europe as the final stages of the European elections
campaign erupted yesterday into a row over job creation. With all three
party leaders winding up their European election campaigns at set-piece
rallies, the prime minister focused his attention on persuading traditional
Conservative supporters not to abstain tomorrow in protest at the
government's domestic record.
In an implicit acknowledgement that the government needs to muster its core
support to avoid an electoral catastrophe, Mr Major said protest votes and
abstentions would severely damage Britain's interests in Europe.
He told a rally in London that the campaign had shown 'we are the only party
prepared to fight day in and day out for Britain's best interests in
Europe'.
But Labour and the Liberal Democrats insisted the poll would be a referendum
on Mr Major's record since the 1992 general election. Mrs Margaret Beckett,
the Labour leader, said that voters would be rejecting a government which
was 'divided over Europe, riven with incompetence and incapable of telling
the truth'.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democrat leader, urged voters to deliver a verdict
on a government which had 'broken its election promises and betrayed the
hopes of the people'.
The speeches came as the three main parties were embroiled in a fierce row
over the implications for Britain of a report by the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development on labour markets.
A clearly delighted Mr Major was joined by a phalanx of senior ministers in
insisting the report amounted to a ringing endorsement of the government's
emphasis on deregulated and flexible markets.
In surprisingly confident mood at last night's rally and during earlier
media interviews, Mr Major insisted that the Conservatives had won all the
main arguments during the campaign.
He spoke of his 'passionate conviction' that Britain should play a part in
shaping Europe's future and described 'this European Union of ours' as 'a
very great venture'.
But in a carefully-balanced speech he again conjured up a vision of a
flexible, multi-speed Europe with member states free to act in their own way
and at their own speed.
Flanked by Union Jacks, Mr Major was firm on defence, saying there was no
need 'for the Commission to be involved in the defence of Europe'.
Mr Major was supported by Sir Norman Fowler, the Conservative party
chairman, who cautioned against the view that the Liberal Democrats
represented 'some middle way' on Europe.
In defiant mood, Sir Norman said Liberal Democrat policies were just as
'extreme' and 'damaging' as Labour's.
Mr Major's relatively relaxed demeanour appeared to reflect confidence at
Conservative Central Office that the government will win closer to 20 seats
in the Strasbourg assembly than the five or six some have projected.
That assessment was reinforced by an ICM poll in today's Daily Express which
suggested they might win between 15 and 25 seats.
