FT  02 AUG 94 / Touche pays Pounds 1.35m to settle 'negligence' case
Touche Ross, the accountancy firm, has paid about Pounds 1.35m in final
settlement of the ground-breaking Caparo case in which it was accused of
negligent auditing.
Mr Swraj Paul, owner of Caparo, the mini-conglomerate, said yesterday that
the money covered his costs in fighting a nine-year legal battle against the
auditors.
Caparo bought Fidelity, an electronics company, for Pounds 13.4m in 1985 and
subsequently discovered that it had overpaid because of alleged
overstatements in the accounts of stocks, sales and pre-tax profits.
It brought a case against the directors - Mr Steven Dickman and Mr Robert
Dickman - who have since become bankrupt, and also against Touche Ross,
auditors to Fidelity.
The Touche Ross case went to the House of Lords in 1990, where it set an
important and much-criticised legal precedent, which severely restricted the
'duty of care' that auditors had to users of accounts. The Lords said the
duty extended only to the company and to shareholders as a collective group.
Mr Paul was determined to continue his campaign to seek redress from the
auditors, and launched a second action structured to get round the Lords'
ruling.
The case, which was due to reach the courts in October, was brought against
Touche Ross in the name of Intersound Consumer Electronics, as Fidelity is
now called. Mr Paul said the size of the settlement was adequate as
Intersound could probably only have claimed damages equal to the size of
Touche's audit fees, because Intersound as a company gained from Caparo
overpaying for the acquisition.
The settlement, which was agreed last month, came without any admission of
liability, and neither party would comment on the size of the payments
involved yesterday.
Touche Ross said: 'We have reached an amicable settlement. Both sides
incurred substantial costs and the case has not yet even come to court. The
only people to make any money were the professional advisers helping each
side so it made sense to settle for commercial reasons.'
Caparo close to US purchase, Page 19
