FT  23 JUN 94 / Black concedes battle but aims to win the war: The reasons
behind the Telegraph's price cut
Mr Conrad Black's decision to cut the price of the Daily Telegraph from 48p
to 30p from today is the most dramatic in the newspaper's history since Lord
Camrose halved the price from 2d to 1d in 1930.
Within two weeks Mr Black's distinguished predecessor had increased sales
from 100,000 to 190,000 with at least some of the increased readership
coming from The Times.
The price cut this time is designed more to halt a gradual circulation loss
to The Times since Mr Rupert Murdoch cut its price to 30p last September.
Telegraph executives have always insisted that they had no intention of
following Mr Murdoch's example. Indeed, when The Times move was first
announced Mr Joe Cooke, who retires as managing director at the end of this
month, said it was sad to see a great British institution marketing itself
not on its editorial quality but on its cheapness.
But at least with The Times Mr Murdoch has confounded the critics, although
the 20p Sun remains a financial burden.
Before the experiment began The Times had a circulation of about 370,000. In
the 10 months afterwards sales have continued to rise gradually but it was
the 35,000 leap in May to a new record of 515,000 at a time when the Daily
Telegraph had slipped below the psychologically important 1m mark that
convinced Mr Black he would have to react.
'He (Murdoch) has won in so far as he has convinced us of the wisdom of
following him,' said Mr Black, who believes a certain amount of pandemonium
in the market is now inevitable.
The Independent, still priced at 50p, cut today's cover price to 20p to try
to get more readers to sample it and read an attack on the behaviour of the
large newspaper proprietors. The paper has already been testing 40p and 45p
cover prices in a number of areas and the 50p cover price is clearly under
review.
The Guardian said last night it was considering the impact of the Telegraph
decision but seems unlikely to take any early action. The Guardian has a
relatively committed readership and sales, which fell to 397,172 in April,
rose to 401,831 in May.
The Telegraph concedes that in a full year the effect of the price cut will
be more than Pounds 40m, although this will be offset by cost reductions and
growth in advertising revenue. The company is believed to be keeping the
wholesalers' margin at 26.5 per cent but making up the loss with a
performance bonus.
One national newspaper editor suggested last night that Mr Black could have
attacked Mr Murdoch more cheaply and more effectively by greatly reducing
the price of the Sunday Telegraph in the hope of luring readers away from Mr
Murdoch's highly profitable Sunday Times, which conspicuously has not cut
its price.
Mr Max Hastings, the Telegraph editor-in-chief, said that the new cover
price meant the paper would be able to build circulation 'by appealing to
readers of mid-market titles and to a greater number of new and non-regular
readers'.
This week Mr Hastings has shaken up his top editorial staff by appointing Mr
Simon Heffer as one of two deputy editors - an appointment that is likely to
presage a move to the right in the Telegraph opinion columns.
Mr Murdoch always made it clear he was aiming at the Telegraph's attractive,
affluent 1m circulation.
Now that Mr Black has fired off his missiles in retaliation it will be the
autumn before it is clear whether 'Darwinian chaos' has been unleashed or
whether the overall market for national newspapers can be expanded,
reversing years of gradual decline.
