FT  17 MAY 94 / Italy plans more active EU role: Berlusconi pledge to raise
his country's profile in the world
Italy's new prime minister, Mr Silvio Berlusconi, yesterday promised that
his right-wing government would play a more active role in Europe and make
his country's voice heard more worldwide. Of all the countries in Europe or
in the Group of Seven Italy has consistently played a disproportionately
small role in relation to its economic strength and strategic position.
Outlining the government programme of his Freedom Alliance to the senate, Mr
Berlusconi also indicated some reserve about the Maastricht treaty. But, in
a speech lasting nearly an hour, he declined to go into details on either
foreign or domestic policy. He only began to put together a programme with
his main allies over the past week.
Mr Berlusconi also appeared reluctant to reveal his policies in the senate,
where his government is at least eight seats short of the 164-seat majority
to win the required vote of confidence. Mr Gianfranco Miglio, the senior
Northern League senator who has always been distrustful of Mr Berlusconi,
yesterday said he would not vote for the government.
The confidence vote is due tomorrow, and yesterday the prime minister
appealed to senators belonging to the small centrist parties for support. He
hinted they should observe a truce to allow his government to set in place
its programme and judge him by his actions.
Mr Berlusconi began by focusing on foreign policy and with the admission
that his government - sworn in last week with five ministers of the
neo-fascist MSI/National Alliance - had been received 'in some respects with
a certain justifiable anxiety'.
He said Mr Antonio Martino, the new foreign minister (in Brussels yesterday
to meet EU colleagues) had already begun 'to state and reinforce Italy's
role as a protagonist in the European Union'. He went on: 'Italy must be in
favour of enlargement of the Union, also towards eastern Europe. . . but a
careful process of reflection on the Maastricht treaty should not delay the
process of union.'
On economic policy he promised 'incisive action' on Italy's public finances
in conjunction with a general deregulation and liberalisation of the
economy. He appealed for the dynamic private sector to adopt
'do-it-yourself' attitude to help stimulate economic growth, but said public
works projects would also have to play an important part.
To aid employers, he promised to introduce in his first 100 days a series of
fiscal measures which would ease the cost of employment and help part-time
and temporary employment. On privatisation, he contented himself with
saying: 'The government is pledged to accelerate the privatisation of Ina
(insurance), Stet (telecoms), Enel (electricity) and Eni (oil and gas).'
On the conflict of interest between his role as premier and his position as
owner of the Fininvest media empire, Mr Berlusconi said he hoped he would be
judged 'by facts and not by prejudice'. He offered no further guarantees
other than the establishment of three jurists, selected two weeks ago to
examine anti-trust laws and prepare a report by the end of September.
