FT  02 DEC 94 / Investment watchdog may broaden scope
Complaints about term assurance and permanent health insurance are likely to
be transferred to the ombudsman scheme linked to the Personal Investment
Authority (PIA), the watchdog to protect the private investor, even though
these policies are outside its scope.
The prospect of such a move increases the probability that the PIA itself
will seek to extend its remit to these areas.
Its board has already commissioned some work on taking responsibility for
regulating the marketing of term assurance - protection-only policies which
do not carry an element of investment as other life policies do - and is due
to discuss the issue again early in the new year.
Since neither term assurance nor permanent health insurance are strictly
investments, they do not come within the Financial Services Act. This means
the PIA could extend its powers only with the agreement of those it
regulates.
The regulation of term assurance is the less contentious issue of the two,
since the policies are relatively straightforward and commissions to sales
agents are generally lower than those for life insurance policies. Permanent
health insurance is more complex, and is an area of the market that is
growing fast.
But the PIA's lack of power to regulate term assurance has already meant
that plans to require sales agents to disclose commission and more product
information on this type of business have had to be postponed. The new
requirements will apply to life insurance policies from the start of next
month.
At present, disputes about term assurance or permanent health insurance
which cannot be resolved between customer and insurer are handled by the
Insurance Ombudsman Bureau. The bureau has already lost responsibility for
complaints about the marketing of life insurance and investments, following
the setting up of the PIA ombudsman scheme in the summer.
Insurance companies have been consulted by the bureau about how to split the
areas of complaints, which do not have to be transferred to the PIA
ombudsman, between the two watchdogs.
The plan which is said to have been generally agreed by the insurers is that
all complaints about long-term policies should be dealt with by the PIA
ombudsman, and all complaints about general insurance should continue to be
handled by the IOB.
A few companies which specialise in permanent health insurance have
expressed opposition to this split. A compromise may be agreed allowing the
IOB to continue to deal with complaints about these businesses.
Arrangements have yet to be discussed fully with Mr Stephen Edell, the PIA
ombudsman. The changes are not expected to be finalised until some time in
the first half of next year.
