FT  18 OCT 94 / Three days is a long time in this peace process: Roger
Matthews shows just how delicately balanced Arab-Israeli negotiations have
proved to be
Just how delicately balanced the Middle East peace process remains was never
better illustrated than during the past 72 hours. On Friday afternoon it was
legitimate to speculate about a possible collapse of the negotiations
between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organisation, with potentially
devastating consequences for the entire movement towards a lasting
settlement. By yesterday afternoon not only had that fear receded, but the
momentum towards peace had gathered pace with the signing of a draft
agreement between Israel and Jordan.
The advocates of peace, and its enemies, will both probably have been
heartened by events. Hamas, the radical Palestinian faction, will have noted
how close it came to provoking Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's prime minister,
into breaking off talks with the PLO and forcing a bitter confrontation
among the Palestinian community.
Little suits Hamas better than being able to portray Mr Yassir Arafat, the
PLO chairman, as a tool of Israeli security policy in repressing Palestinian
national ambitions. By first staging a terror attack in the heart of
Jerusalem and then kidnapping an Israeli soldier, Hamas got the reaction
from Mr Rabin that it sought. The end to the kidnapping, tragic though it
was, would have been so much worse had Hamas been holding the soldier in
territory under the control of Mr Arafat's police.
The speed with which Mr Rabin announced the resumption of talks with the
PLO, suspended last week, on the holding of elections in the West Bank and
Gaza and the further redeployment of Israeli troops, suggests the Israeli
government is aware of how dangerously close the peace process had come to
breaking down. It was also fortuitous that negotiations with Jordan had
progressed to the point that Mr Rabin was able to head almost immediately to
Amman where he and King Hussein worked late into Sunday night to complete
their agreement.
King Hussein had signalled in June his intention to press ahead with
bilateral negotiations. Frustrated by the lack of co-ordination among his
Arab negotiating partners, and generally depressed about the political
health of the region, King Hussein said he had no option but to concentrate
on his own immediate interests. The Jordanians had been angered by the
behaviour of Mr Arafat, particularly over future links between the two
economies, and were being given little information by the Syrians on the
progress of their negotiations with Israel.
'We cannot wait any longer. We have to address the problems which relate to
the interests of this country,' said King Hussein.
This he has now done. In the process, the king has cemented his
rapprochement with the US after the breach caused by the Gulf war, and will
probably be successful in winning debt relief on some Dollars 2bn owed to
western governments. Simultaneously he has given Israel the satisfaction of
having picked off the third of the five Arab nations which had sworn to
remain forever united before the Zionist foe. Egypt, the Palestinians and
Jordan have all now signed separate deals. Only Syria and Lebanon remain.
On paper, the last stage should not present too formidable an obstacle. The
broad outline of an agreement is already well understood by all sides. Syria
requires Israel to withdraw totally from the Golan Heights, occupied in
1967. The Lebanese government, which will not act without Syria's blessing,
similarly wants Israel to quit territory in the south of its country. Israel
is demanding a full normalisation of relations.
The critical issue is over timing. Israel says it must have prior evidence
of the Syrian commitment to peace before it will begin a staged withdrawal,
which would only be completed over several years. The Syrians, of course,
want their land back first.
Given the deeply suspicious nature of Mr Rabin and President Hafez al-Assad
of Syria, it was to be expected that the mediation efforts of Mr Warren
Christopher, the US secretary of state, would only edge forward slowly. But
US officials are confident progress is being made and the most optimistic
talk about a breakthrough before the end of the year. Nothing would provide
a greater blow to the ambitions of Middle East extremists than the sight of
Mr Assad and Mr Rabin shaking hands.
