FT  05 APR 94 / Meciar skulks in Slovakia's political wings: The ousted PM
is determined to beat his enemies at the next election
'What did I do wrong?' a cartoon figure of Mr Vladimir Meciar, Slovakia's
recently ousted prime minister, asked Joseph Stalin, the late Soviet
dictator, on Slovak TV last week. 'You didn't abolish parliament,' came the
reply. This struck a chord with the many Slovaks who accuse the ex-premier
of Stalinist tendencies.
Mr Meciar, leader of the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS), was
forced to resign last month after he lost a vote of confidence in the
parliament he has dominated since taking his party to victory on a wave of
nationalist euphoria in the Czechoslovak elections of June 1992.
But it was the Slovak president, Mr Michal Kovac, who delivered the coup de
grace. The president had obliquely criticised Mr Meciar with repeated calls
for greater tolerance in Slovak political life. This expanded to a scathing
personal attack on the prime minister and, in turn, gave Slovakia's
fragmented opposition parties the courage to call for his resignation.
But removing Mr Meciar from political life will not be easy. He plans to
emphasise his role as 'father of the nation' and devote his prodigious
energy to the task of dividing and confounding his enemies in the run-up to
a general election set for September 30. If he wins he will exact
retribution.
'When re-elected, I will allow the president to swear me in, but then he
will have to resign,' he said shortly after losing power.
What sustains Mr Meciar's confidence, and worries his opponents, is the
knowledge that he has already emerged from a previous political eclipse. He
was deposed by a similar parliamentary coup in April 1991, but he went on to
form his own nationalist party and led it to victory 15 months later while
Mr Vaclav Klaus, the Czech leader, was sweeping to power in the Czech
Republic on a programme of economic reform.
Since then, Slovakia and the Czech Republic have moved in contrasted
directions, and Mr Meciar has suffered by the comparison. The Czechs, with
low inflation and low unemployment, have forged ahead with privatisation and
preparations for entry to the European Union. The Slovaks, with a weaker
industrial base, have seen unemployment soar to 17 per cent of the
workforce, their currency devalued and privatisation stumble to a halt amid
allegations of corruption and sales of state enterprises to political
cronies.
In politics, Mr Meciar has suffered a welter of defections from HZDS ranks
as well as criticisms of intolerance, secrecy and lack of vision.
The new coalition government is led by Mr Jozef Moravcik, former foreign
minister who broke away from the HZDS with 10 other rebels in February. He
has six months to establish this new force's credibility as an effective
government and win the votes needed to keep Mr Meciar from forming a new
government. Mr Moravcik has made clear the government's priorities 'to speed
economic transformation, de-politicise privatisation and take more effective
steps to attract foreign investors'.
The government's first move has been to block 13 of the 45 privatisation
projects approved by the Meciar government in the six weeks before its
removal. The new finance minister and former Meciar supporter, Mr Rudolf
Filkus, has blocked the transfer of shares to the new 'owners' pending
closer scrutiny. Mr Filkus was removed as ambassador to Austria, Slovakia's
main foreign trade and investment partner, for criticising the ex-premier's
policies towards Slovakia's ethnic Hungarian minority.
Blocking suspect privatisations both underlines the government's commitment
to greater transparency and signals its intentions to play hard politics
against what it recognises as a formidable political opponent.
Already the removal of Mr Meciar has led to a lightening of the political
mood. The new government's main task is to demonstrate an alternative style
of government, removed from the rawness of the Meciar regime with its
penchant for fast official cars and its aggressive assumption that critics
were both personal foes of the leader and enemies of Slovakia itself.
Mr Moravcik and his coalition partners do not underestimate the difficulties
ahead. None of the party leaders can match Mr Meciar's forceful personality,
and the coalition parties, which control 83 of the 150 seats in the Slovak
parliament, make uneasy bedfellows. They range from the catholic KHD party,
led by Mr Jan Carnogursky, to the former communists of the Party of the
Democratic Left (SLD).
In the middle sits a hastily-formed 'centre alliance' composed mainly of
defectors from the HZDS such as Mr Moravcik and his predecessor as foreign
minister, Mr Milan Knazko.
The 'historic compromise', which has brought Catholics and former Marxists
together in shared hostility to Mr Meciar, is particularly fragile. 'For
decades our people were persecuted by communists,' Mr Carnogursky recalls.
'Here, in parliament, the SLD's young leaders such as Petr Weiss are like
social democrats and we can co-operate with them. But, in the small towns
and villages, many SLD voters remain old-style communists and the
antagonisms run deep.'
Mr Meciar, whose two years in government allowed him time to sift through
the former secret police's files for ammunition against political enemies,
has made no secret of his intention to exploit any sign of dissent within
the new government's ranks.
But independence, Mr Meciar's war-horse in the 1992 elections, is no longer
an issue. From all sides, people argue that the most important thing now is
to make Slovakia work, and above all to get the economy up and running.
The new government has taken over negotiations with the International
Monetary Fund for a new Dollars 360m (Pounds 246.5m) stand-by loan. The
central bank is forecasting that the economy, with its bias towards heavy
industry and trade with the east, will bottom out this year. Its main task
now is to persuade voters and investors, both domestic and foreign, that it
will push ahead with economic reform, and that it can win the election and
form a stable government, even if Mr Meciar is skulking in the wings.
