FT  21 OCT 94 / International Company News: Rockwell bids Dollars 1.5bn in
battle for Reliance Electric
A bid battle has broken out over the US industrial motor company Reliance
Electric with a Dollars 1.5bn cash offer from Rockwell International. In
August, Reliance agreed to be taken over in a Dollars 1.3bn all-share deal
by General Signal.
Rockwell, which makes industrial controls as well as rockets and missiles,
is much the bigger of the two bidders, with sales last year of Dollars
10.8bn. General Signal, which also makes industrial controls, had sales of
Dollars 1.5bn, around the same size as Reliance. Rockwell plans to merge
Reliance with its Allen-Bradley controls division, to create an industrial
automation business with world sales of about Dollars 3.5bn.
Mr Donald Beall, chairman, said the deal would lead to higher volume and
reduced costs. 'The strategic logic is driven by serving our customers
better and improving our global position, not by cost-cutting', he said.
Rockwell said it would sell Reliance's telecommunications business, which
contributed just under a third of its sales last year. Before the disposal,
the purchase would raise Rockwell's net debt from 17 per cent of capital
employed to the low 40s. 'That's not an issue for Rockwell,' Mr Beall said.
'We have a very strong balance sheet and cash flow.'
Neither General Signal nor Reliance, which described the offer as 'a
complete surprise', made an initial response. Wall Street's immediate
reaction was to mark Reliance shares up Dollars 5 1/4 to Dollars 29 3/4 ,
just short of Rockwell's Dollars 30 a share offer. General Signal's shares,
which had been depressed by the prospect of a heavy equity issue, rose
Dollars 1 1/4 to Dollars 35 3/8  .
One analyst said 'Rockwell has deep pockets, and it's a very logical fit.'
In Europe, Allen-Bradley is one of the best-known names in factory
automation. It has four European manufacturing plants - at Milton Keynes in
the UK, Ivrea and Milan in Italy, and Aarau in Switzerland - and employs
more than 1,000 people. The Swiss plant came with last year's purchase by
Rockwell of Sprecher + Schuh's low-voltage electro-mechanical controls
business and the Sprecher + Schuh name and trademark.
Sales figures for Allen-Bradley Europe were not available, but the UK is by
far its largest European market. It is the UK market leader for programmable
logic controls (PLCs), widely used to control motors in machinery. In 1992,
Allen-Bradley acquired all the assets of Osai A-B, a joint venture in
computerised numerical control equipment, by buying out the interest of its
partner, a subsidiary of Olivetti.
Shortly after the offer was announced, Reliance issued its third-quarter
results, showing net earnings for the quarter more than doubled at Dollars
21m on sales up 12 per cent at Dollars 449m.
Reliance's biggest shareholder is Citicorp, the US bank, which holds 5.25m
non-voting shares convertible into 28 per cent of the equity. Rockwell said
Mr John Reed, Citicorp chairman, had received a courtesy call just before
the announcement of the offer. Citicorp was not available for comment.
Mr Beall said Rockwell had expressed interest in acquiring Reliance in July.
'We were surprised and disappointed that Rockwell was not afforded an
opportunity to further pursue these discussions,' he said. Mr Beall said the
delay in making a counter-offer was due to lack of information from
Reliance.
'We have done a very thorough strategic and financial review from publicly
available information', he said. The deal would be 'accretive to our
financial results, though probably flat in year one'.
