FT  09 NOV 94 / Formula for explosive reaction: The buoyant chemicals
industry is preparing for the eventual downturn
For the world's chemical giants, the good times are rolling. Sales are
rising, prices are rising, and profits are soaring.
Yet in this notoriously cyclical industry, the next downturn is never far
away. How far depends on whether this year's rising chemicals prices owe
more to an underlying rise in demand or to temporary constraints on
production.
The industry is divided on the matter, but not on the fall-out:
third-quarter results have been excellent. Dow Chemical of the US reported
post-tax profits 102 per cent higher than a year earlier, while US rival Du
Pont turned a Dollars 680m loss a year ago, affected by a restructuring
charge, into a Dollars 650m profit. In Europe, ICI's pre-tax profits were 59
per cent higher than a year earlier. There were spectacular figures too from
BP Chemicals in the UK, France's Rhone-Poulenc, DSM of the Netherlands, and
Dutch-Swedish combine Akzo-Nobel.
Industry leaders have been only too willing to claim the credit for this
turnround. 'The majority of the improvement has come from hard-won market
volume gains and improved productivity,' says Sir Denys Henderson, ICI
chairman.
Mr Edgar Woolard, Du Pont chairman, says: 'This performance confirms that
transformation efforts to make all of our businesses globally competitive
are working.'
But this pride would seem to be inflated. The previous five years of
depressed prices and heavy losses brought only modest restructuring to the
industry and few real capacity cuts.
Efforts were made to secure deeper cuts, but they proved unsuccessful. A
year ago, European producers of ethylene, perhaps the most important of the
ingredients for plastics, formulated a plan to shut more than 10 per cent of
capacity in Europe. Prices were so low that all but the largest and most
efficient plants were losing money.
But the plan collapsed because each individual producer feared it would have
to bear the brunt of the cuts. Piecemeal closures followed, including the BP
Chemicals plant at Baglan Bay in Wales. But European capacity fell by less
than 3 per cent.
US producers made only modest cuts. Ethylene production capacity, for
example, rose throughout the recession. The story was repeated in other
sectors, such as propylene and styrene in Europe and North America.
Rather than plant closures, the recovery in chemicals has been driven by
economic recovery in the US and continued growth in Asia, says Mr Richard
Sleep, a consultant with industry consultancy ChemSystems.
Chemicals and their immediate derivatives such as plastics are vital to
almost every sector of manufacturing, and are particularly important to the
producers of cars and trucks, packaging and construction materials.
As economic activity has picked up, so has the demand for chemicals.
In the face of increased domestic demand, US and Asian producers have all
but abandoned exports to Europe, thereby boosting the fortunes of European
producers in their own home markets. European producers have also been
gaining export markets in the US.
'Petrochemicals and polymers production in the US and Europe is up about 10
per cent. But in Europe, what's really driven prices up is exports to the
US. This is very unusual,' says Mr Sleep.
Increased demand has been pushing up chemical prices for several months. But
traders in the world's chemical markets have been just as affected by a
series of accidents, which have curbed the industry's production capacity.
Some of these have been plant failures, blamed on tired machinery struggling
to cope with a sharp rise in production. 'It's like running a rather old car
very gently for several years and suddenly putting your foot down,' said one
industry executive.
Among the biggest were fires and an explosion at Exxon Chemical's complex at
Baton Rouge, Louisiana, on August 8 which hit the US ethylene market. A
ruptured pipe and fires at Enichem's Priolo plant in Sicily cut production
of ethylene and polyethylene in Europe. The industry has even suffered
natural disasters, such as last month's floods in southern Texas.
All these accidents have caused capacity cuts. In August and September, US
and Italian producers experienced a 3m tonne fall in their naphtha cracking
capacity - a vital early stage in petrochemicals manufacture. This was
equivalent to an 8 per cent cut in capacity for ethylene production.
At a time of rising demand, chemicals markets have proved highly sensitive
to such unplanned cuts. An explosion on October 12 that shut a 420,000
tonnes a year methanol plant in Texas - closing more than 6 per cent of US
capacity - triggered a 14 per cent rise in European spot methanol prices.
Methanol is used in the manufacture of petrol and of plasterboard for the
construction industry.
Mr Edmund Clinckspor, director for supply and planning in basic chemicals at
Exxon Chemical, says that the combination of economic recovery and plant
shutdowns has triggered price rises that have, in themselves, pushed up
demand.
'Prices are rising, so people want to buy today before the price rises
again,' says Mr Clinckspor.
Such restocking can be only a temporary phenomenon, however. Within months,
distributors and customers will have tied up as much working capital in
stocks as they feel comfortable with.
But optimists argue that the initial causes of the price rises are likely to
continue for some time. It takes at least three years, from approval, to
achieve significant production levels in new plant, they say. Furthermore,
even if exports from Europe dry up as new plants are commissioned in north
America and Asia, they argue that the European recovery that is only just
starting will take up the slack.
More cautious voices say that damaged factories can be repaired within
months. They also argue that European and Asian manufacturers will find the
US a more difficult market once Dow Chemical's new cracker capacity has come
on stream in the US next year.
In addition, some of the greatest growth in demand has been coming from
price-sensitive Asian customers, such as China.
'China will not stop buying at once, but if prices are moving too high too
fast, there may be some slowdown (in sales),' says Mr Philippe Goebel,
vice-president of planning at France's Elf Atochem, part of the
petrochemical giant Elf Aquitaine.
Mr Clinckspor echoes his concern: 'We can't count on Chinese imports
remaining at this level. I wouldn't be surprised if profit margins across
the whole industry peaked in the first half of 1995.'
That profit margins will recede is a matter on which optimists and
pessimists alike agree. High prices will trigger capital investment that
will lead to overcapacity and price competition. The cycle will continue,
and the industry will be faced with its next downturn.
However, the industry is determined that there will be no return to the
loose cost controls of the 1980s, when inefficiency and under-investment
proved sustainable thanks to high demand.
Some companies claim that they have done enough restructuring to stay
profitable through another recession.
Mr Ettore dell'Isola, chief executive of EVC, the PVC manufacturing joint
venture between ICI and Enichem, says that EVC would not have made losses
during the last recession with the cost base it hopes to have by the end of
next year.
Others place more emphasis on the shift in their attitude. One such is Mr
Earl Timmons, Du Pont's vice-president of finance, who says: 'Although our
formal restructuring programme is over, we don't think that cost-cutting
will ever end.'
