FT  14 JAN 94 / Survey of Drax - The Big Clean-up (4): Crucial decision -
Coal's role
The flue gas desulphurisation units at National Power's Drax plant and
PowerGen's Ratcliffe station will ensure a role for coal in the UK well into
the next decade. But it will be a smaller role than in the past.
The size of the coal market will depend to a large extent on how Her
Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution (HMIP), the government watchdog,
enforces and interprets pollution standards, and on how that affects the
ability of coal-fired stations to stay in operation.
Crucial to coal's role will be whether the generators build more FGDs,
either at stations which burn coal or those which burn Orimulsion, the
bitumen-based fuel imported from Venezuela, and whether they hasten the
so-called dash for gas-fired generation.
In the late 1980s, Mrs Margaret Thatcher, then the prime minister, appeared
to commit the UK to building some 12,000MW of FGDs. But there seems little
prospect of that now. There are even doubts aboutwhether the 8,000MW
indicated by the government for England and Wales at electricity
privatisation three years ago will become a reality.
Mr Granville Camsey, managing director of group technology at National
Power, says his company does not rule out building more coal FGDs on top of
the 4,000MW being installed at Drax but he acknowledges it is unlikely.
FGDs for Orimulsion seem more probable, thus further eroding coal's role.
The coal lobby would be even more enraged, however, if PowerGen decided not
to go ahead with FGD installation at its Ferrybridge plant.
In the government's offer-for-sale document for National Power and PowerGen
at privatisation, PowerGen said it had 'informed the government of its plan
to install FGD equipment at 4,000MW of capacity at existing stations.'
The Ratcliffe installation comprises 2,000MW but PowerGen has yet to proceed
with the rest and there are doubts about whether it will.
Critics say that if it does not do so, it will have broken commitments in
the offer-for-sale. One argument is that the tax payer has already paid for
the full 4,000MW of FGD programme because PowerGen's share price was lower
than it would otherwise have been to take account of the 'commitment'.
Against this, PowerGen can argue that the form of words in the sale document
did not constitute a commitment and that, in any case, it could fulfil its
sulphur reduction obligations by burning less sulphurous coal, mainly
imported, and by building combined-cycle gas stations.
Gas has undoubted environmental advantages over coal. It emits about half
the carbon dioxide per unit of electricity and virtually no sulphur dioxide.
What infuriates the coal lobby is that the new gas plants will replace coal
stations which could have years of useful life left and could, in some
cases, be even cheaper to run when fitted with FGDs.
The coal lobby's explanation for the dash for gas is that regional
electricity companies became involved in joint ventures to set up new
generating companies because they were desperate to escape the clutches of a
duopoly in PowerGen and National Power which charged them more than
necessary for power. These new companies had a captive market in the
regional electricity companies through long-term contracts which allowed
costs to be passed on to customers.
National Power and PowerGen responded, the argument goes, by building their
own gas-fired stations so that they could retain market share. The coal
lobby's conclusion is that the dash for gas is the result of a flawed market
which will result in a waste of UK energy resources and pit closures which
will close off coal supplies for ever.
The generators' response is that it makes more sense to invest in gas-fired
generation which is more environmentally friendly and more thermally
efficient than to retrofit FGDs on to plant which has limited life.
The counter-arguments are unlikely to convince the generators to build
anything more than Drax, Ratcliffe - and possibly Ferrybridge and another
plant at Longannet with Scottish Power funds. What then is the future for
the other 22 coal-fired stations?
The HMIP's role will be crucial. There is considerable uncertainty about how
the inspectorate will interpret the European drive to introduce the Best
Available Techniques Not Entailing Excessive Cost (BATNEEC) through which
'old' plant must be brought up to the standard of 'new'.
The objective is that plant be upgraded by April 2001 at the latest.
The coal industry fears that unless the inspectorate is flexible, it is
possible that early in the new millennium there will be only two or three
coal-fired power stations still running; those fitted with FGDs.
That would provide sales of 15m to 20m tonnes of coal to the electricity
sector which constitutes by far the largest market for coal. That in turn
would provide outlets for considerably less than 10 pits, against the 22 in
operation today, and that assumes that all of the coal used was sourced from
the UK, a highly improbable scenario given the low sulphur content of
imported coal.
All of this is almost certainly too gloomy a picture. After all, PowerGen
expects that by far the majority of the seven coal-fired stations it will
still be operating next financial year will remain open by the end of the
century. Even National Power, more pessimistic on this issue, expects to be
operating at least 10 of its remaining power stations in the next
millennium.
But unless the market changes beyond all expectations, most of the
coal-fired stations that do survive will be operating at considerably less
than their capacity. The chances of coal sales to the England and Wales
generators reaching anything like the 40m tonnes of this financial year are
remote.
