FT  19 MAR 94 / UN due to pass resolution on settlers
Speculation intensified in Jerusalem yesterday that the Israeli government
was considering the evacuation of at least some of the settler enclaves in
the heart of Hebron where at least 30 Palestinians were massacred by a
Jewish settler last month. The Palestine Liberation Organisation has
demanded a crackdown on settler radicals as a pre-condition for resuming
peace talks.
Mr Yassir Arafat, the PLO chairman, is expected to meet Mr Shimon Peres, the
Israeli Foreign Minister, in Cairo early next week in an attempt to clear
the way for a resumption of negotiations on Palestinian autonomy in the
occupied territories. The meeting had been initially scheduled for tomorrow
but it was then realised that the host, President Hosni Mubarak, would only
return to Egypt late tomorrow night from a conference in Zimbabwe.
Mr Peres said yesterday that he planned to discuss with Mr Arafat ways to
speed up the implementation of the 'Gaza-and-Jericho first' autonomy deal.
The idea of a Peres-Arafat meeting was raised by Mr Dennis Ross, the US
peace talks co-ordinator, who is due to visit the region again next week to
mediate a resumption of the autonomy negotiations. The plan was accepted by
the PLO on condition that the UN Security Council first issued its
much-delayed resolution condemning the February 25 massacre.
The Security Council was scheduled to vote late last night on the
resolution, which includes a call for new measures to protect Palestinians
in the occupied territories, including the deployment of 'a temporary
international or foreign presence.'
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's prime minister, has said he would allow an
international observer force to deploy in the West Bank, and has also said
he would be delighted if about 1,000 Palestinian policemen, who resigned
their Israeli-supervised posts at the start of the uprising more than six
years ago, were to return to their duties.
Mr Rabin and Mr Peres were closeted together for several hours in Tel Aviv
yesterday. It is possible that the government could decide to bring the 400
Jewish settlers inside a single compound, instead of the present situation
where they are dispersed in small enclaves across Hebron.
Mr Peres insisted yesterday that 'no decision was yet taken' on the matter.
But Mr Yossi Sarid, the environment minister, who has been playing an
increasingly prominent role in the peace negotiations, said that, 'there
probably will not be any alternative but to evacuate certain settlement
sites inside Hebron.'
Talk of moving or evacuating Hebron settlers has brought a wave of
right-wing protest. Rabbi Moshe Levinger, the ideological leader of the
settlers, said that Mr Rabin's reference on Thursday to the 'crazy'
dispersal of Jews across Hebron was 'an insult to our forefathers and to all
settlers.' Mr David Levy, foreign minister in the former Likud government,
warned that the government was 'bowing to PLO dictates . . . capitulating to
PLO demands.'
