FT  18 OCT 94 / Arrest warrant issued for Spanish financier
An arrest warrant was issued yesterday for Mr Javier de la Rosa, the
Barcelona-based financier who in the 1980s became a symbol of the then
booming Spanish economy as he orchestrated a major investment drive by the
Kuwait Investment Office (KIO) into the country.
The chief prosecutor of Catalonia's supreme court in Barcelona, Mr Carlos
Jimenez Villarejo, said that the arrest had been ordered on counts of fraud,
misappropriation of public funds and falsification of legal documents in
connection with Mr de la Rosa's loss-making holding company Gran Tibidabo
and that he would oppose bail.
Mr de la Rosa is accused of rerouting towards other businesses in his
holding Pta1bn (Pounds 4.96m) of a Pta10bn credit, guaranteed by Catalonia's
Generalitat government, that he obtained in order to develop a theme park
south of Barcelona. Earlier this year Mr de la Rosa sold his interests in
the theme park to a consortium headed by the UK's Tussauds Group, part of
Pearson, owners of the Financial Times.
Mr de la Rosa, who was on a hunting trip in central Spain when the warrant
was issued, meanwhile told a radio station that he was travelling back to
Barcelona to present himself to the court but that he could not 'understand
what all the fuss was about'.
The arrest order has shaken the domestic financial establishment, which had
viewed Mr de la Rosa's rapid creation of one of Spain's biggest private
fortunes with a mix of awe and envy.
'A lot of people considered de la Rosa an upstart and had it in for him but
the general belief was he would get away with it; now they are thinking
again,' said a Madrid broker.
The development is seen as part of a wider judicial movement against the
self-made multi-millionaires of the late 1980s that has already targeted Mr
Mario Conde, who was removed as chairman of Banesto, one of the leading
domestic banks, at the end of last year and Mr Manuel de la Concha, a former
head of the Madrid stock exchange who was held briefly in prison earlier
this year in connection with the collapse of a private banking empire he had
created.
The move against Mr de la Rosa is also likely to have an embarrassing
knock-on effect in Catalan political circles as his meteoric business career
had been consistently backed by the local nationalist party as an example of
Catalonian enterprise. Prosecutor Jimenez Villarejo hinted yesterday that
the judicial investigation into Mr de la Rosa's affairs could extend to
local politicians.
Mr de la Rosa lost executive responsibilities at Grupo Torras, the KIO's
investment arm in Spain, in a 1992 management shake-up and came under
further pressure at a stormy shareholder meeting of his Gran Tibidabo
holding in June after a revised audit declared losses of Pta11bn last year
in place of profits of Pta16m.
Separately, the Barcelona financier, along with other former KIO executives,
is being sued in Madrid and London by the Office's present board over
alleged losses of Pta500bn that forced Grupo Torras into receivership two
years ago.
