FT  11 OCT 94 / Government Bonds: Bunds higher as traders bank on Kohl
victory
European government bond prices rose yesterday, led by the German market.
The US markets were closed and European dealing was slow, with investors
thin on the ground ahead of this week's data from the US, a Bundesbank
council meeting on Thursday and the German election.
German government bonds were lifted in a futures-driven squeeze as investors
prepared their positions for a victory by the coalition government led by
Chancellor Helmut Kohl in the federal election on Sunday.
'A Kohl victory is now priced into the market,' said Ms Alison Cottrell,
senior international economist at Kidder Peabody in London.
This view was shared by Mr Nigel Richardson at Yamaichi in London. 'There is
a general degree of optimism that he will be re-elected,' he said.
He added: 'The general election does not represent a major threat to policy
on supply, and any risk premium in the market is not justified.'
Mr Martin Korbmacher at JP Morgan in Frankfurt said there was now a 70 per
cent probability that Chancellor Kohl would stay in office.
'It will be business as usual,' Mr Korbmacher said. He added that business
was thin yesterday, with a total of 82,000 contracts traded on Liffe and
33,000 on the Deutsche Terminborse.
The December bund future was around 89.07 in late trading, up 0.67 point on
the day.
The UK government bond market took its tone from bunds, and on Liffe the
December long gilt future was around 100 19/32 in late trading, a rise of
5/32 on the day. The yield spread over bunds was around 126 in late trading.
Economists were searching the minutes of the September 7 meeting between Mr
Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, and Mr Eddie George, governor of the Bank of
England, for clues to the next UK base rate increase. That meeting led to
the 50 basis point rise in the base rate on September 12.
Mr Michael Saunders, at Salomon Brothers in London, believes the base rate
will rise another 1 or 1 1/2 percentage points, either later this year or
early in 1995. He said: 'I can't see politics playing a big role at the
moment. It is in Mr Clarke's interest to act like a central banker.'
Mr Simon Briscoe at SG Warburg believes that if the third-quarter GDP
figures, which are released on October 21, are strong, then base rates will
go up shortly afterwards.
He said: 'It is clear the Bank is in the driving seat and it is focusing on
the longer term.'
The gilt market took heart from the level of agreement between the
chancellor and the governor, said Mr Andrew Roberts at UBS. He said: 'Mr
Clarke seemed almost as willing as Eddie George to put up rates.'
Mr Roberts believes gilts may do well against bunds in the coming week, with
the spread coming in to around 110 basis points. He said: 'You have a
feeling of domestic stability in the UK and political uncertainty in
Germany.'
Mr Roberts pointed out that the figures for UK producer prices, released
yesterday, showed a lessening of inflationary pressure.
'Input prices may be rising but they were not passed on to output prices,'
Mr Roberts said.
The Bank of England is due to make an auction announcement on Friday, and Mr
Roberts believes the new stock will be long-dated.
The Bank of England issued Pounds 650m in tranches of new stock yesterday.
It issued Pounds 250m of 6 per cent due 1999, Pounds 250m of 8 per cent due
2009, and Pounds 150m of 2 1/2 per cent index-linked due 2024.
The yield on 10-year Spanish government bonds fell to 11.09 per cent from
11.31 per cent.
Mr Simon Maggs at UBS in London said the market may have been anticipating
data due today which are expected to show a fall in inflation.
The yield on 10-year Italian government bonds fell to 12.16 per cent from
12.32 per cent, as the bonds rose in line with bunds.
