FT  23 JUN 94 / International Company News: Lotus enters the persuasion
market - The computer group is convinced it is taking the right path
Is Lotus Development Corporation suffering one of those bouts of technical
gaucherie which overtakes every software house from time to time, or is its
predicament evidence of a deeper malaise?
If the latter, is it a local difficulty or one that is afflicting the entire
packaged software industry? There is growing speculation that Lotus's
troubles are harbingers of a wave of change which will reshape the global
packaged software industry.
Lotus warned on Monday that its quarterly earnings to the end of June were
likely to be only 20-25 cents a share compared with 34 cents a year ago and
analysts' expectations of nearly 50 cents.
The market reacted by marking the shares down Dollars 14 3/8 to Dollars 37,
some Dollars 50 off the peak for the year. It queried whether Lotus was
losing market share to Microsoft, its principal rival.
Lotus this week brazened it out, claiming that the slippage was a one
quarter issue, the result of delays in upgrades to a number of its software
products. The underlying strength of its communications products business
was not in doubt, it said.
Mr Ed Gillis, Lotus chief financial officer, said yesterday that software
houses find their sales boosted for the two quarters after new product
introductions. Lotus intended to launch six new products in July and August,
so he was confident of an improved financial performance in the later part
of the year.
It is a persuasive argument. Every software house experiences technological
difficulties which force them to delay or postpone products and upgrades. It
took Microsoft, the world's largest personal computer software company, five
years, for example, to bring a commercially successful version of 'Windows',
the best-selling graphical interface for its MS-Dos operating system, to
market.
According to Mr Gillis, the present delays are because of the complexities
of integrating suites or collections of programs so they interwork with one
another; a change to one program means further work on all the others.
Lotus, furthermore, seems to be an exception to the rule that software
houses are 'one product wonders' which cannot replicate early successes.
After making its reputation in the 1980s with the market leading spreadsheet
'1-2-3', it had a fallow period in terms of new, exciting products until the
past couple of years when 'Notes', software which makes it possibles for
groups of people to share information, began to find favour with large
organisations. Andersen Consulting has installed Notes worldwide and AT&amp;T
has formed a joint venture with Lotus to market Notes to a broader audience.
Notes is the undisputed leader in this 'workflow' software which now
accounts for 30 per cent of Lotus' Dollars 1bn revenues.
The larger threat, however, which applies to every software house, including
Microsoft, is pricing. The cost of packaged software is falling in a fashion
reminiscent of the collapse in computer hardware prices.
The pattern is evident in the US, where software publishers have taken the
lead in offering software at seemingly unprofitable prices. Borland
International, for example, cut the price of its spreadsheet to Dollars
49.99. It has since sold its spreadsheet product line to Novell.
A second approach, pioneered by Microsoft, has been to sell a bundle of
programs at a heavily discounted price.
Lotus is advertising a suite of five of its most popular programs for Pounds
299 (Dollars 454) (Pounds 199 to existing Lotus users), a price which one
analyst described as 'suicide'. One of the programs, 1-2-3, has a
recommended retail price in the Pounds 300 region.
Analysts believe that the trend to lower prices is inexorable and that
software houses must branch out into services, a tack now being adopted by
most hardware companies, if they are to maintain margins and survive. Mr
Gillis says Lotus is already moving in that direction with its Notes
workflow products. The decline in Lotus' share price over the past year
indicates that investors may not share his confidence.
