FT  05 MAY 94 / FT Exporter (23): Unfamiliar ground - Company profile, KOC
In Europe Koc is not a household name. Few outside Turkey are aware that
this is the country's largest conglomerate with a turnover of more than
Dollars 10bn, putting it in the Fortune 500 top international companies.
The reasons are twofold. Firstly Koc is privately-owned and still relatively
inward-looking. Secondly, the company has been less interested in exports
than in the Turkish domestic market where the group has 45 per cent of car
sales in a link-up with Fiat of Italy, and more than half the market in its
two other main activities - household gas and consumer electronics.
But all this is changing. With import tariffs coming down as Turkey moves to
complete a customs union with the European Union (EU) in 1995, even the most
conservative Turkish groups are having to find new markets through links
with foreign partners.
For Koc the move to expand its overseas trade is taking it on to unfamiliar
ground. Exports still account for barely 10 per cent of group turnover.
Consumer electronics, one of the more dynamic export sectors, embracing
brown goods such as television and white goods, such as refrigerators, is a
good illustration of the problems facing the group in expanding its markets.
Export business started in the 1970s, when the company bought washing
machine and other technology from General Electric of the US, and Siemens of
Germany. Today, Koc is producing refrigerators to its own design.
Koc exports around 30 per cent of its brown goods production. Exports
accounted for 50 per cent three years ago before the current recession in
European markets. The white goods sector is also increasing from a smaller
base.
To strengthen its position, Koc is now looking for strategic partnerships in
both its brown and white goods industries, while trying at the same time to
develop its own brand name. It is willing to offer a share of Turkey's
growing domestic market in exchange for a link up with a big foreign name
which would allow Koc access to technology, capital and new markets in
Europe and elsewhere.
Feelers have been put out to a number of European companies, including Nokia
of Finland and the Siemens Group, but a suitable partner has so far not been
found. Mr Hasan Subasi, the director of the electronics division and a
member of the executive board at Koc Holding, says the company is looking at
a share partnership or a joint venture.
Some in the industry believe concerns such as Koc will get left behind as
European manufacturers consolidate. Mr Subasi is more optimistic.
'Consolidation is slowing down. Locals enjoy the biggest margins, offering
competitively priced value for money products.'
