FT  03 DEC 94 / Arts: Being British in Borsetshire - Radio
Shula has sent Jill packing in new post-natal self-confidence. Jennifer has
braved King's Cross in search of runaway Kate (didn't she realise the danger
exclaimed husband Brian, equating London N1 with Bihac on a Saturday night).
Ellen is plotting to get Julia out of not-so-newly-wed Nigel and Elizabeth's
hair. Pasteboard characters mouthing inert dialogue semaphore every
unco-ordinated spasm of plot to an audience of potential imbeciles.
Country folk with phoney accents mollock in a rusticity that could have been
created only in the heart of Birmingham. Stereotypes in stereo, caricatures
in quadrophonic, reeking of patronising artifice from every pore, The
Archers is the Barbie doll of radio drama: sleek, oddly mid-Atlantic,
lifeless. And did I once see them plain? Twice, actually: once in a play
with a mock village fete in the interval, once on an 'Archers Weekend' in
Worcester - I mean Borchester.
Common to both was a small figure with ferocious gnashers and gleaming
spectacles whose smile exuded an alligator-like glitter: the then producer,
loaded with Archers books on which he presumably earned royalties, hawking
his wares with a vigour that uncannily predated subsequent BBC attitudes.
During an 'any questions' session on our first evening, someone asked
reproachfully why he was going to ITV. 'Would you believe Pounds 30,000?' he
asked, teeth positively crocodilian.
In respectful silence we did.
The Archers (Radio 4) is all things to all men. To urbanites it is rural
(though as a country-reared child I found its yokels a townie joke). It
reassures country people that they are in the mainstream of British life.
'It sums up England,' cried the bachelor park-keeper from Dudley who
revealed that his bedsit was packed with Archers memorabilia. 'There's been
a murder,' he smiled happily. 'Doris was attacked once. It's typically
British.'
Like the glum coach-tour of Archers country the next morning. A nice lady
from the local tourist authority told us she often cheered up convicts by
quoting Housman during prison visits, but failed to elicit a similar
response from us.
Remembering the purpose of the trip, she pointed out the Am (of Ambridge
fame). 'Can't you see Nigel and Elizabeth in a punt?' she ventured
recklessly. We did not dignify this with an answer.
Morning coffee in Felpersham (strangely resembling Evesham) was followed by
lunch at Grey Gables (neither grey nor gabled though pleasantly Georgian)
directed by Eddie Grundy in horned cowboy hat and conveniently placed
body-mike, and tea at Brookfield (a lovely working farm, Jacobean plus
additions, complete with duckpond). Tom Forrest, a stout businessman in a
suit, signed autographs. the jodphur-clad Elizabeth excited a youngish man
in flared hipsters, an Afro hairstyle and Zapata mostache. His girlfriend,
apparently called Poodle, was vociferous in crushed cherry-velvet at the
'any questions'. Of the often referred-to but never heard Shane, the effete
wine-bar assistant, she demanded to know if he was a - a - limpwrist.
The panel thought she said 'linguist' and five minutes of baffling cross
purposes ensued. The Zapata tash reproached the programme for not mentioning
the Andrew-Fergie engagement on the actual day. 'It was like a punch between
the eyes,' he said, broken-hearted.
The Archers fulfils a function, like plastic or muzak or fish-fingers. Its
careful drama-school delivery, laboriously simplistic plotting and
characters that variously epitomise greed, snobbery and parochialism do
indeed sum up much of Britain today. That is the most frightening thing of
all.
