FT  15 JUN 94 / US likely to contribute to IMF facility
The US now seems likely to reverse an earlier move and make a contribution
this year to the International Monetary Fund's enhanced structural
adjustment facility (ESAF), which provides subsidised loans to some of the
world's poorest countries.
The willingness of the US Congress to provide the money is expected to be
increased by new signs from the IMF that it may move to release more of its
documents. Some economists and political analysts believe such a gesture
would greatly enhance government accountability for economic policy in some
of the countries that borrow from the IMF.
The Clinton administration has wanted to provide all the Dollars 100m
(Pounds 66m) it has pledged for the ESAF in its fiscal 1995 budget, which is
now under discussion in Congress, but a House of Representatives
appropriations committee eliminated the money from the foreign aid bill.
The Senate appropriations committee is expected, however, to restore Dollars
25m when it considers the bill tomorrow.
This follows efforts by a separate House committee, chaired by Congressman
Barney Frank of Massachusetts, to link approval of the ESAF money to
promises of greater transparency from the IMF.
Mr Frank's committee was expected to agree yesterday on legislation that
would authorise the appropriations committee to provide up to Dollars 25m
this year.
Mr Michel Camdessus, IMF managing director, this month wrote to his board
urging that the fund should not only release more of the documents over
which it has control, such as notes on recent economic developments in
borrowing countries, but also urge member countries to publish documents
such as their letters of intent for IMF loans.
The US contribution to the ESAF is not of any immediate financial
significance, since the IMF will not have to call on the US contribution for
another two years.
Even so, other contributors to the ESAF had made their pledges conditional
on the US, which is perpetually in arrears on its international obligations,
doing its share. Some Latin American countries were incensed at the House
committee's decision to strike the money from this year's budget.
The US was one of the last big industrialised countries to promise money to
the ESAF, which comprises an SDR4.5bn (Pounds 4.8bn) capital fund and a
separate SDR2bn fund to subsidise its interest rates, and its Dollars 100m
contribution was described even by the US Treasury as 'a meagre share for
the largest economy in the world.'
