FT  12 JAN 94 / UK Company News: Howden fan integration prompts 11p share
rise
Shares in Howden Group rose 11p to 96p yesterday after the Glasgow-based
engineering company said it had successfully integrated two large fan
companies bought last year in an attempt to diversify from large-scale
contracting work.
The group spent Pounds 40m on acquiring Novenco, a Danish maker of
industrial fans, and Buffalo Forge, a US fan and air-handling business,
following heavy losses on a Danish tunnelling contract which caused a crash
in Howden's share price in 1990.
The group said yesterday: 'The initial benefits obtained from the
reorganisation of our European and North American fan companies is
encouraging and a firm foundation for future growth has now been put in
place.'
Pre-tax profits increased from Pounds 6.05m to Pounds 9.45m in the six
months to October 31, although the previous figure was reduced by an
exceptional charge of Pounds 2.46m - the final loss on the Danish contract.
Turnover increased from Pounds 156.2m to Pounds 170.5m. Earnings rose to
2.2p (1.8p); the interim dividend is 0.82p (0.75p).
Mr Johnny Johnsen, chief executive, said rationalisation of the fans
business had gone extremely well, with 650 jobs having been shed in North
America, the UK and Denmark. Another 200 jobs would go at Wirth, the group's
lossmaking German drilling equipment subsidiary.
These cost reductions, coupled with excellent order prospects for the rest
of the year, were expected to return Wirth to profitability next year.
The board said it believed that further progress will be made in the second
half, although it was still cautious about the rate at which the group's
various world markets would recover from recession.
COMMENT
The share price rise reflected market relief that Howden's strategy seems to
be working out as promised. The group claims a dominant position in fans
and, having trimmed costs, should benefit from any upturn in its main
markets. Wirth seems poised to win significant orders in east Asia. The 22
per cent recovery in earnings will not be maintained at the year-end, when
earnings will be diluted by the 62m new shares issued last year, but a 10
per cent advance seems feasible. On forecast pre-tax profits of Pounds 26m,
the shares are on a prospective multiple of 15, or a 13 per cent discount to
the market. Having survived the Danish debacle, Howden is unlikely to do
anything rash and at this level looks a reasonably priced recovery play.
