FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (19): Where bureaucrats thrive - Bihar's
poverty is the worst in India
Bihar's riches are underground - coal, bauxite, copper, mica - and in its
fertile soil. But its poverty is just about everywhere. Aside from the
privileged mining and industrial workers who occupy neat rows of company
housing, the only significant number who can live in any comfort are the
bureaucrats in Patna, the state capital. Their swollen ranks and often amply
lined pockets attest to an administration which is certainly corrupt and
arguably bankrupt.
Doctors tell of going unpaid for months on end, until they can find a civil
servant prepared to authorise the release of the funds - for a
consideration.
Billions of rupees in central government grants are unspent every year
because Patna cannot find the matching funds these require.
In the latest financial year the planned provision of some Rs19bn, already
trimmed from Rs22bn in 1993-94, was slashed to Rs7.5bn for this reason.
Such disbursements from Delhi as do come through are frequently diverted to
fund current spending - primarily on the salaries of Bihar bureaucrats who
in many cases earn more than their central government counterparts. If the
money makes it to the upliftment projects for which it is intended, it may
first have spent a while in state coffers aiding cash flow.
For many on the streets of Patna - and the streets are home to many - cash
flow means a few rupees garnered from a passing motorist. More than 40 per
cent of the populace live below the poverty line, compared with the less
than 30 per cent average for all India.
And there is no sign that anything will improve, except perhaps in the
southern half of the state where the mining and industrial activities are
concentrated. A deal in September between the central and state governments
provided for the establishment of an autonomous council which will
administer much of the affairs of Jharkhand, the southern region.
The agreement was the culmination of a struggle for self-determination waged
by tribal peoples in the region and which predated independence from
Britain. Many local businessmen, tired of seeing their taxes disappear north
to Patna for little evident return, had latterly lent their backing to the
cause.
Jharkhand generates some three quarters of Bihar state revenues yet receives
only a quarter of spending on local services. And those are the official
figures: many in the private sector say that Patna's financial vortex has in
recent years left the south only about a tenth of state outlays.
Although the agreement to set up the council will not immediately free
Jharkhand from Patna, it is widely seen as a precursor either to full
statehood or to incorporation as a union territory responsible directly to
Delhi.
In the meantime, Bihar will be able to nominate only 10 per cent of the
membership of an otherwise elected council which will enjoy administrative
control over 40 government departments including agriculture, education and
health, raise its own local taxes, and receive other revenues from the
centre without diversion through Patna.
The state government maintains that the accord merely formalises the
existing treatment of Jharkhand's 40m people and will not impact on its
budget. 'Whatever we were getting, we will be getting,' says a Bihar
official.
Local economists doubt that. 'The condition of Bihar will be very much
worse,' says Mr Shaibal Gupta of the Asian Development Research Institute, a
Patna-based consultancy, who believes the state is 'slowly being written off
from the central scheme of things'.
It is less than clear why Mr Laloo Prasad Yadav, Bihar chief minister,
should have signed up to a deal which goes substantially beyond an appointed
development council for the region which he had previously accepted. The
central authorities are thought to have warned him that funds could be cut
off unless he acquiesced.
But the breakthrough comes ahead of state elections due in Bihar early next
year, one of a batch of such polls in coming months which India's ruling
Congress party is treating as a key test of public support. Mr Yadav's
minority Janata Dal administration ousted Congress in Bihar last time round
in March 1990, and will be looking to consolidate its hold by lessening its
unpopularity in the south.
It and Congress will both seek to present themselves in Jharkhand as the
author of the agreement.
Mr Yadav came to power on a social justice platform promising to promote the
interests of the lower castes, of which he is a member, and minorities such
as the Moslems. To the extent that this has been achieved, it has largely
involved the creation of public sector jobs reserved for the so-called
backward and scheduled castes. The state payroll has risen by tens of
thousands since he assumed office.
While his concerns have been to the exclusion of any focus on investment-led
development, Mr Yadav cannot be blamed for all Bihar's ills. At the
beginning of the 1980s state output was on a par with that of neighbouring
West Bengal, but slipped back under a period of ineffectual Congress rule
while the state based around Calcutta began to prosper under an increasingly
investor-friendly Marxist administration.
Business can be done in Bihar, with a fight. After a court case, a batch of
new taxes on industry were overturned, though investment in several sectors
such as refining of edible oils has moved across state borders because of
better fiscal regimes elsewhere. Mr Shilendra Sinha, joint managing director
of Kalyanpur Cements, an associate of the Swiss Holderbank group, says: 'It
is difficult, but there is less competition.'
Kalyanpur this year built a cement plant in Bihar to replace an older
facility. It could do so because it is better positioned than most on the
state power grid, where interruptions in supply are legion. Businessmen
regard the Bihar State Electricity Board as among the least efficient in
India.
The largest power users will benefit from a central government relaxation in
private generation. Tata Iron and Steel Company (Tisco), part of the
country's biggest industrial group, has just won permission to build a 250MW
plant for use at its mill in Jamshedpur, south Bihar.
Mr Kishore Singh, Tisco's Patna representative and president of the local
Confederation of Indian Industry branch, says there is 'no doubt about the
potential' of Bihar, with its mineral wealth in the south and fertile soil
along the Ganges to the north.
But agriculture remains hampered by feudal landlords. Reinforced by the
caste system and the law of the gun which prevails in a number of areas,
they dictate what their tenant will grow and how he votes.
Land reform has not ranked among the achievements of chief minister Yadav,
who comes from a caste of cowherds. While his record in the towns seems no
better, Congress before him could also claim little in either urban or rural
progress.
