FT  10 NOV 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Malaysia turns its back on
commodities - Primary products have little place in the new industrial
vision
It is enough to make an old planter turn in his grave. Malaysia, for so long
the world's leading producer of natural rubber, is turning its back on the
industry.
'Malaysia is no longer interested in producing rubber,' says Dr Mahathir
Mohamad, the prime minister and main architect of the country's recent high
speed economic growth. 'We hope to relocate the industry to neighbouring
countries like Indonesia.'
Dr Mahathir wants to make Malaysia a fully industrialised country by the
year 2020; and production of primary commodities like rubber and tin has
little place in this vision. Critics say the government's policies are
misguided: in the rush to industrialise a vital part of the economy is being
neglected - expertise and knowledge built up over the years will be wasted.
Over the past 20 years the structure of Malaysia's economy has been
transformed. In the early 1970s rubber and tin made up nearly 70 per cent of
Malaysia's exports. Last year manufactured goods accounted for 74 per cent
of export values, with rubber representing less than 2 per cent and tin only
0.5 per cent.
Until recently Malaysia led the world in the production of natural rubber
and tin. In 1988 it produced 1.8m tonnes of natural rubber but this year
output is likely to fall below 1m tonnes. Both Thailand and Indonesia are
now bigger producers than Malaysia.
The decline has been still more dramatic in Malaysia's tin industry. In the
early 1980s it was producing more than 60,000 tonnes of tin a year. The
industry - the foundation of the fortunes of many the country's early
entrepreneurs - then employed more nearly 40,000 people. This year tin
production will probably be less than 6,000 tonnes and the industry's
workforce has shrunk to about 2,000.
The one bright spot in the commodities sector is palm oil. Encouraged by
generally buoyant world prices, production has doubled over the past 10
years to reach more than 7m tonnes last year. Malaysia now accounts for
about 55 per cent of total world palm oil output.
The fall in world prices for most of Malaysia's primary commodity exports in
recent years has been blamed for the sector's decline. But commodity
producers argue that government policies have accelerated the process. 'The
government is obsessed with manufacturing and ignores the potential - and
the problems - of the commodity sector,' says one rubber producer. 'Yet
commodities are still a central part of the economy.' Last year Malaysia's
commodity exports, including forestry products but excluding oil and gas,
were worth MDollars 25.2bn (Pounds 6bn).
While the share of commodities in overall export earnings is declining the
statistics are misleading.
Commodity producers say their export earnings are of far more direct benefit
to Malaysia's economy than exports from the manufacturing sector.
Multinational electronic companies, operating mostly in free trade zones,
account for a large proportion of Malaysia's manufacturing exports. Those
exports have a high ratio of imported content. A large amount of the funds
from manufactured exports does not flow back into Malaysia but is
repatriated overseas.
Labour shortage problems are particularly acute in the commodities sector.
Local workers have drifted to jobs in factories in the cities and towns:
most of those left behind in the rubber plantations and oil palm estates are
elderly. As a result thousands of immigrants are working in the commodities
sector: on some estates more than 70 per cent of employees are from
Indonesia or Bangladesh.
The plantations object to paying a MDollars 300 government levy, plus
recruiting expenses, for every foreign worker employed. After a few months,
many immigrants go to jobs in the manufacturing sector. Mr Borge
Bek-Nielsen, who runs 94,000 acres of palm oil plantations on Malaysia's
west coast, says action must be taken to keep workers on the land. 'In a way
we are subsidising the industrial sector,' says Mr Bek-Nielsen.
Malaysia has made substantial investments to develop downstream commodity
industries. But producers say that if more attention is not paid to
sustaining commodity output, downstream factories will be starved of raw
materials.
In the first seven months of this year Malaysia's natural rubber imports
increased by 53 per cent compared with the same period last year. In the
first half of 1994 the country's domestic tin in concentrates production
fell below consumption - a position undreamt of just a few years ago.
Malaysia leads the world in many aspects of commodity research and
development. Its rubber, palm oil and cocoa plantations are among the best
run and most productive. Producers say the government should encourage
investors to capitalise on this expertise rather than continually urging
people to put their money into the manufacturing sector.
Mr Lim Keng Yaik, the minister of primary industries, told a planters
conference in Kuala Lumpur this month that people should not feel that the
production of primary commodities in Malaysia had reached the end of the
road.
But Dr Mahathir clearly feels this point has been reached in natural rubber
production.
