FT  21 NOV 94 / Survey of Germany (3): We're no pushover, politicians are
told - Why the east voted differently
There was extraordinary relief among German politicians when the election
results started coming through on the night of October 16.
All the parties had cause to celebrate. Chancellor Helmut Kohl's governing
Christian Democratic Union and the Christian Social Union, its Bavarian
sister party, was returned to power, albeit with a majority of 10 seats.
The Free Democrats, the junior partner in the coalition, managed to jump the
5 per cent hurdle - due to tactical voting - which will allow them to remain
in the coalition. The opposition Social Democrats had their share of the
vote increased by nearly 3 per cent to 36.4 per cent. And the Greens/Bundnis
90 got 7.3 per cent, 1 per cent more than the FDP.
Even the Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS), the successor to east
Germany's former communist party, got 4.4 per cent of the vote on the
federal level, and nearly 18 per cent in eastern Germany itself.
Yet behind the smiles and jubilation lies one fundamental problem which
unites all the west German political parties: the election results clearly
showed that if there is to be genuine political unification, the parties
must work hard to establish themselves in eastern Germany. The elections
results there explain why.
In eastern Germany, the CDU's share of the vote fell by 3.3 per cent to 38.5
per cent; the FDP's fell by 8.9 per cent to 4 per cent; the SPD's vote rose
by 7 per cent to 31.9 per cent; the Greens/Bundnis 90 remained almost the
same at 5.7 per cent; and the PDS's share of the vote rose by 6.6 per cent
to 17.7 per cent.
The lesson of these results is that a political culture is evolving in
eastern Germany which could point towards polarised voting.
At one end of the spectrum is the CDU. At the other is a divided left, with
the east Germans deciding over the next few years whether the region's
legitimate left-wing party will be the PDS, successor of the communists, or
the SPD, the western-based Social Democrats.
The SPD, against all the odds, did better than expected in the five eastern
states. After all, it was the only political party which had no 'block'
party which before German unification had been sanctioned by the ruling
communist, or Socialist Unity Party. As a result, since 1990, the SPD had to
start from scratch in building up a local grass roots organisation.
It made no significant headway over the past four years, for example by
winning over PDS voters. One reason was that the SPD lacked personnel. More
important, as the central party organisation in Bonn moved towards the
centre this had the affect of creating a vacuum in eastern Germany which the
PDS gradually filled.
Moreover, the SPD in Bonn, under Mr Rudolf Scharping, failed to sense the
shifting political alliances in eastern Germany, particularly after the
elections in June in the eastern state of Saxony-Anhalt when the SPD managed
to dislodge the governing CDU/FDP coalition from power by forming a minority
government with the Greens/Bundnis 90, but with support from the PDS.
Saxony-Anhalt represented a turning point. It showed that the SPD in eastern
Germany needs the support of the PDS if it is to dislodge the CDU from
power, and if it is to make any inroads into the left-wing vote. But the SPD
in Bonn is not prepared to allow another Saxony-Anhalt model to emerge in
the eastern state of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern. There, Mr Harold Ringstorff,
leader of the SPD, had considered trying to form a minority government with
the backing of the PDS. Mr Scharping staunchly opposed this and insisted
that the SPD instead form a coalition government with the CDU, the largest
party.
This pressure from Bonn is seen by SPD officials in eastern Germany as
counter-productive. 'We will never establish our own roots and identity if
the SPD federal leadership does not recognise that eastern Germany is
different, that our political culture is different, and that we need
support, not instructions from Bonn, to help us establish ourselves as a
genuine left-wing party here,' a Mecklenburg-Vorpommern SPD official said.
Yet as this battle for the left-wing vote will almost certainly intensify
over the next four years, with the PDS determined not to lose the momentum,
or remain a protest, or 'anti-wessi' (anti-west German) party, the FDP and
the Greens will have to reconsider their entire strategy in eastern Germany.
The FDP failed to jump the 5 per cent hurdle in the east, and failed to get
re-elected in the eastern state governments of Saxony-Anhalt, Saxony,
Thuringia and Mecklenburg-Vorpommern. The Greens came under immense pressure
as well. Although they jumped the 5 per cent hurdle throughout eastern
Germany, they failed to get back into the state parliaments of Saxony,
Thuringia, Brandenburg and Mecklenburg-Vorpommern.
These voting trends for the the FDP and the Greens indicate two things: the
centre/liberal political culture has failed to become rooted in eastern
Germany; and second, the question of environmental issues and the need for
an alternative voice representing greater accountability in the German
political system carries practically no weight in eastern Germany. The
political liberal/centre and alternative political parties do not yet exist.
The FDP explains its miserable performance in the east by pointing to the
absence of a Mittelstand, the small and medium-sized enterprises which form
the backbone of the FDP in the west. But FDP officials also add that
libertarian values of civil rights, easier access to citizenship, more
rights for foreigners, an immigration law, the protection of civil rights,
and curbs on police powers, have little relevance to the east German voter.
'A section of the east German voters want strong leadership, a government
which will provide security, combat crime, and reduce unemployment,' an FDP
official said. Perhaps, when the economy in the east picks up, the fledgling
Mittelstand might shift to the FDP. But at the moment, the PDS has captured
part of this constituency.
The Greens/Bundnis 90 are even in a more difficult situation. They are
handicapped by a tiny membership. But their policies, which focus on
environmental and ecological issues, touch few east Germans. More
disappointing for the Greens is that the inspiring and energetic spontaneous
movement of 'people power' which emerged in the autumn of 1989, and whose
immense pressure led to the collapse of the Berlin Wall and the communist
system, has disappeared.
The wish - however idealistic - for a political system based on the local
and popular level has either given way to disillusionment, or else some of
those energies have been channeled into the PDS.
Perhaps time, coupled with an economic upswing, will allow the FDP and the
Greens/Bundnis to regroup and reorganise in eastern Germany. But as
officials across the political spectrum in eastern Germany admit, the east
Germans are politically tired, while those with any political energy do not
want interference from Bonn.
'There is a yearning to make our own politics. To find our own way,' an SPD
official in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern explained. 'If we cannot do this, more of
our voters will drift to the PDS. We have much to do over the next four
years,' he added.
