FT  15 JUL 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Delegates optimistic following
'constructive' rubber pact talks
Delegates from key natural rubber producing and consuming nations concluded
three days of informal talks yesterday expressing optimism that a global
pricing pact could be achieved this year, reports Reuter from Kuala Lumpur.
The high-level working group meeting in Kuala Lumpur was held ahead of
UN-sponsored talks in Geneva in October to renegotiate the International
Natural Rubber Agreement.
'The informal talks have been constructive. I am optimistic that we can
reach an agreement in October,' said European Union delegate Mr Derrick
Taylor.
The working group comprises rubber producers Indonesia, Malaysia and
Thailand, and the top three consumers, Japan, the EU and the US.
Delegates said UN rubber pact negotiating president Mr Peter Lai also
appeared optimistic that a deadlock over pricing would be resolved at the
Geneva talks.
The rift between growers and consumers over the key pricing issue blocked
efforts to conclude negotiations on a new Inra in Geneva in April.
Consumers, led by the United States, want no change in the reference price,
which has remained at 196.84 Malaysian/Singapore cents a kilogram since the
first pact was agreed in 1979. The reference price is used to calculate when
buffer stocks can be bought or sold in the market. Producers say inflation
and the rising costs of production since 1979 both warrant an increase in
the reference price.
'We both understand each other's positions better now after having frank
talks,' Mr Taylor said. Other delegates thought the same. 'Both sides seem
to be more sympathetic to each other's position,' said one. But he added
that producers were still seeking a higher reference price.
Malaysia, the world's third largest producer of rubber, has said a higher
reference price would encourage small growers to stay in business and ensure
long-term supplies. It argues that rubber's present strength could be
temporary.
The talks were held as the International Natural Rubber Organisation's
buffer stock manager was selling rubber in an effort to arrest a recent
sustained rise in prices.
The EU last week demanded early and substantial sales from Inro's buffer
stock in order to have maximum market impact. Buffer stock manager Mr Aldo
Hofmeister responded by selling an undisclosed amount of rubber in several
markets, beginning last Friday, from its warehouses in Britain, China,
Malaysia and Indonesia. Mr Taylor hoped that rubber prices would ease
following Inro's intervention. 'EU member nations would think it is
illogical to pay for a buffer stock if it does not work,' he said.
Rubber prices should settle down 'in a week to 10 days', said Mr Hofmeister.
Inro's sales have so far failed to contain its five-day moving average
price, which rose on Wednesday to 233.35 Malaysian/Singapore cents a
kilogram from 232.93 cents.
