FT  04 NOV 94 / Tough measures to stamp out legal aid fraud announced
Lord Mackay, the Lord Chancellor, yesterday announced moves to counter
solicitor fraud thought to be costing the Legal Aid fund millions of pounds
each year.
The measures are designed to tighten rules governing the 'green form' scheme
to provide free legal advice and assistance to people on low incomes.
Solicitors receive an average fee of Pounds 60 from the Legal Aid fund for
two hours of legal advice, but they can receive up to Pounds 91.50 in London
and Pounds 86.50 outside. Once a client has signed a form, the solicitor
gives a brief description of the advice given and submits it to the Legal
Aid Board for payment.
In 1993-94 more than 1.6m people received help under the scheme.
Three firms are under investigation by the Serious Fraud Office for alleged
fraud. One firm under investigation has submitted Pounds 2.2m of claims in
the past 12 months.
Firms are suspected of offering inducements to low-income families to sign
forms and of making multiple applications for a single client.
Grosberg &amp; Co, a two-partner firm based in Leigh and Bolton, Lancashire, was
closed by the Solicitors Complaints Bureau on suspicion of 'green form'
fraud.
It was offering free food obtained from a European Union intervention board
to people on benefits if they signed up for a 'benefits check' under the
'green form' scheme. The firm cleared the idea with the Law Society before
putting it into operation.
The senior partner was arrested but has not been charged. He denies any
wrongdoing. One former employee estimates that the firm would have submitted
10,000 forms to the Legal Aid Board this year.
The tough new measures announced by Lord Mackay include moves to speed up
detection and action on suspect claims.
A new, more detailed form will be introduced for firms not franchised by the
Legal Aid Board. Solicitors will be required to seek authority from the
board before giving advice under more than one 'green form' per client in
any 12-month period. The board's powers to deal with cases of suspected
fraud are to be set out in new regulations.
