FT  19 MAR 94 / Cookery: Qu'ils mangent de la brioche
No food is more fundamental in the west than bread. Those who go out to work
are breadwinners. Lose your job and you may be on the breadline. Give us
this day our daily bread, we pray.
Bread was the trencher on which other foods were served before dinner plates
were commonplace. The rich who feasted on meat may have fancied their bread
soaked in gravy but etiquette demanded that they left their trenchers
uneaten. That way the bread might be given to feed the less fortunate.
For centuries bread was a mainstay of meals for the majority. And it remains
important in the thriftier corners of Europe where traditional bread soups
and bread salads are much in evidence.
Bread soups consist basically of bread and water plus a little of whatever
local produce is plentiful and cheap. Hard rations you may say. Certainly
such fare must seem monotonous if you have no choice but to eat it week in
week out. But, for those of us who can dip into bread soups just
occasionally - like Marie Antoinette playing at milkmaids - few foods seem
more satisfying and soothing.
Bread soups are basic and highly practical. Amazingly speedy one pot dishes
 -non-cook cooking - they are just right for the tired, the busy and the
culinarily inept. Conjuring substantial comfort from very little they come
to the rescue when Mother Hubbard's cupboard is bare and the houskeeping
budget reaches rock bottom. More than that they can be utterly delicious,
the individual flavours of an area giving each soup its territorial
character, while plenty of soaked and swollen bread provides solid
sustenance.
In Tuscany I will happily eat Pappa col Pomodoro for several days on the
trot: tomatoes, garlic, basil, olive oil and water simmered fruitily and
thickened with generous chunks of bread to make a pappy pink porridge. Alas
this lovely bread soup does not travel well, rich vine-ripened tomatoes
being beyond British reach.
Much easier to reproduce here is Mourtairol from south west France. For two
people scald three ladles of pure rich chicken broth and enrich it with a
pinch of saffron. Add a few meaty chicken scraps taken from the wings if you
are feeling indulgent, or a little snipped parsley, and pour the mixture
slowly over 3oz of stale, roughly torn country bread encouraging the crumb
to sop up as much of the flavoursome liquid as it can hold.
From the same region but simpler is Tourin. This consists of onions fried in
duck or goose fat, seasoned and stewed in water, then poured over slices of
bread, usually with the addition of an egg or two. When all the solids have
been eaten and little liquid remains in the soup bowl, the spoon is laid
down, a slurp of wine or something stronger is added to the bowl, and the
remnants are drunk in one lively swig. Shades of the onion soup of porters
at Les Halles, served complete with heartwarming rafts of cheese topped
bread and petit trou.
Spain brings us Gazpacho. Today it is often tarted up with a stream of
extravagant garnishes. The original peasant dish would have consisted of
little more than cooling draughts of water made fragrant with a few crushed
tomatoes, a little cucumber, garlic and crusts of bread. Much more
refreshing.
In Portugal, where 20th century sophistication seems to have made relatively
little impact on home cooking, traditional country dishes that major on
bread still abound and a love of acordas and migas remains widespread.
Acorda Alentejana, which may or may not include eggs, is a great favourite.
To serve two people, crush 2 garlic cloves with  1/2 teaspoon salt and
soften them briefly in 1 1/2 tablespoons olive oil. Season with pepper and 2
tablespoons chopped green coriander. Pour on 1pt water, bring to a brisk
boil and poach 2 eggs in it if wished. Ladle the aromatic liquid over a
scant 3 oz bread broken into rough chunks. Add the eggs and sprinkle on
another tablespoon each of olive oil and chopped green coriander.
Even the Swiss still serve a traditional bread soup: a few roots and leeks
sliced, sweated and stewed in water until soft, thickened to a porridge with
hefty chunks of bread and finished with a grating of cheese.
Only in Britain do bread soups seem to have been gentrified out of all
recognition, the bread reduced from central component to genteel garnish.
The most bready offering you are likely to get here is a modest spoonful of
tiny, neatly diced fried bread croutons scattered over a light cream of
vegetable soup. Hardly substantial enough to keep up the strength of a two
year old.
I have, though, come across East Anglian references to something called
Suffolk Kettle Sop. Consisting simply of broken bread, a knob of butter,
salt and pepper with boiling water poured over, this is said to cure a sore
throat if drunk in bed. More medicinal than pleasurable?
Elsewhere there are mentions of an ancient Cornish bread soup known
variously as Kettle or Kiddley Broth. Made with a little onion cooked in
butter or dripping or with a few rashers of streaky bacon, then stewed with
plenty of water (and sometimes a splash of vinegar), additionally flavoured
with marigold petals in one version, and poured over squares of stale bread
for serving, this sounded more promising than the Suffolk cough remedy. I
tried it but was uncharmed.
It struck me then that, given Cornwall's coastline, seafood might make an
appropriate alternative to fat bacon. So I adapted the manuscript version of
the recipe to suit my own whims. The resulting soup lacks historical
accuracy of course but it tastes pretty good.
To make My Kiddley Broth for two people, first chop a shallot or two (or
half a small onion) and sweat it for 5 minutes in 2 tablespoons butter or
olive oil. Add 1 teaspoon white wine or tarragon vinegar and let it bubble
up vigorously.
Add  1/4 teaspoon salt, 2 tablespoons chopped flat leaf parsley (or better
still coriander leaves) and 1 pt water. Bring to the boil and boil for 2-3
minutes.
Add  3/4 lb cleaned mussels, cover and cook briefly until opened. Lift the
cooked mussels from the broth and half-shell them, shell them completely, or
leave them as they are, as you wish. Then mix them with 3oz good quality,
roughly torn bread and spoon the broth (but not any sandy mussel sediment)
over them.
Britain is of course meat-rich dairy country and we are notoriously
sweet-toothed. So it is hardly surprising to discover that, whereas other
countries used their loaves to make substantial water-based soups, we
generally preferred to dunk our stale bread in milk to make puddings.
Our recipe books are jam-packed with examples of this kind. Think of queen
of puddings, quaking pudding, bread and butter pudding, brown bread ice
cream, charlottes and ambers, summer pudding, treacle tart, poor man's
bakewell, and the use of breadcrumbs instead of flour for superior steamed
sponges.
I can think of only one traditional savoury way with stale bread that has
survived here. Bread Sauce, made with creamy milk and butter, flavoured with
onion and cloves, thickened to a porridge with stale grated crumbs, is
probably as popular now with roasted poultry and game birds as it was in the
middle ages when crumb-thickened, rather than roux based sauces, were the
norm.
Then there is the sweet equivalent of bread sauce: bread and milk, once a
nursery favourite but largely forgotten today except for feeding pet
hedgehogs. What a shame. I loved it as a child and I love it now, a basic
inelegant version of bread and butter pudding but even more comforting by
virtue of its instant, effortless preparation. It is the cure-all I turn to
gratefully when low in spirits or poor in health, when bed, a good book and
a hot water bottle beckon. Or I will eat it for breakfast on a cold morning.
Any excuse will do.
For Bread and Milk for 1-2 people, depending on the degree of comfort
needed, break 3oz or so of chollah, brioche or other enriched white bread
into pieces. Plain white bread will do at a pinch but bread and milk should
be a treat. Butter the bread and sprinkle it with pinches of ground
cinnamon. Add smears of honey if you like and put the bread into a bowl or
bowls. Scald  3/4 -1pt Jersey milk with a shake of pure vanilla extract,
sweeten it with 2 teaspoons vanilla sugar (or slightly less if honey is
used) and add an optional teaspoon of brandy. Pour the flavoured milk over
the bread and stir until the crumb sponges up and the butter is melted.
