FT  04 OCT 94 / IMF returns to 'business as usual' after row over reserves
The world's leading industria-lised countries yesterday launched a
determined effort to put behind them the weekend failure to agree on a
modest increase in the world's monetary reserves.
Adopting a 'business as usual' approach, ministers and central bank
governors underlined that Sunday's meeting of the International Monetary
Fund's policymaking interim committee had made progress towards bolstering
the IMF's capacity for helping countries in economic difficulty.
Officials said the committee's decision to press ahead with a temporary
boost to annual access limits, which determine how much economically
troubled countries may borrow from the fund in any given year, could prove a
big help to both Russia and Ukraine. These countries are planning to
negotiate standby credits with the IMF.
The interim committee has asked the IMF board to agree a formula that would
allow members to borrow an amount equivalent to at least 85 per cent of
their membership subscriptions in the fund against 68 per cent at present.
Many countries, including Britain, support access limits of 100 per cent.
The Group of Seven leading industrial nations and the developing country
members of the interim committee were unable to agree on an allocation of
the IMF's own reserve asset - known as special drawing rights - at their
meeting on Sunday.
The talks broke up acrimoniously with Mr Michel Camdessus, IMF managing
director, criticised by some industrial country representatives for failing
to back a G7 proposal for a selective SDR16bn (Pounds 14.9bn) allocation.
But yesterday, as delegations analysed the weekend events, hope grew that
there might be some resolution of the SDR dispute in the months ahead.
Mr Camdessus told the IMF and World Bank's joint development committee that
he continued 'to hope that in the not too distant future, agreement will be
reached' on a package comprising an SDR allocation and a strengthening of
the IMF's temporary systemic transformation facility which helps former
communist countries.
World Bank urges mixed pension policy, Page 5
SDR wars, Page 19
