FT  16 MAY 94 / FT Guide to the Week
MONDAY 16
EU ponders Russia policy
European Union foreign ministers meet in Brussels to decide whether to give
the go-ahead to a political and trade accord with Russia. Doubts remain over
the latest Russian offer to open up the banking sector, and how to deal with
export of Russian nuclear fuels. But ministers hope to have an agreement
ready to sign at the European summit in Corfu next month.
Ministers will also discuss latest diplomatic efforts to end the fighting in
Bosnia, and are expected to approve a Ecu32m (Dollars 36m) plan for the EU
to take over the administration of the Bosnian town of Mostar. Separately,
the Council will consider a European Commission proposal to send Ecu100m of
food aid to Ukraine, as part of a broader strategy to Russia's neighbour.
Dominican poll: Election day in the Dominican Republic sees President Joaqun
Balaguer, 87, seeking his seventh term at the head of the Caribbean nation.
But it will be a close-run thing since he is trailing in the polls to Mr
Jose Francisco Pena Gomez of the social democratic Dominican Revolutionary
Party. The last time Mr Balaguer won, in May 1990, his main opponent charged
him with fraud.
Ecofin: European Union finance and economy ministers, meeting in Brussels,
will review the economies of
member states and discuss the Commission's white paper on growth,
competitiveness and jobs. Financial assistance to eastern Europe and the
former Soviet republics is also on the agenda, and the ministers will turn
their attention to the Union's anti-fraud strategy.
Japan's taxpayers: A list of the 100 highest taxpayers in Japan is to be
released. The tax list, prepared by the national tax office, is a mixture of
honest and less honest millionaires. It is also an interesting economic
indicator. Last year, for example, the survey showed a decline to 125,000
people paying more than Y10m in tax, down from 175,000 in the previous
survey.
Top of last year's taxpayer league was Hiromasa Ezoe, former president of
Recruit, the employment agency, on trial over the 1988-1989 Recruit shares
for favours scandal. He paid Y3.96bn in tax in 1992.
Platinum survey: Johnson Matthey, the world's biggest platinum marketing
group, publishes its highly regarded annual survey of the world platinum
market. It is likely to make depressing reading for the producers by
suggesting the market remains in surplus and that, unless there is
market-disturbing news from either of the two biggest producers - South
Africa and Russia - prices will remain relatively low.
Holidays: Israel (Shavuot), Saudi Arabia (Eid al-Adha), Venezuela.
TUESDAY 17
US rates likely to rise
Many economists expect the US Federal Reserve to announce another rise in
short-term interest rates following today's meeting of the policy-making
open market committee. A quarter- or half-point increase in the federal
funds rate to 4 per cent or 4.25 per cent is widely seen as necessary to
bolster the dollar and slow the pace of domestic growth.
If the Fed wants to send a strong signal it will also 'ring the gong' -
raise the discount rate, at which it lends to banks. So far the discount
rate has stayed unchanged at 3 per cent despite three increases to 3.75 per
cent in the Fed funds rate.
Malawi goes to the polls:
Presidential and parliamentary elections will give voters a choice of
candidates for the first time since 1964. The multi-party elections follow
last year's referendum in which Malawians rejected President Hastings Kamuzu
Banda's one-party state. Mr Banda (above), who has ruled since independence,
is standing for re-election despite his advancing years.
Lloyd's of London, the insurance market, will report its fourth consecutive
year of losses. Forecasters agree the loss will be about Pounds 2.5bn,
compared with Pounds 2.9bn in 1990 and Pounds 2.1bn in 1989. The market,
which reports its results three years in arrears, will soften the blow on
Names, whose assets have traditionally supported the market, by stripping
out the so-called 'double count'. This occurs when claims produce losses for
the syndicate underwriting an original policy, as well as for those
underwriting errors and omissions, stop-loss or estate protection insurance.
Names will also be allowed to borrow against part of the profits expected
for the current year. Trading conditions at Lloyd's have improved over the
past two years, with steep rises in insurance rates in some sectors.
Bulgaria's largest trade union bloc has called a general strike to push for
higher wages for state sector employees. Prices have risen sharply this year
because of the introduction of VAT and the sharp devaluation of the Lev.
The strike will keep up pressure on the government of Lyuben Berov, a
non-partisan economist, which is facing its sixth vote of no confidence
since taking office in December 1992.
FT Survey: World Forest Products and Power Generation Equipment.
Holidays: Norway (Independence Day), Saudi Arabia (Eid al-Adha).
WEDNESDAY 18
Derivatives report appears
The General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of the US Congress,
publishes a study of financial derivatives, such as options and interest
rate swaps. The study was prompted by a nightmare scenario of a collapsing
world financial system, as overexposed institutions were forced to default
on their obligations. The report is expected to propose increased regulation
of the multi-billion dollar business, both of those issuing and trading
these financial instruments and the companies that use them. The industry,
and some policy makers, are against hasty legislation, arguing that existing
procedures are working well.
Israel is due to complete its military withdrawal from the occupied Gaza
Strip, placing 850,000 Palestinians under PLO control.
Bulgaria's debt: Deutsche Bank and 300 other London Club banks have until
today to indicate their terms to the banking committee handling the
rescheduling of Bulgaria's USDollars 9.3bn foreign commercial debt. The two
sides, which agreed to reduce the debt by about 50 per cent last November,
have set a June 30 deadline for completion of the rescheduling deal.
Bulgaria, which unilaterally defaulted on its foreign debt in 1990, is the
last of central Europe's former communist states to reschedule its foreign
commercial debt.
UK economy: April's retail price index will be scrutinised for any sign that
inflation may be gathering pace, after the Bank of England's warning last
week about inflationary pressures. The market expects the figures to show
monthly inflation to have risen to 1.3 per cent, up from 0.3 per cent the
previous month, largely as a result of rising council tax bills and the
introduction of VAT on fuel.
Saleroom: This week both Sotheby's and Christie's sell expensive jewels and
works of art in Geneva. The auctions reach a climax this evening with
Sotheby's sale of 125 items of jewellery from the collection of the late
Helene Beaumont, who, with her American husband Louis, helped make the Cote
d'Azur the magnet of the smart set in inter-war Europe.
The Jonker No. 2 diamond of more than 40 carats, cut by jeweller Harry
Winston from the rough 726 carat Jonker diamond, and set in a ring, should
make the top price of more than Dollars 2m.
Rugby: England begin their first official tour of S Africa since the ending
of apartheid with a game against Orange Free State.
Football: In the European Champions Cup final, AC Milan of Italy plays
Barcelona of Spain in Athens.
FT Survey: Toulouse.
Holidays: South Korea (Buddha's birthday).
THURSDAY 19
Lome under review
Ministers from the European Union and the African, Caribbean and Pacific
(ACP) group meet in Swaziland to review the Lome Convention, which expires
at the end of the decade. There is tacit agreement on both sides that, with
the deregulation of international trade and changes in the patterns of
private investment flows and official aid, the trade and aid treaty, in its
present form, will be the last of its kind.
ACP officials admit that it will not be easy for many of their economies to
disengage from Lome, with its guaranteed markets for commodity exports and
development finance. The EU, on its side, wants to move away from a system
based on old colonial ties to a more rational foundation for its trade
arrangements.
UK economy: Retail sales figures for April are expected to show that the
rate of consumer spending has slowed slightly, following recent downbeat
evidence from big retailers and the Confederation of British Industry's
distributive trades survey.
Month on month, sales are expected to show no growth, after a 0.8 per cent
rise in March. But with some economists predicting there could even be a
fall of 0.5 per cent in retail spending, the result seems set to provoke
further debate about how far April's tax rises have dented consumer
confidence.
Rao meets Clinton:
PV Narasimha Rao (left), the Indian prime minister who is this week on a
six-day visit to the US, is due to meet President Clinton today. The two
leaders' discussions are expected to include improving bilateral trade and
investment, nuclear non-proliferation and the tensions between India and
Pakistan.
Frisson of interest: The UK Building Societies Association begins its annual
conference in Birmingham, central England. The recent Pounds 1.8bn bid by
Lloyds Bank for Cheltenham and Gloucester building society, the announcement
of a merger between two societies in the north-east of England, and the
statements by several banks that they are interested in buying societies
should all serve to enliven the atmosphere.
Informal plotting and intrigue aside, the formal events include a speech by
Rosalind Gilmore, head of the sector's statutory regulator.
FT Survey: World Taxation.
Holidays: Kuwait, Lebanon, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates (Eid
al-Adha).
FRIDAY 20
Japan's budget expires
The 1994 provisional budget expires, necessitating fresh provisional
financing, pending agreement on a full budget. This has been delayed by
obstructionism from the opposition, Morihiro Hosokawa's resignation as prime
minister, and the fragmentation of the ruling coalition.
John Smith: The funeral of the Labour party leader, who died suddenly of a
heart attack last week, takes place at Cluny Parish Church, Edinburgh.
Labour has called for campaigning for June 9's European Parliament elections
to be put off until after the funeral. Despite losing its leader, Labour
looks set to make big gains, after which it will begin the process of
selecting a successor.
Nobel lectures: FW De Klerk, former president of South Africa and now joint
deputy vice-president, winner of the Nobel peace prize along with Nelson
Mandela, gives one of a series of lectures by last year's laureates at
London's Royal Albert Hall.
Exit Florence: The UK Pounds 10 note featuring Florence Nightingale ceases
to be legal tender after today.
WEEKEND 21-22
Tougher embargo on Haiti
Unless Saturday's deadline for Haiti's military rulers to step down is met,
the United Nations is due to impose further and tougher sanctions. The
regime ousted President Jean-Bertrand Aristide in a coup in 1991 and last
week installed 81-year old Emile Jonassaint as president.
US president Bill Clinton has said military intervention remains 'an
option'. His administration says it would prefer any action to be
multinational and take place under a mandate from the UN.
Prague's spring arts festival begins on Saturday.
Yachting: The Whitbread Round the World fleet of yachts leaves Fort
Lauderdale, Florida, on Saturday for the last 3,818 mile leg of the race.
The race should arrive at Southampton, southern England, on June 6 or 7.
Football: The Scottish Cup final is played in Glasgow between Rangers and
Dundee United on Saturday.
Cycling: The Giro Italia tour of Italy begins on Sunday and is scheduled to
be completed on June 12.
