FT  26 SEP 94 / Management: Taming the beast of H Street - Costs are being
cut at a World Bank critics claim is bloated and bureaucratic.
Last week Lewis Preston - president of the World Bank Group since 1991  -
dropped a little bombshell into the laps of his staff. Over the next three
years, he proposed, the budget should be cut at an annual rate of some 6 per
cent in real terms. Stringency has come to what its critics argue is a
bloated and over-bureaucratic leviathan. First-class air travel has already
gone. What might come next?
Preston's stringency is the latest element in a programme of internal
management reform progressively introduced since his arrival three years
ago. It goes well, for example, with dollar (or cash) budgeting, under which
senior managers are being given sums with which to achieve agreed
objectives.
The financial squeeze partly reflects Preston's appreciation of the chilly
climate. Some shareholders, notably the US, believe the Bank should share
the pain felt by public sectors everywhere. They note that between the
financial years 1990 (July 1989 to June 1990) and 1995, staff costs of the
Bank Group are expected to rise by 56 per cent to Dollars 878.8m (Pounds
556m), and overall costs to grow by 60 per cent to Dollars 1,420.3m. Total
administrative costs this year are larger than the gross domestic products
of several of the Bank Group's clients, Mozambique being an example.
So large an increase in expenses seems surprising, since lending activities
have stagnated for many years (see chart). Shahid Husain, the Bank's
recently-appointed vice-president for management and personnel services,
explains the rising costs by reference to three developments:
hugely expanded work on eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, little
of which has as yet borne fruit in lending;
expanded lending for the environment, which is relatively labour-intensive;
and
improved project implementation, following the Wapenhans report on that
topic.
These explanations provide a valuable reminder that the Bank's mission is
not to transfer money at minimum cost. But the president obviously feels
that things have gone too far, all the same. The question is how the
proposed squeeze on costs fits into his attempt to remedy the failures of
what he once judged among the most under-managed institutions he had
encountered.
The Bank's problem is not financial. The equity (paid in capital, plus
reserves) of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the
Bank's commercial lending arm, is Dollars 26.6bn, on which shareholder
governments demand no dividends. If the Bank were merely to earn a 5 per
cent real return on its capital, it would be able to support the current
level of administrative costs in perpetuity.
This huge subsidy must, however, be justified by performance. Here lies the
Bank's challenge. 'There has been a broad recognition, led by Preston, that
an institution like the Bank cannot keep on expanding,' says Husain. 'There
is also a consciousness that the Bank has to be managed. You don't simply
manage loans and you don't simply manage economic and sector work, but you
have to manage resources and people. Improvement in efficiency and reduction
of costs have to become an integral part of the work of the Bank.'
The task is made urgent by the criticism of the institution and by the
rapidity with which the world continues to change. The Bank's main long-term
mission is deemed to be the alleviation of poverty, above all in Africa and
South Asia, along with environmentally sustainable development. But around
this core the Bank must be 'tremendously mobile', in Husain's words.
Leviathan must learn to waltz.
Before Preston's arrival, the Bank had suffered two traumatic
re-organisations: one in 1972, the other in 1987. These focused on the
Bank's structure, rather than on its processes and procedures.
Husain says: 'We believe that large traumatic changes of the sort that took
place in 1987 leave behind so much debris that in the long run they are
self-defeating. One disadvantage of such infrequent large changes is that
people do not take change as a normal way of life. What we are trying to
inculcate, however, is the idea that since the world around us is changing
all the time, so must we.'
The other disadvantage, alluded to by Husain, is the effect on staff morale.
The World Bank employs highly qualified staff who believe in what the Bank
does, but dislike the institution itself. This problem of poor morale was
greatly exacerbated by the 1987 upheaval, in which staff were simply told to
scramble for new jobs, as in a giant game of musical chairs.
When Preston came to the Bank he found an organisation still shattered by
that event. This had reduced staff numbers by about 500 and created four
large, self-contained regional offices. The cuts proved to be temporary. The
number of regular staff, at 6,406 last June, can be compared with the 6,095
in June 1986, before reorganisation, and the 5,665 shortly afterwards.
The new structure coped quite well with narrowly regional challenges, such
as structural adjustment in Latin America and the growing involvement with
China. But Husain argues that this decentralised Bank 'could not serve us
well in providing a centrally-driven response to changes in the
international environment. For example, our work on the environment was slow
to take off. Our work on Russia and eastern Europe also took time to take
off. And above all we took a long time to recognise that the wind had
changed and that our constituents both in the developed and developing
countries expected much greater rigour in management and efficiency'.
Preston's initial effort was to strengthen the centre, by creating a
presidential office with three managing directors. He also established three
new central units in the areas of sustainable development, human resources
and promotion of the private sector.
A next stage was to strengthen the Bank's personnel and management function.
Husain says that 'in the course of the 1987 reorganisation there was an
almost total demolition of the central management and personnel capacity.
There was no unit that was concerned with business processes . . . (there
was) very poor capacity on organisation issues, poor capacity for
recruitment for an institution which basically has only one asset, its
people, and inadequate management of training and skills.'
The main emphasis has been on changing processes, but changes in processes
are expected to affect structure as well. This sequence - from process to
structure, rather than the other way around - is novel for the Bank.
It is now looking at specific parts of its organisation, one after the
other, asking first whether what is being done should be done, and second
whether things should be done in the way they are being done.
So far, the spotlight has shone on the East Asian regional office and on the
international economics department. Simultaneously, attention is being paid
to the administrative apparatus and information management. Market-testing
and contracting-out are among the buzz-words here.
The work has already been completed in one department of the East Asia
region. Attention will soon be turned to South Asia and Latin America.
Husain says: 'We hope to complete all this work in the next two years.'
Husain gives a telling example of what is involved by pointing to the Bank's
core function, lending for projects. 'In our old procedure, project officers
would first have preliminary ideas. They would write up these preliminary
ideas, which would be reviewed within the division, with people in support
departments, with the director and with the regional vice-president.
'The second step would be a final project summary, which would go through
the same review process. In the meantime, much project preparation would
take place. After this last review, a mission would be sent to appraise the
project. The mission would come back and would prepare an issues memorandum.
Again people would collect from around the Bank to look at those issues.
'Then the vice-president would give the go-ahead to write the appraisal
report. Thereupon, there would be negotiations with the borrower. When the
negotiations were completed, someone in the vice-president's office would
look at the final negotiated project, which would be sent to the Board for
approval.
'What we are doing in the case of East Asia is to have one simultaneous
review at a very early stage. We are going to do pilot projects on that
basis. The fundamental thesis is this: review things once; do things
simultaneously; do them faster.'
Husain admits that 'this may all seem minor, but every year we approve 250
projects. At any time, the World Bank is working on 1,000 projects. It also
spends massive amounts on economic and sector work. We believe it is through
this detailed re-engineering that we will get to the issue of cost and
efficiency. This will require delegation. It will involve a tremendous
amount of effort in selection of people and in training. It will also
require rationalisation of internal information and technology.'
The Bank is, in short, trying to get things right first time. For what has
effectively been a governmental bureaucracy, these are huge changes, with
radical implications for delegation and training, and for the quality of the
people doing the jobs, as opposed to those who manage the people who do the
jobs.
These efforts at improved internal management do appear significant. But
questions remain: over the effectiveness of the board, for example,
particularly in supervising the Bank's management; and over the effects on
the shaky morale and hunger for security of a staff whose opportunities
elsewhere are limited both by their experience at the Bank and by the G4
visa for foreign members, which prevents them from staying in the US. Husain
insists that forced redundancies should be unnecessary. Will that prove
correct?
Yet there remains a bigger question. How does an organisation whose aims
have included 'institution-building' justify the delay in attending to
itself? If the questions being asked now are the right ones, why were they
never asked before? Senior managers seem convinced that they have to be
answered decisively and effectively if the Bank is to enjoy a secure future.
They may well be right. They must hope that they are not already too late.
