FT  09 AUG 94 / Minefield offers way to Jordan
Israel and Jordan changed the road map of the Middle East yesterday, opening
a border crossing on a former minefield and inaugurating what Jordan's Crown
Prince Hassan described as 'a commonwealth of shared human interests' that
would do away with regional poverty and injustice, Julian Ozanne reports
from the Israel-Jordan border.
The Crown Prince, with Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israeli prime minister, and US
secretary of state Warren Christopher all emphasised the border opening
would pave the way to a tourism boom, business and commercial contacts, and
economic co-operation and development.
Mr Rabin later crossed into Jordan for a summit with King Hussein at his
winter palace in Aqaba, the first time an Israeli prime minister has
publicly set foot on Jordanian soil since the creation of the Jewish state
in 1948.
'Three weeks ago the dream of peace was far away,' Mr Rabin said shortly
before he and Prince Hassan cut the white ribbon opening the new border 3km
north of the Red Sea ports of Aqaba in Jordan and Eilat in Israel. 'Today it
is materialising: telephone lines, tourism. Soon it will seem as though this
is the way it has always been.'
The prince said the border was the beginning of regional transport networks
and a token of Israel and Jordan's desire for material economic links. 'Let
the opening of this border gate in this particular location mark the
foundation stone on which we intend to build our common future,' he said.
Mr Christopher said the two nations were 'weaving together the fabric of
human contact and mutual interest that are the foundations of genuine
peace.' Later he said the Rabin-Hussein summit had discussed trilateral
Israel-Jordan-US plans for regional development and October's Middle East
economic conference in Casablanca, sponsored by King Hassan of Morocco,
President Bill Clinton and Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
Mr Christopher said the conference, expected to bring together more than
1,000 companies with governments to finance Middle East development, would
be 'a great opportunity to unlock resources' for the regional projects. Mr
Christopher also promised continued US political and economic support to
both Israel and Jordan and said the US had written to the Paris Club of
creditors to seek debt relief for Jordan and was speeding through Congress
legislation to write off US loans to Jordan, worth about Dollars 1bn.
Israel and Jordan have drawn up a joint economic agenda but only a few of
these plans can be implemented until a formal peace treaty is signed.
Israeli and Jordanian negotiators resume bilateral talks today on the
Israeli side of the Dead Sea to resolve border demarcation and water
disputes - the obstacles that stand in the way of a peace treaty.
