FT  12 JUL 94 / Survey of World Automotive Components (7): Re-emerging
market force - Profile of Lucas Industries
Within the next few weeks Lucas Industries, the automotive components and
aerospace group which with nearly 40,000 employees world-wide is one of the
UK's largest companies, will start coming out of its self-imposed purdah.
George Simpson, former chairman of the Rover vehicles group, took over as
Lucas's chief executive in April. He is already putting the final touches to
a management restructuring and by autumn will have undertaken a complete
review of Lucas's activities and strategies.
It will largely determine Lucas's prospects of remaining a substantial
long-term participant in a world motor components sector becoming ever more
viciously competitive. It is also one in which many western manufacturers
have shown considerable capacity for self-delusion in terms of their
productivity and quality achievements compared with rivals from Japan.
As John Neill, chief executive of the Unipart components group, pointed out
at last month's launch of Cardiff Business School's 'lean' enterprise
research centre, the UK government's recent white paper on UK industrial
competitiveness highlighted an average performance deficiency compared even
with other western competition.
What was particularly worrying, said Mr Neill, was that 'only 2 per cent of
UK companies were found to be world class - but 73 per cent thought they
were'.
Relatively few in the UK motor industry have been better placed than Mr
Simpson to see a 'world class' Japanese company in action, as a result of
his long involvement with the 14-year partnership between Rover and Honda.
Mr Simpson is widely credited with the transformation of Rover from a minor
lame duck car maker to a still minor producer, but one with enough restored
prestige for BMW to have been willing to pay Pounds 800m plus debt
assumptions for it.
So, much as Lucas has improved its own motor components productivity and
quality over recent years, it is only to be expected that institutional and
other backers are looking to Mr Simpson to give substantial new impetus to
Lucas.
Mr Simpson's own appointment at Lucas marks a sharp break with the past. For
nearly a decade Sir Anthony Gill had combined the posts of chairman and
chief executive. When Sir Anthony goes in November, Mr Simpson will be
working with a non-executive chairman, Sir Brian Pearse, who recently
retired as chief executive of Midland Bank.
By any measure, Lucas is one of the leading companies on the world
components scene. It supplies virtually every principal vehicle maker
throughout the world with a wide variety of key components and systems.
It is a leading source of engine management and injector systems for petrol
and diesel engines. It is one of the world's biggest manufacturers of
braking systems. It produces many electrical and electronic systems, ranging
from wiring harnesses to electronic control units (ECUs).
The automotive activities, including supplies to the aftermarket, are the
group's most important, accounting for more than 60 per cent of total sales.
There is no lack of apparent confidence at the company, even if it is not
yet Mr Simpson who is expressing it.
Earlier this year senior managers were declaring the view that higher
productivity and rationalisation benefits, coupled with substantial
cost-cutting under a restructuring programme begun in 1992, are opening the
way towards sustainable 10 per cent margins - higher even than at the peak
of the eight-year motor industry boom of the 1980s.
It is a confidence yet to be reflected in Lucas's overall profitability.
Lucas Industries made a pre-tax profit of only Pounds 20.1m on sales of
Pounds 1.19bn in the first half of its financial year to the end of January.
Within this total, however, the automotive business's operating profit
increased from Pounds 13m to Pounds 27m on sales of Pounds 830m and Sir
Anthony insists that this will continue to rise sharply when firm recovery
sets into continental Europe's vehicle markets.
Restructuring and cost-cutting activities have been substantial. More than
Pounds 75m has been raised from divesting non-core businesses and further
disposals are in prospect. Some Pounds 60m costs were reduced last year,
with 4,860 jobs lost.
At the same time, Lucas has not been reluctant to make investments in areas
which it believes will provide substantial long-term growth opportunities,
particularly Asia and Eastern Europe.
A venture to manufacture brakes in China is in prospect, for example, while
in the Czech Republic it has formed a joint venture with Autobrzdy to supply
Volkswagen-controlled car maker Skoda with rear axle assemblies.
Lucas is also active in India, which is starting to attract serious
attention from the world's car and components makers as it grows under the
Indian government's industrial liberalisation plans.
It has a long-standing venture with TVS, one of India's 20 biggest
industrial conglomerates, originally to produce generators for Hindustan
Motors' Ambassador cars but now also embracing production for Maruti
Suzuki-based small cars.
Nor has the UK and elsewhere in western Europe been neglected.
Some 650 jobs are to be created over the next 18 months in England's Tyne
and Wear region by Lucas SEI Wiring Systems, a joint venture with Sumitomo
Electric Industries of Japan, which is constructing a plant to make wiring
harnesses for Honda, Rover, Toyota and Jaguar. Production is expected to
start early next year after an investment of Pounds 15m-Pounds 20m.
At Bouzonville in northern France, nearly Pounds 30m is being invested in
completely overhauling the plant and processes for brake caliper
manufacture, creating an integrated manufacturing system claimed to be
'world class' measured by Lucas's benchmarking programmes.
Earlier investments in North America and in the rapidly-growing diesel
vehicle sector have also begun to pay off. Some Pounds 150m spent on
expanding capacity to produce diesel injectors and management systems for
trucks as well as cars has allowed Lucas to increase its European market
share in the sector.
