FT  12 AUG 94 / International Company News: Asset sales lift Thomson profits
in second quarter
Thomson Corporation, the travel and publishing group controlled by Canada's
Thomson family, recorded a 39 per cent rise in second-quarter earnings after
being helped by gains from asset sales.
Operating profit from travel and newspapers improved substantially, but
there was a small drop in specialised publishing's contribution.
Earnings rose to USDollars 104m, or 18 cents a share, from Dollars 75m, or
13 cents a share, a year earlier. The bulk of the increase came from
non-recurring gains, mainly the sale of the group's 50 per cent interest in
Thomson Directories. Sales climbed to Dollars 1.56bn from Dollars 1.47bn.
Thomson Travel's operating profit rose to Dollars 39m from Dollars 31m.
Supply and demand for the UK subsidiary's summer holidays this year has been
almost in balance. Bookings are currently 18 per cent ahead of last year and
should end the season about 15 per cent higher.
Fewer holidays than usual need to be sold in the late part of the season
when price-cutting is normally most intense. Furthermore, Britannia Airways,
a Thomson subsidiary, is operating at 'near maximum' capacity this summer.
Thomson said it had formed a base for expansion into the domestic UK holiday
market by buying Country Holidays, the UK's largest holiday cottage letting
agency.
The drop in the information and publishing division's profits to Dollars 56m
from Dollars 58m was ascribed to seasonal losses in the education and
school-publishing group, and delays in finalising unidentified sales.
'Prospects for the full year remain good,' the company said.
Operating margins of Thomson's UK regional newspapers continued their recent
improvement. The UK-based legal, professional and business publishing group
also put in a stronger performance.
Circulation and advertising lineage of its US and Canadian newspapers are
'marginally' ahead of last year.
Gulf Canada Resources said production of natural gas and crude oil declined
in the first half of the year primarily due to the divestment of assets in
1993, Reuter reports. The company posted a first-half loss of CDollars 49m,
against a loss of CDollars 41m in the first half of 1993.
