FT  31 OCT 94 / China shows growing confidence abroad
China's leaders begin a series of foreign missions this week in a virtually
unprecedented show of diplomatic zeal that underscores China's growing
self-confidence internationally.
China's official media yesterday described visits by the country's three
most senior leaders to neighbouring countries over the next two weeks as
part of a 'new diplomatic drive'.
Xinhua, the official news agency, said it was 'rare' for three top Chinese
officials to 'go abroad in quick succession'. It noted that the visits were
'mostly in the Asia-Pacific region'.
Premier Li Peng, who ranks number two in the standing committee of the
ruling Politburo, begins a five-day visit to South Korea today. He will be
the most senior Chinese official to visit Seoul since Beijing established
diplomatic ties with South Korea in 1992.
Mr Qiao Shi, chairman of the standing committee of the National People's
Congress, China's parliament, leaves later this week on a five-nation tour
of New Zealand, Australia, Argentina, Brazil and Fiji. Mr Qiao ranks three
in the politburo.
President Jiang Zemin, who also serves as general secretary of the Communist
party and chairman of the powerful Military Commission, will visit
Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia and Vietnam between November 6 and 22. He
will attend the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation forum in Indonesia in
mid-November.
Other senior Chinese officials who will be engaged this week in high level
diplomatic missions include vice-premier Li Lanqing who will visit
Washington to press China's case for admission to the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade.
Mr Li, who is a former minister of foreign trade, will seek to counter US
misigivings about China's progress in meeting requirements for Gatt entry.
US trade officials say Beijing is still some distance from satisfying market
liberalisation requirements for Gatt accession.
Western officials in Beijing view China's diplomatic blitz as a sign of
growing self-confidence in the international arena. 'This indicates that
things are going their way on the diplomatic front,' said one.
The official noted that Beijing appears to have successfully neutralised the
worst of the international opprobrium that followed the June 1989 massacre
of pro-democracy protesters around Tiananmen Square.
'There are increasing signs that different countries are now prepared to put
human rights down the list of priorities when dealing with China,' he said.
The visits abroad by China's three top officials are the culmination of
perhaps the most active year of diplomatic activity in the history of the
People's Republic, beginning with a tour of Central Asia in April by Premier
Li Peng. Mr Li went abroad again in mid-year when he visited Austria,
Germany and Romania.
President Jiang went to Russia, Ukraine and France in September, and earlier
this month Mr Zhu Rongji, the senior vice premier in charge of the economy,
was in Madrid for the IMF-World Bank meeting.
Xinhua said Chinese leaders would 'try to alleviate fears of the so-called
'China threat'' in their discussions with regional counterparts.
'Chinese leaders are expected to explain China's position on the
establishment of a new political and economic order,' Xinhua said. 'They
will reassure their hosts that China has no intention of seeking hegemony.'
