FT  29 SEP 94 / World Commodities Prices: Gold traders discount Russian
export move - Market report
A headline indicating that Russia intended to stop exporting GOLD sent the
precious metal briefly to Dollars 400 a troy ounce yesterday. Once dealers
read the accompanying story, the price swiftly dropped back to close in
London at Dollars 395.50, up 10 cents.
Mr Valery Skripchenko, head of the scientific and technical department at
Russia's Precious Metals Committee, said: 'We will set up a mechanism before
the end of the year under which it will be unprofitable to sell gold abroad
but it will pay to sell it all domestically'.
Analysts argued that Russia needed all the foreign currency it could get,
and gold was one source, while it would take many years to develop a
domestic gold market. Also Russia had not been a substantial seller of gold
in the west this year, Mr Skripchenko said that Russia exported 6.6 tonnes
of gold in the first five months of 1994 compared with 21 tonnes in the same
months last year.
Substantial selling was seen when gold reached Dollars 398, dealers said.
One analyst suggested that it was significant that gold could not hold on to
a move through Dollars 400 despite the apparently bullish news from Russia.
At the London Metal Exchange most base metals ended the day on a firmer
footing following sprees of speculative buying and short-covering.
The three months delivery COPPER price briefly hit a high of Dollars 2,578 a
tonne but did not have enough upside momentum to trigger stop-loss nuying
orders hovering just above that level, dealers said. It ended the day
trading at Dollars 2,564 per tonne, up from Tuesday's Dollars 2,558 close.
Early Japanese buying and news that power to Alcoa's Portland smelter in
Victoria, Australia, would be trimmed and could restrain production helped
to underpin the ALUMINIUM market. The investment fund and consumer buying
that encouraged took the three months price to a high of Dollars 1,632 a
tonne; but it slipped back to end at Dollars 1,675, up Dollars 13.
London Commodity Exchange COFFEE futures ended weaker but off lows in sleepy
London trade as many investors retreated to the sidelines for lack of news,
traders said.
'The market is looking to stabilise around current levels,' said one dealer,
adding that it did not want to stray too far below Dollars 4,000 a tonne
because of the continuing uncertainty about Brazil's weather conditions.
Compiled from Reuters
