FT  25 APR 94 / South African Elections: Destined to remain on periphery -
Democratic Party
It has been a long political journey for Dr Zach de Beer, who entered
parliament in 1953 aged 24 (for the now defunct United party) before
switching careers and joining Anglo American, where he was a director until
his retirement in the mid-1980s.
Now 65 and leader of the liberal Democratic party, Dr de Beer is within
reach of a cabinet seat in the post-election government of national unity.
Should he take up the position (his decision will depend partly on what he
is offered) he will represent a party that has long been the conscience of
white South Africa. However, the Democrats will remain on the periphery of
real power.
Over the weekend Dr de Beer expressed the obligatory eve-of-poll confidence.
'I think we will get at least 5 per cent, probably 8 per cent, of the vote,'
enough under the proportional representation system that determines the
allocation of cabinet posts for the DP to get at least one port-folio.
But admirable as the party has been as a champion of a now-triumphant cause,
and which had the doughty Helen Suzman as its MP for most of her 36 years in
parliament, it seems to have failed to expand much beyond its liberal white
constituency and make significant inroads into the black electorate.
Last night, at their final rally in the wealthy Johannesburg suburb of
Houghton, still the party's heartland and the constituency dominated for so
long by Mrs Suzman, the audience was enthusiastic, supportive - and mainly
white.
Dr de Beer and Mr Tony Leon, the party's tough, talented and quick-witted
37-year-old deputy, rallied the party faithful, castigating the record of
the National party.
At the same time they questioned the African National Congress's commitment
to a market economy, and warned that despite Mr Nelson Mandela's support of
a justiciable bill of rights, the country still needed the Democratic party
to play its traditional watchdog role.
But the respect the party enjoys is not matched in the polls.
Unfortunately for the party, the Nats have stolen most of the Democrat's
clothes, and the best Dr de Beer and his colleagues can hope for is to keep
the liberal flag flying in the new parliament and hope that their day will
come if and when a realignment of political parties takes place in the years
ahead.
