FT  18 MAR 94 / Lyell says he was not warned by MI6
An embattled Sir Nicholas Lyell yesterday denied that he had been warned by
the intelligence service MI6 (SIS) to call off the prosecution of three
Matrix Churchill executives for breaching arms regulations.
But last night a senior Customs &amp; Excise official confirmed that his
department had told the attorney-general about the intelligence connections
of one of the Matrix Churchill defendants before the prosecution.
'I have no doubt that the attorney-general was aware of the situation,' the
official said. Customs was informed by MI6 that one of the Matrix Churchill
executives, Mr Paul Henderson, had 'given them information selectively'
about Iraq's military procurement activities.
Sir Nicholas's statement followed a report in yesterday's Independent
newspaper about the MI6 allegations.
An official Whitehall source confirmed that MI6 passed information about Mr
Henderson's intelligence work to Customs before its decision to prosecute.
MI6 considered Mr Henderson a 'brave man' and a 'source that provided some
useful information'. The source added: 'It was the role of Customs as the
prosecuting authority, not SIS to warn the attorney-general to call off the
prosecution. They didn't'
The Matrix Churchill trial collapsed after evidence from Mr Alan Clark, the
former trade minister, and documents which the government had tried
unsuccessfully to suppress showed that Matrix Churchill exported
defence-related goods to Iraq with official backing.
Mr John Major, the prime minister, yesterday told the Commons that Sir
Nicholas had his 'full and complete confidence'. Challenged in the Commons,
Mr Major said that Sir Nicholas had received 'no notification' from Lord
Justice Scott's arms-to-Iraq inquiry 'that any such evidence' about MI6
warning Sir Nicholas 'has been given to them'.
The secretary to the Scott inquiry, Mr Christopher Muttukumaru, said
evidence would be 'checked again' - but added that his recollection was that
'no such evidence' was given by MI6 officers.
But neither statement allayed suspicions among opposition MPs that Sir
Nicholas was being set up as the 'fall guy' if the Scott inquiry delivers a
harsh verdict on the government's handling of the affair. Sir Nicholas is
due to give evidence on March 24.
Mr Menzies Campbell, Liberal Democrat defence spokesman, said: 'The steady
drip of adverse publicity against the attorney-general reinforces the
impression that he is being set up as a sacrifice to the Scott inquiry. But
even that will not allow more senior government ministers to evade their
political responsibility for the government's actions in this matter.'
Meanwhile, the Scott inquiry was told yesterday by a senior Customs lawyer
that Customs investigators hit a 'complete wall' when trying to get the most
confidential papers about Matrix Churchill from MI6.
Mrs Annabelle Bolt said some papers were released and others made available
to Customs investigators given special security clearance. However, Customs
was never told of other papers relating to their inquiry, including material
from GCHQ, the government's secret communications centre.
