FT  16 NOV 94 / Law of the Sea promises many disputes
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which enters full force
today, seems likely to be treated by coastal states as a rich source of
legal and rhetorical arguments to be used against rivals.
This is in spite of the fact that the last thing the law's drafters wanted
was to provide disputatious countries with extra torpedoes. One of the law's
ostensible purposes is to encourage compromises over the exploitation of
maritime resources, even among countries with unresolved disputes.
Apart from a standoff in the Aegean - where Turkey has threatened war if
Greece extends its territorial waters to 12 miles - one of the most grave
maritime disputes involves China and Vietnam, locked in a war of words over
oil rights in the South China Sea.
Both China and Vietnam claim to be acting in accordance with the Law of the
Sea but their interpretations of the document are miles apart.
Over the last month, China has accused Vietnam of infringing its interests
in international waters by inviting US and European companies to explore for
oil in the Tonkin Gulf.
Vietnam has retorted that it is exercising its legitimate rights in the
economic zone to which it is entitled by the UN convention. It said that
under the terms of that treaty, there were no international waters in the
Gulf.
This dialogue of the deaf reflects confusion over the difference between
territorial waters - which may be extended, under the UN Law, up to 12 miles
 -and the 'economic zone' which coastal states are entitled to claim,
amounting to either 200 miles or the full extent of their continental shelf,
whichever is larger.
China and Vietnam are also arguing over resources around the Spratly
Islands, a group of reefs and atolls whose other would-be owners are Taiwan,
Brunei, Malaysia and the Philippines.
China has awarded an exploration contract to the US company Crestone for an
area south-west of the Spratlys, while Vietnam has awarded a consortium led
by Mobil a bloc slightly further to the west. Each state has denounced the
other's contract.
Sovereignty over the Spratlys - and hence control of the surrounding
economic zone - is crucial to each side's claim to energy rights, and the
salience of this issue is expected to grow as the UN convention enters
force.
However a study by a London-based law firm, maintains that the law favours
pragmatic joint exploitation accords, even among countries with unresolved
disputes.*
Laying out the common-sense arguments for such accords, it notes that oil
deposits which straddle two states' economic zones cannot be exploited by
one without damaging the other's interests. When one state drills, oil from
the rival state's zone is liable to flow across the boundary line as a
result.
Article 83 of the UN convention says that pending final agreement on zones,
countries should 'make every effort to enter into provisional arrangements
of a practical nature'.
As an example of such a deal, the study cites the 1989 accord between
Australia and Indonesia over waters south of Timor.
However, such accords are not a panacea. Portugal - still seen by the UN as
legal administrator of East Timor - has challenged Australia's right to
enter the accord, before the International Court of Justice.
The entry into force of the UN Law comes a year after its ratification by
the minimum of 60 states. Another breakthrough came this summer when
provisions on deep-sea mining - outside the zones of any country - were
amended so as to convince the US, the UK and Germany to sign.
*Paper by Charles Robson of Lovell White Durrant, 65 Holborn Viaduct, London
EC1A 2DY
