FT  09 JUN 94 / UK Company News: Exceptionals leave Anglo United Pounds 75m
in the red
Losses at Anglo United, the heavily indebted owner of the Coalite smokeless
fuel business, rose from Pounds 30.5m to Pounds 74.6m pre-tax in the year to
end-March, but the bulk of the deficit arose from the sale of the
Charringtons Fuel business in March.
The company showed a marginal improvement in its operating performance, and
Mr Harold Cottam, chairman, said Anglo United was exploring the possibility
of bidding for parts of the British Coal privatisation.
It is interested in Coal Products, a manufacturer of smokeless fuel, and
British Fuels, a distributor of coal, gas and oil, which both complement
Anglo United's existing business. However, these acquisitions would be
contingent upon further financial restructuring.
Mr Cottam said: 'We believe that Anglo's period of retrenchment is now
over.' It has almost completed a programme of asset disposals, following a
debt for equity swap with its leading bankers.
Net debt has been reduced by Pounds 32.8m to Pounds 96.1m, but the company
has an additional Pounds 24.9m in convertible loan stock and Pounds 56m in
deep discount loan notes. About Pounds 103m of its bank debt is repayable in
March 1996 making further restructuring inevitable.
Turnover was Pounds 518.5m (Pounds 544.7m) and operating profits before
exceptional items amounted to Pounds 21.9m (Pounds 20.3m). The company
suffered Pounds 11.9m of exceptional losses, primarily related to the
closure of one of Coalite's two production plants, in Grimethorpe.
The sale of Charringtons resulted in a book profit Pounds 14m, but it took a
Pounds 75.7m exceptional loss from goodwill previously written off.
Interest costs fell 28 per cent to Pounds 23.5m, due to the impact of
disposals, and Mr Cottam was confident that operating profit would exceed
interest payments in the current year. Losses amounted to 8.3p (8.9p).
Staff levels have been reduced from 3,000 to below 1,800, and with reduced
costs, Anglo United increased profits from smokeless fuels despite a 4.5 per
cent fall in domestic sales. However, earnings from Coalite chemicals fell.
COMMENT
At its peak, in 1990-1991, Anglo United made profits of more than Pounds
15m, but with its current structure, such levels are no longer attainable.
It should achieve a marginal profit for the current year, but future
earnings growth is restricted by the shrinking Coalite market. Having swept
the decks, the management wants to sail forth and explore opportunities for
capitalising on its expertise. If it succeeds, shareholders face significant
dilution from another debt-for-equity swap. If it fails, the company retains
a substantially negative value. Either way, the odds seem stacked against
the equity shareholder.
