FT  03 MAR 94 / Northern Ireland committee could be in place after Easter
MPs are to vote next week on whether to set up a parliamentary select
committee on Northern Ireland in a move expected to bring the creation of
such a body significantly closer.
Mr Tony Newton, leader of the Commons, will this afternoon announce the
timing of next week's debate - which could pave the way for the committee to
start work shortly after Easter.
In an adroit piece of tactical manoeuvring, ministers have decided to hold
the Commons debate on the annual renewal of the Prevention of Terrorism Act
on the same day. Labour traditionally opposes renewal of the act and is
annually pilloried for its stance by Tory backbenchers.
The select committee move will be interpreted as a bid to placate the Ulster
Unionists, the province's largest political party, which vowed this week not
to return to round-table talks on Northern Ireland's future with Dublin and
other constitutional parties.
In another development certain to be welcomed by unionists, Lord Fitt
intends to use a speech today in the Lords to urge participants in the talks
to discard the old 'nothing is agreed until everything is agreed' formula.
The independent socialist peer, who founded the mainly Catholic Social
Democratic and Labour party, intends to urge participants to concentrate on
agreeing a structure for a power-sharing elective assembly in Ulster.
Lord Fitt is expected to argue that many SDLP members would welcome such a
step and would not be prepared to let the absence of an Irish dimension,
dealing with relations between the province and Dublin, stand in its way.
He intends to call for the publication of the agreement hammered out last
year by Mr John Hume and Mr Gerry Adams, arguing that the SDLP leader had
put the Sinn Fein president on a pedestal.
The UUP's increasingly inflexible stance was yesterday criticised as
'regrettable and very disappointing' by Mr Dick Spring, the Irish foreign
minister. Mr Spring is to meet Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland
secretary, in Dublin on Friday for informal talks ahead of next week's
meeting of the Anglo-Irish intergovernmental conference.
The committee move was immediately attacked by both the SDLP and Sinn Fein,
but was supported by Rev Ian Paisley's hardline Democratic Unionist party.
Mr Adams urged the government to ignore unionist demands for a select
committee, which he described as an 'exercise in time-wasting and crisis
management'.
It was unclear last night whether the Commons would vote next week on
details of the select committee's composition, which remains a bone of party
political contention.
