FT  26 OCT 94 / Survey of Technology in the Office (21): Systems are under
scrutiny / a look at the health risks in using office equipment
The mouse, a harmless looking device used by millions of people to control
their computer software, is the latest piece of electronic equipment to come
under scrutiny for health and safety reasons.
It is the subject an international standard covering health and safety for
high-tech offices being drawn up by national standards bodies worldwide, and
it will correlate with EU requirements.
Recent studies have shown that using a mouse can cause injuries, says Bjorn
Malmberg, technical co-ordinator at ICL Personal Systems. Most people place
the mouse to one side of the computer, where they have to extend their arm
to use it. The slight clicking action works muscles further up the arm, even
though most people are not aware of it. The further one has to stretch to
hold the mouse, the more strain is put on those muscles.
'Some applications require you to use the mouse a lot, and you can get
inflamed muscles' said Mr Malmberg. He recommends placing the mouse as close
in to the shoulder as possible to avoid the condition, which is known as
tennis elbow.
Another condition caused by the use of a mouse is carpal tunnel syndrome.
The symptoms are tingling feelings and pain in the thumb, index and middle
fingers and a weakening of the thumb. Carpal tunnel syndrome can happen to
mouse users if they rest their wrist on the desk while holding the mouse for
extended periods. This position pushes the wrist joint back at an angle,
causing pressure on the nerves which transmit signals between the hand and
the brain.
Some mouse products have been designed to allow the hand to rest in a more
natural position. The Dexxa mouse from Logitec, for example, is designed to
raise the wrist position. It costs about Pounds 15. The Microsoft Ergonomic
mouse costs Pounds 39. Mouse mats with a raised surface at one end are also
available, for about Pounds 10.
Similarly, new-style computer keyboards, designed for comfort, are coming on
to the market. Injuries caused by extended use of computer keyboards include
carpal tunnel syndrome and repetitive strain injuries. Mostly they occur
where the user performs repetitive tasks in a position which cramp the
hands, wrists or shoulders. This may be due to poorly designed equipment or
to poor posture, or both.
Software company Microsoft has just launched its Natural Keyboard. Shaped
like a wave with the two halves of the Querty keys sloping away from one
another at a 40 degree angle, it also has a sloping piece of plain plastic
along the front, intended as a palm rest and a pop-up stand underneath to
act as a wrist-rest.
Initially, the keyboard feels strange. But Microsoft claims that the slope
puts the shoulders in a more relaxed position does than the conventional
keyboard. The shoulders are opened out, instead of being hunched up. The
pop-up wrist-rest - Microsoft calls it a wrist leveller - forces the wrist
in a slightly downwards-sloping position for those who like to rest their
wrists while typing.
A rival product from US manufacturer Key Tronic uses a system of mechanical
levers underneath the individual keys to create a softer landing for the
fingers. Hard contact switches used to work the keys create a mechanical
resistance to the finger on conventional keyboards, which also make the
finger press directly down on the key - an unnatural movement.
The Key Tronic Pro Touch keyboard allows the fingers to arch over the
keyboard in a naturally comfortable position.
ICL's ergonomically designed keyboard helps minimise the strain on muscles
in the hands and forearms with a curved, sloping surface. It also
incorporates an anti-static device in the space bar - computers generate a
lot of static, which attracts dust and can result in headaches and
tiredness.
People who type on the keyboard while talking on the telephone are running
an additional risk. This issue has received little attention so far, but it
is known that holding the phone between the head and neck affects the
balance of the vertebrae in the neck, causing a condition called
Torticollis. Wearing a headset with a telephone microphone, could be the
solution because it lets the user have both hands free.
According to Stephen Murphy, of headset manufacturer Plantronics, headsets
are governed by strict regulations on sound quality. But headsets can be
expensive, with starting prices at Pounds 150 from either Plantronics or
rival manufacturer Racal Acoustics.
However, all manufacturers point out that improved equipment alone will not
prevent any of the debilitating medical conditions.
'Our keyboard does not prevent repetitive strain injury. Just as you don't
lose weight by drinking diet Coke,' said Richard Teversham, hardware product
manager at Microsoft. Mr Teversham believes that telling people how to
organise the overall work environment, will help them to help themselves.
For example, a desktop computer should be placed at an appropriate height
for the user. A footrest - costing between Pounds 15 and Pounds 40 - reduces
the strain on legs and feet.
A chair with built-in lumbar support - costing between Pounds 100 and Pounds
150 - supports the back. Lighting should not cause glare or reflections on
the screen. And users need to be educated to take breaks from keyboard or
mouse work and to maintain a good posture.
Alan Cuthbertson, an independent consultant, pointed out that all employers
in the European Union have a legal responsibility to educate their employees
about high-tech health and safety.
This follows the European directive 90/270 which was passed in 1992. Member
states were required to introduce legislation by January 1993, and
organisations have been given until 1996 to bring their offices in line.
