FT  26 JUL 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: UK scientists in search for
'greener' dairying system
British researchers are investigating whether dairy farming can be both
profitable and environment-friendly.
The government's farm advisory service, Adas, is examining ways of reducing
the waste products and emissions from dairy farms, such as nitrogen run-off
and manure or slurry. Project managers have set up three dairy systems at
Adas's Bridgets research centre in Hampshire to compare the results of
different types of management.
Disposing of slurry in a way that is not harmful to the environment is a
controversial issue in the European Union where it is tackled by different
countries in different ways. In Denmark, farmers must own enough land to
dispose of their own slurry or must be able to secure contracts from their
neighbours to get rid of it on their land.
The British government is looking at the possibility of introducing
legislation that would force farmers to store the slurry for a period and
dispose of it when it was least likely to be harmful to the environment.
This would raise costs for farmers, but it would also bring some benefits as
the land gets more nutrients from manure if it is spread done in the winter.
The experimental dairy units range from a conventional system with a
stocking rate of 2.1 cows a hectare to a farm with the same amount of land
and number of animals but which has incorporated measures for reducing
nitrate losses.
The third unit includes more land with the same number of cows so that
nitrate leaching losses can be cut to below the European Union limit of 50
milligrammes a litre.
Mr Steven Peel who runs the project, which has received a Pounds 700,000
grant from the government, says the profitability of the different systems
will be studied for three years to see if environmental management can be
improved without affecting profits.
At the same time, the researchers are looking at the use of forage maize for
cows' diets as a replacement for silage, which will help to reduce the
amount of nitrogen they excrete. Feed can be formulated in a way that
eliminates excess nitrogen.
