FT  01 JUN 94 / Leading Article: Tangled yarn in Ulster
Northern Ireland has the highest unemployment rate in Britain, an economy
unhealthily dependent on public support and an image which can deter foreign
investors. Any private sector manufacturing project which promises to create
hundreds of jobs there should normally be welcomed. However, such a welcome
can only be extended with confidence when there is clear evidence that the
project stands a reasonable chance of success.
It is difficult, on the basis of the public information available to date,
to form such a judgement about the plan by Hualon, a Taiwanese industrial
conglomerate, to build a Pounds 157m synthetic fabrics plant in Belfast. Too
many unresolved questions surround the background of some of the individuals
involved, the economics of the project and the manner in which it has been
dealt with by both British authorities and the European Commission.
These questions take on particular importance because the plant is being
assisted with Pounds 61m of public money. It is surprising that the
government proposes to give these funds to a company, two of whose top
managers have been charged - and one of them convicted - in connection with
an alleged financial fraud. Ministers have declined to say whether they knew
of the charges and, if so, why they considered it proper to back the
project. Inquiries have been referred to Northern Ireland's Industrial
Development Board, which conducted the negotiations with Hualon. The IDB's
response has also been unsatisfactory.
Shrinking market
Lack of clarity also surrounds the plant's proposed operations. The market
it is being set up to supply is already shrinking, and will face further
pressures as the EU lifts controls on imports from developing countries with
far lower labour costs. The IDB says Hualon plans to compete by using highly
automated capital-intensive production methods. Yet it claims the plant will
employ 1,800 people. Not only is that figure regarded as high by others in
the textiles industry; but the European Commission says it was able to
approve state aid for the plant only because its technology is so basic that
it will not threaten other EU producers.
Just where the truth lies is impossible to say, since the IDB refuses to
disclose any details of Hualon's business plan or of the procedures used to
vet the project. Nor is there any evidence that the business plan was
scrutinised by independent experts before the go-ahead was given. It is
difficult to imagine any prospective private investor not taking such an
elementary precaution. The IDB's apparent failure to do so hardly encourages
confidence in the plant's viability.
UK lobbying
A different set of issues arises from the conditions in which the project
was approved by Brussels. The UK government's energetic lobbying for
approval - against competition objections from commission experts - is
inconsistent with its repeated criticisms of other countries' industrial
subsidies. Nor has the Commission's apparent readiness to yield to political
entreaties enhanced its reputation for impartiality.
Beyond that, the case highlights a deeper dilemma in EU policy. In
principle, its efforts to encourage the transfer of resources to Europe's
poorer regions are to be commended. In practice, the result has too often
been rivalry between governments to woo mobile investments with large
financial inducements. These penalise other producers and distort markets,
particularly in sectors such as synthetic fibres where there is chronic
excess capacity. Such policies also risk attracting marginal investment
projects which cannot raise funds elsewhere.
Above all, governments' overriding desire to create jobs can too easily
impair their judgment. A memorable consequence was the De Lorean car venture
in Northern Ireland, which collapsed in the early 1980s. There is no
evidence to suggest the Hualon plant will suffer a similar fate. But
taxpayers and the people of Belfast need more information about the project.
The political accountability of the IDB also needs to be clarified. If
ministers will not provide answers voluntarily, the newly-formed Commons
Northern Ireland committee should require them to do so.
