FT  30 SEP 94 / Oxfam urges big change at World Bank
Big changes in the approach of the International Monetary Fund and World
Bank towards Latin America were urged by the British-based aid organisation
Oxfam in Madrid yesterday.
After four successive years of economic growth, Latin America has come to be
regarded as a success story for the market-oriented policies urged by
Washington-based organisations. But, in yesterday's report, Oxfam said Latin
America's free-market revolution has only widened already extreme income
inequalities and worsened poverty.
Oxfam welcomes the World Bank's recent commitment to poverty reduction 'but
remains concerned that the strategy adopted is essentially a repackaging of
the IMF and World Bank's policies, with social investment and safety nets
added on'.
According to the charity, the new policies' main flaws are that they fail to
introduce policies for wealth distribution, and do nothing to protect what
it calls basic rights, a lack of which has resulted in low-wage precarious
jobs, unequal land distribution, restricted access to capital, and
inadequate health and education.
It says IMF stabilisation policies and World Bank insistence on market
deregulation, import liberalisation and export growth have undermined any
anti-poverty strategy. Growth was also based on the dismantling of workers'
rights and the erosion of wages, which would further worsen economic
insecurity.
Its central recommendation is for the two institutions to replace their
current single policy blueprint with a country-by-country reform strategy
based on dialogue with local civil organisations, governments and relevant
UN agencies.
It favours selective trade protection and 'carefully targeted' subsidies for
key industries, as well as low real interest rates. It also calls for social
clauses in international trade and investment agreements 'to reverse the
current trend towards low-wage export strategies'.
Land reform should be a central element of the World Bank's poverty
reduction strategy.
Further, it says foreign debt is still draining many Latin American
countries of resources. The Brady plan, though welcome, had been biased
towards big debtors, and had failed to restore their long-term financial
stability. Meanwhile debt to multilateral agencies such as the World Bank
has become an increasing part of the problem, rising from 5 per cent of the
regional debt stock in 1980 to 28 per cent in 1992.
It urges quick implementation of the British government's proposal to use
IMF gold stocks for debt relief for very poor countries, and says debt
relief should be separated from IMF reform packages. The World Bank, it
argues, should use its Dollars 17bn (Pounds 11.3bn) in reserves for
selective debt relief; efforts to reduce countries' commercial debts should
be renewed.
Structural Adjustment and Inequality in Latin America: How IMF and World
Bank policies have failed the poor. Published by Oxfam UK and Ireland Policy
Department.)
