FT  14 APR 94 / Unionists flinch at Mayhew remarks on IRA
Assurances from Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, that the IRA
will not be expected to 'surrender' in order to join the peace process
provoked a political row in the province yesterday.
While firmly restating London's insistence on a permanent cessation of IRA
violence, Sir Patrick aimed to encourage republicans to enter the peace
process in a speech to the Foreign Policy Association in New York. He said
an end to the armed conflict in Ulster was 'not going to require any
surrender'.
The recent three-day ceasefire was not enough, said Sir Patrick, and he made
clear that any similar gestures - hinted at by Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein
president - would also be dismissed. He stressed that if Sinn Fein renounced
its support for violence and delivered an end to armed action it would
within three months join exploratory talks leading it to a full role in the
democratic process.
His remarks were being seen last night as recognition of the need to enable
the republican movement to extract itself from violence without having to
concede defeat.
Downing Street insisted they did not change government policy 'one iota',
however. The Downing Street declaration did not require any party to give up
its aspirations or beliefs but simply to renounce violence as a means of
pursuing them, it said.
Sir Patrick's measured comments, in which he also acknowledged Sinn Fein's
electoral mandate in the province, drew condemnation from unionists. Mr
David Trimble, Ulster Unionist MP for Upper Bann, said the speech undermined
the government's integrity and would create 'confusion and alarm' among
Ulster's law-abiding majority.
Mr James Molyneaux, the UUP leader, said the remarks were 'ill-judged'.
Mr Nigel Dodds, secretary of the Democratic Unionist party, said he was
alarmed that Sir Patrick should send signals to terrorists saying they need
not surrender. 'It confirms our view that the government is not in the
business of seeking to defeat the IRA at all,' he said.
The speech was given a qualified welcome by Mr Tom Hartley, national
chairman of Sinn Fein, who said it appeared to recognise 'the reality that
there will be no unilateral surrenders by any side'.
Mr Seamus Mallon, deputy leader of the Social Democratic and Labour party,
also welcomed Sir Patrick's remarks, saying they were in accordance with the
declaration.
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, said he had always maintained
there was no question of a military victory or a military defeat for either
side. The road to a just solution could be 'long, slow and painful,' he
acknowledged.
The Commons Northern Ireland committee meets today for the first time and is
expected to elect Sir James Kilfedder, leader of the Ulster Popular Unionist
party, as chairman.
