FT  15 MAR 94 / Camacho doubt confuses poll calculations: Damian Fraser
studies form in Mexico's presidential race
Judging by most opinion polls Mexico's ruling Institutional Revolutionary
party (PRI) will coast to victory in August's presidential election. But in
a country where there is little tradition of testing political opinion
honestly, the reliability of such polls has been attacked fiercely.
While the polls differ, the PRI's clear advantage is undisputed. A Harris
poll paid for by Mexico's businessmen's organisation gives it some 51 per
cent of the vote, against 17 per cent for the left-wing opposition Party of
Democratic Revolution (PRD). Even the poll least favourable to the PRI - by
Mori of Mexico - gives the party's candidate a 16 point lead over his
nearest rival.
The possibility that Mr Manuel Camacho, the government's peace envoy in the
southern state of Chiapas, might challenge the PRI's official candidate, Mr
Luis Donaldo Colosio, for the presidency complicates the picture.
His candidacy would probably both divide the PRI and take support from Mr
Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, the PRD candidate. But since Mr Colosio is currently
ahead of Mr Cardenas, according to the latest Mori opinion poll, the PRI
candidate has most to lose from a Camacho candidacy.
Under Mexico's electoral rules, an opposition party can change its candidate
up to a month before the August 21 elections. With the two main opposition
parties apparently committed to their candidates, Mr Camacho would have to
persuade one of the smaller parties' candidates to make way for him - which
may not be easy.
Even if Mr Camacho decides not to run, as is still perhaps most likely, he
is sure to remain a thorn in Mr Colosio's side and thereby provide another
element of uncertainty in the run-up to the election.
The PRD reckons voters are in any case highly volatile, and that much can
change before the election. At this time six years ago Mr Carlos Salinas was
well ahead of Mr Cuauhtemoc Cardenas in the polls, only to see his advantage
almost disappear.
Mr Miguel Basanez, head of Mori of Mexico and publisher of the opinion
magazine Este Pais, concludes that although the PRI is well ahead, the race
is closer than it looks. In his view, the undecided are more likely to vote
for opposition than government. If so, current declared support for Mr
Colosio, at an average of around 37 per cent, is far short of what is
necessary to win.
Critics of the polls further argue that many are biased in the governing
party's favour, either deliberately or unintentionally. Mr Basanez says
that, in an authoritarian culture, people are afraid of saying they will
vote for the opposition. Unless the pollster's neutrality is clear, then,
support for the PRI will be artificially high.
In a recent survey Mr Basanez told those questioned the poll was for the
PRI, and found that the party won 60 per cent support. When he told them the
poll was being conducted for Este Pais, support dropped to 36 per cent,
against 20 per cent for Mr Cardenas and 29 per cent undecided.
However, Mr Abraham Nadelsticher, head of Pearson, a Mexican market and
public opinion research firm, says there is no evidence Mexicans lie in
polls, and says techniques such as secret balloting can protect those
fearful of saying whom are they will support.
Such a view is shared by Mr Salinas's pollster, Mr Ulises Beltran. He says
the undecided are no more likely to vote for the opposition than the
government, and that since 1988 his polls on state elections coincided with
the eventual result, indicating that they are a reliable guide to election
returns.
Cynics like Mr Basanez say this is because electoral results are manipulated
to coincide with government polls.
