FT  01 JAN 94 / Window on the world: Many of the predictions made for 1993
proved accurate, if rather safe, bets. Answering the most important
questions for this year, FT writers do not expect a great upheaval in global
fortunes - but some economic and political changes may be positive
How well did FT writers forecast events in 1993? Quite well, it appears.
Martin Wolf decried the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development's December 1992 forecast of 2.3 per cent for Japanese economic
growth and 1.2 per cent for German growth in 1993. He predicted, instead,
that the former would grow very little and the latter contract. Even he was
optimistic. He also forecast the collapse of the old European exchange rate
mechanism into a narrow D-Mark zone, with floating rates among the leading
European currencies. That is what happened, with the ERM reduced to a link
between the Netherlands and Germany. His January 1992 forecast that the
Uruguay Round would succeed came true, a year late.
Edward Mortimer argued that there would be no peace in the Balkans, but
assumed - too optimistically - that 'the international community' would
never accept a Serb victory de jure. Jurek Martin was bullish on Mr
Clinton's ability to get things done, rightly so. Philip Stephens said John
Major would still be UK prime minister at the end of 1993, while Lionel
Barber assumed the Maastricht treaty would be ratified. As for peace in the
Middle East, Hugh Carnegy noted, correctly, that awareness of the narrowing
'window of opportunity' might spur a breakthrough.
John Lloyd thought that the Russian economy would get worse; Stephen Fidler
that Brazil would remain a country with potential it fails to achieve; and
Alexander Nicoll that Chinese economic reform would endure. Safe bets all,
they remain so for 1994.
So how will 1994 turn out?
WILL MARKETS CRASH?
John Plender writes: With financial markets still adjusting to powerful
disinflationary forces in the global economy, bonds will bubble on and up in
the first half of 1994. But not in the US, where recovery is well advanced
and the gap between actual and potential output - a key indicator of
inflationary pressure in the economy - is disappearing. The question for
world equity markets is how fiercely the Federal Reserve twitches in
response. A big rise in short-term interest rates could precipitate the
Crash of '94.
A more likely outcome is a cautious tightening of policy which initially
fails to dent the equity euphoria. The bump will then come if and when the
Fed's action is perceived as too little, too late. Equities in most markets
are expensive by historic standards and will look much cheaper at some point
in the next 18 months, even if a few ounces of capital gain remain to be
squeezed out in the short term. Best defensive bet: UK commercial property,
where yields are still at historically high levels. Wild cards that could
bring a premature end to the equity party: Vladimir Zhirinovsky, Kim Il Sung
and their like, who yearn to play with nuclear toys.
WILL THE ERM BE BACK IN NARROW BANDS?
Martin Wolf writes: No, but it should at least be feasible. What destroyed
the credibility of the old narrow-band ERM was the inappropriate monetary
policies it imposed upon most member states. The price paid for that lack of
credibility were the high interest rate premiums that had to be paid on
weaker currencies. Once the European economy returns to steady growth, which
should begin this year, fixed exchange rates should become more defensible
once more.
Real short-term interest rates remain quite high in the continent. But the
Bundesbank will become increasingly confident that German inflation is on
the way down. Given its determination to restore German monetary
credibility, it will cut short-term interest rates slowly. But the strength
of the disinflationary forces at work in Germany should allow rates to go
down a long way. The OECD December forecast that they will be below 4 per
cent in 1995 might even be too cautious.
If so, recovery should be well entrenched by late 1994 or early 1995. It
would then be possible to move back to narrow bands. But it would be more
sensible to retain the present, more flexible system and use it as a jumping
off point for economic and monetary union.
WILL THE EU HAVE MORE MEMBERS BY NEXT YEAR?
Lionel Barber writes: Yes, but not necessarily as many as first planned. Nor
is it certain that Austria, Finland, Norway and Sweden will enter the
European Union by the agreed target date of January 1 1995.
The enlargement negotiations are proving stickier than first thought, and
public opinion in all the candidate countries remains a mixture of equivocal
and hostile, with the possible exception of Finland. Any effort to speed up
negotiations to meet the March 1 deadline could lead to overhasty
concessions and a backlash at home.
Pencil in success for Finland, Austria and Sweden, but it is still not a
safe bet that all three will be ready by new year 1995. Norway remains the
shakiest candidate, mainly because of its tough demands on oil and fishing.
WHO WILL SUCCEED DELORS?
Lionel Barber writes: Mr Ruud Lubbers, the Dutch prime minister, remains
front-runner to become European Commission president. He briefly denied he
was a candidate last autumn; but his aim was to avoid accusations that his
Brussels ambitions were blunting Amsterdam's chances of beating Frankfurt in
the race to win the European Monetary Institute.
Mr Lubbers has spent almost 12 years at the top of Dutch politics, he knows
his way round the corridors of power in Europe, and it is time that a
smaller EU state took the top Commission job, according to Buggins's Turn
Rules in Brussels. More important, as a Christian Democrat, Mr Lubbers may
also have German Chancellor Helmut Kohl's vote in his pocket.
An upset could come if countries decide they want a more exciting candidate.
Sir Leon Brittan, chief EU trade negotiator, is running hard on the back of
the successful conclusion of the Gatt world trade talks; and it would be
unwise to rule out Mr Peter Sutherland, a former Irish commissioner and
director-general of Gatt.
Other potential contenders include Mr Leo Tindemans, former Belgian prime
minister and currently a Euro-MP; Mr Wilfried Martens, another Belgian prime
minister; and Mr Willy Claes, who impressed as Belgian foreign minister
during the recent Belgian presidency of the EU.
HOW LOW WILL UK BASE RATES GO?
Martin Wolf writes: British base rate will trough at 4-4 1/2 per cent
towards the end of 1994. The further reduction of 1 1/2 percentage points
will be justified by continued disinflation and the sluggishness imparted by
the Pounds 7.9bn in tax increases due in April.
If that were not a good enough reason to lower short-term interest rates,
declining European interest rates will help too. With German short-term
interest rates continuing to decline, the pound is likely to strengthen
against the D-Mark, the last thing Mr Kenneth Clarke will want to see. As
the gap between US and European rates of interest shrinks, the dollar is
likely to strengthen too, which would also help the UK economy.
Lower base rates may help both the economy and the great British borrowing
classes, but they also punish depositors. Higher taxes on those in work,
alongside still lower interest rates for those in retirement, will sadden
the hearts of Tory voters and politicians.
HOW WILL THE UK CONSERVATIVE PARTY FARE?
Philip Stephens writes: After spending most of 1993 locked in virtual civil
war, there are signs it has remembered it is the party of government, not
opposition. But the lesson of this government has been never to assume the
recent past is a guide to the near future. John Major's grip on 10 Downing
Street remains far from certain. Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, is waiting
in the wings should the prime minister stumble.
WILL THE JAPANESE ECONOMY RECOVER?
Robert Thomson writes: Probably not. For the last two years, the Japanese
government has predicted that economic recovery is a few months away, but
the passing of each month has brought a continuing deterioration in
corporate profits. Recovery is still, officially, a few months away, but
bureaucrats at the finance and trade ministries fear that the economy is on
the brink of a new downturn, perhaps triggered by workforce reductions.
There are positive signs. Housing starts are on the rise and the yen has
weakened by 11 per cent since August, when it edged close to Y100 to the
dollar. But the strong yen encouraged fresh investment in other east Asian
countries, where labour costs are lower. The Japan Research Institute
estimates that the transfer of production overseas will mean 1.1m fewer jobs
within Japan over the next five years.
Bank of Japan officials say the two most important indicators of a recovery
will be consumer confidence, weighed down by concerns about job security,
and capital investment, shrinking because most manufacturers are attempting
to reduce production capacity at home. If the coalition government crumbles
and an election produces another unstable alliance, consumer and corporate
confidence will be further undermined.
Most private forecasts for the fiscal year beginning in April are rather
gloomy. Nomura Research Institute expects the economy to contract by 0.4 per
cent, Nippon Life Insurance forecasts zero growth, and the Bank of Tokyo
predicts an expansion of 0.4 per cent. To complete the gloomy picture, the
Daiwa Research Institute expects corporate profits to fall for a fifth
consecutive year.
WILL ZHIRINOVSKY FIND MORE SUCCESS?
John Lloyd writes: This will be a difficult year for Vladimir Zhirinovsky.
Success came rapidly at Russia's December elections, but afterwards he did
everything wrong. He posed as a moderate, but slipped and threatened to use
nuclear weapons on Japan and Germany. Having insisted he really was a
Liberal Democrat, he revealed that his main ally was Dr Gerard Frey, leader
of the far-right German People's Union. He claimed cabinet posts, then said
he would lead the opposition.
Russian politics are messy but have limits: unless he shows some sense of
what to do with his victory in the polls - and it was a victory - he will
fall. However, the disaffection which gave him that victory may find a
better vehicle.
WILL WAR END IN THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA?
Edward Mortimer writes: An overall peace settlement is unlikely. Although
there is great war-weariness, there are also burning grievances and intense
mutual mistrust. Winners (so far mainly the Serbs) are unwilling to purchase
peace by giving up territory gained. Losers (especially the Bosnian
government) still see more hope of regaining something by war than by
negotiations. As for the 'international community', its inability to mediate
and unwillingness to impose peace have been amply demonstrated.
Serbia would like peace, to get rid of sanctions, but it no longer controls
(if it ever did) either the Serbs of Bosnia or those of Croatia. Fighting in
Bosnia might gradually wind down, if Moslems have captured as much territory
from Croats, and Serbs from Moslems, as they can reasonably hope for. But
any truce will be unstable, because the Moslems will not have a viable
territory and will be on the look-out for chances to regain some of what
they have lost. At worst, Sarajevo may fall to Serbs or be partitioned, with
attendant atrocities.
Fighting may resume in Croatia, whose government will want to prevent Serbs
from consolidating de facto 'independence' in occupied areas. And the fact
that war did not break out in Kosovo in 1993 does not mean it will not in
1994.
WILL FIDEL CASTRO SURVIVE?
Stephen Fidler writes: Probably. Castro's position as Cuban leader has
weakened significantly as the economy has sunk since the loss of Soviet aid.
The economy may in 1993 have turned the corner after a severe slump, but not
enough to quell popular dissatisfaction over the economic hardship being
suffered. The government's grip over the country has also been loosening as
it has moved reluctantly to reform its economy. Some of the reforms, in
particular the legalisation of the dollar, are accentuating divisions in
society.
But it is hard to see how resultant dissatisfaction could develop into a
force strong enough to overturn Castro's government, which has been skilful
in targeting the internal groups around which opposition could coalesce. And
though many Cubans may be disenchanted with Castro, there is widespread
dislike of the expatriate opposition groups centred on Miami.
Cuban officials have been suggesting one-man rule is giving way to a more
collective form of administration. But this will probably make little
difference to the US embargo, which - by allowing him to blame Washington
for the country's troubles - may be Castro's greatest prop. The betting must
be on Castro to remain el lider maximo through 1994.
WILL CLINTON CONCENTRATE ON DOMESTIC POLICIES?
Jurek Martin writes: Yes and no. Nothing matters to him more than healthcare
reform. Universal coverage will not be in place a year from now - even if he
had things all his own way, it would not properly kick in until 1998 - but
he must have a partial legislative victory in place before November's
midterm elections to have a chance of finishing the job in 1995. The battle
in Congress could be daunting, especially with Republicans expecting gains
in the midterms.
Also on a heavy domestic agenda are education and worker training
programmes, welfare reform and that most divisive of political issues, gun
control. As last year, he may win more than he loses if he can amass the
right coalitions again, but healthcare is the 'big one', requiring maximum
endeavour and with current odds barely in his favour.
That said, Mr Clinton has a Bush-like travel schedule in 1994, after going
abroad only twice last year. No fewer than four European trips are planned:
in January, to Brussels (for Nato), Prague, Moscow and Minsk, and Geneva
(for Assad of Syria); in June, for the 50th anniversary of the Normandy
landings; in July, to Italy for the G7; and in November, to Budapest for the
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. He will also attend the
next Apec summit in Indonesia at a date still to be fixed. The summit with
South American leaders will, at least, be in Washington.
If 'being there' is any guide, and with foreign policy problems far more
intrinsically important than Haiti and Somalia looming, he will do well to
keep even half his eclectic mind on the home hearth.
WILL HONG KONG'S ECONOMY BE DAMAGED?
Alexander Nicoll writes: Hong Kong's financial markets appeared in 1993 to
be oblivious to the deadlock between Britain and China over electoral reform
proposals by Mr Chris Patten, the governor. They are operating as though the
territory is already part of China - of which it will be a Special
Administrative Region from mid-1997. Logic suggests that China, with an
enormous financial stake in Hong Kong's prosperity, will not act to
undermine it - but logic may not always overcome the passions which Hong
Kong stirs in Beijing.
Although Mr Patten's proposals are now destined for anguished debate in Hong
Kong's Legislative Council, it seems likely that the economy will march on
for the time being regardless of bitterness between the present and future
patrons. If Sino-British talks on the practical details of the handover do
not speed up, however, the transition may be bumpy, which could affect the
economy.
Whether the economy will be harmed in the longer term by failure to advance
democracy depends on whether Mr Patten is right to contend that basic
freedoms underpin Hong Kong's economic success. In any case, its economic
performance is increasingly bound up with China's, and thus with whether
Beijing can slow its own economic boom without resorting to severe austerity
measures.
