FT  09 FEB 94 / Jobs: Warning - this weapon can backfire / Time management
has its uses but is unlikely to make you super-efficient in five easy steps
Time management books are like diet books. Both hold out the hope of
changing your life forever: one by making you thin and beautiful, the other
by making you efficient and successful.
Both are surefire publishing successes. Thin-Think, Slim for Life, You Don't
Have to DIET] and Lean Revolution are recent big sellers on the health
shelves, while in the management section are titles such as Better Time
Management, Perfect Time Management, The Complete Time Manager and Manage
Your Time.
Yet there is no proof that people have either lost weight or become more
productive as a result of their improving reading. Indeed, there is some
evidence to suggest the reverse. People who constantly go on diets are
likely to be fat. Similarly those who get fixated on getting the right
events into their Filofaxes or electronic organisers may be letting the
management of time get the better of them.
'You get to the point where too much time management can be a stress in
itself,' says Marge Malcolm, an ex-comprehensive school teacher and founder
of LPC Consultancy. 'People start living by the clock. And if someone jumps
in front of their train in the morning they think, 'What a bloody nuisance,
I'm going to be late.''
Managers who charge round with their personal organisers all day, getting
home shattered at 8pm for specially allocated 'quality' time with their
families are deluding themselves. 'Talk of quality time is escapism', says
Malcolm. 'Its not quality time. It's just time.'
The books are only the tip of the time management iceberg. Time management
courses have become a staple of executive training, and in the last decade
have proved a great money spinner for their providers. So much so that it is
hard to find many managers who have never been sent one.
It is not difficult to understand why both the books and the courses are so
popular. They play on your worst nightmares of being out of control, and
then offer a simple formula that promises to make you master of your time.
The slim volume, Perfect Time Management, begins with the warning that if
you don't manage your time, you will be inefficient, ineffective, won't get
promoted, will be despised by both subordinates and your boss, and will be
first in line to be made redundant.
The answer, according an 'energising one day seminar' entitled How to Manage
Priorities and Meet Deadlines, lies in 24 'power pointers'. These, it
promises, will 'boost your productivity Now]'
The power points consist of tools to combat procrastination, personalised
action plans that take into account your 'natural energy cycle', three easy
steps to spot unrealistic goals, and four easy steps to stop other people
from wasting your time.
If only it were that simple. The techniques of time management are all
sensible enough. Keeping a clear desk, writing lists of priorities, never
handling a piece of paper more than once, reducing the amount of time spent
in meetings, discouraging people from disturbing you, doing telephoning and
memo writing in batches - all these tips make sense. But not everyone can
live like that.
My own experience of time management courses has been a sobering one. I have
been taught how to keep my desk tidy, and how to organise myself. I know all
about colour coding of files and priority setting. I know how to classify
work as important, unimportant, urgent and non-urgent.
Yet my desk is deep with old newspapers and press releases. I have no
consciousness of my priorities: I do whatever seems most pressing at the
time, accepting that I will be interrupted throughout.
Apparently, I am not unusual. Malcolm has consulted 300 managers in the
insurance industry who have attended courses and found that only 10 per cent
have taken the lessons to heart. She argues that such tricks only help
people who are that way inclined anyway. Managers who love making lists may
pick up some further tips on how to make even better ones. But those who are
by nature badly organised may attend the courses and buy the books but will
only add to the piles of paper that already litter their desks.
Malcolm's own approach to time management is more flexible. Despite her
dismissal of more formal techniques, she does believe that even the most
shambolic persons can change their ways. She claims to have helped managers
ranging from undisciplined underwriters to chaotic Oxford dons. She belives
that the answer is to look at each person individually, and to start small.
The first step, she says, is to get each person to draw up two lists and
compare them. One is of what they want to achieve, the other of what they
actually do achieve. Getting people even this far is a challenge - many
managers cannot account for how they spend their time, and need constant
nannying to keep a log for even one day.
Most, she says, are horrified at how much time they waste, particularly in
meetings and interruptions, and are horrified at how far their actual day
departs from the desired one. They are then asked which bits they are
willing to change, and what price they are willing to pay.
'The aim is to try to stop them feeling guilty about what they are not
doing, and to make a few small decisions', she says. The idea is to start by
changing something manageable, like leaving work on time. She advises
managers to make appointments to meet people after work, to ensure they get
out of the door at the appointed hour. She also tells them to give
themselves a reward for compliance.
In many cases changing one small thing works wonders, making people feel in
control, less guilty and less stressed. Once that is accomplished they may
be ready to tackle another task.
Time Manager International, a Danish owned consultancy which since 1975 has
trained over 2m managers worldwide to be more efficient, argues that the
results from time management courses can be more dramatic than Malcolm's
individual drip-drip approach to efficiency.
Chris Lane, chairman of TMI UK, argues that virtually everyone can benefit
so long as the courses are handled right. He says there are two sorts of
people: 'people' people and 'task' people, and what works for one type will
not work for the other.
'Time Management should not be about desks and diaries, but about putting
your head above the morass and saying what is this all about?', he argues.
Lane has a large white board in front of his desk, just in case he should
forget what he himself is trying to do. On it his mission is written in
large letters: he must do good consulting work, he must signal a clear
vision to others in the company, and so on. 'I look up and think: what have
I done today to do those?', he says. Lane reckons this sort of technique
works with everyone: only people who are in deep depressions or who are
going through severe psychological crisis are beyond help.
I imagine a large notice above my desk saying 'My mission is to write more
articles of a consistently higher standard' and wonder what effect it would
have. It would certainly keep my colleagues amused.
