FT  28 JUN 94 / World Trade News: Airlines in plea to Clinton on UK flights
Six US airlines yesterday wrote to President Bill Clinton urging him to
intervene to break the current deadlock in efforts to liberalise airline
services between the US and the UK.
The airlines - including United Airlines, Trans World Airlines, Northwest
Airlines, Federal Express, Tower Air and Unted Parcel Services - are
concerned about the possible repercussions involving transatlantic airline
services should the two countries fail to negotiate a new air agreement this
year.
The US Department of Transportation walked away last December from
negotiations on air liberalisation following the UK's refusal to open up
London's Heathrow airport to all US carriers immediately.
The DOT has also indicated it was not prepared to approve a recent marketing
agreement between Delta Air Lines, the third largest US carrier, and Virgin
Atlantic which would enable Delta to gain access into Heathrow.
In May, Britain said it was ready to approve the transatlantic partnership
between to encourage greater competition and consumer choice on flights from
Heathrow airport to the US market.
Mr John MacGregor, UK transport secretary, has already agreed to approve the
Delta-Virgin deal and has also offered the US airlines greater access into
UK regional airports as well as London's Stansted airport as part of a new
air liberalisation package.
The six US carriers wrote to Mr Clinton saying it was important for the US
to resume negotiations as soon as possible.
Since it was impossible to achieve full and immediate liberalisation, the
airlines suggested the new negotiations should seek 'realistically
obtainable' opportunities in the short term setting the stage for a 'full
open skies regime' in the future.
This approach would appear to meet the UK's long-standing position of a
gradual three-stage process of liberalisation in UK-US air services.
However, the US authorities are under pressure from other airlines,
especially American Airlines, which have pressed Washington to block
negotiations unless the UK opens up Heathrow, the world's largest
international airport.
The initiative of the six US carriers also comes as Mr Clinton's National
Economic Council is about to make recommendations to the White House on
whether to renounce the current air agreement between the two countries.
This could lead to cuts in the number of flights between the US and the UK.
