FT  24 FEB 94 / Lilley signed Matrix 'gag' order after opposing trial
Mr Peter Lilley agreed to restrict information wanted by the defence in the
Matrix Churchill court case even though he believed the trial should not go
ahead, the Scott arms-for-Iraq inquiry heard yesterday.
Mr Lilley, now social security secretary, signed a public interest immunity
(PII) certificate in the committal proceedings of the Matrix Churchill trial
after his officials dissuaded him from attempting to stop it.
'It was pointed out to me that it would be quite improper for a minister to
interfere with an independent prosecuting authority (Customs). Had I
interfered, I think there would have been a very different inquiry going on
now,' Mr Lilley said.
He said that while serving as trade secretary he had concluded that the
prosecution would 'certainly fail' after learning that one of the
businessmen being prosecuted had been working for British intelligence.
He had also accepted a key aspect of the defence case - that businessmen
charged with illegally exporting arms to Iraq had carried out their
activities on the basis of advice given to them by Mr Alan Clark, a former
trade minister.
Mr Lilley defended his signing of a PII certificate on the basis that there
was a 'collective ministerial responsibility' to protect the confidentiality
of advice given to ministers by officials.
'You can't unilaterally blow a hole in it (the system of PIIs) and expect to
remain on board the ship,' he said after being asked by Lord Justice Scott
whether he had any discretion not to sign.
Mr Lilley also said he been advised by government lawyers that none of the
documents he was attempting to suppress would have any 'significant
relevance' in the Matrix Churchill case.
However, the legal position of ministers signing PII certificates was again
challenged by Lord Justice Scott, who made it clear that he considers the
subject a central issue of his inquiry.
With his counsel, Ms Presiley Baxendale QC, referring to specific documents
covered by Mr Lilley's certificate, the judge questioned the necessity of
the minister signing a 'class claim' covering suppression of a wide range of
Whitehall documents, some of which the defence claimed were vital to ensure
a fair trial. Mr Lilley said he had once questioned why, as a minister, he
had no more power than that of 'a limited role in classifying documents',
but did not receive a 'satisfactory answer'.
The minister's evidence last night fuelled the Labour party's growing
offensive against the government over the Scott inquiry.
Mr Robin Cook, Labour's shadow trade and industry secretary, said it
'beggared belief' that a cabinet minister knew the Matrix Churchill
prosecution was a 'mistake' but could do nothing to 'stop a trial that could
have put innocent men in prison'.
