FT  24 DEC 94 / A first saint for Down Under: Nikki Tait tells of an
Australian woman about to be beatified
Candles will burn a little more brightly this Christmas in Penola, a small
town in rural South Australia.
A 19th-century nun called Mary MacKillop, whose quarrels with the Roman
Catholic Church prompted a temporary excommunication, is due to be beatified
by Pope John Paul II in Sydney next month. She will become Australia's, and
Penola's, first saint.
Mary MacKillop - or Sister Mary of the Cross, as she was known - looks
likely to prove a popular figurehead. In a country which has always admired
gritty pragmatism rather than cloistered intellectualism, and has a soft
spot for well-meaning rebels, she fits the bill nicely.
The elevation is timely. Despite the general decline in institutionalised
religion in many western countries, Australia is one place where Catholicism
appears to be on the rise. More than 27 per cent of Australians, or 4.6m
people, gave this as their faith in the 1991 census, making it the country's
largest religion.
This was not always the case. In the mid-1970s, for example, the number of
Anglicans outstripped Catholics, despite the country's Irish and southern
European links. But Australia's population rose by about 24 per cent in
1976-91, while the number of Catholics increased by a third.
Her gender also may help the Church. As Ms Janet West, an Anglican
historian, pointed out recently: 'The Catholic Church has witnessed an
erosion of support from younger women accustomed to greater equality in
society at large.'
What's more, Mary MacKillop's elevation is seen in some quarters as a
further sign that Australia is 'coming of age'. Debate over the country's
constitutional ties to the British crown and the possible redesign of the
Australian flag is vigorous.
These are plainly secular matters but the notion that the country should
have its own saint plays to the same sensibilities.
'Beatification . . . will be one more sign of Australia's maturity,'
concluded Lesley O'Brien, author of a recently published biography of
MacKillop. 'It will be clear that the Australian Catholic Church is not an
outpost of the European Church, but an arm of the universal Church, with its
own identity.'
MacKillop was born in Melbourne in 1842, the daughter of first-generation
Scottish immigrants. She moved to Penola in her late teens as a governess,
where she met Father Julian Woods, an English-born parish priest who had
worked as a journalist on The Times in London.
They established the Order of the Sisters of St Joseph, with the aim of
bringing Catholic education to poorer communities. Later, they opened
women's refuges and orphanages.
The fiercely egalitarian outlook of the order and its refusal to accept
diocesan control brought MacKillop into conflict with the Church
establishment. In 1871, she was excommunicated. The ban was lifted fairly
quickly but she continued to battle the authorities for several decades.
Only in 1888 were the Josephites formally recognised as an Order and their
constitution approved. Mary died in 1909.
The campaign for sainthood has been under way for more than half a century.
It began in the 1920s but was halted when earlier, unsubstantiated
allegations of alcoholism resurfaced.
Her cause was pressed again from the 1950s. This year, the Vatican formally
recognised her role in one miracle - the cure of a woman suffering from
leukaemia. Beatification was agreed.
According to local church authorities, this will mean that she may be
revered as a saint in Australia - she will have her own saint's day, for
example. However, another miracle needs to be accepted before she can be
canonised and fully recognised as a saint within the Catholic Church.
A local industry built around the recalcitrant nun is thriving. Her life
story featured in a recent Qantas in-flight magazine, a documentary about
her beatification has been aired by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation,
a film of her story, backed by the Australian Film Finance Corporation, is
in cinemas, and several paperback biographies are in the bookstores.
Nowhere is this surge in interest more marked than at the Mary MacKillop
Secretariat in North Sydney, where the Josephites are based. An office
groans with paraphernalia ranging from postcards and pamphlets to a
specially designed toile fabric.
