FT  21 NOV 94 / Survey of the World Nuclear Industry (9): Shortage of
options / A look at waste disposal
Where to store nuclear waste: that is perhaps the most difficult question
the nuclear industry must answer in making a case for itself.
Environmentalists focus on it, seeing it as the weak link in any argument
for nuclear power; they argue that it is immoral to leave a form of
pollution which will persist for tens of thousands of years for future
generations to solve.
The nuclear industry has traditionally countered this stance by pointing out
that nuclear waste can be neatly contained in barrels, unlike atmospheric
pollution from burning fossil fuels, a rival source of energy. But where
should the barrels be stored? That question has not yet been answered
conclusively.
There is some urgency in finding solutions. Even though civil nuclear
programmes are on hold in many western countries which were previously
enthusiastic - notably in Germany, the US and Britain - the operation of
existing reactors continues to generate waste which needs disposal.
Moreover, the eventual dismantling of the reactors will produce large
volumes of waste, from lightly-contaminated concrete hulks to
intensely-radioactive reactor rods. Some countries, such as Britain, also
have nuclear submarines which need to be scrapped.
But pressure from public and environmentalists is narrowing the range of
disposal routes. Under amendments in the past two years to international
conventions on marine pollution, the option of disposing of even low-level
radioactive waste at sea has been suspended for at least a decade. That
leaves a variety of land-based techniques, but despite their investigation
by many different countries, there is no agreement about the best option.
A decade ago, it seemed that reprocessing used or 'spent' nuclear fuel would
be the ideal. Reprocessing extracts reusable uranium and plutonium from fuel
rods, leaving a much smaller volume of waste. The UK and France, with large
civil programmes, began years ago to invest heavily in reprocessing
capacity. However, since then the price of uranium has fallen sharply.
Concern has also grown internationally that the greater the amount of
plutonium created, the more likely that some is diverted to bomb-making.
Other storage options are cheaper, many have argued, but bring their own
political and technical problems. The UK and Germany have investigated
permanent deep storage - depositing the waste hundreds of metres underground
 -at Sellafield in Cumbria and at the Gorleben salt mines. This option is
likely to be cheaper than storage on the surface because it needs little
surveillance and is secure from terrorist attack.
It also has political attractions - it appears to offer a permanent solution
rather than leaving it for future generations. But in Germany, controversy
over the choice of location has widened into an impassioned row about the
future of the nuclear power industry, which has stalled development of the
site.
There are also considerable geological problems: it is hard to find a site
without fissures or water seepage which will contain the waste safely for
the next 10,000 years. Such considerations have already prolonged the
investigations of UK Nirex, the company charged by the UK government with
finding a deep disposal site for low-level and intermediate-level
radioactive waste.
Such concerns lead many environmentalists, such as the pressure group
Greenpeace, to back the option of storing waste on the surface. This route
is more expensive, but does allow the waste to be closely monitored, and
keeps permanent disposal options open.
Others, such as Scottish Nuclear, one of the two UK nuclear generators,
favour a hybrid of the two techniques for accommodating highly radioactive
waste. Scottish Nuclear has vigorously backed 'dry storage' for spent fuel:
keeping used fuel rods on the surface surrounded by inert gas for 50 years
until the radioactive content and heat fall to a point where the rods can be
stored underground.
Those debates, in which political, economic and scientific considerations
are enmeshed together, are far from resolved. Indeed, in several western
countries a stalemate has been reached.
The only route forwards which appears to be acceptable to western publics is
to put nuclear waste on sites already occupied by nuclear installations -
Sellafield is a case in point.
If countries cannot resolve the debate about location domestically, they may
investigate whether other countries will accept their waste, or at least
store it temporarily while processing it into a different form. British
Nuclear Fuels, owner of the UK's Thorp reprocessing plant in Sellafield, has
made no secret of its opinion that the UK should capitalise on its expertise
in handling nuclear waste.
The new factor which could ease such stalemates in the west, however, is the
Asian embrace of civil nuclear power. Asia is beginning to produce large
volumes of waste and the next two decades will see the different techniques
for treatment and disposal vigorously explored and refined. That may allow
western governments and nuclear industries, from a vantage point
uncomplicated by domestic politics, to make a more thorough assessment of
the answer to nuclear power's trickiest problem.
