FT  21 OCT 94 / Arts: Delusions of dance - Clement Crisp reviews Momix
Momix is the name of a cattle-food. It is also the name given by Moses
Pendleton to the group of five gymnasts he directs, who are offered to the
world as dancers. The word 'choreography' is used in the programme to
describe their little numbers. The words 'dance', 'illusion', 'satire' are
found in their publicity. I would venture that the satire lies in their
illusion that they dance.
I saw Momix on Wednesday night at Sadler's Wells as a ten day season got
under way. I did not see all the programme, finding it impossible to remain
for the latter part of Passion, their chief offering, since by then Momix'
activities had induced symptoms I associate with having eaten a spoiled
oyster. So my comments relate to about two-thirds of the evening. It may be
that, thereafter, blazing theatrical genius fired the event. It may also be
that the members of Momix (2m; 3f) are Equerries and Ladies in Waiting to
the Queen of Peru.
The programme offers gymnastic exploits and a few skimpy costumes - stretch
fabric - in brief scenas of unfathomable purpose. One man exercises on a
table; three girls do a Page Three with balloons; someone is involved with a
rope, which gives the audience a chance to giggle. Bodies assume shapes
curious but far from intriguing. The accompaniment is rock blare.
One number, Alan Boeding's Circle Walker is memorably revived from a
previous visit. Boeding has made a handsome structure which is a metal
circle whose lower half is set at right angles to its upper part and joined
by curved struts. There results a sculptural and free-wheeling object inside
which Terry Pexton moves and poses. It is an imaginatively fascinating
concept. Pexton becomes an heroic figure, part Icarus as he stands high on
the circle's edge, part Sisyphus as he pushes it, both master and prisoner
of the wheel, and we see fascinating possibilities for dance and for
choreographic exploration of willed and involuntary momentum. It is grown-up
activity, a phrase I cannot use about the rest of the evening.
The show is, I'd hazard, ideal for those in their early 'teens. There is
relentless pop music, played before the performance and in the interval -
and also in the Wells' cafeteria. The performers have fine physiques, and
there is a topless moment to intrigue the younger lads. Passion, the main
item of the evening, has music of vast banality by Peter Gabriel, and, for
as long as I watched, was pointless - unless the sight of the cast bent in
half and clutching their buttocks was a message about the terrors of
haemorrhoids. Perhaps this was the satire we were promised by the
advertisements. It certainly wasn't the dance.
Momix is at Sadler's Wells until October 29.
