FT  09 DEC 94 / UK Company News: Insurers left adrift after losing their
selling ties - The future for Standard Life and Guardian Royal has been
doubly disrupted
Many life insurance companies feel they have taken a battering over the past
year or so.
Sales have been hit by public concern about standards of selling, and the
sector faces a heavy task in identifying and compensating the victims of bad
advice to buy personal pensions.
Companies are also redesigning their policies and, in some cases, cutting
margins ready for the new regulatory regime requiring them to disclose more
information to customers about products and charges.
Against this generally bleak background, two life companies - Standard Life,
the UK's largest mutual life insurer, and Guardian Royal Exchange, the
composite insurance group - face a particular 'double whammy' in how they
sell their policies.
Both are losing the links which allowed them to sell through the branch
networks of the UK's two biggest building societies. At the same time
competition among insurers to sell through independent financial advisers,
their other main sources of sales, is intensifying as the number of advisers
falls.
In September last year Halifax, the UK's largest society, said it was ending
its tie with Standard and setting up its own life insurance and unit trust
subsidiaries. These will become operational in January.
This spring, Nationwide Building Society announced it was to stop selling
Guardian policies and setting up wholly owned life and unit trust
operations, which are due to open in the middle of next year.
In each case, the insurer is saying goodbye to a substantial amount of
business. Halifax is thought to provide about 20 per cent of Standard's new
life business. For Guardian the blow is even more serious. In 1993, 30 per
cent of its new life business came through Nationwide.
Although clearing up after the personal pensions debacle and meeting the
rising cost of regulators' requirements are taking their toll of independent
advisers, both Standard and Guardian sound optimistic.
'While the sector will probably shrink in terms of the numbers of
independent adviser companies, with smaller ones going to the wall, I don't
think that necessarily means their share of the market is bound to
decrease,' said Mr Richard Wood, marketing director of Guardian. 'Those
which survive will become more efficient and get more customers.'
Mr Tom King, sales general manager at Standard Life, said those leaving the
market may represent only about 2-4 per cent of the premium income generated
by independent advice.
However, the departures, and the pressures leading others to join together
to share costs, are concentrating the market in the large firms and networks
of independent advisers, which can decide on a panel of six to eight life
companies from which their advisers can choose for any particular product.
'If you're not on the panel you're wasting your time going out to individual
advisers,' said Mr King. 'An individual adviser would have to come up with a
special reason for ignoring head office.'
Standard said it was well placed to be on panels. Guardian admitted it had a
problem.
'We are on virtually all panels for protection policies such as critical
illness cover,' said Mr Wood. 'But our investment performance has made it
more difficult to get on to panels for investment policies.'
He believed Guardian's future would be helped by strong general insurance
product and other new policies being developed.
New policies are part of Standard's plans as well. Its announcement last
month that it would provide better early surrender values for long-term
policies, while continuing to pay commission as now to advisers, was seen by
competitors as an aggressive move to grab market share.
But the distribution squeeze also means both companies are gradually
building up direct sales forces.
Guardian's direct sales force is now growing slowly, after falling to 180
from its peak of more than 1,000 in 1990. Standard's direct sales force has
grown from nothing in 1990 to 330.
Mr King said that in three to five years time he would like direct sales to
generate about 25 per cent of new business. The aim would be to run on the
same cost basis as sales through independent advisers, but Mr King admitted
that this had not yet been achieved.
Though the plans for larger direct sales forces make sense in terms of
expanding distribution, both companies are embarking on them as regulation
makes running sales agents more expensive. And the new disclosure
requirements together with the generally low levels of investment returns
make controlling costs more important.
If Standard and Guardian can come through these immediate pressures, they
will be well-placed for the following years when the prospects for new
business are likely to improve. Even so, it is a test neither would have
sought.
