FT  09 NOV 94 / DNA drugs can save 'millions of lives'
Vaccines and other drugs derived from biotechnology have the potential to
save millions of lives, especially in developing countries, and to combat
diseases ranging from cholera to cancer and Aids, according to scientists
advising the World Health Organisation.
Sir Gustav Nossel of the Royal Melbourne Hospital, Australia, said yesterday
that genetically-engineered (recombinant) drugs were 'purer and safer' than
conventional vaccines, highly effective and could be manufactured in large
quantities. Far from introducing additional regulations to control such
drugs, the need was to make them as widely available as possible, he said.
Sir Gustav was speaking near the end of a three-day meeting, which he
chaired, on the safety and ethics of using recombinant DNA vaccines and
drugs to tackle disease. He said the meeting, which brought together
doctors, scientists, ethical experts and consumer and industry
representatives, had found no innate disadvantages in the use of
genetically-engineered products compared with conventional ones and many
benefits.
Recombinant DNA products already in use include hepatitis B vaccine, insulin
and erythropoietin, which helps patients dependent on artificial kidneys.
Products in the pipeline include vaccines against cholera, typhoid, Aids,
certain cancers such as melanoma and birth control drugs producing temporary
infertility in women and men.
A new whooping cough vaccine that would avoid the 'nasty' reaction now shown
by one in 2,000 children could be available 'quite soon', Sir Gustav said.
Clinical trials on a drug to combat genital herpes were well advanced.
The WHO pointed out that some of these products, such as erythropoietin,
could not be made by conventional means while manufacture of insulin once
required the slaughter of 30m pigs a year.
The UN agency sees some of the biggest benefits coming in developing
countries where up to 12m people die each year from infectious diseases. The
hope is that genetically engineered vaccines may overcome the limitations of
existing vaccines.
The new drugs tend to be far more expensive than their conventional
counterparts. But delivery costs, which account for 90 per cent of the cost
of immunising a child, could be slashed by development of heat-stable
vaccines which do not need expensive refrigeration and 'one-shot' vaccines
giving protection from several diseases in a single dose.
Cancer vaccine to be tested, Page 12
