FT  26 AUG 94 / The bear has a sore head: Russia's healthcare system faces
collapse. Linda Bilmes and John Lindquist examine the political struggle
over reform
As the healthcare debate in Washington nears a climax, an equally fierce
struggle is getting under way in Moscow. Faced with a growing public health
crisis, President Boris Yeltsin issued a decree requesting the Russian
ministry of privatisation to tackle healthcare. Its proposals are now being
debated in the health committee of the duma (lower house of parliament); if
implemented, they will result in radical market-based reforms.
If one thing has brought home to Russians the disastrous decline in their
economy over the past three years, it is the near-collapse in the country's
public health system. Since 1992, male life expectancy has fallen from 63 to
59 years - 14 years below the average in countries belonging to the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Rising infant
mortality, and a jump in stress-related deaths such as heart attacks,
alcohol poisoning, as well as suicide and homicide, are all responsible for
the decline. In addition, infectious diseases almost forgotten in the west,
such as diphtheria and typhoid, have become common. Last year, for the first
time since the second world war, more Russians died than were born.
'Russia's trends since 1991,' says demographic expert Mr Nicholas Eberstadt
of the American Enterprise Institute, 'have been very much like a country
convulsed by war.'
The public health crisis follows a precipitous drop in spending. Funding for
healthcare in Russia was already low by international standards - about 3
per cent of gross domestic product compared with 6 per cent in the UK and 12
per cent in the US. For the past two decades that 3 per cent has been
misspent, thanks to financial incentives which reward inefficiency and poor
treatment. Over the 12 months of 1991, however, real healthcare spending
dropped by 39 per cent. Despite the introduction of employer-paid compulsory
medical insurance, real expenditure in 1994 is still expected to be at least
10 per cent below 1991 levels.
Lack of money has led to a freeze on capital investment, at a time when the
condition of most Russian hospitals is appalling. A quarter lacks sewer
connections, a fifth is without central heating, and nearly half does not
even have a bath or shower on the premises. One leading hospital in Moscow
has resorted to putting cats into the operating theatres to control mice and
vermin.
These problems are set to worsen. Russian enterprises, which have
traditionally provided a decent quality of healthcare for employees and
their familes, are getting rid of 'social assets' such as hospital beds to
compete more effectively in the new market economy. They have already
reduced their share of beds from 10 per cent to less than 3 per cent of the
total, and will soon begin to phase out their 'polyclinics' (which combine
general practitioners and specialists).
One of the most serious aspects of the crisis is the drastic reduction in
the supply of essential drugs. In 1992, Russia produced 59 per cent of its
requirements for cardiovascular drugs, with most of the remainder imported
cheaply from eastern Europe. By 1993, Russia produced only a third of these
drugs and due to hard currency imports met only 65 per cent of total demand.
Because of the collapse of distribution, the ministry of health estimates
that 45 per cent of demand for basic drugs will go unfilled.
The result is the rapid development of a black market in healthcare. Prices
are quoted freely for most procedures; you can pay a set fee (to a hospital
official, doctor, or even a worker in the laundry) to jump waiting lists for
operations; and even children and pensioners, who are supposed to receive
free medicine, must pay for the most basic drugs. Doctors supplement their
official salaries of Pounds 100 per month with under-the-table payments from
patients. In the case of specialists, these payments can increase their
earnings as much as tenfold. Almost every hospital service can require a
'tip' - even a bedpan has its price.
Reformers have now placed healthcare at the top of Russia's political
agenda. They blame the communist system for a legacy of poor healthcare,
while hardliners see the current crisis as a byproduct of reform. 'Our
opponents will try to use this issue for a fantastic political battle
between communist politicians and reformers,' says deputy privatisation
minister Mr Dmitri Vasiliev, one of the architects of Russia's privatisation
programme. 'But if we can find a mechanism to improve quality, it will be a
major political advantage, showing that reformers can improve people's
lives.'
Ironically, among Mr Yeltsin's most intransigent opponents to reform of the
system are the communists who run the ministry of health. Already bruised by
decentralisation measures three years ago, and reluctant to give up more
power, the ministry has failed to offer any plan for improvement.
Consequently it is the privatisation ministry which has become the driving
force of reform.
Its draft 'Law on Privatisation of Health Facilities, Pharmacies, Medical
Supplies and Pharmaceutical Industries' would enable healthcare providers to
choose one of three routes: they could become non-profit organisations,
limited partnerships, or joint stock companies. The proposals would not
completely privatise healthcare providers but would permit them to become
semi-private hybrids with greater autonomy. The idea is to enable hospitals
to become a Russian version of the UK's National Health Service Trusts, run
and managed by doctors, with the land and buildings leased from the state.
The Trust could seek partners in the private sector, among companies
affiliated with the medical sector (drug companies, medical insurers,
equipment suppliers).
In polyclincs, the aim is to introduce greater competition and patient
choice. For example, individual doctors would be able to set up on their own
as general practitioners. Polyclinics could also opt for one of the
privatisation routes. The duma would need to pass legislation to enable
non-profit organisations to be created.
The new law would require the new healthcare entity to pledge to provide
free healthcare to the local population, maintain capacity, and provide
training as required by the ministry of health.
In the pharmaceutical industry the government is likely to retain a
controlling stake for the time being. Pharmacies, wholesalers, and
manufacturers of drugs and medical equipment would be privatised, according
to the existing laws on state-owned assets, already applied in most other
sectors of the economy. This aspect of the privatisation ministry's plan is
a crucial step in helping to unblock the supply of drugs. Similar
privatisation measures among food wholesalers increased the supply of fresh
vegetables by up to 40 per cent.
The ministry believes that by introducing market mechanisms, health
providers will have an incentive to rectify problems such as excessive
hospitalisation (the average length of stay in hospital is about 22 days),
little attention to screening and disease prevention, and unsympathetic,
surly care. However, this is the first time that it has attempted to apply
market forces to a social service. 'Our approach to privatisation in the
social sphere fundamentally differs from the material one in its aims and
objectives,' says Mr Vasiliev. 'We want to provide better services to the
population, and the basic means to achieve this is by introducing
competition.'
Mr Vasiliev admits that the privatisation ministry's current thinking is
'very very rough'. But he is adamant any new healthcare system must
guarantee universal access and special protection for children, pensioners,
and needy groups. 'In truth, rich people can pay but the system doesn't work
at all for the majority of people,' says Mr Vasiliev.
Ms Natasha Sipiashvili, a ministry representatives on the duma health
committee, says the draft proposals will be discussed in committee during
the autumn. 'In our experience,' she says, 'the duma won't refuse to discuss
a controversial topic. They just won't move forward. But in this case,
President Yeltsin himself is interested, so the discussions are likely to
receive attention.' The ministry aims to secure the enactment of a
healthcare reform bill by next year.
One complication is finance. Russia is still struggling to implement a 1991
law which decentralised healthcare funding to the regions and introduced
compulsory medical insurance - a 3.6 per cent payroll tax paid by employers.
The insurance scheme was supposed to become a significant source of revenue
but it has not. According to Dr John LeSar, who has just completed two years
as director of environment and health for the US Agency for International
Development in Moscow, 'the main problem is the complete lack of skills in
the insurance sector, and in contracting, building statistical databases on
costs, and managing the funds and transfers. Also, the system is seriously
underfunded.'
In the first half of 1994, compulsory medical insurance funds covered 20 per
cent to 50 per cent of official health expenditure, varying by region, with
the remainder financed by local and national government. However, the tax is
garnering only 70 per cent or less of expected revenues. According to a
study by the Boston Consulting Group, even if yields could be increased to
95 per cent, it would require a 20 per cent boost in local government
spending, or an increase in the tax to 5 per cent, to restore Russia's
healthcare spending to 1991 levels. 'Without changing the financial
picture,' says Mr Vasiliev, 'it will not be possible to accomplish our
objectives.'
The conservative duma, facing elections in December next year, will be
watching public opinion closely. At present, opinion is finely balanced. In
a recent nationwide poll, 55 per cent of respondents said they were not
satisfied with healthcare in Russia (29 per cent were satisfied); the reason
most frequently cited is the shortage of medicine. One the other hand, 54
per cent of respondents agreed with the statement that 'the healthcare
system in Russia is basically sound and the problems are only temporary',
and 52 per cent agreed that 'allowing individuals and businesses to run the
healthcare system will only make healthcare unaffordable for most Russians.'
Nevertheless, both the public and the medical profession seem willing to
give market forces a try. In a separate survey, seven out of 10 doctors said
that 'competition among healthcare providers would result in better care at
lower costs'. And 78 per cent of the healthcare profession support the Trust
hospitals idea. Among the public, 55 per cent say they would happily go to
such Trust hospitals, regardless of whether they are non-profit or
profit-making.
Perhaps the most striking result in the nationwide poll is the extent to
which Russians are worrying about the future of their healthcare system.
Fully 70 per cent of poll respondents say they worry 'a great deal' that
they 'might be required to pay' for their family's basic care. This figure
cuts across all regional and demographic lines, and rises to 81 per cent who
worry about their ability to pay for a catastrophic illness.
'If I look at the situation in healthcare, and I look at the poll numbers,
and I look at the lack of any credible alternatives, this issue looks like a
clear winner for the reformers,' says Professor Jonathan Hay, an adviser to
the privatisation minister Mr Anatoly Chubais.
The reformers must convince the public that Russia's healthcare problems
stem from years of communist ineptitude: not simply the poor economy. As Mr
Eberstadt points out: 'It's not inevitable economic crisis leads to
healthcare crisis. When Latin America and the Caribbean had a debt crisis,
and their economic output dropped by a third, their levels of mortality did
not just shoot through the roof.'
Some government officials fear that communists and anti-reformers will seize
upon the public's anxiety over healthcare and turn it to their advantage.
'People's anxiety is not organised or vocalised at present,' says Dr LeSar,
'but could easily become so, if the anti-reform movement took up the issue.
All it would take is a catalyst: somebody being turned away from a
privatised clinic, or a cholera epidemic, for this to become an organised
protest.'
With reports of cholera at a Moscow railway station, and confirmed cases in
the south of Russia, there is no doubt that the stakes for the reformers are
high. It is ironic that in both the US and Russia, with vastly different
healthcare systems and approaches to medicine, public health has risen to
the political forefront at the same time. With presidential elections set
for 1996 in both countries, the healthcare issue is unlikely to go away.
The authors, of the Boston Consulting Group, are advising the Russian
government on healthcare reform
