FT  31 DEC 94 / On The Front Line: Khamenei enigma - War and Peace
(Warmongers and Peacemakers)
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei is an 'honest, virtuous, well-informed, courageous,
efficient administrator and religious jurist, enjoying the confidence of the
majority of the people as leader'. He has to be, because those are the
obligatory virtues of Iran's spiritual leader as specified by the country's
constitution.
But not all the world, and especially the western part of it, shares the
views expressed by the authors of the Iranian constitution. The US
Administration has substantially different ideas. It has constructed a
policy of 'containment' towards Iran under Ayatollah Khamenei, designed to
frustrate what it believes are politically hostile intentions, supported by
a military build-up and ultimately the acquisition of nuclear weapons. In
short, senior members of the Clinton administration think that Ayatollah
Khamenei might contemplate going to war in pursuit of his ambitions.
Judged solely on Khamenei's public statements, the Americans might have a
point. He has described the US as the pinnacle of sedition and corruption.
He advocates spreading the message of Islamic revolution. He vigorously
supports the fatwa condemning writer Salman Rushdie to death. As for the
Middle East peace process, the ayatollah argues that 'those taking part in
this treason will suffer the wrath of nations'.
From this it would seem fair to conclude that Khamenei is a worthy successor
to Ayatollah Ruollah Khomeini, his theological and political mentor. It was
not so clear five years ago when Ayatollah Khomeini died. Despite having
served as Iran's president, Khamenei was still only a middle-ranking
clergyman with several more senior Islamic jurists ahead of him as possible
spiritual leaders. And he was considered, even within Iran, to represent the
more pragmatic face of the Islamic revolution. Together with Hojateslam Ali
Akbar Rafsanjani, who succeeded Khamenei as president, there was deemed to
be the prospect of a more moderate Iran seeking its way back into the family
of nations.
Exhausted by the eight-year war with Iraq, it was not unreasonable to hope
that the sharpest edge of the Iranian revolution had been blunted. The
country needed a period of calm to bind the wounds of war, absorb the impact
of radical political change, and begin rebuilding its economy.
Much rested on the ability of Ayatollah Khamenei and President Rafsanjani to
work together. Western experts spent long hours attempting to decide whether
the two men were different sides of the same political coin, or locked in a
struggle for power. Whatever the judgment, Khamenei has come out ahead,
while economically and politically Iran has fallen further behind.
International debts have mounted, the economy has contracted, unemployment
and poverty have worsened.
But the rhetoric of the leadership is little changed, and Iran still looks
hopefully around the region for the emergence of Islamic regimes with which
it can ally itself.
Weapons and financial aid are available to deserving causes, while the
Iranian propaganda machine continues to assail neighbouring monarchies and
other western-oriented governments. Khamenei may have compelling reasons for
not wanting to involve his country in another war, but remains responsive to
others pursuing the cause of Islamic revolution.
