FT  15 NOV 94 / German citizenship proposals under fire
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's new government was yesterday accused of doing too
little to help integrate Germany's 6.8m foreigners.
As Mr Kohl presented his programme for the next four years in government,
opposition parties homed in on the one issue which had caused the three
coalition partners the most difficulties in their talks over the past three
weeks.
The new government will introduce laws which will give foreign children
German nationality until they are 18. They must then choose whether to keep
their parents' nationality or to continue with German nationality.
Mr Rudolf Scharping, the leader of the opposition Social Democrat party,
said the changes amounted to a 'political and legal nothing'.
The Inter-Cultural Council in Germany said: 'This attempt, allegedly to make
integration of foreigners easier, will do nothing to change the fact that 7m
foreigners live in this country with diminished rights.'
The programme also outlines measures to combat unemployment while keeping a
tight control on government expenditure.
After almost three weeks of negotiation between his Christian Democratic
Union, its more conservative Bavarian sister party, the Christian Social
Union, and the liberal Free Democratic party (FDP), the government has
pledged to reduce federal bureaucracy by at least 1 per cent a year - around
13,000 jobs - and do all it can to increase privatisation at state and
municipal level.
Efforts will also be made to reduce the proportion of gross national product
consumed by government spending from 51 per cent to 46 per cent, where it
was before German reunification in 1989.
Laws to combat crime would be updated and efforts made to introduce
Europe-wide measures.
The new cabinet is expected to contain 16 ministers, two fewer following
fusion of the education and science ministries and the ministries for family
and women. No important changes are expected, but Mr Kohl would not name his
new team until he has been confirmed as chancellor in a Bundestag vote
today.
The FDP, which has been under pressure to cede ministries following its poor
election result, will hold on to the foreign, economics and justice
ministries.
It remained unclear whether Mr Gunter Rexrodt, FDP economics minister, would
keep his job or have to give way to forces within the party who want him
out.
Feverish speculation continued yesterday about whether Mr Kohl would be
re-elected as chancellor given that he can only afford to give away four
votes without losing the absolute majority.
