FT  28 DEC 94 / Violence raises concern over future of Karachi: Farhan
Bokhari on the unrest which has claimed 170 lives this month in Pakistan's
business capital
Karachi's worst outbreak of factional, ethnic and sectarian violence in
recent memory has led to fresh tensions between India and Pakistan and
raised concerns over the future of Pakistan's business capital.
The violence, which Pakistan claims has been fomented by Indian agents and
which has led to the closure of the Indian consulate in Karachi and the
expulsion by both countries of two diplomats, has claimed at least 170 lives
this month. More than 650 people have been killed this year.
In two recent incidents, the bullet-riddled corpses of four paramilitary
troopers were discovered blindfolded and tortured with their hands tied
behind their backs and shot at close range. No one claimed responsibility.
The next day, a group of nervous off-duty policemen blindly pointed their
guns towards a side street and fired in response to celebratory shots fired
in the air by people in a marriage party. The bridegroom and best man died.
The base of the country's vital port facilities, Karachi is home to the head
offices of some of the country's largest business groups and financial
empires.
Many foreign businesses, including multinational corporations, banks and
stock market investment groups, are also based in the city and have a stake
in its future.
Many businessmen, fear the security crisis could affect investment
decisions.
The violence has already hit the heart of that confidence.
The KSE-100 index of the Karachi Stock Exchange has fallen by almost 15 per
cent in two months, while many small shopkeepers claim that sales have
fallen by up to a half.
Fears for personal safety run high, and confidence in the ability of the
police to reverse the trend stands at an all-time low. Many foreign
governments have advised their citizens to avoid travel to the city.
'The business activities in Karachi are coming down day by day, and if this
situation is not brought under control, we fear that in coming weeks the
activities may (come to a) standstill,' says Mr Ahmed Sattar, president of
the powerful Karachi Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Pakistan's largest
business chamber.
The violence has escalated rapidly since the government pulled out army
troops from Karachi last month, ending a controversial 29-month operation
which was criticised by human rights activists for excesses against
civilians. But the withdrawal has given an opportunity to well armed
political and religious groups to settle scores.
One significant cause of the problem is the continuing crisis caused by a
bloody split in Karachi's largest ethnic political party - the MQM (Mohajir
Qaumi Movement), a group representing Moslems who migrated from India in
1947 at the time of independence from the British raj.
Security officials claim that the rivals have tried assassinating each
others' leaders, to strengthen their own position.
Some of the MQM-related violence has also been ethnic, with the mostly
Urdu-speaking migrants demanding more representation in government jobs than
that given to the Sindhis, who have a majority in the province but mostly in
areas outside the city.
Some of the recent killings are also linked to religious disputes. A group
of Sunni Moslems has been campaigning to have members of the Shia Moslem
minority officially declared non-Moslems.
Despite these factors, government officials primarily accuse intelligence
agencies from India, Pakistan's neighbour and arch-rival, for fomenting much
of the unrest.
Many local businessmen, including Mr Sattar, accept the notion of the
enemy's 'invisible hand' stirring the trouble. But some western diplomats
are less convinced. 'Both India and Pakistan have repeatedly made such
accusations. In Karachi, even if there was some truth, the core problem is
essentially the government's failure to find a political settlement,' one
diplomat says.
The government of Mr Abdullah Shah, the provincial chief minister, with the
support of Ms Benazir Bhutto, the prime minister, and President Farooq
Leghari, has begun negotiations with representatives of the MQM's larger
faction, in an effort to find a political solution.
Some officials are convinced that the key to ending the killings lies with
Mr Altaf Hussain, the movement's leader, who lives in exile in London.
The government wants Mr Hussain to use his influence over his supporters,
who are probably an overwhelming majority among the city's migrant
population, to denounce violent tactics. In return, MQM legislators in the
provincial assembly in Sindh could be offered ministerial slots.
'An agreement could help to bring the MQM in the political mainstream and
put the violence to rest,' says one government official in Karachi.
Officials hope that if Mr Hussain's faction agrees to a settlement, the
rival faction, whose following is much smaller, could be brought around to a
truce.
However, it is not clear if such an agreement would be reached, and if so,
how long it would hold together.
Furthermore, it is also not clear how the government would deal with
sectarian and ethnic violence even if the MQM's two factions silenced their
guns.
Some analysts are convinced that even if the killings are stopped, other
socio-economic problems which plague the city and create the temptation for
crime would be far more difficult to resolve.
In recent years, a combination of growing numbers of unemployed youth
together with a large flow of guns and drugs - a fall-out from the war in
neighbouring Afghanistan - created new temptations.
The city is also a striking example of the stark contrast between the rich
and the poor, with the elite living a life of luxury in fashionable enclaves
while the slum population grows substantially in katchi abadis (shanty
towns).
Ms Sherry Rehman, editor of Karachi's monthly Herald magazine, assessing the
situation, says: 'You can't just give ministries to people and forget about
it. The city needs a comprehensive package covering politics, economics, law
and order, social services.'
