FT  09 MAR 94 / Can Europe Compete?: Rivalries to the rescue in the search
for lost creativity - Diversity
In Italy for 30 years under the Borgias they had warfare, terror, murder,
bloodshed - they produced Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci and the
Renaissance. In Switzerland they had brotherly love, 500 years of democracy
and peace, and what did that produce? The cuckoo clock.' - Orson Welles in
The Third Man.
The historical detail is flawed. The Swiss have fought two civil wars since
the 16th century and did not invent the cuckoo clock. But Welles' monologue,
ad-libbed amid the ruins of 1940s Vienna, contains a poetic truth. Conflict
is a powerful spur to creativity. And diversity is the mother of conflict.
If Europe has a genius, a single defining characteristic, it is diversity.
In no other region is such intense intellectual, cultural and linguistic
variety packed into so small an area. Nowhere has the destiny of so many
nations been more powerfully shaped by continuous rivalry between them.
In some eyes, this is a debilitating heritage. It has, after all, exacted a
cruel price over the centuries in recurrent wars. Now that national
advantage is furthered more by economic than military means, it is
fashionable to decry Europe's heterogeneous structure as a handicap in the
face of the relative homogeneity of Japan and the US.
Has not Japan's economic success been based heavily on management by
consensus and a widely shared sense of national purpose? Has Hollywood not
conquered the world because of the scale economies available from its large
and integrated home market? Surely, logic requires European industry to
respond by closing ranks and presenting a united front to the world?
Such analyses, however, miss the point. At a time when technology and
liberalisation are forcing open markets worldwide, the toughest corporate
challenge is not to achieve global production scale, but to differentiate
products and services and tailor them precisely to widely varying local
demand.
In theory, these trends should work in Europe's favour. First, because
restricted home markets have long compelled ambitious producers to look
beyond their own borders. For many, learning to adapt to unfamiliar
conditions, and incorporating the lessons into their own operations, has
been a prerequisite of expansion.
Secondly, because many of Europe's enduring industrial successes have been
built on intensive specialisation and continuous striving to create and
enhance distinctive competitive capabilities. This is the story of German
capital goods, Swiss precision engineering, Italian luxury products, French
fashion and British pharmaceuticals.
The point was well understood by the authors of the single market programme.
Their intention was never to create a uniformly level playing field
dominated by equally matched industrial monoliths. Rather, by unleashing
fiercer cross-border competition, they aimed to promote specialisation by
freeing resources to flow to where they were most efficiently employed.
But the vision is still far from realisation. European countries continue to
cling to the notion that sovereignty requires a presence in a broad swathe
of industries, almost regardless of the cost.
For all the talk of EU integration, governments obstinately defend the right
of national steel producers to continue losing money and of sleepy
telecommunications monopolies and flagship airlines to charge high prices
for mediocre service.
Nor is such nationalism limited to bigger countries. It was clearly at work
in the decision last year by Swedish shareholders to torpedo the
Renault-Volvo marriage and in the collapse of Alcazar, the planned merger of
Austrian, Dutch, Swiss and Scandinavian airlines.
The result is not simply diminished efficiency, but the duplication across
Europe of largely undifferentiated structures in many industries. Instead of
breeding healthy diversity and creativity, national rivalry has perversely
produced sameness and common weaknesses.
In these circumstances, preserving existing structures wholesale is not
evidence of an ability to compete, but of a refusal to do so. The real test
will be how effectively European economies enhance comparative advantage by
abandoning poor performers and concentrating resources on those activities
which they do best.
