FT  29 JUN 94 / Labour more confident of Smith seat
Labour's confidence was growing yesterday that it would hold Monklands East,
John Smith's former seat near Glasgow, in tomorrow's by-election.
This is in spite of an aggressive campaign by the Scottish National party to
overturn a 15,712 majority and widespread discontent with Labour-run
Monklands District Council, which yesterday led to Mrs Helen Liddell, the
Labour candidate, indirectly challenging Mr Tom Clarke, Labour MP for
neighbouring Monklands West.
Labour's reviving confidence that it will scrape home in the seat is based
partly on an ICM opinion poll published on Monday night which put its
support at 50 per cent, against 43 per cent for the SNP.
This is Labour's largest lead in an opinion poll in the constituency. A poll
taken last week gave Labour a lead of 1.9 percentage points, but a third
gave the SNP a 3.3 point lead. Political observers consider the ICM poll,
conducted among 614 people between June 22 and June 25 for The Scotsman
newspaper and Scottish Television, the most thorough.
The poll also found that 74 per cent of those asked (and 60 per cent of
Labour supporters) believed that people in neighbouring Coatbridge received
a better deal from Monklands District Council than those in Airdrie, the
heart of the constituency. Some 52 per cent believed that their religious
background made a difference to the treatment they received from the
council.
Airdrie, a largely Protestant town, believes that predominantly Catholic
Coatbridge benefits more from the Labour council because most Labour
councillors are Catholic.
Mrs Liddell initially dismissed such allegations as 'tittle-tattle',
although the evidence has been public since 1992. But last week she obtained
confirmation from the council that between 1982 and 1992 Coatbridge received
Pounds 18.8m on 'strategic' capital projects, while Airdrie received
nothing. It was unacceptable, she said.
On Monday Mr Clarke, Labour's overseas development spokesman and a former
provost of Monklands, rejected Mrs Liddell's claims and dismissed criticism
of the council from Tory MPs as largely McCarthyite smears and mythology.
But yesterday Mrs Liddell said she would fight for the people of Monklands
East 'regardless of who I have to fight with. I don't care if I even have to
take on a neighbouring north Lanarkshire MP,' adding prudently 'like the
shadow secretary of state for Scotland,' Mr George Robertson, MP for
Hamilton, who was sitting beside her.
Discontent with the council is the main issue raised on the doorstep
according to canvassers for all parties. It will bring in a lot of support
for Mrs Kay Ullrich, the SNP candidate.
The poll put the Tory candidate, Mrs Susan Bell, on 5 per cent and the
Liberal Democrat, Mr Stephen Gallagher, on 2 per cent.
A victory for the SNP, which won only 18 per cent of the vote in 1992
against Mr Smith's 61 per cent, would be devastating for Labour.
