FT  07 OCT 94 / Arts: Tallis Scholars reach the masses - Richard Fairman
hears works by two very different early music composers
Earlier this year the Tallis Scholars took their Palestrina to Rome. Below
the golden renaissance ceiling of the Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore the
group had been invited to celebrate the 400th anniversary of Palestrina's
death at the heart of the city where he lived and composed.
This was not a private occasion: Gimell, the company set up as the recording
arm of the Tallis Scholars, has issued a live recording of the event on CD
and video, and plans that the video will be sold to television companies
worldwide. A follow-up concert held in the Sistine Chapel, to celebrate the
end of the cleaning of Michelangelo's 'Last Judgment', was shown live on
Italian television and subsequently broadcast in Japan.
Early music - even unaccompanied sacred music - has become big business. To
those who knew this music solely within a religious context it must be
puzzling or even disturbing to watch it being opened up to mass audiences,
researched, recorded, marketed, broadcast in the same manner as any other
public music.
Founded in 1973, the Tallis Scholars were early into the field and have
never let that advantage slip. There is no group to touch them for quality
and professionalism - least of all in Italy, where interest in the great
Italian heritage of Palestrina and even Monteverdi was long ago swept away
by enthusiasm for the Italian opera composers of the 19th century. After
Rome the Tallis Scholars have returned to London. Peter Phillips, the
group's founder, is keen to remind us that not only Palestrina but also
Lassus died in 1594 and has put together a series of concerts pairing these
two very different composers.
At the Queen Elizabeth Hall on Wednesday the first programme included
Palestrina's Missa Papae Marcelli, his most celebrated work, and Lassus's
Penitential Psalm No. 2. Setting Palestrina at his most lucidly radiant face
to face with the darker, more personal probing of Lassus - the sunlit South
of Europe opposed to the gloomy, introspective North - could hardly have
made the contrast between them more striking.
The performances, directed by Phillips, were as flawless as ever. The Tallis
Scholars' characteristic sound, bright and penetrating trained voices with
no vibrato, was accentuated by the dry acoustic of the QEH, where even the
vowels (the 'e' of 'et resurrexit') started with a kick. One way or another
there was a concentration about the singing that set it apart from the
devotional atmosphere of worship. Perhaps that is inevitable when this music
enters the public, professional arena.
The Palestrina and Lassus series continues during the winter at St. John's,
Smith Square.
