FT  18 APR 94 / Arts: A language for the Zulu Tolstoys - Novelist Justin
Cartwright asks if art must be a political weapon in the new South Africa
Up on the slopes of Table Mountain, looking across the Cape Flats towards
the distant purplish mountains, Cape Town University is blessed with a
beautiful campus in a unique setting. The main buildings are built in local
stone; a large figure of Cecil Rhodes gazes north from a comfortable sitting
position. From the arts block, home to John Coetzee and Andre Brink, this
view is marred on closer inspection by the sprawl of the townships and
squatter camps which starts just at the point where the suburbs end and the
wind-swept flatlands begin. It stretches as far as the eye can see along the
once pristine sweep of False Bay. The university and the Cape Peninsula are
now separated from the rest of the country by an isthmus of misery.
It is not surprising with this reminder of the true state of the nation,
this painful contrast between the serene university and the squalid
townships, that teachers of the arts are suffering a crisis of identity. No
academic I spoke to has come to terms with the role of culture in the new
South Africa. With people dying in ever-increasing numbers and a grim
realisation that the new South Africa may in some ways be worse than the
old, the cultural debate has urgency but little cogency.
One of South Africa's finest essayists, Stephen Watson, describes his
feelings one day as he was preparing to lecture at the university: 'I was
forced to realise with a feeling akin to vertigo . . . that I no longer knew
what I was saying.' Watson found himself overwhelmed by the conflicting
claims of university as ivory tower and as 'site of struggle'. In some
degree every academic in the old, white, universities has suffered this
confusion.
The reasons, apart from the sheer scale of the deprivation, are not hard to
understand. Saul Bellow famously asked: where is the Zulu Tolstoy? Here the
questions are, if there is a Zulu Tolstoy, how is he going to come to our
notice? In what language is he going to be published? What - white -
academic is going to unearth him? And what Scandinavian country is going to
subsidise his airfares to international seminars? A number of academics
suggested to me that their work in township poetry, drama and workshops was
their justification for continuing to teach English literature. Others have
shied away from any notion of relevance. The relevance of JM Coetzee's bleak
novels to the South African predicament could hardly be greater, yet his
work is coded and freed of partisan content by being set in placeless and
timeless shadowlands. Nadine Gordimer, by contrast, believes in direct
participation in the cultural and political struggles, both as sponsor of
the Congress of South African Writers and ANC member. Her writing, too, is
clearly set in time and place. If she is sanguine about the prospect of the
ANC becoming just another political party, others find it difficult to
accept that they should now show allegiance to a party after years of
fighting for principles.
But while hundreds of people are dying each week, it is perhaps unsurprising
that the coercive language of progressive thinking is flourishing. In some
quarters the term 'cultural worker' is used without irony to describe anyone
in the arts or teaching fields. That this demonstrates a fondness for the
language of totalitarianism, seems not to worry the ideologues. There is, of
course, resistance to the notion, expressed by the ANC's cultural
department, that the refusal to take sides is itself a form of taking sides.
As Watson says, no artist, indeed no man, is obliged to give up his freedom
by speaking in the language of the day. This is quite a different issue from
the poet Jeremy Cronin's plea in his poem To Learn How To Speak that South
African writers must 'learn how to speak with the voices of the land'. The
one is a legacy of seminars in Eastern Bloc countries, the other is an
artistic desire to find a new South African voice.
At the heart of the marriage between ANC and communists is a historical
compromise which makes it difficult to know where the new government will
stand on many issues. The Marxist element finds culture itself suspect.
Something in its very nature is seen to be elitist. This leads to some
dangerously nave conclusions. The Zulu Tolstoys should not be discriminated
against just because they cannot write English. Some way must be found for
liberating their writing from the hegemony of colonial language.
(Colonialism is a protean term. It covers anything which smacks of
Eurocentrism. One lecturer told me that if she wants to attract an audience
for Jane Austen she includes the word in her description of the course: Jane
Austen, colonial norms in pre-feminist society.) And because the townships
were, as Watson says, the crucibles of resistance, it is logical to believe
that the most responsive art will emerge there. There is little evidence
that this is so. Indeed, with the exodus to the suburbs of the educated it
is unlikely ever to come to pass. Thanks to the struggle and Bantu
Education, no major black literary figures have emerged since the
generations of Lewis Nkosi and Wally Serote. Real progress, Nadine Gordimer
says, has been made in the theatre where black actors are highly
influential. The Market Theatre of Johannesburg has earned a reputation
worldwide for its invigorating and challenging productions.
Albie Sachs, the lawyer and ANC activist who was maimed in a car bombing in
Mozambique in 1988, caused a furore by suggesting in an ANC discussion paper
that culture was not a weapon of the struggle. Perhaps in his travels he saw
too much of socialist realism. The way he puts it is: 'We (the ANC) want to
give leadership to the people, not exercise control over them.' The counter
argument, sometimes explicit, often implicit, is that all hands are required
at the pumps. One poet suggested to me that while artists have personal
freedom, they must study the struggle and learn from it. She seemed not to
have considered the possibility that there could be more than one outcome of
the prescribed study.
The protagonists are going to have something to get their teeth into the
moment the issue of the theatrical and ballet companies and symphony
orchestras is addressed by the new structures. ('Structures' is a word you
cannot avoid in South Africa at the moment.) The bulk of government arts
funding has gone into huge, ugly buildings housing these companies. Largely
white audiences go to see largely white musicians and dancers performing the
works of dead, white males. Sachs himself claims to have attended the Cape
Town Symphony every Thursday religiously since his return in 1991 but he
cannot see how the massive subsidies to foreign musicians can be maintained.
A scramble for realignment is going on, with the old organisations trying
desperately to prove their credentials. For example, the strangely embalmed
Performing Arts Council of the Transvaal has instituted creative workshops
and appointed a black director for the Windybrow Theatre. Township theatre
groups have sprung up. Oral poets are being published. Northern Transvaal
woodcarvers have many new admirers.
Behind this nervous quadrille are worrying questions: Who is to be the
arbiter of taste? Who is to decide what is subsidised and what is dependent
upon the free market? Is it to be the ANC's cultural department, or is it to
be an independent Arts Council? To some this is as important an issue as
whether or not the new government will attempt to force the economy along
statist lines. It is an issue, like so much else in South Africa, which will
depend on which tendency of the ANC triumphs in the next five years.
