FT  01 SEP 94 / Fears of violence stalk Cairo conference: Population
delegates are putting themselves in danger's way, militants warn
The glee with which the Egyptian government originally greeted the UN's
selection of Cairo as host to next week's International Conference on
Population and Development looks increasingly tinged with apprehension, as
the hordes of delegates, journalists and assorted experts start to arrive.
After two years' hitting the headlines for Islamic militant violence,
publicity which devastated its glittering tourism industry, Egypt was able
to point proudly to the conference as evidence of the highest confidence in
its control of domestic security. The prestige of the gathering was also
taken as acknowledgment of Egypt's central role in the Middle East and
Moslem world.
But as Monday's official opening of the conference nears, its hosts have
reason to feel anxious.
Not only has the violent and militant Gamaa al-Islamiyya re-emerged after
several months' relative silence to warn visitors that they 'are putting
themselves in danger's way' by attending, but the debate about the
conference's agenda has suddenly reared into an awkward religious battle
which seems to have caused one of Egypt's staunchest regional allies, Saudi
Arabia, to boycott the affair altogether.
It has put Cairo firmly on the defensive in its domestic political tussle
with Islamic conservatives.
The government has bent every bone to assure the greatest possible security
for the conference, which will attract 15,000 delegates, with an assortment
of prime ministers, vice-presidents and celebrities.
The capital's main routes are dotted with white-uniformed police, and
parking has been banned around the main hotels, which resemble minor
military encampments.
Until a week ago, the Cairo government could claim with some confidence that
it had won the upper hand in its assault on violent Islamic extremists.
Although violence continued in militant hotbeds around Assiut in Upper
Egypt, Gamaa al-Islamiyya had failed to pull off attacks on tourist targets
for almost five months, its flow of faxed warnings had abated and the
capital had for months been free of even minor incidents.
But last Friday, Gamaa re-surfaced to claim credit for an attack on a group
of Spanish tourists in Upper Egypt in which a young Spaniard was killed.
Last weekend it condemned what it called the 'conference on licentiousness'
and made its warning to attending delegates.
The result has been to remind the government, and all those attending the
conference, that however successful the government has been in constraining
militant violence, it has failed to eliminate it.
Few diplomats or other observers in Cairo would therefore pronounce with any
confidence that the next 10 days will pass without a single incident. 'It is
an enormous test,' says a western diplomat. 'The militants will know that
the smallest incident over the next few days will get them big headlines.'
But the headlines surrounding the conference to date have already been
discomfiting enough for the government.
That the conference's proposed final text has become the focus of a furious
battle between Roman Catholic and Moslem conservatives and the majority of
the other 170 states represented at the meeting, who have been working on
the draft for some two years, is embarrassing enough.
It has already led to the boycotts by Saudi Arabia and Sudan, and is likely
to have been a factor in the decisions of Turkey's Premier Tancu Ciller and
Ms Begum Khaleda Zia, Bangladesh's prime minister, not to attend.
Worse, for the government, however, is the ammunition the row over the draft
text has handed Egypt's religious conservatives, particularly the Moslem
Brotherhood, to which President Hosni Mubarak's regime vehemently denies
status as a political party.
The regime has done all it can in recent months to counter the Brotherhood's
increasingly successful infiltration of powerful professional associations,
such as the lawyers' and doctors' syndicates.
The government is suspicious of the Brotherhood's position in relation to
extremist and violent militant groups, despite the Brotherhood's constant
assertion of its moderation.
It recently excluded the Brotherhood from a national political dialogue,
saying it did not exist as a political group. It has done all it can to try
to diminish the Brotherhood's religious and political authority, in favour
of its own state-sanctioned Islamic voice, which has traditionally issued
from the Al-Azhar University mosque, one of Islam's oldest seats of
instruction.
But the Al-Azhar earlier this month handed the government an unpleasant
surprise by condemning the conference as un-Islamic. It accused the draft
text of condoning homosexuality, abortion and pre-marital and adolescent
sex. The Brotherhood promptly agreed with the condemnation, branding the
conference an imperialist attempt by the west to curb population growth in
the Moslem world.
That the row over the draft text has handed the Brotherhood a powerful
political platform is clear from the fact that the government has been
forced to reply, defensively, that it could not condone anything in the
final document which ran contrary to Sharia, or Islamic, law.
'The government cannot oppose the Brotherhood,' says Mr Essam al-Arian, a
doctor and Brotherhood spokesman, 'because society feels we are moderate and
active. They have no choice but to have full dialogue with us.'
The full political consequence of this row for the government, and the
implications for its own population policies will take much longer than the
conference to shake out. Leaders of the Brotherhood have their eyes firmly
on next year's party elections, which they are likely to contest in informal
alliance with the Labour Party.
Meanwhile, the conference hosts can only hope at least for another
incident-free fortnight in Cairo, one which might help to restore the city's
currently fully booked hotels to their former profitability.
