FT  26 SEP 94 / Leading Article: World Bank Group at bay
In the financial year ending June 1994, the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, the commercial lending arm of the World Bank
Group, made net disbursements to developing countries of minus USDollars
731m. Such figures will be meat and drink to its critics. So too will the
fact that administrative expenses have risen 60 per cent over the past six
years, while gross disbursements have stagnated. Inevitably, the Bank is
finding it difficult to convince the public that it knows what it is doing
and is doing it efficiently and effectively.
What makes the task particularly difficult is the changed international
climate. Historically, the Bank had two groups of supporters in industrial
countries: cold-warriors and do-gooders. The first group has now
disappeared, while those who claim to have the interests of developing
countries at heart now condemn the Bank for its stinginess, its
heavy-handedness, its encouragement of environmental despoliation and its
neglect of the cause of the poor.
For all its might, the Bank lacks friends and, lacking friends, is
politically vulnerable. But it will achieve nothing by pretending to be what
it is not. It is a large, international public organisation that must work
with, and through, governments. Its brief is, in essence, to assist
developing countries achieve rapid, poverty-alleviating growth. Again, there
is no huge mystery about how this is to be achieved. East Asian developing
countries have shown the way. The trick - difficult in most places and
hitherto impossible in some, notably in Africa - is to help others follow
the same path.
Economic returns
The Bank must confront its critics. If it is to be blamed for its failures,
it must point to such successes as East Asian development and the green
revolution. It must also reject the notion that its brief is to transfer
resources, something that could be done better by a check-writing machine.
The wasteful use of oil revenues by so many oil-exporting developing
countries demonstrates that the mere availability of money does not ensure
economic development. The question, instead, is whether lending brings
satisfactory economic returns to borrowers.
True, the Bank has made big mistakes: over rural development lending, for
example, the sustainability of the commercial bank lending of the 1970s and
the durability of the 'energy crisis'. It is as important for the Bank to
admit - and learn from - such mistakes as it is to stand up for itself. But
the development record taken as a whole is not so bad. It can, and must, be
defended.
Less bureaucratic
Yet if the Bank is to defend both itself and its core mission, it must also
change. First, it must become leaner and much less bureaucratic. A start has
been made on this. The recent proposal by Mr Lewis Preston, the Bank's
president, to reduce the administrative budget by 6 per cent a year in real
terms, will increase the pressure. Second, it must be more flexible. The one
certainty in its environment is uncertainty. How many, just five years ago,
foresaw the collapse of the former Soviet Union or the torrent of private
capital pouring into middle-income developing countries? Third, it must be
more aggressive with its critics, more aggressive with its clients, and also
more aggressive, when appropriate, on behalf of its clients. The Bank cannot
be all things to all people. If, for example, it believes there ought to be
more generous official debt-relief for Africa, it should say so, loudly and
clearly.
There is much debate inside and outside the Bank about what sort of future
it might have. Some believe the prospect is one of genteel decline, as its
activities are progressively limited to Africa and South Asia. Others
believe it could become an integrator of ideas and money world-wide, even in
countries that do not need its direct financial assistance.
Such choices do not yet have to be made. The challenges of eliminating
extreme poverty and helping to integrate most of humanity within the global
market economy remain huge. Notwithstanding its faults, the Bank represents
a unique - and irreplaceable - repository of experience, skill and financial
resources, dedicated to these tasks. Those assets must be used effectively.
Their appropriate use must also be vigorously defended. These are the twin
challenges confronting Mr Preston.
