FT  01 SEP 94 / World Trade News: Rolls-Royce seeks bigger Airbus share
Rolls-Royce, the British aero-engine manufacturer, is seeking to win a
greater share of the European Airbus market after two decades in which it
favoured supplying engines for rival US aircraft manufacturers including
Boeing and Lockheed.
The move reflects the UK company's reassessment of the growing penetration
by Airbus of the market for large aircraft. Airbus has now secured about 30
per cent of the world market and set itself a target to increase this share
to 50 per cent over the next decade, according to Mr Jean Pierson, the
Airbus chief executive.
Rolls-Royce, which is expected to report higher first-half profits today, at
present only provides the Trent 700 engine for the Airbus A330 twin-engine
wide-body airliner, although it participates with other companies in the
V2500 engine powering the smaller A320 and A321 twin-engine narrow-body
airliners.
The UK company's hopes hinge on the development of a new 40,000lb thrust
engine to equip a new larger-range version of the A340 four-engine wide-body
aircraft. This is currently powered only by CFM engines jointly manufactured
by General Electric of the US and Snecma of France.
This new engine could also have applications for advanced versions of the
older A310 wide-body airliner currently under study at Airbus.
Airbus confirmed yesterday it was holding intense studies with all three
leading aero-engine manufacturers (Rolls-Royce, Pratt &amp; Whitney and GE) on
the development of a new 40,000lb thrust engine.
Mr Pierson said the consortium expected to take a technical decision on a
longer-range version of the A340 next year. The ultimate aim was to develop
an ultra-long-range aircraft capable of flying a one-stop round-the-world
trip. The new engine would have a market estimated at about 5,000 units for
both the A340 and the new A310 advanced aircraft.
Rolls-Royce, whose first Trent 700 engine made its debut on an A330 airliner
for Cathay Pacific yesterday, is also seeking opportunities to equip other
future Airbus products with its expanded engine family as well as with
possible new power plants.
Rolls-Royce's intention was to offer engines for Airbus programmes including
possible replacements of the older A300 and A310 wide-body airliners, future
derivatives of the A330 and A340 and the proposed A3XX super-jumbo, said Mr
John Rose, Rolls-Royce's deputy managing director.
Airbus, which is also collaborating with Boeing on a possible development of
a super-jumbo aircraft, plans to have a scale model of its proposed A3XX on
display at the Farnborough Air Show next week. It says the new four-engine
super-jumbo - capable of carrying up to 840 passengers in one class with a
possibility of going up to 1,000 in a stretched version of the aircraft -
would not require the development of a new engine but could be equipped by
power plants like the Trent 700 and its US rivals.
But demand for a super-jumbo is not expected to emerge until the next
decade. Mr Peter Sutch, chairman of Cathay Pacific, said the Hong Kong
airline did not envisage a need for a super-jumbo until around 2003. It
unveiled yesterday a new corporate livery to reflect what Mr Sutch called 'a
changed and revitalised airline moving into a new era'.
Both British Airways and Singapore Airlines have already expressed interest
in acquiring a super-jumbo.
Mr Pierson yesterday welcomed the roll-out of the first A330 equipped with a
Rolls-Royce power plant, saying it was 'high time we saw a made-in-Europe
engine on an Airbus aircraft'. With a Rolls-Royce engine and British
Aerospace's 20 per cent share in Airbus, the UK content of the A330s ordered
by Cathay Pacific topped 50 per cent.
Mr Rose said the A330 was 'one more building block' in the UK company's
relationship with Airbus. 'We must now build up this relationship,' he
added. But Rolls-Royce is also interested in developing its share on new US
Boeing aircraft, including the 777 twin engine wide-body airliner and Boeing
studies to develop a larger version of its 747 jumbo or a new very large
aircraft.
