FT  12 MAR 94 / Customs defends handling of Matrix case
Customs &amp; Excise prosecutors continued with the Matrix Churchill trial
although they knew of the government's confidential shift of policy to
promote the export to Iraq of machinery capable of making arms, the Scott
inquiry was told yesterday.
The prosecution of three businessmen was brought on the basis that the tools
produced by the company were specially designed for military use and that
Whitehall officials were unaware of this, Mr Cedric Andrew, an assistant
chief Customs investigator, told Lord Justice Scott.
In a statement defending the Customs' decision to prosecute, Mr Andrew said
that Department of Trade and Industry officials suspected some machine tools
exported to Iraq might be used for military purposes.
This did not, however, amount to an adequate defence for the three
businessmen accused, but later acquitted, of evading export restrictions.
Mr Andrew said it was clear from the early stages of the investigation that
the government's policy on exports to Iraq was not 'black and white'. There
was 'quite an evident will' in some Whitehall circles after the Iran/Iraq
ceasefire to modify the policy.
He added: 'The investigation and prosecution conceded that there was plenty
of government suspicion, perhaps bordering upon knowledge, that some, if not
many, machine tools were going to Iraq for military use.'
Since this was conceded by Customs, it was not felt to be an area worth
'prolonged investigation'. Had the alleged breached of export regulations
occurred in relation to 'dual-use' machinery no prosecutions would therefore
have taken place, said Mr Andrew.
Instead, the Customs prosecution focused on the premise that the Matrix
Churchill exports were designed specially for military use, Mr Andrew said.
'Had the exporters openly declared, when their sales contracts revealed it,
that their machine tools were clearly intended for military use, then the
evidence is, from all those involved in the licensing decision, that an
export licence would have been refused,' he added. 'Such a declaration . . .
would have removed any argument or uncertainty about military end-use.'
Mr Andrew said that nobody in government, including Mr Alan Clark, the
former trade minister, had ever argued that, had the full facts been known,
the exporting of specially designed military-use goods would have been
approved.
There was no evidence, however, that anyone in the DTI knew the Matrix
Churchill machinery was certain to be used, for military purposes.
Mr Andrew said: 'Customs evidence contends that the defendants had not told
the government the truth that the goods for which an export licence was
sought were specially designed.'
