FT  24 JUN 94 / Survey of Indonesia (11): Natural gas on the equator - David
Lascelles looks at mining, natural gas and forestry developments in the
Indonesian part of Borneo
Bontang lies almost exactly on the equator. The air is hot and steamy, and a
warm breeze blows in from the sea. But ice several inches thick coats the
huge compressors where natural gas is being liquefied at temperatures below
 150 degrees centigrade.
Each year the giant Bontang plant produces 15m tonnes of liquefied natural
gas (LNG) from the surrounding gas fields and loads it on to special
container vessels for shipment to Japan, South Korea and Taiwan. Developed
nearly 20 years ago at a cost of some Dollars 3.5bn, it is now the largest
of its kind in the world - a big contributor to Indonesia's overseas
earnings.
Over that period, a complete town has sprung up along what was previously an
empty coastline, dotted with a few fishing villages. Still hard to reach by
land because of the poor roads and muddy rivers, Bontang is linked to the
outside world mainly by air and sea. Although the plant itself only employs
1700 people, it helps to support a community now estimated at close on
100,000 people. But out at sea, within sight of the plant, a small village
still perches on stilts: the home of the orang lau, or sea people who live
offshore.
In the past, Bontang has been overshadowed by Indonesia's other LNG plant at
Aceh in northern Sumatra which was developed more rapidly. But Bontang is
about to take the lead. As Aceh's output levels off towards the end of this
decade, Bontang's will continue to grow. Last November it opened its sixth
train, or production line, and it has plans to add a seventh by 1997 and an
eighth by the end of the decade, by which time capacity will be about 20m
tonnes.
Mr Subroto, the plant's manufacturing manager, says that the only constraint
on the scope for growth is the ability of the gas field contractors to
supply the gas fast enough. The market for the LNG is there: the fuel-hungry
electricity utilities of the Pacific rim are expected to double their
consumption by 2010, and there is space at the plant for the additional
trains.
Bontang is owned by Pertamina, the state oil and gas company. But it is
managed by PT Badak, a company jointly owned by Pertamina, a consortium
representing the Japanese customers who financed construction of the plant,
and two of the companies which supply the gas: Total of France, and Vico (a
joint venture between Lasmo of the UK and Union Texas Petroleum).
The gas comes from fields to the south of the plant, linked by a network of
pipes running through the forests and mangrove swamps, culminating at the
Badak processing plant just below the equator where the gas is made to the
right blend and pressure for transmission up to Bontang. The fields also
supply the Kaltim fertiliser plant just to the north of Bontang - again one
of the largest of its kind in the world. Badak marks the spot where the
first oil and gas was found in the area - by Roy Huffington of Texas
(Huffco) in 1971. Huffco's properties later became part of Vico, with Lasmo
acquiring its interest in 1991 when it bought Ultramar.
Since the Huffco finds, Total has been successful in discovering large new
offshore fields in the mouth of the Mahakam River, despite the difficult
operating conditions. The French company will shortly become the main
supplier to Bontang, contributing about three quarters of the gas needed to
fulfil new contracts currently under negotiation. 'Our gas reserves will
continue to improve,' predicts Mr Bernard Vitry, Total's representative in
Jakarta.
The total capacity of the fields supplying Bontang is about 33 trillion
cubic feet, of which Total has about half.
