FT  12 DEC 94 / Moscow protests greet Chechnya invasion: As Russian tanks
roll into the breakaway republic, democrats fear provocation of another
Afghanistan
'There is no more important task for Russia's democrats,' wrote Russia's
best known liberal columnist in the Izvestiya newspaper last week, 'than to
ensure that a decision to use military force in Chechnya is not made.'
Mr Otto Latsis drew a parallel with the British struggle against IRA
terrorism in Northern Ireland. But the parallel went only so far. 'A
centuries' old British democracy can survive such a war,' he wrote; 'the
young Russian democracy would not.'
The democrats have failed in the task he described and their disappointment
 -and not only theirs - will dominate the Russian political scene in the
coming weeks. Last night, in the bitter cold, several hundred people
gathered in Pushkin Square - the traditional place of protest in the Soviet
period - to condemn the invasion. Chechen representatives gave passionate
speeches demanding that Russia withdraw its troops, as groups of women wept
and passers-by jeered.
'At the time of the fall of the Soviet Union, the absolute majority of the
Chechen people supported our independence from Russia,' said one Chechen
speaker. 'This action is a return to the terrible times in the relations
between our peoples. The integration of the Chechen people into Russia
should be under a treaty, not by force.'
Russians, too, protested against the use of force. Under a banner
proclaiming 'An end to democracy? No to a second Afghanistan,' one Russian
protester said: 'If we should have learned anything in this country it is
that you cannot solve those problems by military means.'
Is the political class of this mind? Yes and no. At a closed session last
Friday, the Duma, the lower house of parliament, debated the issue with -
from the reports - more heat than light.
Deputies from all sides condemned the government but the condemnation was
centred on the bungling of a covert operation to topple Chechen leader
General Dzhokar Dudayev two weeks ago, rather than on matters of principle.
The revelation by the Russian prisoners taken during that operation that the
Federal Intelligence Service had recruited them to spearhead the 'uprising
by the Chechen opposition' has been grist to many mills, as parties who
dislike the present administration find an issue which, many say, could
destroy President Boris Yeltsin.
Curiously, the one leading politician to say clearly that the troops should
be sent in is a liberal - Mr Boris Fyodorov, the leader of the Liberal
Democratic Union (not to be confused with Mr Vladimir Zhirinovsky's Liberal
Democratic party). Mr Fyodorov said at the weekend: 'Chechnya is part of
Russia. There are bandit groups operating on its territory. It persists in
an unlawful regime. Of course the administration must act. Only why has it
taken so long?'
Others would not disagree with that, but would add that the action now
courts a much wider war than merely a limited military operation in
Chechnya.
The instability of the Caucasus, the common grudge of many in the region
that they were deported (and murdered) by Soviet troops during the war and
their common Moslem religion, could draw them together, overcome their
notoriously bitter and perpetual feuding and present them as a united front
against Russia - as they were, for a time, in the mid 19th century.
The parliamentary debates have shown, too, that the politicians as a whole
are more concerned to destabilise the Yeltsin government and administration
than to offer an alternative strategy for the solution of the Chechnya
problem - beyond appealing to 'more negotiations' and 'a peaceful way'.
The other members of the Commonwealth of Independent States are likely to
keep well clear: only Mr Vafa Guluzade, the foreign policy aide to President
Aliev of Azerbaijan, also a Moslem, Caucasian state, commented: 'It's very
sad: Russia many times said it would avoid bloodshed.' Their interests are
in keeping friendly with Russia: they will make neutral noises as long as
they can.
Although Mr Yeltsin's order signed on Friday made possible yesterday's
intervention, the president is as usual inscrutable in this matter; indeed,
he was in hospital yesterday awaiting what was described as a minor
operation. The democrats say they believe he has been taken over by the
militarists but his aims so far seem limited to forcing Gen Dudayev to
negotiate in front of a cannon.
