FT  22 JUN 94 / Management: Diversification brews success - Emiko Terazono
meets shipbuilder turned tea-seller Michio Ota
Corporate venturing has a chequered history in Japan. Recent forays by steel
companies into computers, breweries into the flower business and ball
bearing manufacturers into semiconductors demonstrate this. But the decision
by Hitachi Zosen, a leading shipbuilder, to invest in Tu-Chung Chinese tea,
has proved a notable exception.
The venture, started in 1986, has grown into a Y10bn (Pounds 64m) business
and profits contributed to half of the company's 26.3 per cent pre-tax
earnings growth last year.
Like other shipbuilders in the mid-1980s, Hitachi Zosen faced a sharp
decline in demand and plunging profits due to the high yen. In an effort to
reduce dependence on its core business, the company appointed Michio Ota, an
engineer who had spent the previous 39 years constructing ships, as general
manager of the new biotechnology division.
Ota's new career began unpromisingly with the failure of projects to grow
mushrooms and make a type of fish bait. But he was sure that the idea of a
healthy Chinese tea would be popular given Japan's ageing population and
growing interest in health products.
The tea's effectiveness had been tested in several university hospital
laboratories. 'Having a background in physics, I liked the concept of
manufacturing and selling the tea with a lot of scientific research data,'
he says. That people in China have been drinking it for 5,000 years was also
reassuring, he adds.
Market research was carried out on 30 Hitachi employees, who confirmed that
the tea induced a favourable effect, including weight loss, a decline in
cholesterol and lower blood pressure. However, introducing a product and
being new to the business proved to be a handicap. 'No one would buy the tea
for the first few years,' he says.
Neither Ota nor Hitachi had experience in dealing with consumer products.
The company did not have a retail network and Ota was unable to entice any
of the beverage or foods makers into a tie up. As a result he decided to go
it alone, walking from retailer to retailer, asking barber shop chains and
cosmetic sales staff to offer the tea to their customers.
Hitachi's president ordered the company to use Tu-chung tea internally,
while sales staff in the shipping divisions were told to give clients and
business contacts samples of the tea and special kettles to brew it with.
Hitachi attracted the interest of large stores with health food departments
in 1989, but the big break came in 1992 when the product was introduced to a
wider audience by a health magazine. When a television feature described the
tea as an effective dietary aid, food companies, including Coca Cola and
Asahi, which had shunned Hitachi's initial requests, all rushed into the
market.
Hitachi, which now sells its tea in more than 5,000 retail outlets, faces
growing competition with over 50 companies active in the tea distribution
business. Quality control is an increasingly important competitive weapon;
tea leaves imported from China which do not have enough acids to cut
cholesterol or anti-stress substances are now removed.
The company's diversification into environmental machinery - for instance,
incinerators - has also succeeded, and it has managed to reduce its
dependence on shipbuilding to only 30 per cent of sales. For the business
year just ended last March, Ota expects to post Y10bn in tea sales, 2.5 per
cent of total sales.
Food fads, though, come and go quickly in Japan, and the popularity of
Chinese tea could start to wane. 'We want to start marketing the tea as an
ordinary beverage rather than just a health remedy,' says Ota.
