FT  25 APR 94 / Brazil eyes the satellite launch market: Angus Foster visits
a rocket site being built with modest hopes for business
Hidden from the view of tourists visiting the crumbling colonial ruins of
Alcantara, on Brazil's north-eastern coast, is a gleaming highway complete
with drainage ditches and bright white lines. The road, incongruous in a
region better known for poverty and backwardness, leads through a tightly
manned security post to a testing ground for the country's high technology
capacity - a satellite launching site.
Brazil hopes to complete the site by the end of next year, in time for the
launch of the country's first domestically developed rocket, known as the
VLS. If successful, Alcantara's services will be marketed abroad.
Brazil hopes it will become a a cheap and easy alternative to better known
launch sites, such as Kouros in French Guiana, used for the European Ariane
rocket.
However, the country has cancelled some of the more ambitious of its space
plans since the project was launched by the military government in the early
1970s. The country is now stressing that its programme is 'modest' in scale
and non-military in character.
The February decision to merge its satellite and rocket research under a new
Brazilian Space Agency (AEB), linked directly to the office of the civilian
president, was partly designed to reduce the military's visibility and gain
access to much needed foreign technology.
The Alcantara base, which is key to the programme, has been held up by
funding problems because of the central government's economic problems. The
base has received only Dollars 135m (Pounds 90.6m) of its planned budget of
Dollars 260m. According to base commander Colonel Lauande the launch site is
now 65 per cent complete but the satellite control centre still requires a
lot of work. 'To complete the launch of the VLS we need Dollars 40m,' he
said.
According to the Brazilians, Alcantara will be the most economical launch
site in the world for certain types of satellites. Its proximity to the
equator means satellites can be put into orbit using less fuel. Brazil hopes
a satellite launched with a rocket like the European Ariane would use 8.5
tonnes less fuel from Alcantara compared with Cape Canaveral in the US.
This would make the launch much cheaper or allow heavier satellites to be
launched. Brazil says Alcantara will be cheaper than the nearby site of
Kouros, which is slightly further from the equator. According to private
analysts, it is impossible to guess at Alcantara's launch costs before it is
fully operational. But they admit it is a perfect site.
Brazil hopes to offer the base to other countries for launch services. So
far, Russian officials and a private US company have expressed interest. The
Japanese Space Agency also visited the site last month.
The programme's final goal is to put a satellite into space using a
Brazilian-designed rocket. The VLS, a 19-metre launch rocket being developed
near Sao Paulo and based on Brazilian technology, has been delayed by
technical and financial difficulties. Private sector analysts warn that the
rocket may still be some way from launch.
If there is a further delay with the VLS, next year's planned launch of
Brazil's second meteorological satellite will have to be carried out with a
foreign rocket from an overseas site.
Brazil is also looking for foreign partners for its programme, partly
because of spending constraints and partly to share technology. Last year
the country formalised a 1988 joint venture agreement with China to develop
two satellites due for launch in 1996 and 1998. China, which also has an
ambitious space programme, will hold 70 per cent of the Dollars 150m venture
and Brazil the remainder.
The satellites are designed to photograph the earth and monitor atmospheric
pollution and forest reserves.
Brazil's space programme this month received welcome support from an
unlikely quarter. Mr Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, the left-wing frontrunner in
polls for October's presidential elections, said during a visit to Alcantara
that he would support the base because of its technological importance.
Mr da Silva's Workers' party, which is deeply mistrusted by the country's
former military rulers, was probably sending a message to the generals that
key - and favourite - projects would be left untouched if it wins power.
