FT  08 JAN 94 / Faith makes Durham fizz: Hugh Dickinson finds David Jenkins
the most exciting and stimulating bishop
The timing was perfect. Try putting a bomb under the angels and shepherds in
July and it would not even make the Parish Mag. But here we are at Epiphany
and all the world knows that a senior bishop of the Church of England has
taken a pot shot at the three wise men. (These mysterious magi arrived at
Bethlehem on Twelfth Night. Um, or didn't)
The Durham affair has had a splendid run. It was headline news for two days
in both BBC and ITN The Radio 4 programme, The Moral Maze, devoted a whole
bad-tempered hour to it. MPs and peers pontificated disapprovingly. Fellow
Bishops sighed. Evangelical clerics railed. The tabloids and the broadsheets
devoted column after column to it. Leader writers said the faithless Bishop
was a prime cause of the loss of nerve and decline in the Church of England.
It is odd that no-one defended David Jenkins. Very odd indeed. For I have
frequently sat in packed halls and churches listening to him hold his
audiences enthralled.
Let me state boldly that he is the most exciting, stimulating and
faith-enhancing Bishop on the Bench. Who was it who held a sixth-form
conference of 300 young people spellbound for an hour after their allotted
period was supposed to be over? Who was it who (so the rumour goes) brought
the House of Bishops to their feet in a standing ovation after an
impassioned speech about faith? Who has had the courage and integrity to
share with Christian lay-people the conclusions of a century of Christian
scholarship which are taught as a matter of course to the majority of
theology students?
Right. David Jenkins.
Here in Salisbury (hardly the heartland of liberal scepticism) he received
tumultuous applause from a packed Cathedral after a profound and moving
lecture last summer. I know lay and ordained men and women who would say
that the Christian faith has only been made believable for them by people
such as David Jenkins and others who have dared to be truthful about Gospel
Truth.
So it is odd that the media presents an image of an academic noddy, a dried
up, liberal sceptic, when he is in reality a dynamic and profoundly
believing Christian man with a faith that is both generous and contagious.
How can such a mismatch come about? Well, nothing is so much fun as seeing
high-minded religious people at each other's throats. But in this case there
is a real and profoundly felt disagreement between two kinds of believing.
There is script faith and seed faith. Each views the other with deep (but
Christian) hostility and distrust. There are lots of illiberal and
fundamentalist clergy and laity who feel the truth of Scripture is betrayed
by the kind of faith which makes David Jenkins fizz.
His seed faith is open, questioning and undogmatic. It focuses on the
central core of belief. It is willing to suspend judgment on historical
authenticity; it treasures myths which fire the imagination. It distrusts
static formulae; it asks people to think for themselves, to respond from the
heart to whatever speaks to the heart.
It does not seek to control or manipulate. It believes that God is
ultimately mysterious.
For Scripture is not script. It is a kaleidoscope of historical facts,
poetry, metaphor and myth which holds truths at many different levels, but
all pointing to the claim that God was at work in Jesus.
For the Bishop's critics, by contrast, faith is a construct of authoritative
texts, statements of belief and traditional teachings. It is a complete
package. To pick and choose would be to set your own fallible judgment
against the Word of God.
If the Bible says the angels burst into song over Bethlehem, then you have
to believe that a tape-recorder would have picked up the tune. If it says
Jesus converted 120 gallons of water into wine, then Chateau Lafite it was.
Allow one stitch to be unpicked and the whole thing will unravel.
Behind this kind of belief is a longing for certainty and a desire for
authority. And it is effective. There is a resonance between a public which
longs for security and an end to doubt, and powerful and dogmatic
personalities who are only too happy to offer it.
It has simplicity, clarity and power. All over the world fundamentalist and
conservative religions are making converts. People's lives are being
changed. Energies are being channeled in programmes, fatwahs, jehads,
crusades and missions. Liberals are demonised, along with the new age, yoga,
and socialism.
By its nature script belief is highly sympathetic to right-wing politics and
hostile to causes such as equal rights.
By contrast seed belief seems vague, equivocal and woolly. It distrusts the
techniques of mass persuasion.
It refuses to offer factitious certainties to the vulnerable and uncertain.
To children and the simple-minded it seems hesitant and confusing. And yet
for many people who dislike the dogmatism of script belief it offers a way
of believing which treasures intellectual integrity and recognises that
truth is many-layered.
But given that believers do divide into these two opposing camps, how is it
that all the nobs and commentators are so hostile to the Bishop of Durham?
Is our society deeply authoritarian? Do we do not want people to think for
themselves?
To my mind it is patronising and offensive to suggest that Christian lay
people should not be told the conclusions of 100 years of theological
scholarship. It is like saying: Don't tell them the earth is round; they'll
all be terrified of falling off.
Many more would be Christians if they did not have to believe in
unbelievable accessories, because then they could hang on to the simplest
and most cogent formula I know: God is. As he is in Jesus. Therefore we have
hope.
That is what David Jenkins is saying.
Hugh Dickinson is Dean of Salisbury
