FT  31 MAR 94 / Waiting to see if the punches are worth taking: Matthew
Curtin and Michael Holman assess the mood of business people in South Africa
South Africa: things don't fall apart, was the title of a recent analysis of
investment opportunities by Salomon Brothers, the New York-based investment
bank. As word came in on Monday of mounting casualties following a Zulu
demonstration at the African National Congress headquarters, even such
cautious bullishness seemed inappropriate.
It may yet prove to be accurate, however, as the country's politicians have
faced equally grave crises in the four years since Mr Nelson Mandela's
release and stepped back from confrontation.
Economic statistics and ratios 'indicate the country should be placed
squarely in the mid-investment-grade category', says the Salomon report. But
it also warns that there is 'a small possibility of a rapid deterioration in
the country's political stability and ability to access foreign currency to
service its foreign debts'.
This could lead to a credit rating below the level suggested by a purely
economic analysis. Nevertheless, Salomon reckons any rating below the upper
BB range - just below investment grade - 'would be unjustified'. Salomon is
on a shortlist of international banks bidding to advise the new government
on entry into the international bond market.
The local business community would have been happy to settle for an upper BB
as Monday's death-toll rose to more 50 and the JSE all-share index fell
nearly 3 per cent. Opinion was summed up by Mr Richard Stuart at
stockbrokers Martin &amp; Co: 'When your hands are tied behind your back, you've
just got to take the punches.'
Mr Stuart has consistently told his overseas clients that the run-up to the
election would present the best buying opportunities. Taking such advice
requires a strong nerve and a belief that, despite the violence, the country
will emerge stable and profitable from the transition to democracy.
Unnerving as Monday's events are, maintains Mr Stuart, investors should not
lose confidence in South Africa's potential. With a market value of some
Dollars 150bn (Pounds 103bn) and a highly sophisticated financial services
sector, it is not so much an emergent market as a re-emergent market.
But Mr Stuart's sanguine view is not necessarily shared by the local
stockbroking community. Mr David Schapiro, a director at Frankel Pollak
Vinderine, says Monday's events were 'the last straw' for many people who
have worked hard to market the country abroad. 'It's becoming an
increasingly frustrating game of snakes and ladders, and many brokers are
fed up with the uncanny ability of our politicians to put us back at square
one.'
From Dr Chris Stals, governor of the country's central bank, comes the
phlegmatic comment: 'We have to accept Monday's events as just another
adverse short-term event. All it will do is confirm the 'wait-and-see'
approach which already prevails among international investors.'
Mr Michael Spicer, a consultant to Anglo American, the mining and industrial
group, says: 'The country's institutional framework is strong and will
bounce back, the economy is fair-set for a mini-boom, while we have always
warned our international contacts that the transition would be testing.'
However, behind the brave face is an unease that the business community has
not felt for some time. What made Monday's events so traumatic was the
symbolic impact of mayhem under the noses of the men and women whose job has
been to sell 'South Africa to the rest of the world'.
A toughened senior executive in one of the country's biggest mining
companies was shocked to discover that a bullet had struck the
reinforced-glass window of his city-centre office. As businessmen rang each
other to compare eye witness accounts, the mood was as sombre as it has been
at any stage during the country's perilous transition from apartheid to
democracy.
Yet within 48 hours the country's resilience was demonstrated as the
Department of Finance unveiled interim budgetary guidelines based on a
forecast of 3 per cent growth in gross domestic product this year, compared
with 1 per cent in 1993.
Perhaps most striking was a meeting in one of Johannesburg's luxury hotels
between more than 100 executives and top officials from the ANC. In contrast
to the hostility which has often marked exchanges between the ANC and the
private sector, the executives left reassured on important issues such as
the independence of the central bank, fiscal discipline and exchange rate
policy.
Meanwhile the world watches and waits. As Mr Stuart observes, 'the main body
of investment money will come to South Africa only after the elections'.
Blueprint for black mining control, Page 34
