FT  31 JAN 94 / Company News (This Week): Murdoch revival should be on the
bottom line - News Corporation
Many questions have been aired over Mr Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation
recently, but the delivery of some good bottom-line figures for the six
months to end-December on Thursday is not in much doubt.
BSkyB, the UK satellite television venture is likely to brighten the
results. In December the satellite company set a new monthly record by
adding 140,000 new subscribers, bringing the total to around 3.3m. But the
newspaper price cutting war in the UK, while boosting sales of The Sun and
The Times is likely to cost around Pounds 43m in the 1994 financial year.
Many analysts think that after-tax profits for News first half-year, before
abnormals, could nudge above ADollars 600m (Pounds 283m), compared with
ADollars 490.1m last time. In terms of operating profit, however, the
progress is likely to be less marked.
News actually saw a small fall here in the first three months, with the
quarterly figure easing to ADollars 412.2m from ADollars 432.5m. Earnings
from the newspaper interests were affected by the price war in the UK, while
the smaller magazine and inserts division reported a 32 per cent profits
drop.
Analysts say that this situation is unlikely to reversed in any dramatic
fashion during the second quarter, although earnings from the film interests
are expected to be strong. Indeed, the newspaper division's earnings will be
further affected by the sale of a 34.9 per cent interest in the South China
Morning Post in October. Macquarie Bank Analysts talks of a very modest
ADollars 5m rise for the first half overall.
The boost to net profit, say analysts, will come from falling interest
charges and from a rise in associated companies' profits - namely, Ansett
Airlines, the Australian carrier which News owns jointly with TNT, and
BSkyB, News' 50 per cent-owned satellite broadcaster in the UK. (Pearson,
publisher of the Financial Times also holds an interest in BSkyB).
Meanwhile, gossip over Mr Murdoch's joint venture plans - said to involve a
move into the 'electronic superhighway' field - has eased off in the wake of
the 'super share' plan's demise.
But few analysts think News' interest has died: 'I don't think the subject
has gone away,' says one, 'but it's a question of how to do it.'
Murdoch watcher Mr Terry Povey of Bell Securities is predicting an Pounds
80m contribution to News Corp this year and Pounds 140m in 1995.
