FT  06 MAY 94 / Survey of The Channel Tunnel (3): High speed and comfort -
What the user gets
For the regular air traveller between London and Paris, the Channel Tunnel
rail service is the answer to a jet-lagged dream. Farewell to the
interminable London Underground journey to Heathrow airport. Goodbye to the
air passenger in front whose seat is pushed back against your nose. No more
confused wanderings around the circular terminal one at Paris Charles de
Gaulle. Adieu to FFr250 taxi rides into central Paris.
While many travel agents expect the Eurostar railway service from London's
Waterloo station to Paris and Brussels to take business away from the
airlines, they say it will not appeal to everyone. And they are less
optimistic about the chances of the Le Shuttle car service taking business
from cross-Channel ferries.
The Eurostar service is expected to win business from the airlines,
particularly among business travellers. European Passenger Services, which
will run the trains, has indicated it will charge fares which undercut
airline prices.
Mr Simon Beeching, managing director of Wexas International, a club
organising business and leisure travel for its members, believes Eurostar
could win business even if it charged slightly more than the airlines.
'Everyone I've spoken to has said they like the idea of going by train. It
takes you from the heart of London to the hearts of Paris and Brussels,' he
says.
Mr Mike Platt, director of commercial affairs at Hogg Robinson Business
Travel International, says many of his customers have mentioned the
attractions of being able to sit around a table on trains between London and
the Continent, running through presentations or preparing for meetings -
something which is difficult to do on an aircraft.
For anyone living reasonably close to the centre of Paris or London,
travelling by Eurostar could take about the same amount of time as flying.
Door-to-door, a journey from a London suburb to central Paris is about four
hours. The Eurostar train journey between the two cities is expected to take
three hours; door-to-door travel will also be about four hours.
Mr Platt points out, however, that the Channel Tunnel rail service will not
be convenient for everyone. Many business travellers from London live in the
Home Counties and they might not be travelling to the centre of Paris. Mr
Platt says: 'If you're travelling from your office in London SW1 and going
to downtown Paris, the train is ideal. But it's not if you're going from
your home outside London to a factory outside Paris.'
The train service will also be up against one of the airlines' principal
attractions: frequent flyer points. Accumulating frequent flyer points has
become an obsession with many business air travellers, who use them to take
their holidays.
Business travel agents say that European Passenger Services should have no
difficulty developing attractive customer loyalty programmes. Paris and
London are popular tourist destinations for the British and the French
respectively. The opportunity to collect points towards a family visit to
either capital would be a strong incentive for many Eurostar customers.
If the attractions of the Eurostar services will be obvious to many, those
of Le Shuttle will be less so. Cross-channel ferries have succeeded in
recent years in making the journeys they offer more pleasant, with bright
decor, children's play areas, cinemas and better restaurants and shops.
Car shuttle services are expected to be relatively spartan, with travellers
remaining with their cars during the journey and the price of travelling by
shuttle will be higher than crossing by ferry.
But Mr Peter Shanks, retail commercial director at travel agents Thomas
Cook, points out the time advantage to travelling by shuttle. From motorway
to auto-route, travelling time by shuttle will be 60 minutes. By ferry, it
is 80 to 90 minutes.
Mr Shanks expects that by next year Le Shuttle will have 40 per cent of the
non-air, non-rail traffic, compared with 60 per cent for the ferries, and by
1996, 50 per cent.
