FT  02 SEP 94 / Militant Serbs want arms ban lifted
US threats to lift the arms embargo against Bosnia's Moslem-led government
have produced an unexpected reaction: the most militant Serbs say they would
welcome the move, while some prominent Moslems view the prospect with alarm.
This paradoxical response reflects the hardline Serbs' confidence that they
could make further gains in the event of an all-out war, and Moslem fears
that their side, albeit growing in strength, is not ready for an escalating
conflict.
President Bill Clinton has told Congress, where the ban on arms sales to
Bosnia is unpopular, that he will formally propose lifting the embargo
unless the Bosnian Serbs accept the current peace plan by October 15.
Militant Bosnian Serbs, who have resisted pressure from their kinsmen in
Belgrade to accept the plan, are confident the US move would force all Serbs
to bury their internal divisions and prosecute the war with renewed
intensity.
President Alija Izetbegovic, Bosnia's Moslem leader, acknowledged this week
that his side had not yet matched its enemies' firepower.
His remarks reflect growing concern in Sarajevo that, if the embargo is
lifted, Bosnian Serb forces would quickly move to crush the government army
before it could get heavy weapons and learn to use them effectively.
The fighting ability of the Bosnian army has improved since the creation of
a Moslem-Croat federation six months ago, but troops are still organised on
a local basis and are ill-prepared to fight beyond their village or town.
UN officers say that if the embargo is lifted, it could take at least a year
for the Bosnian army to make proper use of what equipment it received. Mr
Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, claimed last week his adversaries
lacked professional officers capable of handling heavy weapons.
General Ratko Mladic, Bosnian Serb commander, has shown little concern about
the arms embargo.' Let them lift it,' he had told the independent daily
Borba. Another Bosnian Serb officer said: 'If they lift the embargo, the UN
would leave and we could fight a real war. We would finish them off
quickly.'
Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic yesterday threatened to cut gas, water,
power and food supplies to Moslem and Croat communities unless Belgrade
lifts its economic blockade, Reuter reports.
The Serb regime in Belgrade imposed a trade embargo on Serbia's recalcitrant
kinsmen in Bosnia four weeks ago to punish them for refusing to agree to the
peace plan.
