FT  21 NOV 94 / Survey of Germany (25): Expensive learning curve - Student
militancy sinks cash reforms
It is surprising how little students need to protest in Germany before they
derail even relatively modest plans to reform the higher education system.
At the beginning of February this year, several hundred thousand of them
braved the cold and took to the streets across the country. While in France,
such demonstrations sometimes turn violent, with students pitched against
the police, the German protests were a measured affair: some stopped the
traffic in city centres, others organised public readings.
The focus of their wrath were government plans to inject a bit more vigour
into a further education system which for years has produced very well
qualified students but has recently seemed rather unwieldy compared with
other similar systems.
The reforms had proposed that students would do tests after two semesters,
instead of after four, to ensure they were meeting academic targets; they
had also required students who were studying too slowly to pay fines.
There was no surprise about the fines: German students need on average seven
years to finish their degrees, compared with an average 3.3 years in
Britain.
The tests and fines were part of a package of reforms which had been debated
extensively a year ago. Chancellor Helmut Kohl had convened an education
summit and there had been countless other discussions to see what could be
done to give students more choice, improve competition among universities
and cut costs of around DM30bn for universities alone.
However, within days of the protests, Mr Rainer Ortleb, the education
minister, had resigned. The plans were shelved in the run-up to the October
elections and they do not seem to be a top priority for the new government
which wants to avoid arguments among the three party coalition.
Under the federal system, education is largely a responsibility of Germany's
16 Lander. While they work hand in hand with the federal government, all
important decisions, including financial ones, are made in the state
capitals. The fact that each Land has a slightly different education policy
also made it harder to reach consensus about far-reaching reforms.
Efforts to cut costs also made little headway. BAFoG, the training
assistance law which ensures that around 770,000 students receive funds to
finance their studies, was to have been frozen until 1996. In July, Mr
Karl-Hans Laermann, the new minister, managed to increase it by 2 per cent,
which was less than the rate of inflation but nonetheless a setback for the
government.
Meanwhile, the university system is bursting at its seams: 1.8m students are
expected to make do with 850,000 places at universities.
Since 1977 the number of new students has risen by 73 per cent, an increase
in line with other industrial democracies, but while Germans are not loath
to sign on, around 27 per cent of them drop out of their studies for one
reason or another, according to figures from the Federation of German
Industry (BDI); in North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany's biggest state, up to 38
per cent leave their studies unfinished.
Parallel to the universities Germany has since the beginning of the century
had a system of vocational training offering qualifications from banking to
hotel management for those not wishing to go to university.
Each year about 550,000 German school-leavers sign apprenticeship contracts
with companies. Every German profession has its own training programme,
lasting two or three years, and all of the 500,000 mostly medium-sized
companies which take on apprentices must provide qualified instructors.
But participants in this programme are also beginning to wonder about the
costs. Employers spend DM40-DM50bn a year on training and there are growing
concerns that the system is also becoming too inflexible. And as German
industry sheds jobs in an effort to raise productivity companies often have
to turn away the Lehrlinge or apprentices who have completed their training
only to find that the jobs they were promised are no longer available.
Managers too are becoming increasingly aware that the German system, admired
for decades, may be losing its advantage over comparable systems abroad
which are more competitive and flexible. A survey conducted by the
Munich-based Ifo economics institute earlier this year, showed that 38 per
cent of companies think the German standards are slipping.
Mr Tyll Necker, the BDI president who steps down next month, has been a
particularly vociferous critic of the shortcomings of the further education
system.
He has argued repeatedly that the system must be better tailored to the
needs of industry and society in order to avoid a situation where up to 23
per cent of university graduates work in jobs where degrees are not
required. 'If society has to devote a large part of its resources in order
to educate people then it also has to have the right to ensure that there is
some sense to it,' Mr Necker said.
But the momentum generated by the heated discussions last autumn has all but
petered out. As part of plans to streamline the government, there are even
proposals to fuse the education ministry with the ministry of research and
technology, reflecting the low priority accorded to the reforms.
Advocates of the German system still say it produces more better educated
people per head of population than other systems. They may be right but
pressures associated with an ageing population and a lack of funds means
that much still needs to be done if Germany is to preserve its comparative
advantage in years to come.
