FT  14 MAY 94 / Finance and the Family: Bass brew goes flat - The week ahead
The results season for brewers gets into full swing this week, with full
year figures from Whitbread on Monday, Allied-Lyons on Tuesday, and interims
from Bass on Wednesday. A common theme is likely to be that brewing and
old-fashioned basic pubs are still doing badly, while pubs relying more on
food and leisure are thriving.
The worst figures from the trio are, therefore, likely to come from Bass,
the UK's biggest brewer and also an enormous pub operator. Against Pounds
229m last year, pre-tax profits this time could be flat or even slightly
down.
Whitbread is expected to do better, with pre-tax profits of perhaps Pounds
232m against Pounds 220m before exceptionals last time. Again, profits from
beer and tenanted pubs should be down, but Whitbread is particularly strong
on more up-market, restaurant-type outlets.
Allied's figures will take a little interpreting since this will be the
first full year to show the effects of its brewing joint venture with
Carlsberg. The market will be alert for any suggestions that Allied is
closer to extricating itself from the venture which, it has hinted already,
does not fit its overall strategy.
The actual pre-tax figure is not a matter of debate since it was forecast at
Pounds 630m at the time of Allied's deal with Domecq in March. This compares
with Pounds 542m ' again before exceptionals ' the year before.
Shareholders will be interested to find out how much the US Peabody coal
dispute has cost Hanson, which announces interims on Tuesday; estimates
hover around Pounds 80m. The conglomerate's profits figure - stripping out
the strike costs - should be between Pounds 580m and Pounds 675m pre-tax, up
from Pounds 507m. But it is thought the quarterly dividend will be held at
2.85p.
National Power, the UK's largest generator, is expected to increase pre-tax
profits by at least 14 per cent from 1992-93's Pounds 580m when it announces
its results on Wednesday. Dividend expectations are around 12.2p, against
10.6p.
The City will be looking for indications as to how the company is
progressing with the potential sale of three to four gigawatts of generating
plant following a deal with the industry regulator in February. There are no
indications of an early disposal.
Analysts are predicting pre-tax profits for British Telecommunications of
around Pounds 2.7bn when chairman Sir Iain Vallance announces its full-year
results on Thursday. That represents a 40 per cent increase on last year
(Pounds 1.9bn). But taking account of last year's exceptional items, the
increase comes down to a more modest 2 per cent. Strong competition from
Mercury and the cable companies has restricted growth. Earnings per share
are expected to be around 29p, against 19.8p last year before exceptionals.
Burton, the UK fashion retail group which includes such names as Debenhams,
Top Man and Top Shop, Burtons and Principles, is expected on Thursday to
report an increase in reported pre-tax profits, after exceptional items,
from Pounds 30m to about Pounds 35m - but a fall in underlying profits. As
last year's figure was after an exceptional charge of Pounds 11.9m to cover
the costs of the move towards greater part-time working, pre-tax profits
will actually have fallen.
First-quarter results from British Gas, due on Thursday, are expected to
reflect the profits' warning issued by Richard Giordano, chairman, at the
annual general meeting last month. He warned that profits were 'likely to be
at a similar level' to the first quarter last year, when earnings were
Pounds 650m. Analysts expect that a continuing loss of market share in the
mainly commercial segment above 2,500 therms to independent gas marketers
will offset any benefits that would normally be expected after a
particularly cold winter.
