FT  05 FEB 94 / The future of Auschwitz: Christopher Tyler visits the
extermination camp where Nazis killed a million people and asks how it can
fulfil conflicting functions as memorial, museum and, increasingly, tourist
attraction
Fifty years ago this month a young chemist called Primo Levi was marched
through the gate inscribed Arbeit Macht Frei, stripped, shaved, tattooed,
dressed in stripes and clogs, and thus reduced to an Untermensch, a starving
slave worker of the Thousand-Year Reich.
Hitler's war was already as good as lost when Levi and 650 other Italian
Jews were deported in cattle trucks to Auschwitz in Poland. On arrival, 29
of the women were admitted to Birkenau camp. Of the men, 96 were sent to
work at Monowitz sub-camp where IG Farben, the German industrial
conglomerate, was trying to produce synthetic rubber at a slave-built
factory. The rest of that night's consignment - men, women and children -
were taken directly to the Birkenau gas chambers.
Because of his chemistry degree and his later confinement for scarlet fever
Primo Levi survived until liberation in January, 1945, to emerge a
devastatingly eloquent witness to the crime which still defies human
comprehension. Levi's testimony is not only eloquent but has proved exact in
all but a few details, according to Piotr Setkiewicz, a young Polish
historian from the Auschwitz museum.
The testimony of Levi, who committed suicide seven years ago, remains as one
kind of memorial to the 1.1m to 1.5m people, 90 per cent of them Jews, now
estimated to have been gassed, shot, hanged, starved or simply worked to
death at Auschwitz.
Another kind of memorial is Spielberg's film Schindler's List, the story of
Oskar Schindler, the Sudeten-Czech entrepreneur who saved 1,100 Jews in a
small camp in nearby Krakow. The film, which crosses the Atlantic later this
month, will reach a wider audience even than the recently-opened Holocaust
museum in Washington, DC. It will probably be seen by more westerners than
have ever read about, let alone visited, Auschwitz or the other Nazi
extermination camps in Poland.
But what is to be done with Auschwitz itself? As the camp's few survivors
die out, one kind of memory dies with them. But recollections alter,
meanings conflict and the camp symbolises quite different things to Jews and
Poles, to Russians, Gipsies - not to mention the Germans themselves. The
problem of reconciling historical accuracy with present sensitivities and
future instruction creates for the caretakers of Auschwitz what has been
called the greatest conservation challenge in Europe.
Should Auschwitz be restored to what it was or preserved as it is (including
such post-war reconstructions as the small gas chamber in the base camp)?
Should it be developed in some way, or left decently to decay? These
questions have assumed added importance today because the re-writers of
history, the Holocaust-denial specialists, are riding the crest of a new
wave of neo-Nazi racism in Europe. They are likely to seize on any
'distortion' of Auschwitz.
Levi's camp at Monowitz has virtually disappeared, although the factory
beside it is working to this day (it produces synthetic rubber for the
Polish state). The solid, pre-war barracks of the main lager, Auschwitz I,
with its execution yard, medieval torture cells and gibbets, stand intact.
But for Poles, especially under Communist rule, Auschwitz I is primarily the
place where 75,000 of their compatriots died, a memorial to Resistance
heroism or Catholic martyrdom because it served first as a concentration
camp for political prisoners, some of whom, only incidentally, were Jews.
Until five years ago (and in line with the current ideology) the museum
guidebook referred only to the murder of 'people', not Jews.
Birkenau, 3km away and built in 1941-2, presents the other face of
Auschwitz. Seen from the guard house tower on a misty winter's evening, the
camp seems to stretch for ever: more eloquent than the 60-odd preserved
wooden huts in the foreground are the rows of skeletal chimneys of hundreds
more huts that have long since rotted away.
A railway spur, laid in 1944 to expedite the last frenzy of genocide, runs
innocently up and through the central archway of the long, red-brick facade.
It proceeds down the middle of the 425-acre field to terminate beside an
earth platform. A few yards further on, behind a screen of poplars, lies
what is left of four gas chamber / crematoria, whose exploded remains were
left by the SS as they fled the advancing Russians. Behind the crematoria
again are ponds where human ashes were dumped and pits where corpses were
burned when the ovens became overloaded.
Here, the Jews driven to their deaths had no chance to be 'martyrs' nor
resistance fighters, only victims. While Auschwitz I illustrates SS
brutality and perversion, at Birkenau it is the scale of the Nazi crimes
that becomes apparent: the euphemistic, bureaucratic, systematic and
industrialised slaughter known as the Final Solution.
Auschwitz has to fulfil three functions, according to the Oxford historian
Jonathan Webber, who is a founder member of the International Auschwitz
Council set up in 1990 to advise the Polish authorities. It is a place of
mourning, being the largest cemetery in the world; it is a museum of record;
it is also - inevitably and increasingly - a tourist attraction.
Of the resulting conflict there have been many examples, large and small.
The arrival of a group of well-meaning Catholic nuns to pray for the souls
of the dead in a building at the first camp (outside the original wire, but
within the wider complex) led to an international incident. After five years
of dispute, the nuns were rehoused a few hundred yards away in 1992. Some
Jews were hurt by the Pope's beatification of Edith Stein, a Jewish woman
who converted to Catholicism and became a nun: she was gassed in 1942 not
because she was a nun but because she was Jewish, they say. Others find
offensive the museum display of seven tonnes of women's hair and the cloth
into which it was woven by German factories. They say it should be decently
buried. For similar reasons survivors blocked a proposal to dig a section
across the field of ashes and line it with glass to demonstrate the awful
depth of the human remains.
It has taken the council three years to recommend new wording for plaques on
the modern monument erected at the end of the Birkenau railway line. These
were erased because they quoted a false Russian estimate of 4m Auschwitz
victims and made no specific mention of the Jews. But which of the many
nationalities were now to be recorded, in which order, and in what
languages?
Today's visitors bring further problems. Dr David Cesarani, director of the
Wiener Library in London, is worried by the apparent incomprehension shown
even by Israeli and Jewish-American children when they tour the camps.
'They've not quite - what shall I say - got the hang of it,' he said. Jewish
schools were teaching children about the Holocaust, Piotr Setkiewicz said,
but in an emotional way that did little to explain the ideology behind it
nor the war that facilitated it. The museum has asked the Polish minister of
culture to set a minimum visiting age of 14.
Even adults seem confused, according to Wanda Hutny, head of the museum's
education department. She described how Americans arrive in coach parties,
dressed in shorts and T-shirts, take a few snaps of each other in front of
the crematorium chimney and jump back on the bus. Japanese visitors, when
confronted with the 'wall of death', are seen to smile - the Oriental way of
showing discomfort but shocking to any westerners who may be with them. One
day, a nosegay of flowers was found under the gallows where the Auschwitz
commandant Rudolf Hoss was hanged after the war. It might have been a
neo-Nazi gesture, or an innocent mistake.
The council, where the cry of competing interests and differing theologies
and commemorative customs is heard, is gradually overcoming its early
clumsiness. With its approval a new guidebook is being written, further
righting the record. The permanent exhibition at base camp is being
modernised with a broader historical context and there are plans to put
explanatory signs and photographs at Birkenau, hitherto left largely
uninterpreted. Some minor, non-controversial, conservation work is being
undertaken.
Curators from the Metropolitan Museum in New York have estimated that
Auschwitz will cost Dollars 42m (Pounds 28m) to preserve; but until an
overall policy has been decided the figure means little. A Dollars 500,000
donation from the Greek government has been received, but a larger Belgian
government contribution has been held up by wrangling as to who should be
the channel for it, and a DM10m (Pounds 3.8m) pledge from German government
and private donors through the Lauder Foundation in the US is conditional on
specific schemes being drawn up.
One obvious gap is the lack of a Jewish memorial, said Webber, but the main
task is to develop an overall concept of the place, to steer a path between
the 'theme park' approach (though that, he said, need not be so terrible)
and a dignified memorial. Ideally, all the exhibition material should be
removed and put into an educational centre outside the camp. This is what
David Cesarani calls the 'poetic approach'. The place should be left silent
and eerie, he said, and the explanation of that silence provided elsewhere.
'Auschwitz is didactic above all but I think the site speaks for itself if
people know a little before they arrive. It can be freeze-dried, and should
be, not left to sink into the marsh.'
Webber agreed that 'clumsy exhibitions in old barrack blocks are not the
way.' But he disagrees about the far future. 'The question is how to let
Auschwitz sink into the European consciousness. There should be a serious
monument so that in 200 or 300 years there is something left to see.
Otherwise I think the whole thing should be allowed to rot.'
A perfect solution was impossible in this transitional age, he added. 'The
fuss and problems are very healthy, a reflection of decent, ordinary, moral
concern. That's perfectly reasonable. But in the long term it will sort
itself out.'
Ben Helfgott, a 64-year-old retired businessman living in London, spent more
than five years in concentration camps. He was 10 years old when he and his
family were herded into a ghetto in their home town of Piotrkow, near Lodz.
He was just 13 when his mother was killed, just 15 when his father was taken
away. One sister was killed. Another, like him, survived with a tiny handful
of the 1 1/2 m children rounded up.
'Decent people - you and me - say some of the arguments are trivial. But we
don't live in a rational world. I believe that somehow, while one has to be
careful of what revisionists will say, we have to make sure that we preserve
what is left. It might look slightly different, but still it is there.
'Nothing is an answer to what we suffered,' he said. 'No-one in the world,
not even a writer like Levi whose description is almost divine, can really
convey what we felt, what we experienced - the starvation, the punishments,
the beatings, the humiliation, lack of sleep, being eaten by vermin.'
There were two debts to be paid, he said finally, one to those who were
killed, the other to those still to be born. 'So that those who died will
not have died in vain we must be constantly aware of what happens when a
government or people take it on themselves to decide the fate of other
people. The safety of individuals must be preserved. That is a sacred duty
of all of us.
'That is why the places should be there for people to see. It's important to
preserve them with dignity, without exploitation or exaggeration. Auschwitz
can be preserved both as a symbol and as a museum. I don't see it as an
issue.'
We may never be able properly to understand what happened at places like
Auschwitz. But to see the remains is to comprehend, in physical
confrontation, the real meaning of Hitler's war.
