FT  29 JUL 94 / Paris woos trade with system to speed big share deals
The Paris Bourse yesterday announced the creation of a system to allow big
blocks of shares to be sold quickly.
This is calculated to recoup some of the domestic business which has
migrated to the London Stock Exchange's Seaq International trading system.
The block-trade market system, to begin operating in October, will initially
cover 50 stocks, including all component stocks of the CAC 40 Index and
other stocks with similar market capitalisation.
However, in a climbdown, the Paris Bourse said that unlike current practice,
other investors would not be immediately aware of these deals.
In contrast to the competing Seaq system, trades will be reported to the
central market after a two-hour delay or, for the largest trades, the
morning of the following day and will thus still be more transparent to
users.
'The creation of a block-trade market enhances the competitive position of
the CAC central-market system. In particular, it ensures that investors are
better informed of transactions that were previously executed in London with
no transparency whatsoever,' the Paris Bourse said.
Separately, the UK Treasury yesterday announced the Paris Bourse had become
the first European stock exchange authorised to operate in London.
Securities firms with the Bourse's CAC trading screens will be able to
transact business without having to establish a Paris office.
From January 1996, EU legislation will allow exchanges in all member states
to operate in a similar fashion.
Seaq International 'has been quite an incentive for the modernisation of the
Paris market', said Mr Jean-Francois Theodore, chairman and chief executive
of the Paris Bourse. But he said the new block trading system was also
designed to improve services for institutional investors in Paris.
The new system would cover deals at least five times the 'normal market
size' in each stock. It would calculate a 'weighted average spread' of
outstanding offers to trade those shares, creating a wider than usual
'spread' between the best buy and sell offer. However the total cost to
investors would still fall.
