FT  26 JUL 94 / Jordan and Israel agree trade pact for peace: Leaders end
46-year-old state of war and move towards Mideast common market
Israel and Jordan formally ended a 46-year-old state of war in a White House
summit yesterday and agreed an unexpectedly broad package of measures
towards normal relations and the creation of a Middle East common market.
Although 'The Washington Declaration' signed by Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israeli
prime minister, and King Hussein of Jordan falls short of an official peace
treaty it marks a historic change in a region torn apart for almost half a
century by war, hostility and mutual suspicion.
Sunshine bathed the ceremony, and King Hussein and Mr Rabin repeatedly shook
hands enthusiastically throughout the day. After the first handshake Mr
Rabin said: 'Your Majesty, the entire state of Israel is shaking your hand.'
US president Bill Clinton said: 'As this century draws to a close, a new era
of peace opens before us in ancient lands as brave men choose reconciliation
over conflict.'
Underlining the economic incentives driving the Israeli-Jordanian peace
efforts, the five-page declaration called for an immediate series of
confidence-building measures to inaugurate a new era of trade, tourism and
regional integration which will stimulate the economies of both nations.
Among the measures agreed are: direct telephone links; opening two new
border crossings; granting free passage to third country tourists; linking
the two countries' electricity grids; and speeding up negotiations on an
international air corridor and co-operation between the Jordanian and
Israeli police forces.
The declaration also pledged both sides to accelerate bilateral negotiations
over border disputes and water issues, and, after much US and Israeli
pressure, Jordan also agreed to suspend its part of the Arab boycott of
Israeli goods and companies.
The document also preserved King Hussein's role as guardian of the Islamic
holy sites in Jerusalem and accorded a high priority to Jordan's historic
role as guardian in final status talks on the future of the Holy City.
Mr Rabin said the package of measures was much wider than the two sides
planned when they agreed to the summit 10 days ago and marked the fact that
trade and economic relations would be the foundation of Middle East peace.
The declaration, Mr Rabin said: 'Bears witness to our ability in Israel and
Jordan to accelerate our efforts toward peace, to overcome obstacles, to
achieve a breakthrough and to put an end to 46 years of hostility.'
Mr Clinton described the economic measures as 'the building blocks of a
modern peace in ancient holy lands'.
Both sides pledged to meet continuously until a peace treaty could be
signed. Earlier Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, said: 'I think
it is only a matter of months until there's a formal peace agreement.'
Rare moment of sun for Christopher, Page 4
