FT  16 AUG 94 / Czechs to repay all IMF debt early
The Czech Republic is to repay its entire outstanding debt of Dollars 471m
(Pounds 305m) to the International Monetary Fund before the end of
September, two years ahead of schedule.
The Czech National Bank said that because of the strength of the country's
official foreign exchange reserves, which stood at Dollars 5.3bn at the end
of July, the loan should be repaid earlier than the first official payment
date in 1996. 'We expect a further rise in reserves by the end of the year
and this allows us to make the repayment ahead of time,' said Mr Tomas
Potmesil, an adviser to the governor of the bank, Mr Josef Tosovsky.
The loan is part of a package of credits totalling Dollars 1.6bn granted by
the IMF in 1991 to the former Czechoslovakia. The intention was to
strengthen hard currency reserves and finance the country's balance of
payments deficits as it embarked on the most ambitious economic reform
programme among the former communist economies of eastern Europe.
The Czech Republic and Slovakia separated at the end of 1992, and the debt
was divided in the ratio 2.29 to 1 respectively. The loan to be repaid
represents the outstanding amount of the Czech Republic's share of the
total.
Since the split, the Czech Republic's balance of payments has moved into
surplus, driven by a rise in exports to western Europe and the growth of the
services sector. At the end of July the surplus stood at Kcs8.7bn (Pounds
201m).
Czech foreign exchange reserves have risen sharply this year because of a
big increase in the inflow of foreign capital, attracted by the country's
economic stability and high long-term interest rates. Reserves stood at an
average Dollars 3.8bn in 1993 and rose to Dollars 4.8bn in May this year.
Reserves at the end of July are at their highest since the economic reform
programme of Mr Vaclav Klaus, prime minister, began in 1992.
Apart from the official reserves, Czech banks have also attracted big
capital inflows and reserves in the banking system stood at Dollars 6.8bn at
the end of last month.
Last week the national bank raised its estimate of total foreign capital
inflows for 1994 to Kcs100bn from Kcs60bn, which would give official
reserves of nearly Dollars 9bn. It also raised its growth estimate for M2
money supply from 14 per cent to 17, but said the impact on inflation, which
hovers close to the bank's target of 10 per cent for the year, should be
broadly neutral.
The national bank raised the minimum reserve requirements of Czech banks on
August 4 from 9 per cent to 12 per cent of deposits to dampen the
inflationary impact of M2 growth and to maintain it at a level consistent
with a projected 2 per cent rise in gross domestic product for this year.
