FT  06 APR 94 / Euphoria and photos as Israeli troops leave Gaza
'It is not a lovely thing to do to fight against children with stones. We
are lucky and happy to be getting out,' Major Udi Cohen in the Gaza Strip
said yesterday.
The major spoke as Israel continued packing up military and police bases,
redeploying troops from Gaza and the West Bank town of Jericho in
preparation for Palestinian self-rule. The arrival of the first independent
Palestinian police force is imminent. The redeployment is Israel's first
withdrawal from occupied Arab lands - captured in the 1967 Six Day War -
since it handed the Sinai back to Egypt in 1982.
All across Gaza yesterday, smiling troops expressed their relief as they
departed. Soldiers photographed each other to commemorate a moment many hope
will be historic and irreversible.
The soldiers will move to a new base in the Gush Katif block of Jewish
settlements in the south of the strip - which will remain after Palestinian
self-rule. 'The new base is more beautiful and you can see the sea,' Lt
Nitzan said. 'We will be surrounded by Jews there.'
Not all soldiers are happy to quit the strip. 'We shouldn't give up our
biblical land and go back to Auschwitz borders,' said one.
But most, especially teenage conscripts, are euphoric to be leaving behind
dangerous patrols, midnight arrests, the constant threat of ambush and
Palestinian demonstrators.
'It's been like hell here,' said one soldier. 'We've been surrounded by
Arabs who hate and fear us. You never knew when you or your friend would
take a bullet. At last it's over.'
Senior officers said yesterday they hope the withdrawal will allow the army
to return to its conventional role of national defence rather than
counter-insurgency and occupation. 'We hope to transfer control to
Palestinians so the army can go back to doing the job of an army and not
that of a military police,' said Col Meir Ben-Yishai, commander of southern
Gaza.
Palestinians watched the withdrawal yesterday with a mixture of impatience
and hostility.
In Jericho, Palestinian schoolchildren tossed stones and bottles at Israeli
policemen trying to finish the evacuation of the police station and paint it
before handing it over.
