FT  07 NOV 94 / Survey of Birmingham and the West Midlands (7): Unease at
the nation's crossroads - The extensive transport system is still
inadequate, say businesssmen
The West Midlands region has an extensive road system, the UK's main
north-south rail link, and an international airport within easy reach of
Birmingham city centre.
However, businessmen argue that the principal roads are congested, and they
point to the increasing need for supplier companies to meet the faster and
more accurate delivery times required by big manufacturers. They complain
about a lack of investment in the main west coast railway line, just as it
is becoming a vital access route to the Channel tunnel.
The airport is gearing up for expansion and is hoping to attract travellers
who currently prefer to use Heathrow or Manchester.
Mr Tony Bradley, home policy manager of Birmingham chamber of commerce,
argues that transport is the key to everyone else's industry. The transport
network that grew up to serve West Midlands manufacturing became one of its
strengths as its dependency on exports increased.
Birmingham found itself at a transport crossroads, and pressure on links
intensified as more motorists used roads built to serve industry, and as
those roads became through-routes on the south-east to north-west axis
linking the country's three main conurbations.
The stretch of the M6 across the north-west of Birmingham is a prime
example. Built to a capacity of 80,000-90,000 vehicles a day, it is now
carrying 115,000. A second public inquiry is under way into a proposed new
motorway - the Birmingham northern relief road - to take through-traffic
away from the conurbation.
After the first public inquiry the road was approved, but then the
government decided it wanted it to be the UK's first private-sector tolled
motorway. This time there are more objectors, as some believe a toll
motorway would put the area at a disadvantage.
Further north, there are plans to widen the M6 between Stafford and
Manchester.
Much local lobbying has tried to persuade the government to allow the
upgrading of the 500-mile west coast main line, the railway linking London,
the Midlands, north-west England and west-central Scotland. Inter City, the
train operator, is doing its best, running a service on 30-year-old
equipment. Railtrack and WCML Development, a private sector consortium, are
carrying out a feasibility study for the upgrading.
Planning permission has been given for two regional freight terminals - at
Daventry and Hams Hall - to serve Channel tunnel services.
The West Midlands is one of the few conurbations of any size without an
underground or light rail rapid transit system. This is a deficiency the
region is anxious to put right. It regards the plan for a three-stage
development, starting with a line from Birmingham to Wolverhampton, as a
main contender for government help.
There are also hopes that this metro would have a link with the airport,
whose finance director, Mr Stephen Greenwood, argues that expansion could be
an important jobs generator. The airport will handle about 5m passengers
this year - a further 1m, he said, could add 1,000 jobs to the local
economy.
Birmingham airport's expansion plans are based on getting a bigger share of
the market in its own back yard. The airport meets about half the region's
leisure demand (compared with Manchester's 95 per cent) and 41 per cent of
scheduled demand (65 per cent). Thirty-eight per cent of West Midlands
passengers for Paris use Heathrow in spite of Birmingham's offering nine
flights a day.
To rectify the situation, the airport this month opens a marketing campaign
based on the slogan: 'The world on your doorstep.' It will emphasise the
services, as well as the airport's relatively easy access and parking and
its claimed advantage over Heathrow in speed of baggage and passenger
handling.
The airport's expansion plans involve more than doubling the main terminal
area, and expanding the Eurohub terminal used by British Airways to create
capacity to handle at least 11m passengers a year by 2005. Planning
permission will be applied for early next year.
In the longer term, the airport wants to extend its runway from the present
2,600 metres to 3,100m, to enable it to serve the most distant long-haul
destinations. Mr Greenwood emphasises that the airport can expand regardless
of that extra capability. It is currently in public consultation, especially
with affected communities, and will not seek planning permission for two to
three years.
Crucial to any large expansion is the airport's plan to end its
public-sector status, so that it can fund its Pounds 150m-Pounds 200m
development without an impact on the public sector borrowing requirement. It
is owned by seven local authorities - Birmingham, with 38 per cent, and
Solihull, Coventry, Dudley, Walsall, Sandwell and Wolverhampton in 8-12 per
cent parcels.
The councils have agreed to become a minority shareholder, and control
collectively no more than 49 per cent. The rest will be disposed of by
attracting strategic partners to invest in the airport, placing shares with
institutions or a combination of the two. The government has approved the
move in principle, and the airport is aiming for partial privatisation by
next spring.
