FT  31 AUG 94 / Management: Equal treatment for gay staff - A look at US
companies offering health benefits for partners
The number of US companies offering health insurance benefits to the
partners of gay and lesbian employees has snowballed since Lotus, the
Boston-based software company, began the practice two years ago.
Richard Jennings, executive director of Hollywood Supports, a gay rights
advocacy group, puts the number at almost 200. He says the benefit has
become standard in the computer and entertainment sectors, and in academia.
Apple Computer and Microsoft were quick to join Lotus. They have been
followed by HBO, Warner Brothers, Viacom, Paramount, Harvard University,
Yale University, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and scores of
others.
Thirty-five municipalities, including Atlanta, Boston, Seattle, Los Angeles
and San Diego, now offer employees the option. In July, Vermont became the
first state to do so.
The practice is also affecting the media sector, with the New York Times,
the Seattle Times and the Los Angeles Times considering similar benefits.
According to gay rights groups, smaller companies are also starting to offer
insurance.
Providing health insurance for gay and lesbian partners is gaining ground
for several reasons. Most obvious is that companies say it is a good way of
attracting and keeping valuable homosexual employees. The incidence of gay
and lesbian advocacy groups within companies has also increased the pressure
for such benefits. 'That was their main complaint,' says Randy Massengale,
senior manager of diversity at Microsoft. 'They felt they were not being
treated equally.'
The benefits also make it easier for companies to market to gay and lesbian
consumers, who have become expert at organising boycotts of products from
companies that do not furnish insurance. 'The more companies that offer
these benefits, the harder it becomes not to do so,' says Jennings. 'There
is a lot of pressure especially on the Fortune 500 and on food and retail
groups.'
Following suit is proving a surprisingly cheap way for companies to improve
relations with the homosexual community. Microsoft says the benefits have
inflated its health insurance cost by just 1 per cent, because so few
employees take up the offer. Gay rights activists say that is because the
domestic partners of homosexuals usually work, and are likely to have
coverage through their own job.
Also, the benefits do not receive equal treatment under federal tax laws,
which consider health insurance of homosexual partners as taxable income.
Other disincentives to accepting the benefits may be reluctance to come out,
or a simple desire to keep their private life private. 'We find that many
employees may be openly gay, but are anxious to keep their home life to
themselves,' says Evan Wolfson, a senior staff attorney with the Lambda
Legal Defence, which has championed gays' health insurance rights in the
courts.
Others may be reluctant to sign up because companies often require employees
taking advantage of the benefit to register legally as domestic partners.
Although homosexuals cannot marry in the US, a number of municipalities
offer legal registration, which carries property rights implications.
Most local governments furnishing the benefits have also extended the offer
to the unmarried domestic partners of heterosexuals. Their logic is that
unmarried heterosexuals who live together should have the same options as
homosexual partners. Companies, however, tend to limit the practice to gays
and lesbians. 'There is always the argument that heterosexuals can legally
marry,' says Massengale.
By offering the benefit, companies run the risk of backlash. Conservative
citizens of Williamson County in Texas tried stop Apple Computer setting up
an office there because of the company's accommodation of gay and lesbian
employees.
But the county relented when Apple threatened to indeed move elsewhere, and
other companies say they have encountered little resistance.
