FT  06 JUN 94 / Emerging Markets: Dollar stays focus of market attention -
Currency Markets
The initial concern for foreign exchanges this week will be whether the
dollar can continue the rally prompted last Friday by the release of the May
US labour market report.
The inflationary implications of falling unemployment and rising average
hourly earnings, assisted by comments from senior US officials suggesting
the dollar might be undervalued, helped the US currency to its highest level
for a number of weeks. It closed in London at DM1.6665 and Y105.245.
Confusing the picture, however, was a fall in manufacturing jobs and hours
worked which led some analysts to conclude that the report showed a
moderation in the rate of US economic growth.
Much will depend on the performance of US bonds. A continued rally would be
helpful but a slide in prices would weaken the currency. The April consumer
credit numbers, to be released tomorrow, and the May producer price
inflation figure, which emerges on Friday, will help the market make up its
mind.
Also coming out on that day is the Bank of Japan's quarterly Tankan survey.
Confirmation of continued economic weakness could presage a lowering of
interest rates, which would help the dollar. But some observers think the
survey will show that the economy is past the worst.
Trade framework talks between the US and Japan will continue this week. The
focus will be the telecommunications and medical equipment sectors. Progress
in these talks would support the dollar.
In Europe, meanwhile, markets will be keeping a watchful eye on the outcome
of the European elections, with countries voting on Thursday and Sunday. In
Germany, Chancellor Kohl also faces municipal elections in seven states. A
severe rebuff would probably weaken the D-Mark, but recent polls show his
support rising so markets will be less concerned about the prospect of a
change in government.
Another politician anxiously facing the electorate is Mr John Major, the
British prime minister. A very poor result for the ruling Tory party is
widely discounted, but a third place finish would certainly reignite
discussion of a leadership challenge in the spring.
The political uncertainty this would provoke needs to be set against the
view that any change in premier would be market positive. Results will only
emerge on Sunday and Monday, but markets will doubtless have earlier exit
poll information to chew on.
The market is expecting poor March trade figures when they are released on
Friday, and this will undermine sterling. UK output data, however, should
confirm that another fall in interest rates is unlikely.
