FT  08 JUN 94 / Management: Use your intuition - Rationality is in retreat
as a business tool
Einstein once declared: 'I never discovered anything with my rational mind.'
On another occasion he claimed that 'imagination is more important than
knowledge'. In practice, he used a combination of reason and intuition.
Edwin Land, the founder of Polaroid, the US photography group, worked in
very similar fashion. So, in many respects, do innovative modern leaders
such as Ingvar Kamprad, founder of Swedish-based furniture retailer Ikea,
the Benetton family of the Italian clothing group, and even some
ultra-numerate Americans - notably Jack Welch of General Electric of the US.
They use intuition not just occasionally, to generate 'visions' for their
company's future strategy, but also in everyday decision making.
Yet, for more than 30 years, a management world whose prime task should be
the creation of businesses has treated intuition as a dirty word.
Marginalised by the rise of 'scientific', ultra-rational management -
especially in strategic analysis and planning - intuition became associated
with a discredited, uninformed style of management known as
'seat-of-the-pants'.
But now, as companies search for ways of creating more businesses, and with
excessive rationality in retreat after more than a decade of strategic
planning disasters, intuition is making a comeback.
The problem is how to integrate it with the rigour and deep understanding of
markets, technologies, strategy and competitive behaviour which managers
need at a time of global competition, complexity, uncertainty and rapid
change.
In the last few months two books have been published which extol the virtues
of intuition, try to explain it, and advise how it can be exploited.
One, called Intuition - The New Frontier of Management*, comes from three
authors connected with the International Institute for Management
Development in Lausanne.
Among the many findings of the book - and of a nine-country international
survey which it contains - is that Japanese managers are much more intuitive
than they realise (or admit), while Swedes are far less so than they think.
Americans and Britons rate pretty high objectively, and know it. The study
shows that women are far more intuitive than men.
The other book** comes from Henry Mintzberg, a Canadian professor known
worldwide for his 20-year campaign against the excesses and failures of much
past planning.
As Mintzberg demonstrates, most of the influential corporate planning
literature of the past 30 years, from the pioneering Igor Ansoff in the
1960s to Harvard's Michael Porter in the 1980s, - extols pure rationality in
place of 'gut feel'.
The IMD book, written by an Indian company managing director, Jagdish
Parikh, with two academics, Friedrich Neubauer and Alden Lank, tries to
explain in simple language what intuition is - and is not - and suggests
practical ways of using it profitably.
In the past, it argues, managers sometimes resorted to intuition because of
inadequate data or information. Now computers churn out so much information
that the use of intuition is essential in order to make sense of it quickly.
Conventional mental activities - absorption of information, retention and
reasoning - are now inadequate.
As Parikh and his co-authors argue, it is an innovative, largely intuitive,
grasp of the evolving global marketplace which has transformed businesses
such as Sony, the consumer electronics company and car makers BMW and Honda,
into giants. Creativity of this kind seldom results from convergent,
analytical thinking, they maintain. It is more the result of divergent
thinking, and highly intuitive approaches.
Managers' recognition of this is hampered by, among other things, people's
inability to agree on the nature of intuition. Both Mintzberg, and Parikh
and his co-authors, cite a wide range of confusing definitions (see panel).
But at least Parikh and co are certain of what intuition is not: instinct,
impulse, ingenuity, inspiration, intellect, intelligence or wishful
thinking.
On the basis of their broad definition of the term, they describe various
techniques for enhancing managers' innate intuition, and applying it in
practice, especially to the thought process involved in creating a corporate
'vision'. By comparison, they give only sketchy advice on how intuition can
be applied in everyday practice. They also fail to deal adequately with the
question of how managers can distinguish informed intuition from ignorant
'gut feel'.
More than half the 1,300 senior and top managers covered by the survey
claimed to use intuition and logic or reasoning in roughly equal measure.
But this was not borne out by the objective evidence which the survey
gathered through a complex questionnaire. More accurately, a large minority
of 40 per cent said they used logic and reasoning more than intuition.
The survey showed that age makes little difference to a manager's intuitive
ability. But the 45 to 59-year-olds were rated slightly higher than others.
On the other hand, top managers scored less well in objective tests than
their senior colleagues, but thought themselves superior.
* Blackwell. Pounds 35
** The Rise and fall of Strategic Planning. Prentice Hall. Pounds 19.95
INTUITION: A MYRIAD OF DEFINITIONS
by Mario Bunge (cited by Mintzberg):
As PERCEPTION (quick identification of patterns); IMAGINATION (metaphors,
representation); REASON (inference, synthesis); VALUATION (judgment,
insight)
by Parikh, Neubauer and Lank:
As a LEARNED SKILL (positive visualisation); a NATURAL TRAIT (Jungian
psychology); a SHORT-TERM PROCESS; a LONG-TERM ABILITY; MULTILEVEL
(conscious, sub-/un-/supra-conscious)
