FT  12 JUL 94 / Plymouth tackles casualties of peace: Roland Adburgham on a
city where more than one in five jobs is defence-related
On Plymouth Hoe in Devon, there is a memorial to the port's servicemen and
women who were casualties of the two world wars, inscribed with no fewer
than 23,182 names. Today, Plymouth is having to come to terms with the
casualties of peace.
The 850 redundancies at the city's Devonport naval dockyard, announced last
month, are the most recent consequence of the peace dividend.
In the seven years since the consortium DML took over the yard as a
privatised manager, the workforce has shrunk from 11,400 to 4,350 even
before the latest losses. It is expected that Thursday's defence review
could mean further losses, with the possible relocation of Royal Marines.
Last year's euphoria after winning the contract to refit Trident submarines
has evaporated.
Plymouth has one of the highest concentrations of defence establishments in
the country. As well as the dockyard and employers such as British
Aerospace, there are 18 military bases in its travel-to-work area. According
to Plymouth Business School, defence accounts for more than one in five
local jobs.
Mr Tudor Evans, chairman of the city's employment and economic development
committee, says the latest Devonport redundancies are the equivalent of two
pit closures, but the scale of the rundown has not caught the national
imagination. 'There is no surplus in the local economy to soak up the job
losses,' he said. The Plymouth area has an unemployment rate of 11.6 per
cent, with male unemployment rising to 25 per cent in some parts of the
city.
The first cuts were made with early retirements and large pay-offs.
Redundancy costs, met by the taxpayer, averaged Pounds 30,000 a person. Mr
Peter Whitehouse, DML's business development director, said: 'Now the young
and those who genuinely want to work will be unemployed and the social and
economic impact will be much higher.'
Many of the redundancies are among the well-paid and skilled. At the crowded
Devonport job centre, nearly all the vacancies are for unskilled or
semi-skilled work, often part-time. A tea-shop assistant is wanted at Pounds
3.25 an hour and a fruit packer at Pounds 3. 'There's nothing for me,' said
a former weapons fitter.
Mr Whitehouse described it as 'a horrible situation of almost continual
attrition'. DML had diversified into civil work such as steel yacht
building, accounting for 15 per cent of its workload. Mr Whitehouse said:
'We are starting to move towards the limits of the volume of that work we
might expect. To turn swords into ploughshares is always difficult.'
The defence dependency, not only of Plymouth but of Devon and Cornwall, has
stimulated a recognition that the sub-regional economy needs to be
restructured.
A public and private-sector partnership, Westcountry Development
Corporation, has been set up to help job creation in the two counties. Mr
Mike Boxall, the WDC's chief executive, said the defence rundown was
compounded by events in traditional industries.
'Tourism, agriculture, fishing and mining are all facing fundamental
structural changes,' he said. 'We need a combination of government support
and local initiatives.'
European and government funding is starting to come into the region.
Plymouth last year gained European Objective 2 status, aimed at helping
declining industrial regions.
The city has also been designated an assisted area, but Plymouth Business
School has calculated that funding to compensate for the loss of
defence-related spending had been insignificant.
The government has recently become conscious of its vulnerability in the
south-west. Last month the Conservatives lost the European parliamentary
seat of Cornwall and Plymouth West to the Liberal Democrats.
One action has been the creation of a development corporation for three of
the waterfront military sites in Plymouth.
Other moves have been to tempt international companies such as Toshiba and
Wrigley to the city and a science park is being set up to attract high-tech,
'clean' industries. Plymouth is also promoting itself as a 'historic
waterfront city' to encourage tourism.
Mr John Mannell, chief executive of Devon and Cornwall Training and
Enterprise Council, said: 'Plymouth has such natural potential. But as it
sheds its garrison town image, it is finding it difficult to say what it
wants to bein the future. We want to create a different image - convince
people it is a good place to live, work, invest and visit.'
