FT  30 SEP 94 / Technology: Defence against an alien attack - A look at
medicine based on the immune system in the latest of a series on drug
discoveries
Medical magic bullets come and go. From cancer cures to obesity treatments,
precisely targeted drugs regularly show early promise which fades during
clinical trials. Medicine based on the immune system aims to be different.
It uses the natural mechanisms that can defend the human body against almost
any microscopic invader. The promise is that, while drug companies spend
billions of pounds developing synthetic chemicals to fight disease, the
body's defensive arsenal is in place waiting to do the job. The right
trigger could release a new generation of successful treatments.
The idea is one of the oldest in medicine. In 1796, Edward Jenner conferred
immunity against smallpox by infecting healthy people with a milder disease
called cowpox. In effect, he taught the immune system how to tackle an enemy
it had not yet encountered. Since then, vaccination has all but eradicated
former killers such as tuberculosis, typhoid and cholera.
New vaccines continue to be developed. SmithKline Beecham's Havrix for
hepatitis A is today's world best seller with revenues of about Dollars 500m
(Pounds 330m) a year.
As well as being boosted, the immune system can be suppressed. For 30 years
this has helped transplant patients receive donated organs which would
normally be rejected.
With the power of immune system manipulation already demonstrated,
researchers promise more to come. The body's natural defences could be
directed to kill cancer cells or the Aids virus HIV. Diseases in which the
defence mechanisms have gone wrong, such as multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid
arthritis and psoriasis, could one day be brought under control.
Unfortunately, the immune system is resistant to exploitation because of its
staggering complexity. It has virtually uncountable numbers of mechanisms
and components. Those discovered so far are grouped into categories with
names such as scavenger cells, natural killer cells, eosinophils, T-cells,
B-cells and immunoglobulins. Each can work in small numbers or be mass
produced, function independently or together, influencing each other in the
war against invaders.
Ian Hutchinson, professor of immunology at Manchester University, points out
that there are 100,000bn different kinds of T-cell alone. Each one is
pre-formed in the body and designed to attack a different invader. It is as
if every man, woman and child were a crack shot with 20m types of firearm,
each distinct from the next and each capable of killing just one kind of
attacker. If an alien invader landed, a search would have to be mounted for
the one gun that was effective. It would have to be mass produced and
shipped to the landing site.
Progress in the medical version of firearm production has been slow. Some
individual components of the immune system have been isolated, but this is a
long way from finding the right one to cure a disease.
David Barry, director of research and development at UK drug company
Wellcome, says: 'There are literally hundreds of molecules that are said to
stimulate the immune system. In theory, and sometimes in animal models, they
work. In real life diseases, it is very difficult to prove anything.'
He says that biology has not yet analysed the fine detail of how immunity
works. For example, Aids patients, whose immune systems have been damaged,
tend to suffer from some types of cancer and not others. Yet the exact
relationship between cancer and the immune system remains unclear.
However, plenty of work is going on that could lead to new therapies within
two or three years. Cancer is frequently the target, largely for the
commercial reason that effective therapies are not yet available. The immune
system could be harnessed in the fight against cancer if only cancer cells
could be distinguished better from normal cells.
The work of New York biotechnology company Imclone Systems is typical. It
has a drug called Vaccine 105AD7 which mimics a material on the surface of
colon cancer cells in a way that triggers production of large numbers of
killer cells able to attack the cancer. Clinical trial results published in
April showed that patients receiving the drug survived for 12 months,
compared with an average of three months for those not receiving it.
Cancer vaccines are being developed by several biotechnology companies.
Products from Therion Biologics of Cambridge, Massachusetts, and Somatix of
Alameda, California, are already in clinical trials.
Other companies are trying to use the power of immune system cells to bind
to specific targets such as cancer cells to carry poisons directly to
targets. But all of these products are still at a relatively early stage of
development.
Closer to the market are the latest advances in suppressing, rather than
stimulating, the immune system. The idea is not new. Earlier this century,
doctors noticed that children with measles sometimes suffered a recurrence
of tuberculosis. Measles had depressed the immune system enough for dormant
TB bacteria to become active.
Similar immune suppression was observed in the 1960s as a side effect of
potential cancer drugs. The first proper immunosuppressive drug, launched in
1964, was Wellcome's Imuran, a failed cancer therapy.
Immune suppression is now big business. There are almost 3,000 organ
transplants a year in the UK alone, mostly of kidneys. Transplant patients
take immunosuppressants for the rest of their lives.
The most widely used drug is Sandimmun from Switzerland's Sandoz. It had
sales of almost Dollars 1bn in 1993, making it about the world's 30th best
selling drug.
Compared with immunostimulants, Sandimmun is not very specific. This is just
as well because a transplanted organ stimulates the production of up to
1,000bn different kinds of T-cells. Sandimmun is poisonous, limiting the
dosage, and it depresses too much of the immune system. Patients have to be
given antibiotics to prevent infection.
There are several drugs, which promise fewer side effects, being launched or
close to the market. FK-506 from the Japanese company Fujisawa has over the
past year received approval from many countries to go on sale. The price of
about Dollars 12,000 for the first year's supply has not stopped it winning
sales from Sandimmun.
In theory, immune suppression should be able to help in conditions where the
immune system is over active. In the case of multiple sclerosis, parts of
nerve cells are mistaken for invaders and attacked. In rheumatoid arthritis
material in the joints is damaged. Even allergy is thought to result from an
over-enthusiastic immune response.
Here the goal is to understand the mechanism of action and block it. Several
biotechnology companies are close to marketing treatments.
Immulogic of Massachusetts has developed a way to immobilise the T-cells
that respond to cat fur and trigger cat allergy in millions of people. This
spring, clinical trials indicated the company's lead product, Allervax Cat,
reduced allergic symptoms in 70 per cent of patients.
Drugs for MS and rheumatoid arthritis are proving harder to find. Earlier
this month Wellcome abandoned research on its drug Campath 1-H, which once
promised to be a breakthrough in RA.
Such failures are commonplace in immune system drug research. The field is
vast and the interlinking of biochemical processes so complex that some
promising routes will inevitably prove to be blind alleys. But the immune
system is pervasive and on a good day so effective that immunology is likely
to prove a popular area for drug research for many years to come.
The series continues next month with a look at drugs for coughs and colds.
Articles over the last six months have looked at pharmaceutical
advances in the following areas:
Fungi                  25 August
Stroke                   29 July
Painkillers              30 June
Blood products            27 May
Multiple sclerosis      29 April
Sepsis                  31 March
