FT  07 NOV 94 / Chirac promises Emu referendum
Mr Jacques Chirac, leader of France's governing RPR Gaullist party, said
last night that if he became president he would put French membership of any
European monetary union to a referendum. Speaking on television three days
after he became the first mainstream French politician to declare formally
his candidacy in next spring's election to the Elysee, Mr Chirac said: 'I
only want France to enjoy the same rights as Britain and Germany, which have
already announced their intention to consult their parliaments' on whether
to move to a single currency.
France had adopted the Maastricht treaty by referendum and should decide on
the final stage of economic and monetary union (Emu) in the same way, Mr
Chirac said. However, he suggested that the issue might not arise because he
did not believe that there would be sufficient countries economically ready
for Emu by the Maastricht treaty's 1997-99 timetable.
Last night Mr Chirac staked out a slightly more sceptical approach about the
pace of European integration as well as faster action to bring down France's
record 12.7 per cent unemployment rate, as the main elements distinguishing
his policies from those of his fellow Gaullist, Prime Minister Edouard
Balladur. The latter is expected to declare his rival candidacy, but not
until the new year.
Mr Chirac said he had formalised his candidacy on Friday in order to get the
electorate to take more notice of his views. He also confirmed last night
that at a special RPR congress on Saturday he would step down from the post
of president that he had held since 1976 in order to focus on his
presidential campaign.
An Ifop poll on presidential preferences, conducted later on Friday and
published in yesterday's Journal du Dimanche, gave him 15 per cent support
compared with 10 per cent a month ago.
The same survey showed his gain came mainly at the expense of Mr Balladur,
whose rating fell from 19 to 16 per cent over the same period, while support
for Mr Jacques Delors, the outgoing European Commission president, declined
only marginally from 20 to 19 per cent.
