FT  12 AUG 94 / Leading Article: Thinking about tomorrow
Struggling to pass even a much-diluted version of US health reform,
President Bill Clinton will not want to be reminded of the need for deeper
change. But this week's report from the Kerrey Commission on budgetary
reform offers just that. As it stands, the country's tax and benefit system
implies a burden on younger Americans that is both unsustainable and unjust.
Unfortunately, it is also unlikely to be speedily redressed.
Wrung from President Clinton in return for Senator Bob Kerrey's vote in last
year's budget battle, the Commission will only present its final
recommendations in December. But the interim report, published this week,
unkindly clarifies how little the 1993 package improved the country's
long-run fiscal health. After 1998, the federal budget deficit will begin to
rise again. As the Commission points out, interest payments and social
benefits will consume nearly three-quarters of all federal revenues by 2003
and 100 per cent 10 years later. By 2030, total federal expenditures are
projected to exceed 37 per cent of GDP, compared with just 22 per cent
today.
Much of the rise will be driven by the ageing of the population, a burden on
future workers for which all industrial countries must be prepared.
Shouldering it, in all cases, will require three things: a high national
savings rate, rising productivity of existing workers, and a well-structured
tax and benefit system. The US fiscal dilemma is more pressing than that of
many countries, despite the fact that its population is ageing relatively
slowly, largely because its record on all three has been deteriorating.
Fiscal burden
Some steps have been taken, but these fall far short of what is needed. The
Social Security Act of 1983 established a fund to help pay social security
benefits to baby-boomers when they begin to retire in the next century. But
the trust will run out by 2030. In the meantime, the money saved is
effectively spent on reducing the headline federal deficit, which will, in
any case, rise in line with other obligations, such as Medicare.
The fiscal burden will have to be reduced. That means spreading the cost of
ageing more equitably, both across generations and within them. The current
system fails on both counts. Thanks to the rules of the social security
system, payroll taxes must meet the cost of providing benefits to today's
retirees that are two to five times as great as their contributions would
have earned in a private pension system. Moreover, although two-thirds of
direct federal benefits go to people over 65, less than a fifth goes to
those below the poverty line.
Sensible entitlement
Sensible entitlement reform would continue the efforts, begun in 1983, to
make today's workers meet more of the costs of their future retirement. But
it would have to target future benefit payments by means-testing a good
proportion and ensuring that all are taxed, just as non-retired incomes are
taxed. Less than a quarter of entitlements are currently means-tested. Tax
exemptions must be similarly reassessed: these disproportionately favour the
well-off and cost Dollars 400bn - half the total cost of the entitlement
system.
It is hard to exaggerate the political difficulties involved in passing such
reforms. Owing to its varied membership, the Kerrey commission's
recommendations are unlikely to be sufficiently ambitious. But if, as he
claims, Mr Clinton wishes to boost American long-term economic growth
through public investment, serious tax and entitlement reform is the only
possible route. Without it, there is no room for higher spending elsewhere,
however justifiable.
On recent evidence, the coalition in favour of cutting government
expenditures is fragile, at best. And, when the Commission reports in
December, Republicans may be fresh from a strong showing in November's
elections, and unwilling to grant Mr Clinton any legislative triumphs. As
far as budgetary reform is concerned, he is also unlikely to make the
attempt. First, as ex-chairman of the council of economic advisers Herbert
Stein once said, 'the American public will have to make it safe for
politicians to do the right thing'. Thus far, they have not done so.
