FT  05 OCT 94 / Ford puts two UK plants on short-time working
Workers at Ford's Halewood and Dagenham car plants are to go on short-time
for the rest of this month, taking a total of 8,000 Escorts and 2,000
Fiestas out of production.
Ford put most of the blame on a weaker than expected UK market. But its main
rivals said they had no plans to take similar action and dismissed
speculation that the move might indicate a faltering of the UK economic
recovery.
Ford is to review its decision towards the end of the month, when it is
expected to extend short-time working into November, and possibly to the end
of the year.
Retail motor trade leaders believe that Ford, UK market leader, has been
particularly hard hit by the industry's overoptimistic forecast of the
likely size of the annual August sales 'bulge'.
Most of the UK car trade had expected the August market to reach 500,000
units, a figure matching the record of 1989, but it reached only 452,000.
Motor traders claim that many of these 'sales' were pre-registered by
manufacturers or their dealers and, as a result, have yet to find final
buyers.
Mr Alan Pulham, head of the National Franchised Dealers' Association, said
last night that the miscalculation meant there were nearly 100,000 excess
new cars in the industry's supply pipeline.
The excess stocks would sharply increase competition in the final quarter of
the year. However, he described the excess as a 'blip we have to go through;
I don't think we have an underlying economic weakness'.
Ford's Halewood plant on Merseyside will bear the brunt of the cuts in
hours. Its 5,000 employees are to work for three days a week until the end
of the month, losing output of 800 cars each day. Although the Escort is the
UK's best-selling car, Halewood supplies the UK market solely. A small
proportion of its Escort van production is exported.
The Dagenham plant, which makes Fiesta cars and vans, will lose a total of
two days' production this month, amounting to a total of 2,000 cars and
vans. It has not been so badly hit because it exports about a third of its
output to continental Europe.
Vauxhall, second in the UK market, said yesterday it had no plans to cut
production. Peugeot Talbot is raising production at its Ryton plant near
Coventry.
See Lex
Ford's smallest car, Page 30
GM shake-up, Page 30
