FT  04 MAY 94 / Survey of the Restructuring of Eastern Germany (1): Positive
signs - but still a long way to go / There are indications that eastern
Germany is slowly emerging from an economic trough, but for the 16m people
of the region the initial euphoria of unification has given way to
disorientation
As German unification approaches its fourth anniversary, the scope of the
changes undergone by the people of the former German Democratic Republic is
becoming increasingly apparent.
There are the changes apparent to west Germans and to visitors as well as
less noticeable but more deep-seated social effects. The infrastructure is
improving before one's eyes, and western-style retailing and services -
department stores, pharmacies, petrol stations and bakeries - have spread
across the land.
No less dramatic but less obvious is the social impact on the 16m people,
former citizens of the German Democratic Republic, who now find themselves
attached to the most prosperous democracy in Europe. Because of the
swiftness of the changes - ranging from the switch to the Deutsche Mark and
privatisation to the arrival of large scale unemployment - east Germans have
had little time to adjust and few opportunities to influence the changes.
The initial euphoria of unification has given way to disorientation.
The independent citizens' committees, which grew up in East Germany during
and in the wake of the peaceful revolution of autumn 1989, had hoped for
greater consultation, particularly over the constitutional way in which the
unification would take place.
There were two options. There was Article 146 of the west German Basic Law
which provided that, in the case of unification, a new constitution would be
framed and submitted to a popular vote. There was also Article 23, under
which the former German Democratic Republic would simply be slotted into the
existing constitution of the west German Federal Republic.
The federal government chose to implement Article 23 rather than the more
cumbersome Article 146. That meant imposing on eastern Germany the west
German status quo, and the entire complex of Bonn's laws and regulations,
institutions and procedures.
In taking this path, opportunities were missed by both sections of Germany.
In western Germany, a debate, begun in the mid-1980s, on the need for more
de-regulation and liberalisation of the economy, was interrupted. East
Germans, already familiar with an all-present bureaucracy, had a feeling of
being 'colonised' by the westerners. This perpetuated their sense of
exclusion from political decision-making and delayed the establishment of a
civil society.
This sense of exclusion, coupled with the start of one of the most radical
privatisation programmes undertaken anywhere, traumatised east German
society in two dramatic ways: the birth rate nose-dived and people turned in
on themselves.
According to Nicholas Eberstadt, a US demographer, 'eastern Germany's adults
have come as close to a temporary suspension of child-bearing as any large
population in the human experience.' In 1992, for example, the birth rate
had fallen by 55 per cent compared with 1989 when the Berlin Wall was
breached. Over the same period, the marriage rate had fallen by 62 per cent.
And compared with west Germany, the likelihood of an east German man aged
between 30 and 44 of dying from injuries or suicide is 150 per cent higher
than his western German counterpart.
These trends can be explained by the sudden prospect of women having no
status in a country where 90 per cent of them had a job before unification;
and equally the prospect of a man having no perspective for the future. East
Germany's unemployed, including people on government job creation,
retraining and early retirement schemes, represent 37 per cent of the
working population.
These trends in turn have delayed the emergence of local political and
social elites. Professor Jurgen Kocka, who teaches modern history at
Berlin's Free University, says church membership is falling and east
Germans, unlike westerners, are not joining associations or political
parties. 'They have completely withdrawn into themselves. Even the
intellectual elite is not as active as it should be. There is a vacuum. I do
not know how it is going to be filled.'
Western Germany shares some responsibility for this vacuum. Energetic
officials, whose promotion prospects had slowed down or had been blocked in
the west, seized the opportunity of moving eastwards to help transfer new
political structures to the region. At the same time, thousands of east
German academics and teachers, managers and scientists, had been sacked
because of their alleged links with the Stasi, or former east German secret
police, or because jobs no longer existed. This created an immediate vacuum
on the local level. The younger generation has not yet filled that vacuum,
partly because the Stasi files remain open, making many people feel suspect;
and partly because adapting to the economic upheaval is time consuming.
In spite of these traumatic effects of unification, the government has been
able to maintain stability in eastern Germany largely through the massive
transfers, which last year totalled DM170bn. Over a third is spent on
subsidising consumption in eastern Germany, whose collapsed economy last
year contributed no more than 9 per cent of the combined country's total
Gross Domestic Product.
Yet there are signs that east Germans are slowly reconciling themselves to
the new system. The initial spending spree of 1990 and 1991 has given way to
habits reminiscent of west German society of the 1960s and the early 1970s.
In 1990, after monetary union, the level of east German households'
financial assets was DM20,000 per household. After the consumer spending
spree, private disposable per capita income in eastern Germany rose by 55.5
per cent between the second half of 1990 and the first half of 1993. In real
terms, this represented an increase of 17 per cent. Boosted by west German
transfers, the average income over the same period has reached 55 per cent
of west German levels.
At the same time, the propensity for east German households to save is
similar to that of west Germans. According to the Bundesbank, savings last
year took 13 per cent of their disposable income, compared with 14 per cent
in western Germany, and the financial assets in eastern Germany totalled
DM190bn, or DM30,000 per household. This represents the average amount
reached by west German households in the first half of ther 1970s.
These developments suggest that east Germans, particularly those in work,
are protecting themselves against future unemployment; adapting to the
market, and west German habits; and are comparatively well off, taking into
account the transfers which underpin these assets, and the conditions of
former communist countries. These factors reinforce stability.
But the real test facing the east Germans is at what point their economy
will start producing goods which can be competitive on the west German and
international market.
Much will depend on the level of west German and foreign investment. For the
first time since unification, investment per capita in the east exceeded the
level in the west. Economists argue that these investment levels will have
to be maintained for at least another five years to modernise the
infrastructure and create a highly qualified labour force. They add that the
more investments are targeted on the highest levels of technology, the
greater the chance of higher output and productivity.
The other positive trend is that production has finally risen faster than
overall demand after stagnating output had been steadily outstripped by a
growth in demand fuelled by transfers from the west since 1990. Industrial
orders also show signs of picking up. But industrial production is still
less than 40 per cent of its former level before unification. Recovery is
coming from a very low base.
Any sustained recovery, and a growth in competitiveness, will also depend on
much higher levels of productivity. Productivity levels are on average
between 30 per cent and 40 per cent of western levels, while wages are about
80 per cent of those in western Germany, and are set to match western German
levels by 1996. This means that labour unit costs in the east are 70 per
cent higher than in western Germany.
To reach west German productivity levels, the government might have to
tolerate even higher unemployment levels, (or even indirectly subsidise the
newly privatised sector through more tax breaks) while continuing to
maintain the current levels of transfers to support consumption and the
unemployed.
Over time, some of the unemployed might be absorbed by the Handwerk, or
small crafts sector, the one area where east Germans are becoming
economically engaged. Last year, more than 1m people were employed in
138,500 of these businesses, 20 per cent more than the previous year.
But none of these trends indicate that eastern Germany is moving anywhere
close to becoming a self-sustaining economy. What they do suggest is that
the region is slowly coming out of the trough of the last three years; and
that the small emerging entrepreneurial class may in time help foster a new
political class in eastern Germany. Then, east Germans might be in a
position to contribute to the long overdue political and economic debate in
their country. But they will not be in a position to live without transfers
for many years to come.
