FT  12 JUL 94 / Exco issue more than three times subscribed
Exco, the moneybroking arm of the collapsed British &amp; Commonwealth group,
yesterday gave a note of encouragement to the lacklustre new issues market
with the announcement that its public offer was 3.2 times subscribed.
The response to the Pounds 23m public portion of Exco's Pounds 93m share
offer was far more favourable than the highly publicised flotation of
venture capital group 3i, which spent Pounds 2m on marketing the offer to
the affluent investor type, 'Jeremy'.
The 3i flotation was only 1.1 times subscribed, with less than 20 per cent
of the 385,000 individuals who registered for its prospectus putting in
applications.
Exco received 9,500 individual applications after spending Pounds 200,000 on
advertising.
Mr Simon Neathercoat, of Exco's brokers Kleinwort Benson Securities, said:
'There were fond memories of the success story of the eighties that Exco
was.' Exco was acquired by B&amp;C in 1986, after an extremely successful phase
on the stock market.
Mr Neathercoat added that 'with a good story and a sensible price, the new
issue market remains open'.
Pricing was certainly an issue for Exco. Some merchant bankers suggested the
shares were 'given away', but the pricing had to reflect the low esteem in
which the moneybroking industry has been held by investors, due to concern
about volatility.
Exco shares were offered at 175p, offering a historic price-earnings ratio
of 9.5 and a notional yield of 6 per cent. Given the strong cash generation
of the industry and the success of Exco's global diversification, investors
have clearly been persuaded that the dividend is sustainable.
The issue was also helped by the fact that the Cayzer family's Caledonia
Investments, a canny investor, opted to retain its stake.
By comparison, 3i was considered to be relatively aggressively priced, with
a discount to net asset value of 13.5 per cent, and a gross dividend yield
of 3 per cent.
Baring Brothers, the sponsor, emphasised the importance of the institutional
portion of the 3i offer, which was 1.7 times subscribed, but it must have
been disappointed that the 'Jeremies' had failed to deliver.
Kleinwort Benson said that some institutions had applied for Exco shares
through the public placing. With this level of demand, the shares are
expected to show a healthy premium when they start trading on July 19.
