FT  23 MAR 94 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals (5): Research moves to sharper
focus - Therapeutic categories
As growth of the world's pharmaceuticals market continues to decelerate, so
research and development managers are being forced to be more focused in the
way they direct their companies R&amp;D efforts.
'I think R&amp;D spending will slow down,' says Dr Roy Vagelos, chairman and
chief executive of Merck. 'Over the last 15 years, R&amp;D has grown at about 14
per cent a year. I'd love that to continue, but it's no longer an option.'
Most groups are responding to the new environment by reducing the number of
therapeutic categories they explore. Admittedly, a few, giant groups, can
continue to cover most areas. Dr Edward Scolnick, president of Merck
Research Laboratories, says: 'You can do research in most things in most
therapeutic areas. It doesn't cost that much.'
Other companies, without the benefit of an R&amp;D budget of more than Dollars
1bn a year, and 1,800 people working in discovery, are being forced to
concentrate their efforts.
'You have to be at the leading edge of the areas you're researching and you
have to be focused,' says Mr Lodewijk de Vink, president and chief operating
officer of Warner-Lambert.
'It'll be like the biotechnology industry. You'll soon be talking about
burn-out rate for those pharmaceuticals companies still looking at all
areas.'
Choosing which therapeutic areas to investigate is far from easy - 'the
hardest decision you have to make is which areas to explore,' says Dr
William Scott, senior vice-president exploratory drug discovery research at
Bristol-Myers Squibb. 'It's like a kid going into a candy store with a
credit card. You can kill yourself. You have to be very focused.'
Many R&amp;D directors continue to duck the difficult decisions. Although they
claim they are more focused than before, the areas they continue to explore
cover most human diseases. An R&amp;D director whose researchers are looking at
inflammatory diseases can cover diseases as diverse as asthma, rheumatoid
arthritis, and inflammatory bowel syndrome.
When choosing which areas to cover, there are a large number of criteria
adopted by companies. The most important are probably medical need and
biological science, according to Dr Scolnick - 'biologically you have to
understand the basic physiology - what the disease mechanisms are. We find
projects with the right combination of scientific understanding and medical
need and then we set to work.'
Dr Takao Tanakaya, executive director drug discovery division at Fujisawa,
agrees: 'You have to understand the basic pathology of the disease. Although
Alzheimer's looks interesting because there's a huge potential market, we've
steered clear of dementia because we don't understand what's going on. That
means it's difficult to develop anything really innovative.'
Some companies also try to match unmet needs with the their expertise. At
Schering-Plough, management will only work in areas that match the company's
strengths, where the group has sufficient critical mass to make a
difference, according to Dr Robert Spiegel, senior vice-president clinical
research.
The demand for new treatments for diseases in the elderly, such as
osteoporosis, and Alzheimer's has attracted many companies.
Dr Teruhisa Noguchi, executive vice-president for R&amp;D at Yamanouchi,
explains: 'We've decided to concentrate on cardiovascular, gastro-intestinal
and central nervous system diseases, as well as endocrinology, diabetes and
bone disorders. They're all linked to the ageing population which is a real
problem in Japan.'
But there are dangers in focusing only on untreated and unexplored areas.
Some groups see the need to balance the risks between different therapeutic
categories.
Dr Spiegel at Schering-Plough explains: 'There are some discovery areas
where we are quite comfortable that if we invest the money and have the
patience, products will come out.
'But there are others that are high risk areas that are scientifically
exciting and could be of great potential yield, if you hit it right.'
'The problem is that the new areas are really difficult,' says Dr Spiegel.
'In brand new fields, the regulatory and clinical environments are unknown.
'Take Alzheimer's: until Parke Davis had Cognex approved, nobody knew what
sort of efficacy the FDA wanted. There had never been a drug approved in
that area before. You have to have a balance of risk.'
A number of companies have cut the number of therapeutic areas in a
meaningful way. SmithKline Beecham's exit from gastro-intestinal disease
more than 12 months ago - it was an area that virtually created its
predecessor SmithKline French - was probably the most dramatic.
However, Wellcome has also moved out of tropical diseases, and Dr Trevor
Jones, director of research, development and medical, says the group will
stop developing new anaesthetics once it has completed its present
generation of products.
Dr Pierre Simon, R&amp;D director at Elf Sanofi, explains his company's decision
to concentrate on only three areas. 'Seven years ago, Sanofi was present in
all areas of research. I told the chairman it was stupid  - you can't do all
that effectively because development is becoming more and more sophisticated
and expensive. Instead, we decided to concentrate on just three areas.'
Dr Leon Rosenberg, president, Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research
Institute, says: 'We'll have to cut some areas over the next few years. We
won't scale back on cardiovascular or oncology, and we have a very major
position in dermatology.
'We'll also stake our future on immunological areas, but in central nervous
system diseases and diagnostics we cannot lead. Now that there's a bright
light shining down on everything we do, we have to concentrate on those
areas where we are leaders and have greatest strengths.'
Once the therapeutic areas have been chosen, the R&amp;D directors next
difficulty is to decide which of the many compounds competing for limited
developed resources should be selected.
'For the last while, we have only pursued those new therapies that will
produce a clear medical benefit. We will only develop those with a distinct
advantage,' says Dr Paul Herrling, head of research at Sandoz.
'There's much more scrutiny than there used to be about the quality of the
drugs in development,' agrees Dr Robert Spiegel, senior vice president
clinical research at Schering-Plough. 'You have to look at what the market
will bear for a product which is only a minor improvement.'
'The medicines have to add value, otherwise we're not prepared to spend time
and money on them,' says Sir Richard Sykes, chief executive of Glaxo.
Dr Scolnick agrees: 'You have to have uniqueness in discovery, otherwise you
end up selling generic drugs.'
Dr Simon adds that he recently cut some beta-blockers and H2-antagonists
from his pipeline even though they were safe and effective - 'they made no
sense because they were little better than existing therapies.' he says.
Similarly, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer last year cut a safe and effective 5HT-3
antagonist similar to Glaxo's highly successful Zofran, because it was no
better than existing compounds, according to Mr Robert Cawthorn, chief
executive.
Some groups abandon even promising and innovative projects, however. Dr
Simon at Elf Sanofi explains: 'When you are using biochemical screening you
come up with interesting compounds that do not fit exactly in the areas
where you want to work.
'We came up with a good asthma drug, but we had no intention of getting into
asthma. We want to license it out. The problem is one of timing. If you talk
to early, you haven't much to say. If you're too late you lose time. You
have to have good clinical trials to show it's good and then sell out
quickly.'
Most R&amp;D directors agree it is far easier to develop good quality drugs than
poor ones. Dr Masaji Ohno, managing director of R&amp;D at Eisai, agrees: 'Our
chairman, Mr Yuji Naito, asks us to find compounds that are so good they
develop themselves.'
At Sanofi, Dr Simon adds: 'You have to set high standards to get compounds
into development. We look at strength, oral activity, duration of action,
the toxicology and genotoxicity.
'We also make sure the molecule can be metabolised in man. The drug has to
clear the bar, even if it's set high.'
Production costs are also an important issue, according to Dr Herrling. 'You
have to look at how complicated the molecule is and how many steps it takes
to synthesise. The cost and complexity of manufacture is becoming much more
important,' he says.
Dr Stephen Carter, senior vice-president worldwide clinical research and
development at Bristol-Myers Squibb agrees: 'If it's going to takes 15
chemical steps to produce a compound, I might need 20 chemists full-time
working for a year to generate enough for a clinical trial. If that's the
case, I might not put it into development.'
The potential market of a drug is also clearly important. Dr Noguchi at
Yamanouchi says his company has set a target of minimum annual sales of Y2bn
 -about Dollars 200m - for drugs to move into development.
One consequence of the new cost-conscious environment is that decisions
about the future of molecules are made much earlier than before.
'Just recently we discontinued a couple of compounds which in earlier times
we would have continued to see what happened to them. Today, we just don't
have the luxury of doing that,' says Dr Spiegel at Schering-Plough.
However, although most companies pay lip-service to the over-riding drive
towards innovation, most R&amp;D directors admit they need to balance their
portfolios for risk. In Japan, these low-risk, low-reward, compounds are
called survival drugs, according to Dr Masaji Ohno, managing director of R&amp;D
at Eisai.
'Let's be honest about this,' agrees Dr Carter at Bristol-Myers Squibb. 'If
you just go for high-risk, high-reward blockbusters, you're just going for
home runs. That's not necessarily good for business.
'You have to have singles and doubles to support the franchises. You need to
balance across the franchises and across the risk. A Dollars 100m product in
an old franchise is more valuable than a Dollars 150m product in a new
area.'
Few companies admit setting out to create me-too drugs. However, Dr Spiegel
admits that when you set out to find something exciting you sometimes only
come up with a drug offering marginal improvements.
An important area little stressed by R&amp;D directors publicly is that of line
extensions.
'We call the process evergreening,' says Dr John Niblack, president Pfizer
central research. Dr Carter at Bristol-Myers Squibb agrees: 'Line extensions
help quality of life and generate increased exclusivity for the company.
'Besides, developing line extensions is easier than developing new compounds
because the safety is already proven - you just have to show efficacy. We
don't have to spend a lot of money on this, but it's worthwhile.'
