FT  02 APR 94 / Fashion: Men who change gear - Many can't wait to throw off
their dull weekday attire
It is only at weekends that many men feel they can dress as they choose.
Professional dress is so proscribed that there is little scope for
individuality during the working week. But at weekends, men reveal a little
more about their personality in the way they dress, whether it is to play
sports, play with the children - or play the peacock.
Michael Naylor-Leyland, 37, is executive assistant manager of The
Lanesborough, the luxury hotel on Hyde Park Corner, in central London. His
working days are spent in formal morning dress - not the ideal for someone
who admits: 'I like eccentric clothes, and I've always worn fairly odd
things.' So at weekends, a sartorial butterfly emerges from this
professional chrysalis.
At the centre of Naylor-Leyland's off-duty wardrobe are more than 20
waistcoats, collected over the years. 'I've got velvet, beaded, striped,
even Regency double-breasted waistcoats,' he says. Several come from Tom
Gilbey's celebrated Waistcoat Gallery. 'The great thing is that, along with
a splash of colour, waistcoats give you a couple of extra pockets.'
The names in his wardrobe are well-known for their colourful menswear. A
purple cashmere jacket is from Jasper Conran, another, in Prince of Wales
check printed with purple roses, is by pop-star designer Stephen King.
Naylor-Leyland used to like the extravagant creations of Scott Crolla, and
enjoys the 'wonderful waistcoats and jackets' of Richard James. All are
designers of bold, vivid clothes; even when it comes to jeans, his
favourites are bright red, from Replay.
He likes to wear polo-neck shirts, in red, black, white or purple;
comfortable and casual, they can also look 'faintly formal' worn under a
jacket. 'I never wear a tie in my spare time except under duress,' he
explains. 'I was probably hanged in a previous life.' And because he does
not wear them for work, even his suits can be idiosyncratic, like one from
Katharine Hamnett 'which has baggy trousers and a jacket which is almost a
frock coat.'
Right down to his shoes, Naylor-Leyland exhibits a colourful individuality,
at odds with his professional appearance. His favourite footwear is a pair
of cuban-heeled cowboy boots, bought when he spent a year in Brazil. 'They
were practically a uniform out there, and they're just incredibly
comfortable once you've worn them in.'
In the UK he seeks out classic Frye cowboy boots, and recommends 'a pleasant
shop with an unpleasant name' - R Soles, in London's King's Road. He has
also indulged in 'several pairs' of woven Turkish slippers by interior
designer Nicky Haslam. And he still wears the light slip-ons in purple suede
which Johnny Moke, a King's Road shoemaker, made for his wedding. Only his
socks, it seems, remain in the traditional male palette of black or blue.
Socks, he says, are unimportant.
Francis Hazeel, 49, is a property banker, who runs a German mortgage bank in
the City. His work attire is exactly what one might expect, a traditional
striped shirt and suit. Hazeel says, it is 'not so much a uniform as the
right thing to wear in respect of one's clients as much as one's self'. But
in dressing for the weekend, he completely rejects the equivalent traditions
in British casual dress.
'A lot of my friends eschew the Tattersall check, woolly tie and cavalry
twill point-to-point look, and I totally reject that look,' he says. 'It's
for criminals and country solicitors.'
Instead, his off-duty clothes tend to be American and selected on the basis
of practicality.
'As soon as you become a parent, it affects your wardrobe,' explains Hazeel,
father of boys of 4 1/2 and 10 weeks. 'Basically, my weekend style, which I
would describe as halfway between preppy and grunge, is based on the idea
that it's going to get chucked upon.'
Like many men, Hazeel gets everything from The Gap. 'It's a one-stop shop,
well-priced and the colours are wonderful,' he says. 'I can find everything
in that spectrum of denim blue, navy blue, grey, and chino tan. My Gap blue
denim shirt is probably my most favourite possession.'
The taste for Americana runs throughout his weekend wardrobe, from Bass
Weejun loafers in black and brown and Levi 501s, to fly-button chino
trousers bought from Banana Republic in the US. 'They're all very sporty,
easily serviceable clothes, extremely practical but stylish. Cotton, linen
and denim is really the style of the 1990s, and I find the American style,
particularly Gap style, is more adaptable and certainly smarter than British
country clothes. I only hope - no, I'm sure, my wife confirms it - I don't
look like an Ivy League jock.'
He does have some smarter weekend clothes, for those times 'after 7pm, when
parents have to come out of their chrysalis'. There is a tartan, wool jacket
from Harvie &amp; Hudson, and ties from the Royal Academy. Its shop sells a
striking selection of artists' designs.
'When my casual clothes get shabby, I keep them for painting in,' he
insists. 'Cleanliness is still the gentleman's great motto; a clean mind,
clean body and clean clothes.'
Neil Duckworth, 38, is managing director of Tag Heuer sports watches in the
UK. During the week, he's 'forced to wear tailored suits' but at weekends he
reverts to the sporty style which, he feels, reflects his true character.
'I play a lot of tennis,' he says, 'and I'm always getting changed in and
out of sports gear, so I want weekend clothes which are hassle-free.'
A lot come from Henry Cotton, a label which has the combination he likes of
outdoor styling, ease and comfort, and good quality construction. They also,
he says, have no ostentatious or overt labelling.
'I don't consider myself label-oriented,' he explains, 'but labels do help
when it comes to shopping. And I do like brands which, like my own, have an
authenticity to them.'
Duckworth almost invariably chooses clothes in greens and blues, the colours
at the centre of the Henry Cotton 'country and coast' palette. But he livens
his outfits with a dash of colour, like a red T-shirt, or a shirt from Sam
Browne in Fulham, 'a little more trendy' than most of his clothes.
Naturally, he switches his watch at weekends, from the stylish steel and
gold Tag Heuer chronometer he wears during the week, to a more robust Series
2000 model, with a brown leather strap 'which looks more casual and trendy.
A watch is part of a wardrobe, and should be businesslike or sporty to match
the rest of your dress.'
Weekend trousers tend to be jeans, from Emporio Armani, 'because smart jeans
like those will go with anything, from a trendy top, to a smart shirt and
blazer for lunch.' And with the same kind of versatility, footwear is
Timberland boat shoes, in brown or blue.
For smarter weekend occasions, he has two jackets from Gieves &amp; Hawkes. One
is a classic blue blazer, the other, 'a bit more of a blaze of colour', a
sports jacket in a combination of yellow and green. In both cases, he
prefers the classic style of Gieves &amp; Hawkes. 'My physique just seems to
suit a more traditional cut,' he says. 'Or perhaps it's my age . . .' And
beneath, he wears button-down shirts from Ralph Lauren, 'not cheap, but
really very nice material'.
It's not a huge range of clothes - but, he says, that is deliberate. 'I
don't want an extensive wardrobe,' he says. 'It's the weekend. I don't want
to have to think too much.'
