FT  17 OCT 94 / German Elections: Kohl to tread carefully on deepening EU -
The pivotal position held by the chancellor within Europe
The narrowness of his razor-edge election victory last night still leaves
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl holding a pivotal position on the European
stage during the next four years. Mr Kohl has assiduously promoted the
strategy of carrying out German unification in tandem with the unification
of Europe. Awarded now with a mandate for a fourth successive term, he will
play a vital part in preparing the 1996 intergovernmental treaty to revise
the Maastricht treaty.
Mr Kohl has never left any doubt of his vision that a united Germany has to
be embedded in a solid framework of European co-operation. However, public
support among the German electorate for deepening integration in the present
European Union has fallen during the past four years.
The narrowness of the Bonn coalition's majority may add to the chancellor's
domestic reasons for caution over further extending supranational European
decision-making - particularly over the question of economic and monetary
union (Emu). In view of the potential conflicts between the goals of
intensifying EU integration among the present 12 members and extending the
Union to eastern Europe, Mr Kohl will need to tread a narrow path between
'deepening' and 'widening' the Union.
The fragmentation of the popular vote - the score of the Christian Democrats
and the Christian Social Union yesterday was the lowest since the first
post-war western elections in 1949 - was reflected particularly in the
strong showing by the reformed Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS), the
former communists. Voters in east Germany have been particularly reticent to
espouse the ideal of deepening western European integration, and have shown
more mistrust than the west Germans about the goals of economic and monetary
union.
The need to take into account east German feelings on this issue, and also
to maintain large-scale financial help for east German industrial
enterprises and agriculture, will almost certainly run counter to the free
market policies traditionally upheld by the Free Democrats, junior partner
in the Bonn coalition.
However, the FDP's profile in Bonn has been falling during the last few
years, and the party may experience difficulties in turning its tally of
seats into political muscle.
Opinion polls during the last two years indicate that the German electorate
now gives greater support to enlarging the EU than to further intensifying
links among the 12 present members.
Last night's Yes to EU membership in Finland followed Austria's approval of
adherence to the Union in its referendum four months ago. The Finnish vote
brings a step nearer reality the plan for four members of the European Free
Trade Association to join the EU in the New Year - a move that will add
momentum to the membership ambitions of Poland, Hungary, the Czech republic
and Slovakia.
Mr Kohl now has a chance of exceeding former West German Chancellor Konrad
Adenauer's record 14 years in power. If he serves out the coming four-year
legislative period, he would also become the longest-serving head of
government in any European Community country since the war. The record for a
run of successive years in office is at present held by Mr Pierre Werner,
Luxembourg's prime minister between 1959 and 1974.
Mr Kohl's international status has been amplified by the departure of most
of his fellow European heads of government who agreed the Maastricht treaty
in December 1991.
Following the scheduled departures of President Francois Mitterrand next
spring and Luxembourg's Mr Jacques Santer, who becomes European Commission
president in January, by next summer only four of the 12 leaders who gave
their blessing to the treaty are likely still to be in office. Apart from Mr
Kohl, they are Mr Felipe Gonzalez of Spain, Portugal's Mr Anibal Cavaco
Silva and Britain's Mr John Major.
With Mr Kohl confirmed in power in Bonn, the path Europe takes will depend
crucially on the outcome of the French presidential election due to be held
next May to decide Mr Mitterrand's successor. If Mr Jacques Delors, the
Socialist president of the European Commission and a redoubtable supporter
of a federal Europe, takes over in the Elysee Palace, he and Mr Kohl will be
able to extend close co-operation built up during Mr Delors' 10 years in
Brussels.
However, even Mr Delors has recently been quoted as saying that the
Maastricht treaty was poorly drafted and over-ambitious. If the new French
president comes from the political right - either Mr Edouard Balladur, the
present prime minister, or Mr Jacques Chirac, the leader of the French
neo-Gaullist party - France's European policies might take a more
nationalistic turn. That would constrain the chances of solid Franco-German
co-operation during the period leading up to the 1996 conference.
The main possible source of upset on the road towards further European
integration concerns Emu. Many German voters remain wary of the plan for
economic and monetary union by 1999 set down by the Maastricht treaty, a
step that would mean the eventual disappearance of the D-Mark and its
replacement by a single European currency.
Mr Kohl said in an interview at the end of last month with four European
newspapers that the timetable was not 'basically' up for discussion -
indicating that, under certain circumstances, it might be.
During preparations for the 1996 conference, Mr Kohl seems likely to revive
the German demand, made originally in 1991, for monetary union to be
accompanied by full-scale European political union. However, moving towards
a full-scale 'federal' Europe could be stymied not only by objections from
Britain and France but by reticence among the German electorate about
further transfer of powers to EU institutions.
For many years up to 1993, Mr Kohl was a fervent supporter of the goal of a
'United States of Europe'. However, last year he said he would no longer use
the phrase on the grounds that it might be 'misunderstood' - a move spurred
by opinion polls in Germany during the past two years showing growing
opposition to a federally organised Europe.
Three years ago, Mr Kohl was brimming with optimism that economic and
monetary union would be a reality by 1997. However, during the last two
years his public statements on the subject have become far more circumspect.
Mr Hans Tietmeyer, Bundesbank president, has considerably influenced Mr
Kohl's monetary union thinking. Mr Tietmeyer underlined the central bank's
misgivings over the Emu plan last month by saying the Maastricht timetable
set down nothing more concrete than a 'planning target' and a 'vision'.
If the next German general election is held on schedule in four years' time,
the question of the future of the D-Mark will loom much larger than it does
now. According to the Maastricht treaty, the final date for monetary union
is set as January 1 1999, just a few weeks after the 1998 elections - a
coincidence of the calendar that could cause Mr Kohl or his successor
considerable headaches.
