FT  04 FEB 94 / Traders and councils begin market haggling: Mounting
opposition to charter de-regulation
Opposition is growing to the government's intention, spelt out in its
de-regulation bill, to abolish market charters.
The measure, which would rescind franchise rights going back in some cases
to the 12th century, would break the power of local authorities to stop
markets being set up within 6.66 miles of one of their own markets.
Opposition to charter abolition in Birmingham, where the issues crystallise,
is coming from existing market traders, from the city council and from some
local MPs.
Last week Ms Clare Short and Mr Robin Corbett, Birmingham Labour MPs, took
delivery of a petition signed by 9,000 people who fear that de-regulation
would affect trade at the city's Bull Ring markets.
The petition is one of a series that are being gathered nationally by the
National Association of British Market Authorities.
The Department of the Environment said 182 English and 24 Welsh district
councils, 32 metropolitan authorities and 16 London boroughs had market
charters.
With privileges so widespread, plans to withdraw them were bound to trigger
strong opposition. The department, in a written parliamentary answer to Ms
Short, said it had received 2,322 replies against and 273 in favour in
response to its request for comments on the plan to scrap market charters.
The issue has become confused with political concern about the use of
car-boot sales as a conduit for stolen goods. Abolition of charters has been
equated with the loss of powers to control car-boot sales.
But the purpose of charters has been to protect fixed and regular markets.
Car-boot sales are movable and occasional. As charters are not held by all
councils, they are an imperfect tool for dealing with a national concern.
Mrs Catherine Finnegan, who chairs Birmingham council's commercial services
committee, said: 'The government's proposals would mean the proliferation of
unregulated markets with no control over the quality of goods sold.' The
council is also angry with what it calls 'tinkering around with its common
law rights' and the prospect of losing revenue - Pounds 360,000 a year -
from franchising markets in its exclusion zone.
For the government, market charters are simply a monopoly power. The
environment department said that they were 'rights which can be used to
impose restraints on the development of local enterprise' and 'anachronistic
common-law rights opposed to competition'.
The department denies that local authorities should be compensated for lost
revenue because councils are public bodies and the use of the charters is
against public interest.
The immediate commercial beneficiaries of de-regulation would be companies
which provide facilities for small retailers to trade without facing high
fixed charges.
One such company is In Shops, which operates retail centres throughout the
UK in competition with fixed markets and is often at odds with councils.
Mr Tim Brookes, the In Shops chairman, said: 'Many local authorities are
saying de-regulation spells the end of markets.
'My response to that is that if a market sells shoddy goods at expensive
prices, then it deserves to fail.'
