FT  15 JUL 94 / 'It's an industry that likes to get together'
Allegations that 19 European carton-board makers operated a cartel for four
years came as little surprise to some industry watchers yesterday who
described the operators as 'quite clubby'.
'It's an industry that likes to get together. They're always holding
conferences, and although they stress they don't want to talk about prices,
maybe they decided they wanted to go further,' said Mr Dennis Christy, pulp
and paper analyst at James Capel in London.
The European Commission has alleged that carton-board makers managed to push
through price rises of 6-10 per cent twice a year from 1987 to 1990 in spite
of consumer resistance and falling costs of raw materials. During the four
years, carton-board consumption in western Europe increased by almost 20 per
cent.
Mr Christy said the operation of a cartel could explain the continuation of
high price levels in the sector when other parts of the industry were
suffering a downturn. Prices for other products in the industry, such as
pulp and high quality paper, peaked in 1989. But carton-board prices did not
reach their highs until two years later.
Printers, among of the main users of carton-board - a stiff card-like
product used for making cardboard boxes and for graphics purposes -
complained to the Commission about pricing in the Ecu2.5bn (Pounds 1.97bn)
industry. The British Printing Industries Federation, which recently
complained to the UK Office of Fair Trading about the operation of a cartel
in the paper market following recent sharp rises in price, yesterday
welcomed the Commission's report.
The European Union uses 3m tonnes of carton-board a year of which a third is
imported from Finland, Sweden and Austria.
Carton-board makers are at the mercy of wide swings in price for their raw
materials, which are chiefly wood pulp and waste paper but in the period
when the cartel was alleged to have operated, raw materials costs were low.
This year, pulp prices have risen by 50 per cent, squeezing some companies'
profit margins since they are finding it hard to pass on increases to
customers.
