FT  27 OCT 94 / Israeli accord with Jordan ends 46 years of hostility
Israel and Jordan signed a formal peace agreement on their barren border
yesterday in a desert ceremony with blessings taken from the holy books to
mark the end of 46 years of hostility.
'It is not just the end of war but the beginning of new co-operation,' Mr
Shimon Peres, Israeli foreign minister, told the 5,000 guests. 'Let's dream
together. We've got the licence.'
The treaty demarcates the two countries' borders, resolving disputed water
claims and fixing security and environmental arrangements. The two nations
will exchange ambassadors within a month and begin ambitious joint economic
projects.
President Bill Clinton, who attended the ceremony, praised King Hussein of
Jordan and Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the Israeli prime minister, and said the treaty
had broken the chains that had kept the two countries in the shadow of
strife and suffering.
'Here in this region which is the home of not only both your faiths but mine
I say: Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall inherit the earth,' said
Mr Clinton, who signed the treaty along with Mr Rabin and Mr Abdul-Salam
al-Majali.
Mr Rabin said: 'The peace that was born today gives us all the hope that the
children born today will never know war between us and their mothers will
know no sorrow.'
Symbolic gestures of reconciliation between former warriors dominated the
open-air ceremony. One Israeli in a wheelchair, wounded by Jordanians in the
1967 battle for Jerusalem, wept as Israeli and Jordanian marching bands
rubbed shoulders and played their respective national anthems. An Israeli
girl and a Jordanian girl, whose grandfathers were killed in the 1967 war,
gave flowers to Mr Rabin, King Hussein and Mr Clinton. The Israeli and
Jordanian chiefs of staff together with commanders of the air force, navy
and southern fronts shook hands and exchanged gifts.
But even as the ceremony took place, Jewish settlers claimed that Arab
gunmen had kidnapped an Israeli youth in the West Bank, while Palestinians
opposed to the treaty held rallies across the West Bank and burnt pictures
of King Hussein. The Lebanese Islamic extremist Hizbollah group sent mortar
fire crashing into northern Israel and denounced the treaty as 'a grand
crime and treachery'.
Mark Nicholson adds from Cairo: Earlier yesterday, Mr Clinton held talks in
Cairo with President Hosni Mubarak, the Egyptian leader, and Mr Yassir
Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organisation, after which the
US president said he was satisfied with Mr Arafat's undertakings to combat
the threat to the peace process posed by Hamas, the militant Islamic
Palestinian group.
Calling this a 'matter of great urgency', Mr Clinton told reporters that he
received a 'very firm and unambiguous response' from the Palestinian leader.
'Chairman Arafat said he would continue to do all that he could to combat
terrorism, specifically Hamas, but other groups as well. I'm satisfied with
the response that he gave.'
Mr Clinton added: 'I believe that he understands that Hamas is his enemy now
and that once you become a partner in the peace process, you have to fight
for peace.' Mr Arafat slipped away from the talks before yesterday's press
conference.
The US president also said he would head economic efforts to help Israel and
the Palestinians during the next phases of their peace agreement.
Clinton aims to ease Israel-Syria deadlock, Page 5
