FT  22 NOV 94 / Schools' League Tables: Independents deplore exam ranking
system - Headmasters would much prefer other criteria
Independent schools do well in the government's performance tables, but
remain almost as distasteful of them as state schools.
As last year, independents accounted for almost three-quarters of the top
200 schools, judged by the percentage of pupils attaining at least five
grade C passes at GCSE, and dominated the higher ranks of the A-level
tables.
Independent schools appear to have held their own even when selectivity is
taken into account. At A-level independent boys' schools - including many
which do not select their entry at all - managed an average of 20.62 Ucas
points for each pupil, compared with 20.92 for state grammar schools.
Independent girls' schools also almost managed to match state grammars, with
an average of 19.57 compared with 20.
The Department for Education has published a study of academic 'value
added', comparing pupils' A-level scores with their earlier GCSE results.
This showed that at all levels of GCSE performance pupils were likely to
fare better in independent schools than in the state sector. Academics
considered this study to be crude and simplistic, but the publicity it
generated helped independent schools.
Strong league table showings are also increasingly being used in
advertisements for schools, and parents appear to be referring to them in
deciding to switch their children between schools in particularly
competitive markets.
In Greater London, schools say they have lost more pupils to the four most
successful selective schools - North London Collegiate, the two St Paul's
schools and Westminster - since publication of league tables by newspapers
became widespread four years ago.
Exam rankings are closely studied by parents, particularly in the Far East
where many boarding schools with declining rolls are looking for recruits.
So why the hostility? The schools still believe the government is selling
them short because the assumptions underlying the figures are arbitrary.
At A-level the complaints surround A-level general studies, a subject
normally taught in less time than other A-levels, often as a compulsory
adjunct to an A-level course to allow a well-rounded curri-culum.
Many universities refuse to recognise it when making conditional offers of
places, and last year Professor Alan Smithers of the University of
Manchester, a government education adviser, attacked it, saying it had
failed to broaden the curriculum.
He even found that some students revised for it by playing Trivial Pursuit.
For this reason the Financial Times and other newspapers exclude general
studies when compiling A-level league tables. But in the government's tables
it counts for as much as any other A-level.
Given that some universities recognise the subject, a fair position might
fall somewhere in the middle. As it is, the policy means that schools where
general studies is more or less compulsory as an additional A-level, such as
the two Birmingham King Edward's schools, have an advantage. These two place
general studies at the centre of their sixth-form curriculums.
A further problem is the government's use of age groups, rather than a
school's own year groups. This makes for ease of collection of data by the
government's statisticians, and for state schools it is usually a fair
assumption.
But it is much more common in the private sector either for children to be
promoted a year or for them to take their time. Boarding schools in
particular often allow children to defer exams if they have been moved
around frequently earlier in their education.
Independent schools say as a result the government data should not be used
for measuring excellence, but simply for spotting schools which are in
trouble.
Certainly the government top 10 of independent schools is very different
from that published by the FT in August, which excluded general studies and
was based on year groups.
Only three schools are common to both: Downe House, a girls' boarding school
in Berkshire which came eighth with the FT and fourth with the government;
King Edward VI High, ninth with the FT and second on the government figures;
and Westminster, top of the FT table, and nine places lower on the
government's figures.
'Famous name' schools which appear to have been sold particularly short by
the government data are Winchester - fourth with an average points score of
30.2 according to the FT, but 51st, with a score of 26.1 on government
assumptions - and St Paul's Girls' - 10th with a score of 26.9 in the FT
tables but 53rd with 26.1 points in the government's.
At GCSE the government assumptions have an even more marked effect. A survey
by the Independent Schools Information Service (Isis) showed that some
schools benefited, with St Mary's in Ascot being credited with shepherding
117 per cent of its pupils through to five GCSE grade Cs.
Isis also found, however, 61 schools where it claimed the government had
understated pass rates by 10 per cent or more, compared with the figure they
would have reached by taking year rather than age groups. Again some famous
names saw their results understated, including Harrow  - 86.5 rather than
99.4 per cent - and Haileybury - 86.7 rather than 98.9 per cent.
Against this background even independent schools which on the surface
benefit from the government's tables try to play them down. Mr Hugh Wright,
head of King Edward's, Birmingham, prefers to direct attention to the
school's achievements on the rugby and other sporting fields, in which it is
a national power in spite of selecting only on academic ability.
Mrs Joan Clanchy, headmistress of North London Collegiate, described the
tables rather more condescendingly as 'good clean fun', and is worried that
they may increase pressure on pupils.
Mr David Woodhead, chief executive of Isis, summed up a view prevalent among
most of the sector. Independent schools, he said, were 'especially damaged
by the department's bureaucratic stubbornness'.
They are, he said, 'not afraid of league tables. But they are increasingly
unhappy with a system which ignores the achievements of many pupils and
significantly distorts the performance of most schools.'
