FT  10 MAY 94 / They're all in this together: How long will South Africa's
spirit of reconciliation last under Mandela
South Africa has been stunned by its first brush with democracy. For
citizens of mature nations, to whom democracy is an old and devalued friend,
voting is a banal political act uninspired by higher emotion. But South
Africans came to the polls as political virgins: with their naivety and
their faith, they cast their ballots overwhelmingly for the ideal of one
nation, undivided by race. More than anything else, South Africa's future
will depend on the success of efforts to realise that ideal.
Nelson Mandela, who will today be inaugurated as the first president of a
united South Africa, has devoted his life to that goal. He never lets the
subject drop: every speech, including yesterday's address in Cape Town after
he was elected president, stresses the need to reconcile South Africans to a
common destiny.
Constantly, he repeats the words he first uttered from the dock during the
Rivonia treason trial 30 years ago: 'I have fought against white domination
and I have fought against black domination. I have cherished the ideal of a
democratic and free society in which all persons live together in harmony
and with equal opportunities. It is an ideal which I hope to live for and to
achieve. But if needs be, it is an ideal for which I am prepared to die.'
Mr Mandela did not have to die; outgoing President FW de Klerk had the
wisdom and vision to prevent such a disaster. But it was a close-run thing:
Mr Mandela is nearly 76, and without the adrenalin and excitement of his
release and the subsequent four years of political change, he might well
have begun to fail. But Mr de Klerk knew that no other black leader would
offer whites a better deal, and he desperately feared a race war. So he took
the first inevitable step to racial reconciliation; the rest is up to Mr
Mandela.
The legacy of the recent elections will be no small help to him in this
task. For as the chairman of the discredited Independent Electoral
Commission, Judge Johann Kriegler, pointed out, the exercise had more to do
with reconciling people than reconciling votes. (A convenient excuse from a
man who proved completely unequal to the job of running a modern election,
but true even so.)
So ballots were not reconciled, and their legitimacy could not be proved.
Perhaps that was just as well, for it gave political leaders the excuse to
do their own kind of reconciliation: sharing out power more as they thought
the voters ought to have done, than as they probably did; providing what one
political insider called a 'designer outcome' to a messy and chaotic
election. One local newspaper called it 'a dream come true'; those less
given to hyperbole nonetheless thanked God (who pops up often in South
African political discourse) for such a neat and happy outcome.
For despite the electoral bungling and administrative farce which attended
the birth of South African democracy, the politicians have delivered a
result which stands a good chance of guaranteeing stability in years to
come: a deal which binds all the major parties to the constitution, and
leaves only the tiniest fringe to the left and right in extra-parliamentary
opposition.
The African National Congress is strong, but not dominant: it did not gain
the two-thirds of the national vote which would have made it simpler to
force through its ideas on a new constitution. And crucially, it did not win
control of two important provinces, KwaZulu Natal, with a fifth of the
country's population, and the western Cape. True to form, Mr Mandela
welcomed his party's failure to pass the two-thirds threshold, hoping this
would allay white fears of black domination. That was an essential part of
the 'designer outcome': the ANC could not be allowed to win too many votes,
or national reconciliation would be jeopardised.
The National party passed the 20 per cent psychological barrier needed to
give the party the power base from which to argue for minority interests
within the government of national unity. And the Inkatha Freedom party won
the province of KwaZulu Natal with a fraction more than 50 per cent of the
vote, giving the party a one-seat majority in the 81-member provincial
assembly.
The ANC surrendered Natal - where some 15,000 people have died in the past
decade in fighting which the ANC blames on the IFP - in the interests of
peace. This was almost certainly the wisest course: for with Inkatha running
well ahead in the polling (however crooked the results), the party of Chief
Mangosuthu Buthelezi would never have accepted defeat. Inkatha is likely to
prove much less belligerent within government than outside; and it now has a
vested interest in the success of the new order.
The result has left South Africans in a pleasurable state of shock. The
unimaginable is constantly made fact; sad old truths have been forgotten and
the twin burdens of guilt and oppression lifted from the national spirit.
The momentousness of what has happened - long foreseen but not quite grasped
 -strikes home in the images of the new South Africa. Mr Mandela addresses
the media from the steps of Tuinhuis, the elegant Cape Dutch mansion which
houses the presidential offices; in this building five years ago, he took
tea as a prisoner with outgoing President PW Botha, returning to his cell
after tea was served. He poses for photos on the steps of the tri-cameral
parliament constituted expressly to exclude blacks, and places his hand over
his heart in allegiance as an official band plays Die Stem, the anthem of
apartheid (now one of South Africa's two national anthems).
In the historic Raadsaal (council chamber) in Bloemfontein, capital of the
Orange Free State (last used at the turn of the century to house the
parliament of the Orange Free State Boer republic), Patrick Lekota of the
African National Congress is sworn in as premier of the new province of the
same name. Five years ago, Lekota was serving a 12-year sentence for treason
against the South African state. Now he is one of the most powerful men in
the land.
This scene is repeated throughout the country, as former prisoners take the
salute from their captors. And every provincial premier conveys the same
message: the need for racial reconciliation and investment to build a new
South Africa. That is Mr Mandela's vision: the miracle is that his
subordinates seem truly to have taken it to heart.
Perhaps the spirit of reconciliation will not survive the new government's
first five-year term in office; perhaps it will expire long before. But to
hear the new ANC premier of the Johannesburg-Pretoria region, Mr Tokyo
Sexwale, plead with the white right wing to join in the new South Africa -
and not to closet themselves away in some forgotten corner of an arid
homeland - is to believe that the new government's intentions are good. Mr
Sekwale has even said he will forego the traditional triumphal act of
African liberation: changing the names of streets and buildings to deny the
European past. He understands the impact this would have on the white
psyche, and seeks to avoid it.
It is hard to see how such generous impulses could have survived the
depredations of apartheid, but they have done: only 1.25 per cent of the
electorate voted for a party whose appeal (though not its official platform)
is based on black revenge, the Pan Africanist Congress. And though 400,000
whites voted for Gen Constand Viljoen and his dream of an Afrikaner
homeland, this is far more a cultural than a racial concept. Overwhelmingly,
South Africans voted against racism.
But surely the best is now over: Nelson Mandela's inauguration brings to an
end the era when the ANC was unquestionably on the right side of history. It
must now dirty its hands with the politics and not just the rhetoric of
nation-building. Mr Mandela's good intentions will be sorely tested in this
phase. For there is a contradiction inherent in the twin goals of his new
government: reconciliation and improving the living standards of the black
population. If blacks advance too rapidly at the expense of whites, whether
in terms of job opportunities or government spending, racial relations will
be strained; if they continue to lag behind, the same will happen.
In the end, race relations will worsen or improve as the economy fails or
prospers, within parameters which may be set by the World Bank or the
International Monetary Fund. For once equality is achieved at the ballot
box, economic equality becomes the next target: no new nation can be built
if the whites all leave because of economic decline, or if blacks languish
forever in poverty. That is why Mr Mandela constantly appeals to whites to
stay in South Africa, or return if they have left.
Despite his best intentions, however, strains could quickly develop within
the government of national unity. Though Mr Mandela tried to include several
parties in his cabinet - even those who did not qualify for seats under the
power-sharing constitution - this could work more to his advantage than
theirs. In government, collective cabinet responsibility will force them to
stifle criticism except in matters grave enough to provoke resignation.
In his victory speech last week, Mr Mandela made clear that his definition
of a government of national unity is one in which he gives the orders and
others obey - especially when it comes to implementing the ANC's plan for
black upliftment, the Reconstruction and Development Programme. Under the
constitution, Mr Mandela is required to try to seek consensus on cabinet
decisions; but if he cannot find it, he may act alone. When faced with a
conflict of interest between his core constituency, blacks, and white
privilege, he will have a hard choice to make.
The carefully crafted gestures of reconciliation which marked his election
campaign will then be tested for content as well as form: the hand stretched
out to Mr de Klerk in their televised debate, the embrace for Chief
Buthelezi on the floor of the new national assembly, provided the visual
equivalent of sound bites. The next few months will tell whether they were
indeed genuine, if not quite spontaneous.
In the months and years to come, he will be called upon to implement the
promises made from the dock 30 years ago: 'It is not true that the
enfranchisement of all will result in racial domination. Political division,
based on colour, is entirely artificial and, when it disappears, so will the
domination of one colour group by another. The ANC has spent half a century
fighting against racialism. When it triumphs it will not change that
policy.'
Perhaps these will go the way of all politicians' promises, and be withdrawn
by a President Mandela, toughened and strengthened by power. And ironically,
racial relations could actually worsen rather than improve with the end of
apartheid, as heightened black expectations are inevitably frustrated and
affluent whites take the blame.
But luckily for South Africa, reconciliation does not in the end depend on
the good intentions of one man and his organisation. South Africa's
disparate peoples may share nothing in the way of race, language, ethnicity
and ideology, but they recognise a common danger which unites them: the risk
of mutually assured destruction. A capricious history brought them from
Holland, India, England, Scotland, France and other parts of Africa; but
over the past two weeks they have finally come to ac-knowledge that they
share a common fate.
As the benevolent glow of the past two weeks fades from memory, that fact
will remain. Mr Mandela, the statesman, Mr de Klerk, the pragmatist, Gen
Constand Viljoen, the soldier, and Mangosuthu Buthelezi, the chief, all
accept a common truth: they cannot live without each other. They may not
like the new South Africa, but they are stuck with it. There is no turning
back.
