FT  25 MAY 94 / Survey of Ireland (10): Investors get good terms - Angela
Long at the movies
To call the whole country 'Paddywood' is stretching language, but over the
past year there has been a mini-boom in film production in Ireland.
In April some 12 films were in production. Six more were about to start
filming. A London newspaper went slightly wild recently, predicting that
Ireland could become Europe's main site for film production.
Mr Michael Dwyer, film critic of the Irish Times, points out that ever since
1928, when Alfred Hitchcock made Juno and the Paycock in Dublin, Ireland's
rapidly changing light and slowly changing landscape have been irresistible
to directors seeking not just nostalgia but authenticity. What is more, the
1993 Finance Act gives a three-year tax relief on whatever proportion of a
film's investment is Irish, up to IPounds 1m. More recently, the government
has again tinkered with financial incentives, while insisting that share
capital with a minimum three-year payback should be the baseline source of
funds.
Companies such as Farrell Grant Sparks, Dublin accountants (FGS), have taken
advantage of the favourable terms for film investment. FGS has set up a film
production company, which raised IPounds 2m within two weeks. Mr Richard Fox
of FGS says the company, which 'met investor demand for a tax shelter before
the year-end cut-off for individuals on April 5', is now looking for a
project. 'I'd say that, judging by the success of this venture, we would
look at similar ones in the future.'
Internationally, Irish films have a high profile at present, following
American interest in In the Name of the Father, directed by Jim Sheridan,
and last year's Crying Game by Neil Jordan. The prominence of Daniel Day
Lewis, who also starred in Sheridan's previous big success, My Left Foot,
has also called attention to the Irish product.
It should be no surprise if the Irish were to make a success of the film
industry, at least at the creative level. Their seanachai (storytellers) of
old possessed the wild imagination and verbal creativity which later
surfaced in the work of Swift, Beckett and Joyce. Today Ireland is top in
the whole of western Europe for per capita cinema attendance.
In Dublin, the Irish Film Centre, with smart premises in a former Quaker
meeting house in Eustace Street, in the centre of town, attracted 16,000
members in 1993, its first full year of operation. Squabbles about
management and financing spoil its image slightly, but, with several film
development and production companies located in its premises, the IFC
provides an attractive focus for the film buff in the national capital.
So far, most films for main release made in Ireland have tended to be modest
in budget compared to the big spending on Jurassic Park and its lavishly
produced kindred. Yet the success of, for example, Into the West, made by
Dubliner Gabriel Byrne, has shown that there is a market for the 'small'
picture.
'The Irish industry is never going to make Terminator 3, but our films will
always be story-driven - smaller films costing IPounds 3m to IPounds 5m,'
says Mr James Flynn, submissions manager at the Irish Film Board, based in
Galway.
The film board (Bord Scannan in Gaelic) has been receiving about 30 formal
applications for funding each month since it was revived in 1992. This, says
Mr Flynn, is on top of less formal approaches from a wide range of
film-makers.
The government has also been launching initiatives to create the right sort
of skilled labour for film production. Mr Michael Higgins, minister for
arts, announced a 'comprehensive training programme for the film industry'
last October. His department was looking for EU structural funds to assist
the programme, which he said aimed to raise standards in the complete range
of film skills.
While the future for features looks rosy (provided they get a better
critical reception than the recently-released Widow's Peak - despite the
talents of Mia Farrow, Jim Broadbent and Natasha Richardson), the animation
sector has not lived up to its promise of five years ago. After An American
Tail, a charming full-length feature which failed to ignite the box office
in the Aladdin mode, the animation company mainly responsible, Sullivan
Bluth, went bankrupt. The shell of the company was subsequently salvaged by
overseas investment.
Fred Wolf Animation, the Los Angeles based company responsible for the
invasion of the teenage mutant Ninja turtles, has had a Dublin studio since
1989. Most recently, it did all pre- and post-production of the 11-part
television version of the Duchess of York's Budgie the Little Helicopter, to
be seen on ITV.
Mr Eamonn Lawless, Wolf's managing director in Dublin, heads a full-time
staff of 16. 'We are feeling very optimistic, but things are relatively slow
in the industry overall,' he says. 'For full-length features, Dublin would
be a good location because labour and production costs are lower than in the
US.'
But stiff competition from Asia, where labour costs are even lower, is
growing.
