FT  14 DEC 94 / Business and the Environment: Drive to overcome electric car
barriers - John Griffiths is persuaded of the potential valueof a zinc-air
battery powered vehicle
The scene: a Los Angeles petrol station, in a few years' time. A
medium-sized family car pulls in from the highway and hums up to the line of
pumps. The driver ignores the petrol and diesel nozzles. Instead, he reaches
for the one marked potassium hydroxide.
Five minutes later, just like its petrol-fuelled counterpart which has
filled up at the adjacent pump, the battery-powered car is on its way. By
applying some lateral thinking, California's SRI International  - still best
known by its old name of the Stanford Research Institute  - and Lawrence
Berkeley Laboratories believe they may have the answer to two of the biggest
technological hurdles which for years have bedevilled attempts to produce
viable battery-powered cars.
The hurdles are the lack of mileage provided by batteries between recharges
 - few of the prototype cars so far developed have proved capable of more
than 60-100 miles  - and the length of time needed for a complete recharge;
usually several hours.
Seeking to improve these performance parameters has led vehicle and battery
makers and government research teams around the world into multi-billion
dollar efforts to develop 'super-batteries'.
These efforts have been made more urgent for car makers by California's
adoption of legislation requiring 2 per cent of new car sales to be of
non-polluting 'zero-emission vehicles' in 1998, rising to 10 per cent in
2003. Thirteen other US states are soon to follow suit.
More powerful 'conventional' lead/acid batteries have been developed, as
well as new types of battery using different materials for the process  -
electrolysis  - by which electrical current is generated. But all fall far
short of providing the range and versatility of a petrol car and most have
other drawbacks. Some use materials that would be too costly to put into
mass production, others have technological problems, such as the
sodium-sulphur batteries that need to operate at several hundred degrees
centigrade.
SRI and Lawrence Berkeley Labs have opted for a 'zinc-air' battery, which
generates its power by reacting zinc and oxygen in an electrolyte comprising
zinc particles suspended in potassium hydroxide.
This battery has a good, but not outstanding, performance  - with a mileage
of just over 100 miles in a medium-sized vehicle  - compared with other new
battery technologies, and has the advantage of using cheap and readily
available raw materials.
What makes SRI's approach radical, however, is the concept of not recharging
the battery electrically. Instead, the spent electrolyte is physically
drained and fresh electrolyte simply pumped in as 'fuel'. SRI maintains that
not only does this quick 'refuelling' eliminate the biggest impediment to
driver acceptance of the battery car, but it also allows the potentially
huge infrastructure problems of electrical vehicles to be swept away.
There would be no need to dig up city streets to install a roadside charging
infrastructure; no need for festoons of power cables from houses to cars; no
need for businesses to provide recharging facilities for employees' cars to
make sure their cars can reach home.
Garages would merely have to add two more tanks to their fuel storage
systems. One would pump in the new 'fuel', the other would take the spent
electrolyte to storage tanks for collection. The spent electrolyte collected
from a network of garages would then be regenerated at central recharging
stations in a safe and controlled setting, using off-peak electricity,
before being redistributed.
'This feature is so attractive that one major oil company has become a key
supporter of our concept,' according to Joe Rudzinski, one of SRI's
executives involved with the project.
SRI, one of the world's biggest independent research and consulting
organisations, is starting a Dollars 4m (Pounds 2.4m) prototype programme to
prove the concept's overall practicality.
Its projected cost of a battery pack is around Dollars 3,000. It also
forecasts a forecourt refuelling cost of Dollars 12.30, compared with
Dollars 11.35 for a petrol vehicle of the same size travelling an identical
mileage  - a premium which Californian legislators and citizens are likely
to regard as a small price for relieving the state's notorious air
pollution.
Sixty-three per cent of Californians said in a survey recently they would
probably or definitely consider buying an electric car.
The survey of 400 Californians, commissioned by specialist newspaper
Automotive News, was taken immediately before EVS-12, the biennial symposium
on electric vehicles currently taking place in Los Angeles. Fifteen per cent
said they were prepared to pay up to Dollars 5,000 more than for a
conventional car.
North America's electricity utility industry is expected to watch the SRI
developments with mixed feelings. Whichever battery-powered car proves most
commercially successful, the electricity supply industry will benefit  -
from extra electricity demand arising from a large battery vehicle
population.
But it also sees a considerable business opportunity in the development and
provision of an infrastructure for the electrical recharging of a battery
car population, and has been working within the US Advanced Battery
Consortium  - a federal government-backed, Dollars 1bn project linking US
car and battery makers and utilities  - on how best to provide one.
If SRI's radical approach is successful, much of that opportunity could slip
from its grasp.
