FT  07 MAY 94 / World Stock Markets: Milan finds new focus in screen-based
trading - The market has further to go
The Milan stock exchange building may now be silent, but the Italian stock
market is still in full cry.
Three weeks ago, the exchange moved to full on-screen trading, adding to its
computerised system the stocks still traded on the floor of the exchange by
open outcry. The impact of the change should have been limited - some 95 per
cent of trading was already carried out on-screen - but the transfer
coincided with the busiest week in the history of the exchange.
On several days in the preceding fortnight, more shares were traded in Milan
than on Wall Street. Two days before the scheduled changeover, record
volumes and the sheer quantity of small orders prevented the exchange
opening for normal business. The 'little bang' was postponed for 24 hours
while the exchange authorities put in place special measures to relieve
administrative pressure on the system.
'It was a development which was impossible to predict and unique in the
history of the stock exchange,' says Mr Attilio Ventura, the borsa's
chairman.
Mr Ventura need not be downcast: the market is a victim of its own success.
Since the beginning of the year, the Comit index has risen by nearly a
quarter. But the real surge in investors' interest began when it became
clear on March 28 that the right-wing alliance headed by the media magnate
Mr Silvio Berlusconi was heading for a convincing election victory. Before
the polls had closed the index had risen by 3.6 per cent to 693.52, and by
the middle of last week it had reached a record 813.63, provoking worries
that share prices might be losing touch with fundamental values.
Since then, delays in the formation of a Berlusconi government, and
profit-taking, took the edge off the post-electoral euphoria before the
index bounced back 3.5 per cent yesterday to 800.94 and analysts believe it
should top 900 within the next 12 months.
'The fact that the government is likely to be in place for more than six
months, with the possibility of implementing policy in the longer term, is
having a positive effect,' says Ms Paola Bergamaschi of Goldman Sachs in
London.
In addition, for the first time since the war, the Italian government will
be right of centre and keener to encourage business than its predecessors.
The political revolution is not the only reason for market optimism,
however.
The economy. Mr Berlusconi will inherit an economy emerging from a two-year
recession. Analysts are convinced that industrial company earnings, hit hard
by the downturn, should grow particularly strongly over the next two years.
The value of industrial stock rose 16 per cent in April.
Privatisation. The financial groups IMI, Credito Italiano and Banca
Commerciale Italiana have already come to the market. The next nine months
should see the sale of part of INA, the state-owned insurer, and the
privatisation of Stet, the state telecommunications group. The latter sale
is particularly keenly awaited.
Privatisation, apart from improving Milan's liquidity, is encouraging small
investors to switch their savings from government bonds to equities.
According to Mr Ventura, it could also persuade Italy's many family-owned
companies to consider a market listing.
Share and bond issues. Recent weeks have seen companies as diverse as
Olivetti, the computer group, and Mediobanca, the merchant bank, launching
plans to raise capital, mainly in the form of convertible bonds. Although
some observers blame the prospect of share issues for the small market
correction this week, this does not seem to have dented the enthusiasm of
large quoted companies to exploit a positive market. On Thursday, for
example, Cir, one of the De Benedetti family's two Italian holding
companies, profited from recent buoyancy to place a large stake in Sogefi,
the car components manufacturer, with institutional investors. The operation
was conceived and executed within the space of a week by Lehman Brothers.
The performance of the market in the next few months hinges on the
performance of an untested government. If the Berlusconi administration
departs from the relatively narrow path laid out by the Amato and Ciampi
governments and, in particular, if inflation begins to increase and the
trend for lower interest rates is reversed, then the equity market is likely
to suffer.
Meanwhile, in spite of technical hitches, the exchange is pressing ahead
with expansion plans. It is sometimes a thankless task: having taken action
to limit the number of very small orders which caused last month's overload,
the exchange authorities have found themselves under fire from small
investors, who claim they are being locked out.
But Mr Ventura shrugs off the problems and criticism and says that Milan
should move within a year to full cash settlement of trades. That should
provide a further incentive for non-Italian investors, especially if the
regulatory authorities also take much-needed action to improve the
transparency of public company accounts.
In the meantime, as Mr John Stewart of InterEuropa, the Milan broker, puts
it: 'The general feeling is so positive that it will override any technical
difficulties.'
