FT  19 NOV 94 / Outdoors: A man-made winter - FT Ski Expedition
Arnie Wilson and Lucy Dicker are attempting to ski every day of 1994 on a
round-the-world trip. They are now in the US on the last stage of their
odyssey.
Watching winter take its grip on the Rockies is a slow and fascinating
process. It is like watching blossom buds opening in spring. Right now one
or two small petals are uncurling: in a weeks time, after Thanksgiving, the
ski season will be in full bloom.
Winter is often reluctant to help, it is man and his artificial snow who
curtail the blaze of glory that is the fall. Every year, ski resorts are
desperate to tell the world they have opened on the earliest possible date -
sometimes ridiculously early.
In its traditional battle to be first, Keystone pulled off a master-stroke
to scupper Loveland, its local rival. When Loveland announced it would open
at 9am on October 18, Keystone simply turned on the lights they normally use
for floodlit skiing and opened at 6am, offering free coffee and doughnuts.
Keystone's spokesman, Jim Felton gloated: 'I hate to put it in those terms
but they started it]' But is a resort really open when it has only one run
or one lift operating? It would seem so.
It seems perverse that skiers frantic for winter to begin rush to ski a mile
or so of man-made snow and yet completely ignore mountainfulls of snow and
hundreds of trails in late spring.
We are currently marking time in Summit County, Colorado where we have had
the luxury of choosing from half a dozen long trails in Keystone,
Breckenridge and Copper Mountain, we have been able to monitor winters
unfolding. One run (Born Free) open at Vail. One at Breckenridge (Columbia)
eventually followed by a second (Bonanza). It is all about getting your one
run open and then gradually, trying to get a second run open and possibly a
third.
Not that we have lacked real snow: there have been quite a few falls, but,
except for the storm which gave Mammoth Mountain 2ft in early October (and
then melted) none has been sufficient.
Meanwhile the talk is still of summer activities - particularly Llamas. At a
birthday party for a Forest Service executive, there was much discussion of
Llama Lunch Hikes. You ride the gondola with your llama to the summit of
Keystone Mountain and take a lunch and hike.
Said Boyd Mitchell, the mountain manager: 'Getting a llama into a gondola is
no more difficult than getting a horse into &amp; horsebox' he said. 'They enjoy
it. You can tell, because they hum.' Another guest, Marsha Colby chimed in:
'No, when they hum it means they're stressed.' Perhaps it is just as well
that winter is on its way and the subject of llamas can be deferred.
