FT  21 MAY 94 / Arts: Beautiful in isolation - William Packer admires the
work of Marie-Louise Motesiczky
We fondly believe that talent will out, that all artists of true stature are
known to us and set in their proper art historical place. But what if such
artists would rather cherish their obscurity, happy enough, pace the poet
Gray, that their blooms should blush unseen, wasting their sweetness on the
desert air?
In considering the comparative obscurity of Marie-Louise von Motesiczky, we
can only conclude that either she has been a victim of crass critical
myopia, or she preferred it that way. Marie-Louise addresses the point
herself. 'It was my fate that for decades I concentrated on only a very few
people, both artistically and personally . . . Isolation is a word. It
sounds sad, but it can also be something very beautiful.'
Happily in her old age, with a substantial retrospective in Vienna and
London in 1985 and now this smaller but extremely choice study at
Manchester, that obscurity is more comparative than it was. For she was
known of, certainly, in Germany, moving in the circles of Max Beckmann, who
admired her work, and of Oscar Kokoschka, who drew her.
She was born in Vienna in 1906, and studied there before going to Frankfurt
in 1923, where she first met Beckmann. He invited her to join his classes at
the Stadel, where she stayed until 1928 before returning to Austria. With
the Anschluss of 1938, she left for Holland, and it was only then, at the
Hague early the following year, that she first showed her work.
That summer she came England, moving to London after the war, where she has
lived ever since. 'I like the reticence of English life', she writes: 'The
artist is left alone with himself.' It was not until 1960, at the Beaux Arts
Gallery, that she had her first solo show in England. Thirty-four years on
and her score is three.
She is, even so, as interesting a painter as any in her time. The influences
are evident - Beckmann first and most directly formative, with his breadth
of statement and graphic directness; Kokoschka later on, thinner in the
paint, more fluid in the drawing, more poignant in symbolic effect; and
nods, too, to Matisse and the symbolist expressionism of Chagall, Corinth
and Liebermann.
But all artists are thus of their time and circumstance. What matters is
only what they make of them. Moving freely as she has between the School of
Paris and the German modernism of the 1920s and 30s, Marie-Louise has never
been anything less than herself. She has had, always, her own particular
eye, and touch, and wit - above all, her wit, delicate, affectionate,
ironical, less bleak than Beckmann, less anxious than Kokoschka.
Her gift is an ability to move easily from the narrative and symbolic, to
the formal and objective, to the personal and intimate. Her paintings of her
mother in extreme old age bring all these aspects together in single images.
But perhaps the self-portraits are her truest images of all, now the young
artist in Paris combing her long straight hair, now, a little later,
self-mockingly full-length at the dress-maker's, or wide-eyed and surprised
at herself so beautiful beneath her straw hat. And always, stopping us in
our tracks, is that same calm, questioning gaze of those big, sad eyes.
Marie-Lousie von Motesiczky: paintings 1925-93. City Art Galleries, Mosley
Street, Manchester, until June 19.
