FT  30 MAR 94 / International Company News: Swiss group moves from night to
day - Ciba has joined the international accounting club
Switzerland is fast coming in from the cold in corporate reporting, with
multinationals increasingly abandoning isolation in favour of compliance
with international accounting standards.
The latest to join the trend was Ciba, the pharmaceuticals and chemicals
group, which yesterday published its 1993 accounts, for the first time using
the guidelines of the London-based International Accounting Standards
Committee (Iasc).
Ciba's followers had a taste of what was to come last summer, when it
re-stated its 1992 results according to international accounting standards.
The effect was to increase post-tax profits by 18 per cent, while raising
inventories and cash and marketable securities.
This year, the company reports in full under the new system for the first
time. One short-term frustration for shareholders is that the company has
published no comparison with previous years, since 1993 is the first full
set of figures using the new standards.
The contrast is stark. 'It's like night and day,' says Mr Rolf Meyer, chief
financial officer. 'For the international user the old system was very
unusual and difficult to understand. It was more of a statistical summary
than an integrated accounting system.'
A report late last year by the Swiss Association of Financial Analysts and
Asset Managers suggested that the majority of leading industrial and
commercial companies have now brought their accounting into line with
international standards.
It highlighted more than 15, including Oerlikon-Buhrle, Sandoz, Roche and
Nestle. 'Shareholder information in the leading group is often better than
that of comparable countries in Europe,' it concluded.
This pattern has made Swiss companies among those with highest apparent
compliance with international standards. However, Mr David Cairns, Iasc's
secretary general, stresses that many companies elsewhere use standards
which are compatible with international standards, including those in the
UK, the US and Canada.
'Switzerland doesn't have a history of very detailed accounting rules,' says
Mr Cairns. 'Fifteen years ago Swiss companies had some of the worst in the
world. International companies had to lift themselves substantially above
existing levels.'
He says that in the last few years the Swiss have introduced new legislation
and are developing more rigorous accounting standards. However, these
changes were not enough to persuade Ciba and its competitors to stick simply
to national standards.
Mr Meyer says the primary reason for moving towards international standards
was to reflect a desire to broaden the company's shareholder base in line
with its international operations. Foreign equity is now about one-third of
the total.
He adds that it 'enhances the potential for a listing' in other equity
markets, although he says there are no current plans to seek quotes outside
Switzerland.
It was not an easy process, although the transition has all been achieved
since mid-1990. 'I thought this is somewhat risky and if something slips I
will have to look for another job,' says Mr Meyer.
The company decided not simply to focus on external financial reporting by
international standards, but also to use the same system internally. Its
accounting systems have had to be overhauled as a result, to report in a way
that corresponds closely to the figures shown in the accounts.
It set up a small international team with considerable power to introduce
accounting changes.
'We didn't have any technology freaks,' he says. 'We wanted to use proven
tools that provided results quickly, reliably and in a user-friendly way.'
There were teething problems, including a figure thrown up by the system on
the insurance values of fixed assets that was wrong by SFr1bn (Dollars
690m). However, a series of trial runs appears to have smoothed out the
difficulties.
Mr Meyer says there have been large savings as a result of the change,
including tighter cash management, more efficient capital investment, a
different approach to acquisitions, and more rigid asset management which he
estimates has reduced the value of inventories by 6 per cent.
He says one principal advantage has been to allow the company to benchmark
its performance for the first time against its competitors. 'It has helped
our internal management become tighter and more transparent.'
One of the largest differences has been to move from the arguably more
informative current cost accounting approach that Ciba had used over 25
years - which regularly updates asset values - to historical cost accounting
under international standards.
'From a management accounting view we are still convinced we had a very good
system, but we were calling out from the desert,' he says. 'We were by
ourselves and eventually we had to listen to our customers.'
