FT  22 MAR 94 / A push and they'll all fall down: Allegations of a plot
against Yeltsin have shaken a government facing economic crisis
Mr Victor Chernomyrdin, the Russian prime minister, yesterday broke off a
scheduled meeting with Mr Michel Camdessus, managing director of the
International Monetary Fund, and flew to Socchi on the Black Sea, where
President Boris Yeltsin is reported to be recovering from a bout of flu. 'I
have some things to discuss with the president,' he said as he took off.
The things he has to discuss with the president centre around a fully
fledged allegation of a coup against him, prepared and circulated in the
press and political circles over the weekend, probably by Mr Yeltsin's
opponents in parliament. The rumoured attempt to overthrow the government
resulted in ministers being questioned by the security services - as well as
Mr Chernomyrdin's trip. The status of the coup is not yet clear - is it a
provocation, a real plot which was aborted, or a real plot which is still in
motion? The certainty is that it has convulsed a government already
shivering before the prospect of an economic blizzard.
For the Chernomyrdin government has inherited an infrastructure from the
communist period which is ill-equipped to translate the rigours of economic
reform into even a semblance of prosperity. It struggles against the wave of
corruption and crime which the reforms have encouraged (though certainly not
created) and with which the state cannot properly cope; it has lost a
parliamentary and probably also a popular constituency for radical reform
and thus must enact change, if it will do it at all, against the will of the
people; and it must struggle against high inflation which decimates its
income and makes those who demand extra money even more desperate.
This is the economic climate with which the government must struggle and in
which it is trying to persuade the IMF to release a further Dollars 1.5bn
loan: Production across all sectors fell an average of almost 24 per cent
last month compared with February last year. Mr Chernomyrdin, addressing the
lower house last week, said that thousands of enterprises had stopped work
and thousands more were working part-time. The crisis, he said, was made up
of their inability to sell their stock, compounded by a debt crisis which
means that companies owe a total of Rbs25,000bn and are owed Rbs32,000bn.
The production of oil, Russia's most precious commodity because it is by far
its most tradeable, continues to fall rapidly - down more than 14 per cent
in the first two months of this year over the same period of 1993. At this
rate, it will not be long before the predictions made and widely derided two
years ago - that Russia will be an oil importer before the end of the decade
 -will come true.
The budget for 1994, not yet debated by parliament though it is nearly at
the end of the first quarter of the year, is less of a financial document,
more of a field of struggle. Its headline figures - expenditure of
Rbs183,000bn and income of Rbs120,000bn, with a resulting deficit of some 9
per cent of gross national product - do not indicate the virtual
impossibility of either the income being collected or the expenditure being
kept to that level. The fall-off in government income, because of the
effects of very high inflation on tax revenue, coupled with declining
profits and the huge pressure on expenditure from practically bankrupt
enterprises, from the energy producers, from the military and from
agriculture mean that the real deficit could be twice, three times or even
more than that advertised.
There are two brighter spots. Privatisation, as Mr Anatoly Chubais, deputy
premier for privatisation, told the lower house yesterday, is rolling along
 -with nearly 80 per cent of small enterprises now auctioned off, and up to
14,000 medium and large concerns also through the auction process. In
addition, two huge and profitable giants - the Gasprom production and
distribution monopoly and the Norilsk Nickel plant are about to come under
the hammer. However, the financial condition of the privatised enterprises
is generally no better than that of their state counterparts (sometimes
worse), and the sell-offs have been attended by corruption in some 30 per
cent of the cases (according to those who have seen security service
estimates).
The other bright spot is inflation. It was down to 10 per cent a month in
February and - according to Mr Chernomyrdin - is likely to stay at that
level this month. The government has claimed it is following a tight budget
policy this year, but for the moment inflation is still a result of
decisions made in the last quarter of 1993 rather than a reflection of
virtue in the New Year.
As disheartening as any other fact for Russian ministers is the obvious
truth that, after more than two years of official reformism, there is little
to show in the way of domestic success or foreign confidence. No western
companies of size have made very large commitments to Russia. Trade has
shrunk to levels where most countries can discount it as negligible; foreign
bankers do not believe that Russia will pay back any real debt in the next
five years; and the rouble is driving steadily down to the 2,000 to the
dollar level.
The excited buzzing about investment possibilities which surrounds the names
of China, India and even Vietnam is largely absent in discussion of Russia.
At best, business people will tap the side of their noses and say: 'There's
a lot of money to be made in Russia - if you know how to bend/make/ignore
the rules.' But long-term business commitment comes not from knowing how to
circumvent, but how to observe, the rules.
The conjunction of dire circumstances makes an agreement with the
International Monetary Fund for the payment of the next tranche of the
'systemic transformation facility' loan - the second instalment of a special
Dollars 3bn fund designed to speed the transition from communism to
capitalism - more than usually important, if Russia is to retain a reform
momentum.
The loan is needed both to cover immediate hard currency expenses, such as
debt servicing, but more particularly to increase waning confidence and to
retain some momentum to the west's involvement in Russian reform, reaffirmed
at two Group of Seven summits and likely to be at or near the top of the
agenda at the G7 summit in Naples in July.
The west's involvement, now under increasing criticism in Russia and in the
west itself, has, say critics, produced nothing but rhetoric by western
politicians, often self-serving. The IMF and the World Bank, the two main
lending agencies, say that this is at best a half-truth. They have been
hampered, continually, by their inability to find partners in Russia to whom
to lend.
The World Bank, for example, which takes its lead from the IMF, has been
trying for months to make large loans to cover the cost of a social security
network, and to assist agricultural reform. The first of these has been
refused by the Russians because ministers do not want to pile up more debt
and do not believe that the local uthorities, to whom the money would be
passed, would pay it back. In the second case, the various actors in the
agriculture sector - the Moscow ministry and committees, the regional and
local authorities, the state and collective farm managers - cannot agree on
what a loan would be used for. The result is that, in two of the most vital
sectors for reform, little is being done except local pilot projects.
Nothing that the government can now do would improve matters in the short
term. When it does act - as it did last week when it introduced higher
customs duties on a range of imported goods - it stirs up more opposition
from the public (who, in the large cities, have become increasingly
accustomed to buying imported food and other commodities), and protects
industries which often (not always) appear indifferent to becoming
competitive in world markets.
This is the geology, the sub-structure, of the turmoil we now see. A
shrinking wealth, a government which struggles to find its bearings, an
advanced world which cannot agree on a convincing way to assist: these are
the elements which are producing an ever-deepening political crisis.
