FT  06 APR 94 / Business and the Environment: In pursuit of the
effluent-free mill - Worldwide Waste - A look at the pressures forcing the
Nordic pulp and paper sector to clean up its act
At the Korsnas pulp mill at Gavle on the Swedish east coast, they boast that
the problem of industrial waste has almost been solved. A dramatic cut in
effluents into the surrounding bay has brought fish back and means the water
is 'virtually unaffected' according to Bengt Nordin, Korsnas'
vice-president. 'We have a good answer to pollution questions; we can
improve a bit but the basic job has been done,' he says.
Across the Gulf of Bothnia, in Finland, the newly-reconstructed Enocell mill
of the Enso-Gutzeit group has cut discharges of chlorinated organic
compounds to just 90 grams per tonne of pulp produced, compared with 1.25kg
in 1990 and a Nordic average of 6kg in 1985.
Successes like these have encouraged executives in the Nordic pulp and paper
sector to suggest that 'the totally effluent-free' mill will soon be a
reality. Such a mill would not only recycle the water it uses, it would also
use much less water than is consumed today.
Waste has been a more contentious issue for Nordic pulp and paper companies
than for other industries in the region because of the sector's huge
consumption of water, the destructive impact of some bleaching processes on
the environment, and the economic importance of forestry to Sweden and
Finland where it is the single biggest net earner of foreign currency.
Worries about disturbing the delicate eco-balance of the Nordic lake systems
and fears of aggravating the problems of the heavily polluted Baltic Sea
have only added to the pressures.
According to Nils Jirvall, director of environmental protection at the
Swedish Pulp and Paper Association, Nordic mills have been driven to clean
up their act by the twin forces of consumer pressure and legislation.
German-speaking areas in Europe have sought tighter environmental standards
in the pulp and paper industry, and driven the trend towards 'totally
chlorine-free' bleaching. Export-dependent Nordic forestry cannot afford to
turn a deaf ear to their calls.
As a result, most Nordic pulp mills not only meet legislative requirements
but exceed them. In Sweden, for example, average emissions of chlorinated
organic compounds are 0.5kg per tonne of pulp produced, compared with the
1.5kg level prescribed by the authorities. Regulation is tough and has been
tightened progressively to take account of technological developments.
In Finland, chlorine consumption has dropped from more than 60kg per tonne
of bleached pulp in 1980 to less than 10kg last year. Over the same period,
sulphur dioxide emissions to the air have fallen from 104,000 tonnes to
14,600 tonnes. 'Average emissions are between 7 and 10 times lower today
than they were in the early 1980s,' says Pertti Laine, director of
industrial and environmental policy at the Finnish Forest Industries
Federation.
The improvements have been achieved despite big increases in total pulp
production. The emphasis has been on changing the internal mill processes,
rather than enhancing the treatment of effluent. One big improvement has
been to extend the pulp cooking stage, so that more of the discolouring
resin, lignine, is removed prior to bleaching. Another has been to use
chlorine dioxide instead of chlorine gas in the bleaching process. Some
mills have even gone a stage further, using hydrogen peroxide, enzymes and
ozone to produce chlorine-free pulp.
The cost has been considerable. The Swedish pulp and paper association
calculates that Swedish forestry groups have spent SKr20bn (Pounds 1.7bn)
since 1971 on environmental protection. In Finland, environment-related
investments are costing forestry groups between FM700m (Pounds 86m) and
FM800m a year. Enso-Gutzeit alone spent FM400m on environmental measures
during the FM2.5bn reconstruction of its Enocell mill.
The danger is that such big outlays will damage Nordic competitiveness
during the current market recession at a time when rival pulp and paper
producers in North America, Brazil and Indonesia are not investing as much
on environmental protection. But, Jirvall says, 'even if they don't have the
legislation in Brazil and Indonesia, they still have to act on the market'.
The success of the Nordic mills in cutting pollution has helped to shift the
environmental debate towards forest management and recycling. But many
executives believe emissions can be cut further. It is no longer a question
of whether the technology is available, but whether mills can afford to
install it.
The key is the removal of chlorine. Once this highly corrosive substance is
eliminated from the bleaching process, it is much easier for mills to
enclose their water systems and discharge no liquid effluent. This 'closed
cycle' concept has been embraced by the designers of a planned FM3bn pulp
mill at Rauma in western Finland whose backers say that when starting from
scratch, the capital and operating costs associated with the latest
technology are no higher than with conventional processes.
Next week: France
