FT  28 OCT 94 / Russian government survives vote of no confidence
The Russian government survived a vote of no confidence in parliament last
night as Mr Victor Chernomyrdin, the prime minister, pledged to toughen
economic policy next year to achieve the elusive goal of stabilisation.
The country also survived the first part of a 24-hour strike called by the
official trade unions with little apparent inconvenience, and relatively
small demonstrations in the main cities.
However, the no confidence vote - 194 for, just 32 short of the majority
needed - was closer than expected, and only 54 deputies voted against it.
The rest registered abstentions or did not vote at all.
At the same time, President Boris Yeltsin named the conservative Mr
Alexander Nazarchuk, a leading member of the pro-communist Agrarian faction,
as the agriculture minister.
The nomination and its likely effect on the vital, but largely
unreconstructed, agricultural sector contrasted starkly with the prime
minister's reformist speech as he presented his tough 1995 draft budget to
parliament. It appeared to point again to a widening policy split between Mr
Yeltsin and Mr Chernomyrdin.
Mr Nikolai Travkin, Democratic party leader and minister without portfolio,
said last night 'if before this nomination we couldn't move reforms through
the (farm) lobby, then after it they will be entirely stuck'.
However, Mr Chernomyrdin, in a confident and vigorous performance before the
Duma, made clear that the only strategy he could see was to tighten monetary
policy, squeeze inflation further and refuse additional credits from the
Central Bank.
The budget commended by Mr Chernomyrdin is exceptionally severe, requiring
real cuts in almost every sphere of the economy and making a continuing fall
in production and GNP inevitable.
However, Mr Chernomyrdin said that only such a budget would 'close the doors
on the swamp of depression' and allow real growth backed by real investment.
The leaders of the reformist parties were at best lukewarm in their support
 -though both Mr Grigory Yavlinsky of the Yabloko group, a declared
presidential candidate in next year's elections, and Mr Yegor Gaidar of
Russia's Choice made clear that their opposition was more to the president
than to Mr Chernomyrdin.
While the unions' grievances about the backlog of wages owing are real and
urgent, neither the old official unions nor the new independent ones have
managed to galvanise workers into action.
Radical reforms back on the agenda, Page 2
