FT  16 FEB 94 / Russian troops told to defy UN: Yeltsin administration says
orders must be cleared with Moscow
Russian troops under United Nations command in former Yugoslavia have been
told not to obey orders from their UN superiors until they are cleared by
Moscow, according to officials in President Boris Yeltsin's administration.
This emerged as Mr Yeltsin raised strong objections yesterday to the threat
of air strikes against Bosnian Serbs in his first public comments on the
Nato ultimatum issued last week.
Presidential officials said at least one order to Russian troops in former
Yugoslavia had already been countermanded.
This was when Russian troops in eastern Croatia refused an order to move
nearer to the front line around Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital.
This attitude was underlined by Russian deputy foreign minister Vitaly
Churkin. On his way back from a visit to Bosnia, he said it was unthinkable
that Russian troops should reinforce peacekeepers in Sarajevo while Moscow
was not part of the decision-making process in Bosnia.
Speaking after talks in Moscow with Mr John Major, the UK prime minister, Mr
Yeltsin warned Nato it would not succeed in ending the conflict without full
Russian agreement.
But Mr Yeltsin held back from outright rejection of the Nato ultimatum to
the Bosnian Serbs to withdraw their heavy weapons from around Sarajevo or
face air strikes. British officials said the Russian president was keeping
his options open if air strikes were launched after the deadline for the
Bosnian Serbs to comply runs out at midnight on Sunday. Mr Yeltsin has made
it clear he sees air strikes as a last resort.
The Russian president, who appeared angry at the precedent set by the west
in issuing a unilateral military warning, told journalists at the Kremlin:
'Some people are trying to resolve the issue on Bosnia without the agreement
of Russia. This will not succeed.'
But he did not explicitly demand that the UN Security Council pass another
resolution before launching military action. And he also threw Russia's
weight behind efforts to lift the siege of Sarajevo.
He did, however, draw a distinction between air strikes called in defence of
UN forces in Bosnia - which Moscow approved - and the wider remit of the
Nato decision. He warned the west against trying to impose a military
solution to a conflict that could only be ended at the negotiating table. He
added: 'Russia will take part actively in talks to bring a peaceful
solution.'
Mr Major, the first Nato leader to meet Mr Yeltsin since the air strikes
ultimatum was issued, was anxious to reassure his host. He told journalists:
'Before air strikes proceed on this very limited front there would need to
be a reference back, under previously agreed Security Council resolutions,
to the secretary-general.'
Guns wait, Page 2 Flank left to fester, Page 15
