FT  18 OCT 94 / Sawyer faces early test on Clause 4
Mr Tom Sawyer, a leading trade union ally of Mr Tony Blair, was yesterday
appointed Labour's general secretary by the party's ruling national
executive committee.
His appointment ensures the loyalty of the party machinery, and helps
prepare the ground for Mr Blair's plan to dump its traditional commitment to
common ownership, which is embodied in Clause 4 of the party's constitution.
It became clear yesterday, however, that Mr Sawyer may have a more difficult
job guiding through reform of Clause 4 than originally supposed.
Officials have calculated that more than half of the main unions affiliated
to the party have clauses in their own constitutions committing those unions
to the long-term goal of common ownership.
Although many of those clauses are more loosely worded than Clause 4 they
will either have to be removed before the unions can support a radical
re-writing of Labour's commitment to common ownership or that re-writing
will have to be more restrained than originally envisaged.
Removing the clauses will require special union conferences and, in most
cases, two-thirds majorities. That may be difficult to achieve even in
Labour loyalist unions such as the GMB general union, whose leadership is in
principle supportive of re-drawing Clause 4.
Mr Sawyer, deputy general secretary of Unison, the public sector union,
replaces Mr Larry Whitty, who was regarded by Mr Blair as too close to the
party's traditional socialist wing. His appointment is a boost to Mr Blair,
who believes that Labour's organisational skills must be sharpened if the
party is to win the next general election.
A former leftwinger, Mr Sawyer is solidly behind Mr Blair's plan to dump
Labour's commitment to common ownership. He said: 'I think that Labour party
members will be very pleased when they see the empowerment that can come
from a revised statement of aims and values.'
Meanwhile, Mr Blair's grip on the party machine is expected to be further
strengthened tomorrow by the election of additional supporters to the shadow
cabinet. The elections are likely to be followed by a thorough shake-up of
the shadow cabinet.
Nominations for the annual elections, which closed yesterday, disclose a
record field of 52 candidates, including 17 women.
There are two vacancies, caused by the elections of Mr Blair and Mr John
Prescott as leader and deputy leader following Mr Smith's death. Both are
likely to go to women, partly because rules introduced last year require MPs
to cast at least four of their 18 votes for women.
Mrs Margaret Beckett, the traditionalist former deputy leader, is certain to
return to the shadow cabinet after losing her place in the leadership
elections.
Ms Harriet Harman, the modernist shadow chief secretary, is expected to be
rewarded for her campaign against tax increases by winning the second vacant
slot.
Other candidates include Ms Joyce Quin, who speaks on Europe, Mrs Ann Clwyd
(employment) and Ms Clare Short (women). All narrowly missed election last
year.
Several less well-known MPs are strongly tipped, including Mr Brian Wilson
(transport), Mr Alun Michael (Home Office), Mr Alistair Darling (City), Mr
Nick Brown (Treasury), and Ms Hilary Armstrong, formerly Mr Smith's
parliamentary aide.
