FT  19 JAN 94 / Setback for Clinton over new defence secretary: Inman
withdraws as nominee citing 'partisan' attack by Dole
Another key appointment by US president Bill Clinton crashed dramatically
yesterday when Mr Bobby Ray Inman, the former admiral he picked to take over
as defence secretary, withdrew as nominee.
Mr Inman, a former intelligence officer, said he could not stand the
'distortions of my record, my character and my reputation' involved in
winning confirmation from the Senate. He blamed Senator Robert Dole, the
leader of the opposition Republicans in the Senate, who he claimed had
'directed a partisan response to my nomination'.
The withdrawal is a crushing blow for Mr Clinton, who had hoped to improve
his administration's decision-making structure when replacing Mr Les Aspin,
the intellectual former congressman who is due to step down as defence
secretary tomorrow.
Now Mr Clinton must not only start again to search for a defence secretary,
but will also face questions about his judgment in picking an apparently
thin-skinned and self-centred man for the Pentagon.
Mr Clinton has had many setbacks with his appointments, the most damaging
being the Nannygate controversy over Ms Zoe Baird, his choice for
attorney-general, who had employed an illegal immigrant as a nanny and
failed to pay appropriate taxes.
In an extraordinary press conference yesterday in his home town of Austin,
Texas, Mr Inman claimed he had heard of a deal between Mr Dole and Mr
William Safire, the New York Times columnist, for Mr Dole to mount an attack
on Mr Inman. Mr Safire would return the favour by focusing on the Whitewater
financial imbroglio surrounding the Clintons, for which the president last
week requested the appointment of an independent counsel.
'Whether it's true or not, I believed it was true on the 6th (of January)
and that's the day I made up my mind that I don't need this,' Mr Inman said,
adding that he had delayed his decision because of the death of Mr Clinton's
mother and the president's subsequent trip to the Nato summit and Moscow.
Mr Dole yesterday denied that he had planned to lead any concerted
opposition to Mr Inman's confirmation. 'I have no idea what's gotten into
Bobby Inman, or what partisan response to his nomination he is talking
about,' he said in a statement issued yesterday afternoon.
Mr Inman also delivered a long justification of his financial relationship
with his housekeeper, on whose pay he had not made the required social
security and tax payments. He had already raised eyebrows with his
performance at the White House ceremony to announce his nomination. There,
he announced that he had voted for then President George Bush in the 1992
election, and gave the impression that he had interviewed Mr Clinton for the
job rather than vice versa.
Senator John McCain, a Republican member of the armed services committee who
would have conducted Mr Inman's confirmation hearings, said all his
Republican colleagues on the committee had supported the nomination. He
rejected Mr Inman's theory of a plan by Senator Dole. Many potential
government officials have complained about the rigours of the confirmation
process, but most of those unwilling to undergo such gruelling hearings do
not accept nomination.
