FT  31 MAY 94 / The Hualon Project: Brothers continue to run group despite
allegations
The Hualon group, based in Taiwan, is one of the Far East's leading textile
producers. It is also a manufacturer of electronics and a financial services
company.
Listed on the Taiwanese stock exchange as the Hualon Corporation, the group
is controlled by the Oung family.
Mr Oung Ta-ming, eldest of the three brothers who run the group, was
chairman until 1988 when he took early retirement.
Although he is no longer listed as an officer of the company, he remains in
the driving seat.
Mr Oung Yi-ming, his brother, is chairman of the electronics and
financial-services arms of the group.
The chairman of the textiles side - now run as the Hualon Corporation of
Malaysia, which is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Hualon Corporation of
Taiwan - is Mr Oung You-ming.
The criminal charges outstanding in Taiwan against Mr Oung You-ming have not
prevented him from continuing to run the group's textile operations from
Malaysia, where he arrived in May 1991 after jumping bail.
Hualon has been expanding its textiles operations rapidly, and since 1990
Malaysia has approved the construction of three Hualon textile plants set to
employ an estimated 5,000 workers on completion.
At the end of last year, the group announced a Dollars 240m investment in
eight textile and dyeing plants in Vietnam.
It also announced last year a Dollars 250m expansion of its main Taiwan
textiles facility, and has been investing heavily in mainland China.
Hualon has not yet decided whether the Northern Ireland plant will be part
of its Malaysian-based textiles company, although Northern Ireland's
Industrial Development Board negotiated the deal with the Malaysian Hualon
Corporation. Nor does the group know when, or if, Mr Oung You-ming plans to
return to Taiwan to face the charges which prompted him to leave.
Mr Oung Ta-ming has already been sentenced to 2 1/2 years in jail in the
case over which Mr Oung You-ming is charged, but he is appealing the ruling
in Taiwan's supreme court.
Since his conviction he has been elected an MP, giving him parliamentary
immunity which can only be lifted by a vote of congress.
In a separate case, Mr Oung Ta-ming was charged in 1991 in connection with a
land deal, together with another brother, Mr Oung Yi-ming.
The two brothers were alleged to have given money to an associate to buy
land.
It was alleged that the associate then sold the land to a Hualon company at
a large profit, which he and the Oung brothers shared.
Mr Oung Yi-ming was sentenced to 1 1/2 years for improper enrichment of
others, but the ruling was overturned on appeal.
