FT  20 APR 94 / Opt-out from EU rules on child labour blocked
Britain's opt-out from a European law limiting the number of hours children
can work has been denied for the time being by an unexpected move by Greece,
which holds the EU presidency.
The UK secured a controversial four-year exemption last year to allow
children under 15 - such as paper boys and girls - to work more than 12
hours a week. This gave the UK a six-year breathing space, including the two
years allowed to pass the directive into national law.
Since then the Geneva-based International Labour Organisation has complained
that the special treatment for Britain flouts international conventions on
child labour, and the European parliament has voted to take the British
dero-gation out of the directive.
The European Commission accepted the parliament's amendment, so that, under
EU voting procedures, only a unanimous vote of the 12 labour and employment
ministers yesterday could safeguard the British exemption. Countries that
remain unhappy with the package, such as Ireland, Italy and Spain, were
expected to abstain to allow the opt-out through.
But Greece, without any warning, announced it would vote for the
parliament's amendment. The directive will come back to the next Social
Affairs Council in June, but the controversy surrounding the provisions for
Britain looks set to intensify.
'The more it goes on, the more it is likely to unravel,' a commission
official said yesterday. Mr Michael Forsyth, junior employment minister,
nevertheless said: 'We've today succeeded in preventing the European
parliament proposal to remove the UK opt-out, so I'm very relaxed.'
Greece's change of heart seemed to be caused by annoyance with Britain for
supporting German objections to the EU's fourth poverty programme, an
Ecu122m (Pounds 96.1m) programme to help the estimated 52m union citizens
earning less than half the average income of their countries.
Germany said that under subsidiarity this was a matter for national
governments. The UK, which has no objection of principle, backed Bonn.
In spite of this expression of solidarity, the gulf between Britain and its
partners on social policy gaped anew when the 11 forged ahead with the
directive setting up elected works councils in large trans-European
companies.
