FT  02 NOV 94 / FT Review of Business Books (20): Handle with care - The
problem is that the criteria the authors use are too crude / Hostile
takeover bids
'HOSTILE TAKEOVERS' by Tim Jenkinson and Colin Mayer McGraw-Hill Book
Company Pounds 37.95, 187 pages
Quoted companies worried about the threat of hostile takeover bids will gain
little comfort from a new book by two Oxford academics. After a detailed
study of all hostile bids in the UK between January 1989 and March 1990 the
authors conclude that the chances of a company which is the subject of a
cash bid remaining independent are slim, however good its financial record.
Indeed, they argue that there is little link between a target's previous
financial performance and the likelihood of its attracting or surviving any
hostile bid. This may be true. Unfortunately, the evidence presented
provides limited support for the claim.
The authors divide the 42 hostile bids during the period into three
categories - 16 where there was clear evidence of financial failure; 10
where there was evidence of possible financial failure; and 16 where there
was no such evidence. In each of the first two groups, six bids were
successful but in the third eight succeeded.
The problem is that the criteria the authors use for establishing financial
failure are too crude. Clear evidence was deemed to be present if the share
price of the target decline relative to the FT All Share index in at least
one of the two years prior to the bid, and there was a decline in either
earnings per share or dividends in the year immediately preceding the bid.
If none of these applied there was no evidence of financial failure.
The earnings and dividend hurdles are too low. During the period of the bids
companies were reporting profits generated at the height of the boom. Many
of the companies that increased earnings and dividends at that time would
have been generally viewed as underperformers.
The share price is a better yardstick, although it would have been
preferable to compare the performance against the company's sector index.
Even then it needs to handled with care. Of the companies where the authors
suggest there was no evidence of financial failure, two - Pearl and Higgs &amp;
Hill - underperformed the FT index in the year up to the day before the bid.
The fact that their shares jumped after the bid was announced is hardly the
point.
In the case of Chamberlain Phipps, Laing Properties and Camford Engineering,
the shares underperformed until a few days before the bid when rumours
started to hit the market. Shares in DRG were buoyed up by bid rumours for
months before the Pembridge bid appeared and few impartial observers would
have denied there were questions about its financial performance.
The authors themselves admit that according to their tests BAT Industries
showed no sign of financial failure ahead of the bid from Hoylake. Yet the
bidders' argument that the management was denying shareholders value by not
demerging some of BAT's business was borne out by subsequent events. After
the bid failed the management spun off several businesses leaving the share
price significantly higher than before the bid.
All this is not to deny that well-managed companies can be the target of
successful hostile takeover bids. Yet the authors fail to demonstrate that
it is widespread or indeed that it is a serious problem. They merely state
that that UK companies' unusual vulnerability to takeover 'does not
necessarily produce appropriate incentive structures for management and
that, as a result, corporate performance may in some cases be adversely
affected'.
Even if this is true, the obvious solution would be to design incentive
structures to ensure managements benefit from hostile bids that enhance
shareholder value rather than to make hostile bids more difficult.
The authors repeat the popular view that there may be a link between the
prevalence of hostile bids in the UK and the low level of company-funded
research and development. They do not attempt to explain why the management
of Glaxo was happy to spend Pounds 858m on research and development last
year. Instead, they propose that companies with large research and
development budgets or other long-term investments should be able to erect
some limited technical defences to takeover.
While the authors stress that these should be temporary measures implemented
with the agreement of shareholders, the idea requires an odd view of
shareholders' psychology. To convince shareholders to agree to the takeover
defence, the company would have to demonstrate that the planned investment,
which would supposedly make it vulnerable to takeover, was in shareholders'
best interests. Yet if its shareholders were convinced by the plan the
company would not be vulnerable to takeover.
Only if shareholders could not trust themselves to resist a takeover would
they agree to such a self-denying ordinance.
