FT  02 JUN 94 / Survey of Foreign Exchange (7): Beacons in the monetary haze
 -The former communist countries
Understanding of the crucial importance of a sound currency to the success
of economic reforms has grown rapidly among economic policy-makers in the
former communist world over the past 18 months.
The latest converts have been among the former practitioners of the planned
economy who now govern Russia. 'A strong rouble is the indispensable
condition for the revival of the Russian economy,' Victor Chernomyrdin, the
Russian prime minister, recently told FT readers in a lengthy article which
stressed his government's commitment to market reforms, albeit tailored to
the specific and extraordinary circumstances of a giant country whose
inherited distortions are also on an epic scale.
The attention of Russia, largest of the former communist states, has been
attracted partly by the successful creation of independent national
currencies in several of the new states released from Soviet control over
the past five years. Three currencies in particular stand out like beacons
in the monetary haze left behind by the collapse of the Soviet Union and the
disappearance of the transferable rouble. These paragons of stability, all
well launched on the path to full convertibility, are the Czech crown, the
Estonian kroon and the Slovene tolar.
In each case the countries concerned were the most westerly and most
developed parts of the former Soviet bloc, or of former Yugoslavia in the
Slovene example, and enjoyed specific advantages. But all three share a
strong political commitment to sound money as the basis for a rational
economy and thriving trade.
The Czech crown has been remarkably stable against the dollar and other hard
currencies since 1991. With capital inflows of Dollars 1.4bn last year,
balanced budgets and low foreign debt the crown is being groomed for full
convertibility by 1995. The Estonian kroon, which is umbilically linked to
the D-Mark, is managed on a currency board basis by the central bank which
recently pledged to keep the currency fixed at eight kroons to the D-Mark
until at least the turn of the century. The Slovene tolar is similarly
backed by steadily rising hard currency reserves now that Slovenia no longer
has to subsidise the rest of Yugoslavia.
The importance of a sound currency was first underlined by the architects of
the Polish stabilisation programme in 1990. Their reforms made the Polish
zloty internally convertible and managed to halt hyperinflation. Heavily
undervalued at the start of monetary reform, the zloty steadily appreciated
for 18 months until the first of a series of devaluations. The currency was
last formally devalued in August last year by 8 per cent but regularly loses
value by 1.6 per cent a month against a trade-weighted basket of currencies.
This 'crawling peg' devaluation is needed to compensate for inflation which,
although falling, hovers around 30 per cent annually.
Hungary, which inherited the largest per capital foreign debt in the region,
has also made recourse to forint devaluation to maintain the competitiveness
of exports but has managed to attract foreign investment which has allowed a
strong growth of reserves despite a worrying rise in the current account
deficit in recent months.
With their shift in trade to western markets and commitment to continuing
market reforms and privatisation, however, the economies and currencies of
central Europe are on track to becoming 'normal' by the end of the decade.
They are being followed, with a time lag, by Albania, Romania and Bulgaria.
In recent months the Romanian central bank has created the conditions for
internal convertibility of the Romanian lei by raising domestic interest
rates and taking other measures to close the gap between official and black
market exchange rates. The Bulgarian lev by contrast came under pressure
towards the end of last year as a reflection of higher than expected
inflation and declining hard currency reserves.
The picture is much more complex in the states of the former Soviet Union.
The disintegration of the rouble zone, originally opposed by Moscow and the
IMF, was the logical consequence of the emergence of new states. It has led
to the emergence of a plethora of new currencies such as the Kyrgyz som and
the Kazakh tenge alongside slightly longer established currencies such as
the Ukrainian karbovanets. All the former Soviet currencies are traded on
the Moscow Interbank Currency Exchange while three, the karbovanets, the
tenge and the Belorussian accounting rouble are also traded on the central
Moscow stock exchange.
The currencies of the former Soviet Baltic states, led by the Estonian
Kroon, are in a class of their own with both the Latvian lats and the
Lithuanian litas moving to modified forms of currency board management. But
the fate of most other post-Soviet currencies accurately reflects the lack
of consistent reform and the high inflation resulting from loose monetary
policies.
Some, like the Armenian dram, the Azerbaijani manat and the Georgian coupon,
have been even further devalued by war and civil strife. Faced with
hyperinflation and inconvertible currencies trade in such countries has been
largely reduced to smuggling and barter and those with access to hard
currencies have become the new rich.
If Mr Chernomyrdin's newfound commitment to sound money does lead to tough
restrictions on government subsidies to hard-pressed military plants and
collectivised agriculture and adherence to lower inflation targets, the
Russian rouble could strengthen after its long decline. After all, the
rouble is backed by the enormous natural resources of a Russia which is no
longer obliged to subsidise the less developed parts of the former Soviet
empire.
