FT  03 AUG 94 / Arts: Some jewels among the dross - Television
There is a theory that television schedules during high summer offer little
but pap for the silly-season viewer. The past week's programmes were
certainly well-stuffed with junk: Pets win Prizes on BBC 1, ideal for anyone
with an IQ in single figures; the same channel's Punt and Dennis Show, as
merry as an outbreak of dengue; the shrill Grace under Fire on BBC 2, which
is a barrage of machine-tooled American predictabilities about the wittily
named Grace Kelly. (Gosh, how do script-writers think of such japes?) Here
was essential viewing for people anxious to know how many garments a goat
can pull off a clothes-line, or whether an adenoidal divorcee will get
another man - and presumably pull his clothes off, too.
But there were rewards for grown-ups as well. I am no believer in 'the
majesty of human suffering'. De Vigny's phrase rings inordinately hollow as,
daily, television shows us the self-inflicted wounds of the Rwandan people,
and the reign of cholera over the dispossessed and terrified. And yet, there
is a massive dignity to fighting men who have suffered through battle and
the privations of prison camp, and this was the sustaining thread of The
Valour and the Horror, a two-hour Canadian documentary shown on Sunday on
Channel 4 about a war-time incident too little known.
In 1941, two thousand Canadian soldiers, young and unprepared, were sent to
Hong Kong to help defend the colony against Japanese invasion. Churchill had
privately declared Hong Kong impossible to save. Nevertheless, Canadian (and
Indian) troops were despatched to bolster the British forces. Their
sufferings after surrender - massacred in hospital beds, maltreated in
prison camp, used as slave labour in Japan  - were the immediate matter of
the programme. Underlying this were graver questions about government
decisions (British as well as Canadian) and the rightness of the expedition.
Archive footage, dramatisation of soldiers' letters and diaries (well done,
though the fine young actors looked too healthy, too glossy), and the
presence of two survivors were the means of an horrific narrative.
With immense dignity the two survivors, Sergeant Manchester and Sergeant
Clayton recounted their experiences, from beatings to beri-beri. Confronted
with Japanese participants in the same battle and a witness of their Tokyo
slavery, they showed astonishing self-control. It broke only at the end as
they stood by the graves of their comrades (early on, Sergeant Clayton had
said that other people 'look at stones. We look at people'). Tears, at last,
from them. Tears, surely, from those who watched. But, and here was the
programme's barb, no compensation, no reparations even now for the
survivors' sufferings. Two further programmes are scheduled.
Tears from me, unashamedly, watching Jane Horrocks in Suffer the Little
Children which will be transmitted tonight in BBC2's Stages series. (You can
view it as the essential antidote to Grace under Fire which precedes it.)
Jack Emery's monologue lasts nearly 40 minutes, and every minute counts as
Miss Horrocks plays Deborah, a young mother whose first baby, Daniel, is
born suffering from spinal muscular atrophy. (I infer that the story is
based on fact.) Deborah's prodigious devotion keeps the child alive for a
short time. A second son, Michael, is then born deformed. Once again Deborah
devotes herself to trying to save him, despite medical advice that the
child's life can be nothing but torment to him. Her love, and the tremulous
joy she finds in his personality, are eventually worn away by his ceaseless
physical anguish. Driven far beyond despair, she kills him and then attempts
suicide. The monologue is her account - detailed, reasonable, yet always on
the brink of an abyss of pain - of the child's sufferings and her own fight
for its life, in a police interview room.
It is undeniably harrowing. It is also, because of Miss Horrocks' exquisite
skill and tact as an actress, undeniably beautiful. With nothing forced and
nothing faked, Miss Horrocks tells us everything about Deborah's bravery,
her persistence, her exhaustion of body and spirit. She shows us Deborah
plain. It is a thrilling, heart-tearing performance, astonishing in its
physical precision - the ball of handkerchief scrubbing at tears - as in its
shape, leading to one true and terrible crescendo when she describes her
suicide attempt. Jack Emery's script is admirable. So is the direction by
Betsan Morris-Evans, sensitively judged in pace and manner. Not to be
missed.
Something I think would not be missed was the return of Channel 4's dance
series, Tights, Camera, Action], that bran-tub of post-modern romping. (An
alternative title might be Unlucky Dip.) In the first programme, on Friday,
we were offered a trio of films that should make all but the most perfervid
fan switch over to a re-run of Porridge. We had dance as assault and
battery; dance as non-dance; dance as feminist self-indulgence. We saw a
slam-bang duet by Edouard Lock, shot in black and white, the girl boasting
legs worthy of a wing three-quarter, and needing them to support her chap,
swinging from her as from a trapeze. There followed an inept silent-movie
adventure from France, for a senorita, a matador and a caliph, with - it
being French post-modernism - not a step or a moment of sense in sight.
Finally, a document about ten mothers and daughters - none with perceptible
dance training - who behaved with consummate archness, cuddling and dragging
each other about. (Miss Horrocks' performance should show them the error of
their ways.)
Of such fatuities is the world of television dance nowadays. I recall that a
decade ago BBC TV could stage two prodigious Dance Months, crammed with
magnificent performance, and that at the same time Channel 4 provided a
grand season featuring the work of ten major modern dance creators. There
is, despite the current fashion for the vain and off-putting tosh we saw in
Tights, Camera, Action, much good new dance. And with Channel 4 providing
superb relays from Glyndebourne (last week's Onegin surely one of the finest
of opera transmissions), dance-lovers can feel distinctly under-nourished.
Instead of stimulating a dance public, such programmes are warnings about
thinnest artistic ice.
Since I think all dogs are revolting, the QED programme Revolting Dogs
(Thursday BBC 1) won my immediate sympathy. Here was a selection of those
detestable creatures (I divide dogs into two species: Yappers and Crappers),
whose behaviour - seven years' incessant barking; possessive mania worthy of
a pasha - had brought owners to their emotional knees. A nasty-looking
Alsatian and something else, over-furred and over-fanged like a Hollywood
actress, were taken to Canine Behaviour Counsellors (aka Doggie Shrinks) and
guided, after years of terrorising all and sundry, into calmer ways.
An intriguing contrast in dealing with these four-footed maniacs came on BBC
2 the next night when, in Michael Moore's TV Nation, such horrors in America
were simply hopped up on Prozac. So Willy, a log-fixated bull-pup, was
cured, as was Ruby, a grey parrot much given to tearing out her feathers.
Stuffed with Prozac 'she seems more silly and more relaxed' - and of whom,
under similar circumstances, would one not say the same? Maybe they should
try it on Tights, Camera, Action.
Christopher Dunkley is on holiday
