FT  22 JAN 94 / Poker with the plastic pirates: David Spanier meets the men
gambling on turning Las Vegas into Disneyland with slot machines
While Eurodisney is hurting badly and America remains in semi-recession,
theme parks are booming on Las Vegas Boulevard, making Nevada's pleasuredome
bigger, more vibrant, more vulgar and more lucrative than ever.
Last month Kirk Kerkorian's MGM Grand, the world's largest hotel-casino cum
theme park - 5,005 rooms and 170,000 sq ft of gaming space - opened in Las
Vegas.
Kerkorian's project is so big that it is hard to comprehend. In London, the
site would cover an area from Cambridge Circus in the north to Downing
Street in the south, and from St James's Square in the west to the northern
end of Waterloo Bridge in the east. Yet, it is merely the latest in a series
of new theme-park casinos.
Last month the Luxor hotel-casino, a shiny black pyramid, opened. There,
guests 'tour' an indoor river Nile by barge to view the kitsch-Egyptian
interior. The light shining out from the top is claimed to be the most
powerful in the world.
A week after the Luxor's inauguration, the night sky was lit by the
spectacular destruction of the Dunes, one of the outdated, old-style casinos
which was blown up to celebrate the opening of Treasure Island.
This massive block stands next to the Mirage, built four years ago by
flamboyant entrepreneur Steve Wynn as first of the new theme-park properties
designed to set a trend of family-orientated entertainment.
In front of Treasure Island, a pirate ship and Sir Francis Drake's
Hispaniola face each other across the entrance to the casino, sails
billowing, crews aloft, pennants flying. Every half-hour, their cannons
flash and roar until one of the galleons, holed amidships, keels over and
slips under the water. The pirates always win.
Even in a town of gleaming synthetic wonders, however, the vast, blue-green
MGM Grand is something else. First, it is expensive: it cost Dollars 1bn.
Second, it is a challenge to the long-established and world-famous
Disneyland, not far away in southern California. Third, the very name MGM
(and its famous lion) tap into one of America's deepest cultural veins - the
magic of movies. The lion forms the 88ft-high gateway to the casino, opening
on to the famous yellow brick road which leads up to the emerald city of Oz.
The MGM Grand took only two years to build from start to finish: surprising,
since the casino area alone - to which people (mothers and fathers minus
children) are intended to gravitate after the theme park - is so big that it
is divided into four areas: the Emerald City, Monte Carlo, Hollywood, and
Sports.
Close by the MGM are two other new properties, the Luxor pyramid and the
Excalibur, 28 stories high and built on a medieval theme of jousting
knights.
Opposite is the Tropicana, a comparative pigmy of a casino-hotel with only
2,000 rooms, fronted by brooding Easter Island statues. Walkways over the
city's neon-lit Strip will link these casinos and help to reduce the
traffic.
Kerkorian, who is in his mid-70s, remains full of vim. He jogs and plays
tennis in between buying and selling companies.
He has spent a lifetime wheeling and dealing in casinos and airlines and
much else besides, yet has managed to remain a private figure. He describes
himself as 'just a country boy who got lucky.'
The question remains: why should a man of his age, already a millionaire
many times over, devote so much time, energy and money to building something
like the MGM Grand?
Kerkorian wanted to create the biggest and the most glittering casino the
world had seen.
He had done it before with the International (sold to the Hilton hotel
chain) and the first MGM (bought by Bally, the casino, hotel and health club
operator). But he likes the razzmatazz of casinos and wanted, yet again, to
go one better than anyone else.
'I can't see anything detracting from Las Vegas for many lifetimes,' he
says.
MGM's president is Larry Woolf, a quiet, laconic, witty man who started as
an assistant waiter in a restaurant. As chief executive officer, his task
was to pull together a variety of talents from different areas of the casino
business, and weld them into a team.
Woolf has no doubts that his boss has got it right: 'Kerkorian is a man who
stays above all the noise. He has wonderful judgment of what a business is
worth. Whether it's an airline or an automobile company or a casino, he
knows exactly the right price to buy or sell.'
The test of the MGM will be the theme park: if it attracts the public, the
gaming revenues will follow. Woolf says: 'We are going to give people
everything they want - and then some.'
Las Vegas continues to break records. In 1993 it drew about 22m visitors,
close to the total for all of Britain. Even in recessions, growth goes on,
if at a slower rate. Will that change? 'No,' says Bob Maxey, who led the
planning team at the MGM. 'The market is so deep, you can't even plumb its
depths.'
Yet, gambling on its own is not enough as Atlantic City, on the east coast
in New Jersey, has discovered - to its cost. The public is not so gullible:
most players understand that they will lose. The difference is that a visit
to Las Vegas includes excitement and entertainment.
The new theme-park casinos cater for family holidays. The razzle-dazzle mix
of themes - cowboy, circus, medieval, South Seas, Roman, oriental, movies,
space age - might seem garish, outrageous and artificial. But it crackles
with fun and energy.
Gambling remains the most important source of revenue in Las Vegas. However,
the days when the state of Nevada had a near-monopoly on legal gambling are
over. The moral stigma attached to gambling, especially in the conservative
mid-west and south, has faded. Gambling has been legalised in many places.
Lotteries - many for huge prizes - operate in 37 states and there is casino
gambling in 15 if riverboats and Indian reservations are included.
There are plans to make gambling legal in New Orleans, Kansas City and St
Louis. Beyond this, there is pari-mutuel (Tote) betting in many places on
horses, dogs and jai alai (a version of Basque pelota). In total, gaming
industries in the US had gross revenues in 1991 of about Dollars 26bn, or
0.6 per cent of the country's disposable income.
But the intense competition means that many of the gambling towns, resorts
and casinos will not survive. In Las Vegas itself, many of the older
properties have gone bust, overtaken by the mega-resorts. Kerkorian is
betting Dollars 1bn that the MGM Grand (slogan: 'Watch Us Roar in '94') will
become a beacon by which all other attractions measure their success.
Even so, it will have to fight to get the lion's share.
