FT  12 JAN 94 / People: Coulson prescribed for Prestwick
Prestwick Holdings, the quoted Scottish printed circuit board maker which in
25 years has never broken through to sustained profitability, has called in
the company doctor. It has made Archie Coulson its executive chairman and
hired Postern, the firm of corporate recovery specialists which Coulson
helped found in 1991, to review its trading and financial position and say
what needs to be done. The review, costing Pounds 90,000, will take about
five weeks.
Prestwick lost nearly Pounds 4m in the year to July 31 1993 on sales of
Pounds 36m after the strategy of ceo Wayne Osman, hired in 1990 as a
saviour, turned to dust. The small electronics companies he acquired caused
big losses. Osman was replaced last year by John Gilhooly as executive
deputy chairman.
Coulson, 47, comes in at the insistence of shareholders with more than 40
per cent of the equity, including the Miller family who founded Prestwick
and managed it intermittently. He says the review will see what needs to be
done to improve the company's tight financial position, fulfil a big order
book and strengthen management. It will then see what future there is in
PCBs.
Hugh Laughland has stepped down as non-executive chairman but will remain on
the board at least till the review is complete. Gilhooly, credited by
Prestwick with establishing better relations with bankers and creditors, and
with starting to sort out managerial and manufacturing problems, has
resigned as director, as have David Simpson, a past chairman, and David
Hall. Alastair McKie and William Young remain executive directors.
Postern was set up to provide a one-stop shop to advise troubled companies
on restructuring and to implement rescue plans. Coulson, who gives the
impression on the telephone of a soothing corporate bedside manner, says it
has done more than 15 rescues, not all of which have got its name in the
papers since some companies prefer to be discreet when they call for help.
He sees Prestwick as 'a damn sight easier than most situations. A lot of
companies don't know what they're doing at all'. He suspects Prestwick's
problems stem from its not recognising that 'management is actually quite
boring. Its acquisitions were probably a good idea, but did anyone check
that they had systems that worked, or integrate them with the rest of the
group?'
