FT  06 SEP 94 / The British Association: Ill-health linked to low status
Low social status rather than the impact of poverty is the main reason poor
people do not live as long as the rich and become ill more often, the
association was told yesterday.
Professor Robert Evans, a health economist from the University of British
Columbia, used studies of monkeys living in captivity, free-living baboons
in East Africa and Whitehall civil servants to support his argument that
ill-health is caused by the stresses of social interaction between people -
or baboons - of different status.
Civil servants were divided into four categories of increasing social
status. Those in the upper echelons had longer life expectancy and lower
incidence of disease than those in the categories beneath them.
The baboons of the Serengeti showed a similar difference in health status
correlated with their position in the pecking order.
Reasons for the difference also emerged from measurements of stress-related
hormones (glucocorticoids) and low-density lipoproteins (LDL) in blood
samples taken at different times after social contacts between males of
different status, he said.
Glucocorticoid levels were higher in males of low social status. Levels in
both groups peaked after encounters in which dominant males yawned at
low-status males - to show their teeth - while the low-status males were
eating or mating.
The higher glucocorticoid level in submissive baboons persisted long after
the encounter.
Long-term glucocorticoid elevation also caused increases in LDL, a risk
factor for heart attacks. High LDL levels were found in the blood of
low-status but not high-status males.
To measure glucocorticoid levels it was necessary to shoot the baboons with
anaesthetic darts to take blood. Although this could not be done with the
civil servants - nor is it likely that their superiors yawn at them while
they are mating - the measurement of their disease rates left little doubt
that the results would have been similar.
Prof Evans was speaking in a session on the challenges facing the National
Health Service. He argued that changes to the NHS could not remove the
inequality between rich and poor, because that difference does not result
from differences in treatment. The results from the civil servants
established that the inequality was not simply a difference between the well
off and the destitute.
Other speakers discussed how the internal market could improve healthcare in
the UK. The correlation between health and socio-economic status was first
systematically described 15 years ago in a report by Sir Douglas Black.
