FT  21 DEC 94 / International Company News: Tokyo relaxes listing
requirements
The Tokyo Stock Exchange yesterday announced reforms to its restrictive
listing requirements, to attract companies from fast-growing Asian
economies.
Mr Mitsuhide Yamaguchi, the exchange president, said the new rules would
open the market to smaller companies and reduce listing costs, making Tokyo
similar to the New York Stock Exchange. China and other Asian countries had
shown strong interest, he added.
The measures, which make the infamously expensive and complex Tokyo capital
market more open, are likely to win wide support.
A foreign securities company manager, however, pointed out that deeper
changes may be needed to stimulate Japanese financial institutions' appetite
for foreign equities, another important ingredient in attracting foreign
companies to Tokyo.
The changes, to take effect on January 1, include looser financial reporting
requirements intended to restrain the exodus of foreign groups.
The high cost of being listed in Tokyo, plus the globalisation of equity
trading, lowered the number of foreign companies listed there from a peak of
127 in 1990, to 91 next month. No companies from other Asian countries are
listed in Tokyo.
From next month, foreign company shares will be permitted on the TSE even if
not listed on their domestic markets. The cost of officially vetting a
candidate for a Tokyo listing will be halved to Y1m (Dollars 9,970) as will
the initial fixed cost of the listing, to Y2.5m.
There will be reductions in the annual cost of maintaining a Tokyo
quotation, linked to the number of shares listed.
The size of companies allowed on the Tokyo market is to be cut to a tenth of
the former requirement, a gesture to the many young Asian businesses seeking
equity capital.
From January, they will need net assets of only Y10bn, against Y100bn, and a
three-year record of minimum annual pre-tax profits of Y2bn, also a tenth of
the former size.
Foreign companies listed in Tokyo will no longer be obliged to translate
full annual reports into Japanese, although a shorter Japanese language
financial statement will be required for Japanese shareholders. There will
be no need to issue new reports on items that remain unchanged from one year
to the next.
In an attempt to stimulate investors, the minimum trading unit will be cut
from Y3m to Y500,000. From February, there will be a new authorised trading
block of 500 shares. Currently, foreign shares can only be traded in blocks
of 10, 50, 100 or 1,000.
A similar relaxation in listing rules for foreign bonds was announced
yesterday. Minimum net assets required of foreign bond issuers are reduced
to Y10bn, a tenth of the old size. They will only need to show three years
of Y10bn pre-tax profits, down from Y100bn.
