FT  26 JAN 94 / UK Company News: Shandwick climbs back to the black with
Pounds 4.8m
Shandwick, one of the world's largest public relations companies, yesterday
announced its return to the black with pre-tax profits of Pounds 4.8m for
the year to October 31, compared with a loss, restated for FRS 3, of Pounds
2.5m.
And the highly-indebted group has renegotiated its substantial bank
facilities over a longer period, providing it with a more stable base on
which to build its core business.
Turnover increased by 3.5 per cent to Pounds 162.5m (Pounds 157m) and
operating profit before exceptional items rose to Pounds 11.4m (Pounds
8.5m).
Shandwick has net debt of Pounds 67m and banking facilities have been
renegotiated annually.
Following a new agreement, however, it will lock into a Pounds 55m loan at a
fixed rate for three years, with a further Pounds 16m loan contin-uing on an
annual basis.
Interest payments should fall from a 1993 figure of Pounds 6.6m.
Profits have also been held back by earn-outs, or deferred acquisition
payments, which amounted to Pounds 5.6m last year.
A further Pounds 8m is due over the next four years, of which Pounds 2.2m
should fall during the current fiscal year.
Mr Peter Gummer, chairman, said the outlook for 1994 was extremely positive.
The UK, continental Europe and Asia Pacific all performed ahead of budget
forecasts in the first two months.
The US, which accounts for 50 per cent of turnover, had a slower start, but
has succeeded in winning substantial new business.
Mr John Huckle, finance director, has announced his resignation and will be
replaced by Mr Roger Selman, who is currently group financial controller.
Earnings per share for the 12 months amounted to 6.4p, compared with losses
last time of 4.7p. There will be no dividend.
COMMENT
Shandwick is one of the few media agencies to survive the recession without
a restructuring and, with new banking facilities in place, it is emerging
from a position of relative strength. Profits will be sustained over the
next two years as the torrent of earn-out payments peter out. Analysts are
forecasting pre-tax profits of Pounds 7m for the current year, representing
a p/e of 7.8, rising to some Pounds 8.5m in 1995. Concern will focus on a
possible rights issue to reduce debt levels, but with fresh bank facilities
and positive cash flow, Shandwick can now afford to wait for a further
recovery in its share price.
