FT  12 MAR 94 / Books: Barbed bouquets for mother
MARBLE SKIN by Slavenka Draculic The Women's Press Pounds 5.99, 188 pages
THE GREAT UMBILICAL: MOTHER, DAUGHTER, MOTHER, THE UNBREAKABLE BOND by
Rachel Billington Hutchinson Pounds 17.99, 238 pages
DEAR MOTHER . . .WOMEN WRITING TO OR ABOUT THEIR MOTHERS edited by Marijke
Woolsey and Susan King The Women's Press Pounds 6.99, 173 pages
Just in time for Mothering Sunday, when the recipes for Simnel cake and the
tiny purple non-books of verse come into bloom, these three volumes offer a
rich selection of mother and daughter experiences. Both the Billington and
the Women's Press anthologies yield food for thought, while Slavenka
Draculic's novel Marble Skin comes labelled 'Unsuitable Gift For Mother'.
Draculic is a Croatian novelist and journalist, a co-founder in 1979 of the
first feminist group in Yugoslavia, and the author of the non-fiction How We
Survived Communism and Even Laughed. There are no laughs in Marble Skin, an
intense and claustrophobic narration of a daughter's survival of life with
mother. Soon after the story opens - 'I thought I had already forgiven my
mother for everything' - the daughter, now grown-up and a sculptor, makes a
nude statue and exhibits it under the title 'My Mother's Body'. When
visitors to the show, challenged by the sculpture's sensuality, leave dirty
fingermarks on mother's skin, the daughter feels nauseous but also, 'a
strange excitement gripped me at the thought of all these people doing what
I had never been able to do, at the thought of the forbidden gesture.'
Mother sees a photograph of the reclining nude in a newspaper and attempts,
not for the first time, suicide. Why is the daughter so obsessed with her
mother's body, and what has the unhappy woman done to inspire such revenge?
Mother, in flashback, is a beautiful and deeply sensuous young widow. Not
unnaturally, she attempts to conceal her private life but the child, plagued
by her mother's silence on matters physical, grows into something of a
Peeping Tom. Mother is also fanatical about cleanliness, and when a rare
guest spills wine on her white tablecloth the incident inevitably predicts
trouble at menarche. She remarries and before long the stepfather is
visiting the girl's bedroom and she shatters the veneer of their lives by
telling her mother that he has raped her. Mother sends her away for years
and not until she is old, broken and alone can her daughter forgive her.
Draculic's telling of her bleak, inverted Oedipal tale is masterly, her
prose by turns spare and sensual, but her narrator's stony egotism chills.
In The Great Umbilical Rachel Billington traces the progress of an imaginary
little girl from babyhood to grandmotherhood, with many reflective stops
along the way. The author's views that the influence of the female line is
stronger than that of father to son, and that there is an unbreakable bond
between mother and daughter that is a positive force for good in society,
will neither shock nor challenge, but her enthusiasm is another nail in the
coffin of the 'blame mother for everything' movement so fashionable a few
years ago. This is a book to dip into, packed with mini-case histories and
opinions which will infuriate and intrigue.
Dear Mother . . . which has its share of embarrassments and duds, contains
three or four outstanding pieces and several of interest, as well as
familiar but none-the-worse-for-that extracts from Virginia Woolf, Maya
Angelou and Alice Walker. In An Indian Woman Speaks, the anonymous narrator
tells the immensely cheering tale of a mother travelling to England to
rescue her daughter from a hideous arranged marriage, and Catherine Cookson
 -good to see her up there with the serious sisters - writes compassionately
about her own poor dissolute mother.
The collection's gem, however, is taken from May Sarton's A Wild Green
Place. This has a dual mother/daughter theme as it evokes marvellously a
period in Sarton's mother's childhood when she was sent to stay with an old
Welsh woman and her disturbed and violent daughter. Astonishingly, Judith
Arcana who introduces the anthology says of this strange and moving story
only that it 'shows us the desperate importance of knowing our mothers in
terms of their own lives before we were their daughters, before they were
anyone's mothers.' It does, but it shows us much more, as do the best
ingredients of this celebration of mothers and daughters.
