FT  28 JAN 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (31): Post script
There was really only one place for the investor to be in the final quarter
of 1993, and that was south-east Asia, especially Hong Kong. A number of
unit trusts in the Far East (excluding Japan) sector have doubled their
money over one year; and over five years the average fund has turned Pounds
1,000 into more than Pounds 4,000 (and Pounds 6,500 in the league-topping
case of Gartmore Hong Kong).
On the other hand, the brilliant growth story of the 1980s, Japan, has
turned into the tale of woe of the 1990s. Tokyo dived in the
October-December quarter, and although the strength of the yen has kept UK
investors' heads above water over 12 months, the average Japan fund is
scarcely showing a profit over the past five years. Many, in fact, are down
over this period: our table of sector leaders is packed with small-company
specialists which have been insulated from the worst of the Tokyo bear
market.
The lesson is that no sector success story continues for ever, and in theory
a more broadly-based international fund could provide a more reliable
long-term performance if only it could be managed skilfully. But it seems to
be better to look for this type of fund in investment trusts, rather than
unit trusts. Investment trusts like Law Debenture, Bankers and the daddy of
them all, Foreign &amp; Colonial, have tripled investors' money over five years
(and the first two have added 50 per cent in a year).
In contrast, the international unit trusts tend to be a fairly unexciting
bunch, apart from the emerging markets specialists which have wound up in
this sector and have clearly boosted the average performance level. It is
hard for unit trust groups to sell general international funds on any scale,
because investors (or the intermediaries who advise them) are looking for
specialist vehicles. So the commercial emphasis for unit trust groups lies
in focusing their management resources on specialist funds.
As for the UK funds, they had a good quarter, but it is worth noting the
appearance of several index-tracking funds in the list of leaders over five
years (the Royal Life UK index is sixth out of 100-odd in the UK General
sector). This is a predictable development now that more and more of the
trackers are passing their fifth birthdays.
Too many unit trust portfolios are expensively churned in order to produce
short-term performance, but hardly any outperform the index in the long run.
Over time, the trackers, which have low costs, are therefore creeping
remorselessly up the league table. By the time they have a 10-year
performance history they could well be clustered at the very top.
