FT  14 FEB 94 / International Company News: Samsung Heavy weighs up its
future in cars - A look at the prospects for the big South Korean group's
latest controversial ambitions
The recent listing of Samsung Heavy Industries on the Seoul bourse reflects
one of the company's chief but controversial ambitions - to break into the
car industry.
SHI, while expanding its main shipbuilding business, is determined to become
a carmaker. Its initial share offering, 10 times oversubscribed, will raise
Won150bn (Dollars 185m) for new motor vehicle and shipbuilding facilities.
SHI's carmaking ambitions, however, have met with opposition from both
industry and the government, which has still to give the go-ahead for the
company's plans.
And analysts have warned that SHI could face tough times as it tries to
expand in two of South Korea's most competitive industries, both of which
face overcapacity.
Samsung, however, believes SHI may become as important a mainstay for the
conglomerate as the highly-successful Samsung Electronics, which has sales
of Won8,050bn. SHI accounted for only Won1,900bn of the group's total sales
of Won50,000bn last year.
The Samsung business group recently selected SHI as one of its five core
companies under the government programme to encourage the nation's
conglomerates to specialise in a few industries.
SHI's strength rests on being Korea's third-largest shipbuilder, behind
Hyundai Heavy Industries and Daewoo Shipbuilding &amp; Heavy Machinery. It is
also a manufacturer of machinery and construction equipment, which accounts
for two thirds of its turnover.
It has become increasingly profitable, with estimated earnings of Won82bn in
1993, as Korea overtook Japan last year as the world's leading shipbuilder
in terms of new orders. This reflected the depreciation of the Korean won
against the strong Japanese yen.
SHI last year received total orders of 1.98m gross tonnes for 32 ships,
creating a backlog that will keep it busy for at least two years.
However, the rush of orders also created problems. SHI has been banned from
building or expanding shipyard facilities since 1989, when the government
reacted to a downturn in orders by imposing restrictions on the industry to
curb excess capacity.
SHI complained that its limited facilities prevented it from meeting
delivery dates for new orders. It lobbied successfully for the government to
lift the ban this month.
Samsung plans to more than double its shipbuilding capacity of 450,000
tonnes to 1m tonnes by expanding its second dockyard at Koje and building a
third.
However, these expansion plans have triggered a race by its competitors to
increase capacity, which 'could eventually lead to a significant supply
glut', according to Mr Lee Keunmo, an analyst for Barings Securities in
Seoul.
SHI has also had to fight industry and government opposition to plans for
car production. Its competitors claim Korea can not support a fifth car
company, although the industry posted records in sales and exports last
year.
'Obviously, there is major opposition from existing manufacturers, citing
overlapping investment, waste of resources and excessive competition,' said
Mr Don Lee, motor analyst for BZW Securities in Seoul.
SHI's first step into the motor industry came in 1992, when it won
government approval to produce commercial trucks in co-operation with Nissan
Diesel of Japan.
A factory at Changwon, built for Won72bn, will begin operation by the end of
June, producing 4,800 construction trucks by 1997. SHI plans to build a
second, Won450bn plant at Taegu by 1996. This plant will manufacture 68,000
mid-sized trucks and buses by 2000, with forecast sales of Won800bn.
However, it is SHI's plans to move into car production that are causing the
problems. The government last year blocked a suspected hostile takeover
attempt by Samsung for Kia Motors, the country's second-largest carmaker.
SHI is negotiating for a joint venture or technical co-operation with
several foreign car companies, including Toyota Motor and Nissan Motor of
Japan, Volkswagen of Germany, and Volvo of Sweden.
Meanwhile, the government has yet to decide whether to grant SHI a licence
to make cars. A decision is expected by the end of April.
