FT  18 APR 94 / The Monday Interview: Henderson in from the cold - The man
at the centre of Britain's arms-for-Iraq trial re-enters the business arena
Paul Henderson, the businessman at the heart of Britain's Iraqgate affair,
was not easy to single out amid the clutter of the workaday exhibits at a UK
machine tools fair in Birmingham last week. But his anonymity - sitting in
the temporary stand numbered 3056 in the huge exhibition hall - belied how
much he has learned about how to promote himself when he needs to.
On the day John Major, the prime minister, visited the fair, Henderson -
silver-haired and with the looks of an ageing television soap opera actor -
chose to announce he was setting up a business partnership with John
Butcher, the Tory MP and former junior minister for trade and industry.
Henderson's resurrection from what had seemed business oblivion is not
without its ironies. Butcher's assessment of his partner as a patriotic,
unfairly maligned businessman conflicts directly with that of Lord
Trefgarne, another former trade minister. It was Trefgarne who, in a public
hearing on the arms-for-iraq inquiry held by Lord Justice Scott at the end
of March, accused Henderson of lying.
With his new venture - the takeover of welding company Production Systems
International - Henderson hopes to return to the business mainstream he was
suddenly ejected from when in February 1991 he was charged with breaking
government export regulations.
He was no stranger to publicity. In the wake of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait,
Henderson had already raised eyebrows as the managing director of Matrix
Churchill, the Midlands-based machine tool company under Iraqi ownership.
The case against him, which collapsed, was that Matrix Churchill broke
export regulations by supplying Iraq with machine tools destined to help
make arms. During the trial in November 1992 Henderson's defence lawyers
revealed he had worked for British intelligence.
The government is still counting the cost of the ill-fated legal action.
Later this week Henderson's solicitor plans to present the arms-for-Iraq
inquiry with further evidence that British officials were involved in
approving the export to Iraq of dual-use machine tools capable of military
applications.
Since the trial found him not guilty, the 57-year-old businessman has been a
thorn in the flesh of government and Whitehall. Much of the evidence heard
at subsequent public hearings appears to have strengthened the public
perception that the Matrix Churchill trial should never have taken place.
'I've met a wide spectrum of people since the Scott inquiry got under way,
complete strangers who have come up to me and said how absolutely disgusted
they are by what the government did,' says Henderson.
Allies like his new business partner portray him as a patriot and unfairly
maligned businessman. His detractors - and it is not surprising that there
are many within Whitehall - see him as a publicity seeker.
He has attended the Scott inquiry on and off as a member of the public,
never always making himself available for comment on evidence relating to
his case. Such exposure has put pressures on his family life but he says his
availability to the media is part of a personal crusade to bring to light
the injustice and double-dealing of a government system to which he had
always felt loyal.
He counts among his favourite family portraits that of his son David, a
soldier of the 1st Battalion Coldstream Guards being presented to the Queen
at a royal cocktail party.
Certainly Henderson adopts a disarmingly straightforward manner when he
describes the most controversial aspect of his working life: his recruitment
by the British intelligence services. 'I agreed to work for the intelligence
services for two reasons,' he says. 'The first was the glamour . . . the
second was simply, if I could help my country why not? In all honesty, at
that stage the glamour aspect was more attractive to me than the
patriotism.'
An MI6 officer code-named Balsom, who was Henderson's controller, has
described him as an 'extremely brave man'. Balsom says: 'Few people I have
met would take such risks and take them so much in their stride, with all
the pressures on them.'
Yet Henderson believes the intelligence services betrayed him as much as any
other government department. He may once have got a kick out of leading a
double life, but today he regrets his recruitment.
'When intelligence services get involved with businessmen, they must be
prepared to account for their actions. What I have learnt out of all this is
something I would have preferred not to have learnt: that the British
government I believed in was duplicitous.'
Yet there are very different accounts of Henderson's behaviour. In his
evidence to Scott, Lord Trefgarne described a meeting he had with Henderson
to establish exactly what Matrix Churchill was selling to the Iraqis: 'I
don't think I could have done more than look him in the eye and ask him what
the machine tools were for. He told me. I now believe he deceived me.'
Those who have distanced themselves from Henderson in recent months include
Mark Gutteridge, his former business partner. Gutteridge has not only
severed business links, but has kept a personal distance from Henderson in
recent months.
Businessmen within the machine tool industry are angry about the negative
publicity British exporters have received in the Matrix Churchill trial and
the Scott inquiry.
Henderson's business venture announced last week has been treated with
scepticism. 'Henderson is a salesman, not a businessman,' commented one
executive. Many will be watching closely to see whether he has the skills to
build up the small welding group which only broke even last year.
