FT  16 DEC 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Miners find grounds for
optimism in PNG - The resource-rich but notoriously unpredictable Pacific
nation
Three months ago, mining companies held their breath as the government
changed in Papua New Guinea, the resource-rich but notoriously unpredictable
Pacific nation.
Out went Mr Paias Wingti, the former prime minister, whose administration
was regarded as maverick and internally divided. In came Sir Julius Chan,
PNG's first finance minister after independence in 1975, who previously held
the prime minister's job between 1980 and 1982.
In its first 100 days, the new Chan government has given the resources
community some grounds for optimism. Negotiations over the potential
structure of the large ADollars 1bn-plus Lihir gold mine project, a joint
venture between Britain's RTZ and Niugini Mining, have resumed. Last week,
in Sydney, Sir Julius said he viewed 'fast-tracking' this development as
second in importance only to resolving the secessionist dispute which has
been raging on the PNG-controlled island of Bougainville.
Even more recently, Mr John Giheno, PNG's mining minister, returned from a
meeting with landowners in Lihir, saying that all parties had agreed to work
towards a February 28 date for the issue of the 'special mining lease',
which would allow the project to proceed. The SML was originally due a year
ago, but differences within the Wingti government ground the approval
process to a halt.
In the course of his Australian visit, Sir Julius also noted that Lihir was
not the only project to be progressing. He pointed to the recent final
go-ahead for an oil refinery to be built at Motukea Island, close to Port
Moresby, the capital. This would be the country's first major refinery and,
assuming finance is organised, could get under way by the middle of next
year. The international consortium behind the project has retained
Prudential-Bache's Australian office to look at local listing possibilities.
The PNG prime minister said that there had been a 16 per cent increase in
'grassroots' exploration expenditure in PNG in 1994 and held out the
prospect of a further rise in 1995. The number of new licences granted in
1994 was twice the 1993 level, he said.
But resources policy and economic development have always been closely bound
together in Papau New Guinea, and while some clouds have been lifting on the
former score, the latter has become increasingly obscured.
By its own admission, the PNG government is facing a serious cash crunch.
Stories have circulated of unpaid bills, including some owed to Australian
exporters. Mr Chris Haiveta, PNG's finance minister, has denied that there
will be any reneging on obligations, but conceded that people will 'have to
wait in line'.
Senator Gareth Evans, Australia's foreign minister, has said that his
country has brought forward remaining 1994 aid payments to PNG - which total
around ADollars 300m - to help alleviate the short-term situation while the
country goes about negotiating longer-term facilities with the International
Monetary Fund and World Bank. Mr Peter Sullivan, vice-president of the
Manila-based Asian Development Bank, recently described PNG's macroeconomic
problems, which are largely blamed on runaway public expenditure, as an
'emergency'.
But aside from promoting PNG's desire to fast-track developments to provide
future income and growth, this economic plight could have direct
repercussions for a number of existing resource projects.
First, there are suggestions that the PNG government may not now complete
the vexed deal that was designed to see it lift its stake in the large
Porgera gold mine from 10 per cent 25 per cent. This was to be achieved by
the purchase of additional 5 per cent interests from the three commercial
partners - Placer, Renison Gold Fields and Highlands Gold.
The companies involved say there has been no formal reopening of
negotiations over Porgera, although the rearrangement of equity stakes
should have been completed many months ago. However, the notion has been
sounded informally in Port Moresby. The additional shares were to be bought
for around K140m (Pounds 77m), money the government certainly lacks at
present.
Secondly, there is the question of whether the government tries to raise
funds from the disposal of other resource interests, such as its 22.5 per
cent share in Kutubu. According to Mr Haiveta, McIntosh, the Australian
broking firm which has an office in Port Moresby, had been asked to do a
full valuation of all assets. Both he and Sir Julius also remain
enthusiastic about the prospect of a local PNG stock exchange, on which some
holdings might eventually be sold.
But whether such moves persuade the international investment community that
PNG has become a significantly better risk, when the economic situation
remains so parlous, has yet to be seen. An abrupt decision to float PNG's
currency, the kina, last October, may not have helped, smacking for some of
the country's familiar unpredictability. 'I think people want to see runs on
the board,' says one mining executive.
Last week, Sir Julius was being realistic. Noting that his own ascent to the
office has already come under legal challenge from political opponents -
precisely the maneouvre that felled Mr Wingti - he said only that he hoped
to see 'a little glow at the end of the tunnel' in six months time.
