FT  21 APR 94 / Markets Report: Rate cut helps D-Mark
The D-Mark remained well supported yesterday despite a larger than expected
12 basis point cut in the repo rate by the Bundesbank, writes Philip Gawith.
The German currency was helped by the perception that higher US interest
rates will curb the decline in German rates. It also benefited from its safe
haven status as uncertainty in other European markets caused investors to
seek refuge in the D-Mark.
Casualties of D-Mark strength included the dollar and the French franc. The
US currency finished in London at DM1.694 from DM1.701. The French franc
finished at its lowest level in over four months, closing at FFr3.435 from
FFr3.429.
Belgium followed the German example and cut its central lending rate, to 5.7
per cent from 5.8 per cent. The markets rewarded the move with the Belgian
franc finishing slightly firmer in London at BFr20.60 from BFr20.59.
In the UK, the sterling index finished at 80.1, up from 79.8. Strong
economic data persuaded the market that prospects of an interest rate cut
had diminished.
The lowest bid accepted at the weekly securities repurchase auction in
Germany was 5.58 per cent, down from 5.70 per cent. Although larger than
anticipated, the cut was not sufficient to offset fears that higher US
rates, and signs of an economic upturn in Germany, will slow the pace of
monetary easing in Germany.
This was reflected in the fall in euromark futures prices. The June contract
finished unchanged at 94.69, but the December future fell to 94.86 from
94.93.
German call money, on the other hand, was quoted slightly easier at
5.50/5.55 per cent, from 5.50/5.60 per cent, after the announcement of the
repo rate.
The lower rate had little impact on the D-Mark which was broadly stronger in
Europe. It closed at Pta81.88 against the Spanish peseta from Pta81.86.
Attention today will focus on the Bank of France council meeting. The
central bank finds itself in a dilemma. On the one hand, it is widely
perceived as wanting to lower rates to foster economic recovery. On the
other, the franc is currently weak, having fallen below FFr3.4305 against
the D-Mark, its floor within the old narrow band ERM.
A number of reasons are cited for the franc's weakness. These include the
strong D-Mark, selling of French bonds, concern that economic growth is
lagging Germany's, and the waning political fortunes of Mr Edouard Balladur,
the prime minister.
Economists are split as to whether the franc will be bought or sold if the
intervention rate is cut. Some argue that lower rates will hasten a
sell-off, but others believe the market will reward pro-growth policies.
Mr Brendan Brown, head of research at Mitsubishi Finance International,
predicts a compromise, with the BOF cutting rates, but by less than in
Germany.
He believes that the franc will probably fall to FFr3.48 in the next few
weeks. Mr Brown said investors might become concerned about pressures within
the Gaullist party for monetary policy to be more pro-growth and less a
satellite of the Bundesbank.
Mr Avinash Persaud, head of currency research at JP Morgan (Europe), argues
that 'the fate of the franc is very much in the hands of the D-Mark.' He
said there was a strong perception in the market that higher Fed funds in
the US would put a dampener on the rate at which German, and hence European,
interest rates were allowed to fall.
'The only way the franc can escape is to delink itself from the D-Mark,'
said Mr Persaud.
Although the BOF has rebuilt its reserves since the currency crisis last
summer, analysts do not anticipate that it will try to defend the franc at
current levels. Mr Brown says it is the market, rather than the BOF, which
has put the currency back within its narrow band limits.
Sterling resisted the advance of the D-Mark yesterday to close in London at
DM2.5170 from DM2.5144. It was also higher against the dollar, finishing at
Dollars 1.4858 from Dollars 1.4782.
The UK currency was helped by a batch of economic data which dampened hopes
of an interest rate cut. February average earnings rose by 3.5 per cent,
more than expected. Unemployment was below expectations, with the jobless
rate slipping to 9.7 per cent from 9.8 per cent.
The market interpreted these buoyant data as reducing the chance of lower
rates. Accordingly, in the futures market, the June short sterling contract
closed twelve basis points lower at 94.63. The December contract was
seventeen basis points lower at 93.89.
This picture could change today with the release of retail sales figures for
March. Most economists still favour another 25 basis point cut in UK
interest rates.
In the money markets the Bank of England provided Pounds 450m of late
assistance. Earlier it had injected Pounds 874m into the market to clear a
Pounds 1.3bn shortage.
