FT  15 MAR 94 / Downing Street warns Sinn Fein on violence
Downing Street yesterday gave its firmest assurance yet that there would be
no negotiations with Sinn Fein until after the IRA has called a permanent
halt to its 25-year campaign of violence.
As London and Dublin struggled to stop their peace initiative being blown
off track by last week's mortar attacks at London's Heathrow airport,
officials promised new talks on security co-operation between the two
governments as a matter of urgency.
Downing Street - responding to fresh IRA demands for direct talks between
London and republican leaders - said it was a 'fundamental principle' of
December's joint declaration that there would be no negotiations with Sinn
Fein in advance of an end to IRA violence.
That principle was not going to change. It was 'deeply offensive' to people
in Britain and Ireland that the IRA should claim to be interested in peace
while continuing to kill people in cold blood and to prosecute its campaign
of terror.
However, Downing Street's choice of words appeared to leave the door open
for a possible resumption of messages between London and republican leaders.
When last year's secret contacts were exposed in November, Sir Patrick
Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, said the messages had not amounted to
negotiating with terrorists.
The president of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, yesterday
continued his efforts to wrong-foot the government, saying that Sinn Fein
had 'no great concern' to be engaged in bilateral discussions with London on
constitutional matters.
Repeating his call for clarification, Mr Gerry Adams welcomed the first
official IRA response to the Downing Street declaration on Sunday,
describing it as a 'positive reiteration' of the IRA's commitment to
reaching a negotiated peace deal.
Mr John Hume, leader of the mainly Catholic Social Democratic and Labour
party, said that London should launch new talks with Sinn Fein.
He insisted that the IRA did not intend to detonate any of the mortar bombs
which were fired into Heathrow in three separate attacks.
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, said the attacks on Heathrow
were 'a gross miscalculation by the IRA' which was not going to advance the
peace process.
Mr John Major is expected to be pressed to tighten security in meetings with
the leaders of the two main unionist parties this week.
The Rev Ian Paisley, leader of the hard-line Democratic Unionists, said
yesterday that the prime minister had not got 'the guts or spine or ability'
to stand up to Dublin.
