FT  08 AUG 94 / Triple drug therapy offers hope on Aids, says Wellcome
New combinations of medicines could restore the normal life expectancy of
people infected with HIV, the virus that causes Aids, according to Dr David
Barry, research, development and medical director, at Wellcome, the UK drugs
group.
At the 10th International Aids conference in Yokohama, Dr Barry spoke
yesterday of renewed hope that illness from HIV infection might finally be
brought under control and that the benefit might be measured in decades
rather than years.
Dr Barry argued that by treating HIV with three drugs simultaneously, the
virus could be stopped from replicating itself. Without the ability to
replicate, the virus would be incapable of mutating strains resistant to
drug therapy, he explained.
Controlled by the medicines, the virus would also be unable to damage the
immune system further. Indeed, the system could recover, leaving it free to
prevent the opportunistic Aids infections, such as pneumonia, that kill Aids
patients.
'This sort of triple therapy would not cure Aids or kill HIV, but it could
allow us to keep the virus at bay, controlling the disease like diabetics
control their condition with insulin,' Dr Barry said.
Claims for effective treatments against Aids and HIV have been made before,
but have proved illusory. Dr Barry's assertion is likely, however, to be
taken seriously by Aids researchers because of his stature in the scientific
community, and the reputation of Wellcome, the world's leading
pharmaceuticals company for the treatment of HIV.
Dr Barry presented data from two combinations of three drugs which, he
claimed, stopped the virus replicating. The first involved Wellcome's AZT
(also known as Retrovir); ddI, a drug developed by Bristol-Myers Squibb of
the US; and Saquinavir, a treatment of Roche in Switzerland.
The second consisted of AZT, ddI and 3TC, a treatment discovered by Biochem
Pharma of Canada and partly developed by Glaxo Holdings of the UK.
Other trials involving AZT, Roche's ddC and Saquinavir, or AZT, ddC and 3TC
failed to stop the virus replicating, but Dr Barry said this might have been
because doses had been too low.
He stressed the trials had only been carried out in test tubes and not on
humans. He also admitted there were potential limitations to triple therapy.
The ability of the drugs to stop the virus might be limited if the disease
had progressed too far. There was also the possibility the doses required to
control the disease might be too toxic.
Clinical trials involving at least four different combinations of drug would
start in early September, Dr Barry said.
Japan pledges Aids drive, Page 4
