FT  16 MAY 94 / Hope of Ulster peace progress: Reynolds calls for positive
UK response to Sinn Fein queries
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, yesterday raised hopes that
clarification for Sinn Fein of last December's Anglo-Irish declaration might
at last break the deadlock in the search for peace in Northern Ireland,
writes Philip Stephens, Political Editor.
But Mr Reynolds' comment that written questions about the declaration from
Sinn Fein were 'answerable' coincided with the murder by the IRA of another
British soldier in a rocket attack on an army outpost in Armagh.
Speaking in the US where he held unscheduled talks at the weekend with Mr
Bill Clinton, the US president, Mr Reynolds, also indicated that Dublin and
London would not wait indefinitely for a positive response from the
Republican movement.
Mr Reynolds, pictured above right with Mr Clinton during a ceremony in
Indianapolis honouring Robert Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr, told RTE
radio: 'The questions by and large are answerable, and I hope that the
British government will see them in that light, and will give the most
positive response they can.' He added: 'I think the vast majority of people
in Ireland - and Britain - want to see a breakthrough, and move this latest
roadblock out of the way.'
But in a speech in Chicago where he received an honorary degree from the
University of Notre Dame, Mr Reynolds displayed his frustration at the IRA's
refusal to end its campaign.
Stressing the two governments' commitment to secure a new broad-ranging
political accord to replace the Anglo-Irish agreement of 1985, Mr Reynolds
said: 'The leaders of the Republican movement know that we still hope they
will opt to play their part . . . They must also know, as Edmund Burke once
put it, that there is a limit at which forbearance ceases to be a virtue.'
Mr Michael Ancram, Northern Ireland minister, signalled that the two
governments were drafting plans for a comprehensive political settlement.
British ministers said the questions submitted by Sinn Fein, passed to the
London government by Dublin last week, would be published within the next
few days. Alongside them would be the government's responses.
But Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, was determined that
Britain would not be drawn into negotiations on the declaration unless and
until the IRA ended permanently its campaign of violence.
Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president, gave a clear hint during a weekend
meeting of the areas in which the IRA was seeking clarification.
These include the timescale in which Britain expected to see agreement
between all the people of Ireland, the constitutional options it foresaw as
realistic alternatives to the status quo and the basis for the 'Unionist
veto' on change in the north.
The questions, Page 7
