FT  17 AUG 94 / Business and the Environment: Sparks fly over electric cars
 -Battery-operated vehicles may not be as clean as originally thought
While the US automobile industry scrambles to meet 1998 deadlines to put
electric vehicles on the market, controversy about the environmental
benefits and commercial viability of battery-operated cars is mounting.
Circumstances in the US increasingly favour the electric car. Air quality
laws in California and Massachusetts now demand that 'zero-emission'
vehicles comprise 2 per cent of total sales in the car market by 1998.
Electric cars are the only vehicles to meet such standards so far. Other
states are considering similar laws.
Yet the big three car manufacturers - Ford, Chrysler and General Motors -
have complained bitterly during the last few months that a deadline of 1998
is unrealistic and that environmental benefits from the vehicles are
ill-defined. Several environmental organisations have concurred.
In April, a leaked report by the US Environmental Protection Agency
questioned the air quality improvements from battery-operated cars, lending
credence to electric car critics. 'Electric vehicles will not have a
positive environmental benefit across the country,' says Stephen Burrington,
a lawyer with environmental advocacy group the Conservation Law Foundation.
Many ecologists complain that the term 'zero-emission' vehicle is wishful
thinking when applied to electric cars. The emissions are still there, they
argue, whether they emanate from the electric power plant or from the car
itself.
According to the EPA report, switching to electric vehicles may not always
improve air quality as these cars increase electricity consumption. Benefits
are, therefore, uneven. Regions relying on 'cleaner' electricity sources,
such as nuclear and hydro-electric plants and natural gas, for their energy
will probably fare better than regions depending on more traditional power
sources such as oil and coal.
'The switch to electric vehicles could be disastrous for a state like
Kentucky, which still gets a lot of its electricity from coal,' says Robert
Russell, a lawyer for the Conservation Law Foundation.
Most people involved in the debate agree that electric car use in California
would almost certainly improve air quality there.
'California is an exception, first because it has so many clean energy
sources such as wind power, and second because its electricity sources are
separated by mountains from the cities which have air quality problems, like
Los Angeles,' says Reginald Modlin, Chrysler's manager of environmental
energy affairs.
There the consensus stops. The EPA and NESCAUM, the north-eastern air
quality organisation, believe the north-east of the country, which generates
much of its energy through nuclear power, could also benefit from electric
vehicles.
The car industry disagrees. 'Our studies show that the north-east would not
get any improvement in air quality with a switch to electric vehicles,' says
Modlin.
John Williams, chairman of the US Advanced Battery Consortium at General
Motors, also points out that electric cars are less efficient in the
north-east than they are in California. 'The cold in the north-east hurts
our range,' he explains. 'We can get 70-90 miles in moderate temperatures,
but only 30 miles in freezing conditions.'
Enthusiasts say that studies questioning environmental benefits assume a
lower efficiency than they should for electric cars. 'Old gas-burning cars
normally see a dramatic increase in emissions as they get older,' says
William Sessa, a spokesman for the California Air Resources Board. 'Electric
cars don't see this deterioration. After 100,000 miles of driving, they are
pretty much the same as brand new in terms of emissions.'
Some environmentalists believe electric vehicle efficiency is
over-estimated. 'Getting the energy from the power source to storage, from
the storage to the car, is extremely inefficient,' says Burrington.
Environmental improvements may largely depend on how strictly emissions from
electricity sources are controlled. California's rigid pollution standards
mean that it would reap more benefits than other states. In the long run,
moreover, it may be easier to limit pollution from the electric plants than
from individual cars.
Emissions, however, are only part of the overall impact, say
environmentalists. 'Even if the sources are cleaner, if electric use
increases, it can cause ecological problems,' says Thomas Caffrey, an
engineer with the EPA. 'There are other environmental problems involved with
sources like hydro-electric and nuclear. Hydro-electric power has been very
much criticised lately for what it can do to fish and other water species.'
Russell contends, moreover, that the issue cannot be studied on a
region-to-region basis. 'Cars are marketed widely and cross state boundaries
readily, so we need to look at this on a federal level.'
Environmentalists also worry that electric cars will encourage Americans to
be complacent about their driving habits. 'What we need is an overall
reduction in car use in this country,' says Burrington.
Despite the criticism, electric cars seem poised to represent part of the
car market by 1998. Car manufacturers say they can meet the state-imposed
deadlines, although battery technology cannot yet offer the vehicles at
competitive prices.
The air-quality boards for California and the north-eastern states say they
will forge ahead with plans to encourage electric car use. 'With the smog
problems we face in California, we have no choice,' says Sessa. 'We have to
look at alternatives like electric vehicles. They may not be perfect, but
they're certainly an improvement over what we have.'
