FT  22 MAR 94 / Arts: Rare Cocteau and Strindberg - Fringe theatre in London
Jean Cocteau (1889-1963) did some terrible things in his time, but for our
sakes I hope The Eagle Has Two Heads (L'Aigle a Deux Tetes, 1946) is the
worst. It is a miracle that its audience at the Lilian Baylis does not
laugh, or groan, out loud. On the one hand, there is its plot, which is
three acts of melodramatic royal romance - a kind of cross between The
Prisoner of Zenda, Queen Christina, and Mayerling; on the other, there is
its language, which is typically inflated stuff, reminding you of whatever
irritated you most in Wilde, Maeterlinck, and Cocteau himself. Glamorous,
and wholly phoney.
The widowed Queen still mourns her royal husband and keeps herself from her
public ten years after his death - when, suddenly one stormy night, into her
room bursts his lookalike, a peasant poet who happens to have plans to
assassinate her but whom she saves from death. They promptly fall in love
and (natch) start hatching plans for a double suicide. She, 10 minutes after
meeting him: 'You are my destiny . . . It is my death whom I have saved from
death . . . You are my death.' He, later: 'We are the dreams of a man who
dreams so soundly he does not know he dreams.'
In between, Cocteau drags in his usual King Charles's heads. Poets, love,
death. People talk of the blood of a poet in all three acts; spout such
bravado as 'The one unpardonable crime is failure' and 'If I were not a
queen I should be a revolutionary myself'; solemnly produce sub-Wildean
lines like 'Assassination is the privilege of princes', 'Gossip is about
poets, not by poets', and 'Police and poets never do get on with each
other'; and wax fancy, as in 'What is a queen? She is a woman in an evening
dress who is trying to overtake time.'
Susannah York has somehow found time amid her current performances of
September Tide to direct this; and she has cast Lisa Harrow to play the
Queen - a role created for Edwige Feuillere, and played later by Eileen
Herlie and Jill Bennett. Harrow, with her gloriously sculpted face and
cheekbones, has beauty, charm, polish, and variety. Her performance,
however, reminded me of problems I had with York's in September Tide: the
lines seems to call for a more scintillating spontaneity, and a more violent
sincerity, than she yet provides.
As the poet, Stash Kirkbride does some intelligent and sensitive
line-readings without investing the role (which was for Jean Marais) with
much stature. Both the carriage of his head and the use of his eyes are
dull. Maybe York wants to dust any superfluous glamour off the play. Who
knows? Alas, she dilutes its romance too. But who cares? Though some of
Cocteau's material is exhilarating, not a jot of it rings true.
Beneath all his wretched determination to be surprising is a quite maudlin
flair for cliche. 'I could kill you so as not to lose you.' 'I know this
love could not endure (and so I took poison).' 'All love is a little death,
and great love is suicide.' Finally, the Queen (stabbed by the poet) says to
him (as she reels from the poison he has taken) 'Thank you for making me
live . . . Thank you for making me die.' Thanks, but no thanks.
Meanwhile, down in 'the room' at the Orange Tree Theatre, Richmond,
Strindberg's rare 1907 play, The Pelican, is receiving its second-ever
production in this country. Not unlike Gorky's Vassa Zheleznova (seen at the
Gate in 1990), a play begun at the same time, this is about a latterday
Clytemnestra and her children. The Mother has deceived her husband and
forced him to his death before the play begins; Strindberg's stage action
concerns her children's discovery of her crimes.
The pelican is a bird that, in legend, gives its own blood to feed its
children. The Mother here has brought her children up in starkest poverty,
and has seemed to be such a pelican. Now they discover that she deprived
them - skimming the milk and keeping them in the cold - so as to save money
for herself. She is a compulsive cheat; she has even stolen her new
son-in-law from her daughter. And they come to recognise not only her evil
but her odd helplessness in it: she is 'like a sleepwalker who can't be
woken.' They know, however, that their own lives remain ruined.
As the Mother, Jan Waters gives the most detailed and intense performance,
though also the most over-cultivated. (She projects not greed but vanity;
not meanness but hyper-sophistication.) Charlotte Williams (as daughter and
maid), Brett Fancy (the Son-in-law), Alan Westaway (the son) are sometimes a
tad too pallid, but keep the absorbing, horrid surprises of Strindberg's
drama unfolding freshly. Sean Holmes directs; the new translation, very
effective, is by Eivor Martinus. Like The Eagle with Two Heads, the play is
given without an interval, and gains thereby. It lasts only 95 minutes and
holds its audience's attention with easy command.
The Eagle with Two Heads is at the Lilian Baylis, EC1; The Pelican is at the
Orange Tree, Richmond. Both run until April 2.
