FT  19 OCT 94 / Leading Article: Controlling state aids
The European Commission's powers to police government subsidies to industry
are unique among the world's competition authorities. However, Brussels
seems increasingly to be wielding a rubber stamp, not a truncheon. Last
week, it waved through a FFr11.1bn (Pounds 1.32bn) state bail-out of Bull,
France's nationalised computer maker, soon after blessing a FFr20bn rescue
of Air France.
Approval of these hand-outs is only the most visible sign of faltering
enforcement. EU state aids have grown sharply since 1990, because of
recession and subsidies by the German government to eastern Lander. But
though the Commission has stepped up monitoring, it turned down last year
barely 1 per cent of cases notified.
State aids are defensible if applied on a non-discriminatory basis for
socially beneficial objectives, such as research and development. But when
used to prop up lame ducks, support national champions or induce inward
investments, they threaten serious economic damage. They shelter recipients
from market disciplines, retard industrial adjustment and penalise efficient
producers. In short, they are disguised trade barriers which threaten to
fragment the single market.
The biggest flaw in existing EU controls is that they are too open to
political manipulation. Upholding competition is not always the first
priority of all commissioners involved in state aids decisions, above all
when it means offending the governments which appoint them. Such conflicts
of interest could be avoided by hiving off decisions to an independent
European cartel office. Germany favours that solution, but opposition from
other governments makes it unlikely to be adopted.
Steps can still be taken to strengthen enforcement. Making Commission
proceedings more transparent would increase pressures on governments to fall
into line. Brussels's criteria also need to be rationalised. Separate
guidelines for excess-capacity industries, such as steel and cars, make for
inconsistency, and are also sometimes overridden by competing regional
policy goals.
Still more anomalous is the treaty requirement that aids to state and
private companies be judged on the same basis. Not only does state ownership
make it nearly impossible to know whether aid is being granted on commercial
terms; by implicitly guaranteeing companies against bankruptcy, it
undermines competition. Brussels should have the right to insist on
privatisation as a condition for approving aid.
Yet state aids policy will remain an imperfect discipline, requiring
bureaucrats to second-guess decisions by private investors and managers. The
wisest policy is to minimise the need for intervention by strengthening the
market. It is no coincidence that many European industries where state aids
are common, such as airlines, steel, cars and textiles, are protected from
international competition. Closed markets maximise the distortionary impact
of subsidies; trade barriers only perpetuate governments' belief that funds
poured into inefficient companies can continue to earn a return.
True, removing trade protection might temporarily increase the incentive to
subsidise. In the longer term, however, the sustained pressure of
competition would do more to spur industrial rationalisation - and to make
apparent the true costs of subsidies - than any amount of policing by
Brussels.
