FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (6): The long-term
fix doesn't suit everyone - Mortgages / Reports from the home-loans front
vary. Barbara Ellis checks what the lenders are up to
Two leading market indicators reached a point of almost total contradiction
early in September, when the Nationwide building society reported a 0.6 per
cent rise in house prices, while the Halifax declared a 0.7 per cent fall.
Forecasts tailed off from the Halifax's April prediction of a 5 per cent
rise for the year to a revised 2 per cent maximum. Somehow the idea of
wiping out inflation has never held much appeal for housing-market analysts
employed by lenders, who persist in viewing all house-price inflation as
good news.
Reports of mortgage-lending activity were as diverse as assessments of price
trends.
Patrick Bunton, of the Chase de Vere subsidiary London &amp; Country Mortgages,
said the mood among lenders had changed significantly in the 12 months to
September - from extreme caution to renewed willingness to lend, with local
managers making greater use of discretion.
'Lending is the message from the head offices,' he said. 'Default on
existing mortgage books has peaked, and there are not so many people with
negative equity: it did not hit fairly high-worth clients too hard.'
However, Bunton said lending criteria were still very tight for those
borrowers who wanted to escape negative equity (an outstanding home loan in
excess of the price the property will fetch). Despite the existence of
packages providing loans of 100 per cent or more, he suggested people in a
negative-equity position should approach their existing lender first.
'Existing lenders can be more lenient if they know the track record,' he
explained, 'Most lenders will try to help their own borrowers, but they are
not keen to run out and lend to everybody else's clients.'
The half-point rise in base rates in mid-September was likely to increase
demand for fixed-interest mortgages just as they began to disappear,
according to Bunton, who said his firm had been arranging a large number of
loans on two- and three-year fixed rates for months past.
'It's a big psychological thing,' he said. 'People like the idea of fixing,
but don't want to pay a premium over the lender's standard variable rate.'
An example was that, shortly before the base-rate rise, borrowers had
preferred to take two- and three-year fixed-rate loans at 6.99 per cent,
when the standard variable rate was at 7.75 per cent, rather than pay 8.35
per cent for a five-year fixed rate. At the same time, the TSB had been
offering a 10-year fixed rate of 8.99 per cent.
Still, Bunton recognised the hazards attached to long-term fixes. 'Even if
the loan is portable, the danger is you are locked in with the lender for
any additional borrowing when you want to move. If they are not competitive
at that point, you might have to renegotiate and pay redemption penalties.'
Ian Darby, of mortgage brokers John Charcol, said his firm had seen business
levels in the three months to mid-September up by between 50 and 80 per
cent, with clients asking almost exclusively for fixed rates for terms of
three years or less.
The Britannia building society had been market leader in fixed rates, with
6.99 per cent fixed for three years to October 1997, and a five-year rate of
8.15 per cent fixed until September 1999.
'To my mind, 8.15 per cent looked like a real buy,' said Darby. 'You are
within 10 basis points of Abbey National's base rate, and the consensus in
the market is that rates have only one way to go: up.
Even so, after five years of being very bearish on house prices, Darby said
Charcol now expected a healthier outlook in the next 18 months: 'House
affordability is excellent and the economy is in reasonably good nick,' he
said, as reasons for the firm's change to optimism.
Cash-back deals have been promoted strongly as a means of enticing borrowers
into signing up for the variable-rate mortgages which bring lenders the
fattest profit margins. But Darby said he had arranged very few loans of
that kind: 'The best cash-backs gave you 3 per cent back, yet you could get
a 5 per cent discount.'
At one point during the summer, the Halifax building society stopped
offering discounts, making cash-backs the only form of inducement. But it
reintroduced the discounts at the end of July after seeing a noticeable drop
in business.
A Halifax spokesman blamed speculation about the tax treatment of
cash-backs, following an Inland Revenue ruling that a cash-back deal offered
by the Cheltenham &amp; Gloucester building society would be liable to capital
gains tax, though not income tax, as a 'capital sum derived from a
contractual right'. Borrowers taking the C&amp;G cash were said to be accepting
the money in exchange for the right to a discount.
'There was enough uncertainty to put people off the pure cash-back,' said
the Halifax spokesman, claiming research had shown the society that
borrowers preferred cash in hand at the start of a loan to help fund
solicitors' fees and other items, rather than the drip-feed effect of a
discount spread over maybe two or three years.
However, the Cheltenham &amp; Gloucester said that, despite the Revenue opinion,
its cash-back scheme had been successful enough to be made part of the
society's permanent product range instead of a short-term promotion as
originally intended.
At the same time as launching its cash-backs in May, the C&amp;G pulled out of
fixed-rate lending, saying rates had become too difficult to manage:
'Customers seem to have gone off fixed rates a bit anyway,' said a C&amp;G
spokeswoman.
The C&amp;G's cash-back deal offered borrowers putting down a 20 per cent
deposit a maximum of Pounds 6,000 cash when signing up to borrow at the
society's 7.64 per cent variable rate. Alternatively, borrowers could choose
a 12-month discount of 3 percentage points, bringing their rate down to 4.64
per cent.
The Northern Rock building society also said borrowers had been keen to take
its much smaller cash-back deal, giving a maximum of Pounds 500 to new
borrowers putting down at least a 10 per cent deposit as an alternative to a
one-year discount. Andy Kuipers, mortgage product manager at Northern Rock,
said the society had seen its best month ever in terms of new business
during August, helped by the cash-back deal.
