FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (20): The squalor of centuries -
Environmentalists face a Herculean task
Ten years after the Union Carbide disaster at Bhopal, Indian
environmentalists hope that the present plague will provide fresh impetus
for making India a cleaner as well as safer place to live in. But the sheer
population pressure looks like making such a task a formidable one.
It is summed up in the scene on the banks of the Ganges near the north
Indian town of Kampur, where religious devotees sit praying to the holy
waters, offering garlands of flowers and occasionally soaking themselves as
they have done for centuries.
Nearby, untreated chemical waste from local tanneries is being poured into
the river, together with raw sewage. Vultures and stray dogs take turns to
pick among the garbage that rises in a steep gradient from the shore.
Occasionally, among the debris, a half burnt body is washed up.
For centuries, the Ganges has been venerated as a symbol of Indian
civilisation and tradition as well as sustenance. The river's basin is home
to 37 per cent of the country's population and extensively cultivated. But
it has also become an example of the difficulties India faces in developing
an effective environmental policy that can be justified on cultural, social
and economic grounds.
In 1986, during the premiership of the late Rajiv Gandhi, the Ganges became
the focus of a much-trumpeted national clean-up campaign.
'Ganga (Hindi for Ganges) is a symbol of our spirituality, our tradition,
our tolerance and and our synthesis. But it is the most polluted river with
sewage and pollution from cities and industries thrown into it. From now we
shall put a stop to all this,' declared Mr Gandhi.
Eight years on, the nine-year Ganga Action Plan has almost lost its way.
Under the scheme some new sewage and chemical waste treatment plants have
been constructed along the Ganges, improving some local pollution levels.
But the scheme in areas such as Kampur has fallen foul of a mixture of
under-funding bureaucratic inertia, industrial malpractice and continuing
large-scale illiteracy of sectors of the population which, while immersed in
their ritualistic religious practices, remain ignorant of the environmental
hazards threatening them.
Mr Kamal Nath, India's environment minister, says: 'The Ganga Plan in Kampur
has failed.'
In a candid interview with the FT, the minister admitted that in
implementing the Ganga scheme, the government had found itself having to
tread carefully so as not to upset local industrial interests and religious
sensitivities. But just how typical to the rest of India is Kampur?
According to Mr Nath, India stands out among Third World countries in that
it has consciously 'integrated conservation into our development process'.
Today, as he did in a passionate speech to the UN conference on environment
and development in June 1992 in Rio, Mr Nath lays great emphasis on India's
panoply of legal and administrative instruments aimed at checking
environmental degradation.
Beginning with the Wildlife Protection Action 1972 and extending to the more
recent setting of an emission standard for vehicles, India's environmental
legislation aims to protect everything from the most remote wildlife reserve
in the Himalayas to the most threatened urban landscape, be it old Delhi or
Calcutta.
Nath, a self-confessed 'politician, not an environmentalist', has actively
been courting non government organisations and other environmental groups
and involving them in the programme of his ministry.
New legislation, together with a growing public awareness of environmental
issues among the middle classes, is the most positive fall-out of the
catastrophic gas leak at the Union Carbide pesticide plant in Bhopal,
central India, in 1984 which left an estimated 3,000 killed and more than
50,000 seriously injured.
There are currently statutory requirements for all large and medium sized
industries to install treatment plants for effluent and air pollution
filters.
Mr Shekhar Singh, an environmentalist expert at the Indian Institute of
Public Administration, a non government agency, says that the implementation
of environmental law remains 'very weak', and that the present government is
less ideologically committed than its predecessors to environmental issues.
The IPA has monitored 22 officially designated wildlife protected areas
around India which are nonetheless being threatened because of government
backed investment decisions, mainly energy related.
Mr Singh also believes that sheer population pressure combined with the
government commitment for greater economic liberalisation will further
undermine events for controlling industrial pollution.
The view is shared by Mr Uday Shanker, a features editor of Down To Earth, a
science and environmental fortnightly whose circulation has been boosted as
a result of growing public awareness. 'Today in India there is no single new
investment that does not come under close environmental scrutiny. But a
government that has embarked on a policy of rapid economic development is
bound to compromise on the environment,' Shankar says.
The evidence - not just in Kampur but elsewhere in India - is that
environmental policy continues to be breached rather more than practised.
At the Shiram food and fertiliser industries chemical works on the outskirts
of Delhi, the effluent is so clean that it is regularly passed through a
fish tank.
But the city's river continues to suffer the smells and dirt of chemical
bleach from smaller units and the widespread untreated sewage from large
sectors of the population still lacking basic sanitation.
The popular tourist location of the Taj Mahal has been declared a green zone
with local metal workshops closed under court order.
But as Mr Nath admits, the large scale closure of workshops - accounting for
about one third of India's manufacturing output - is politically impossible
because it would simply add to the thousands of Indians already destitute.
That, however, does not excuse many companies in India who, having installed
pollution control equipment, deliberately leave them switched off to save
costs knowing that during, the rare visits by government inspectors, the
inspectors can be bought off.
Perhaps the most problematic area remains that of religion. When I asked an
employee from a local tannery from Kampur why he was submerging himself in
the black water spewed out by his factory, he replied: 'Mother Ganga will
protect me.'
