FT  18 NOV 94 / Technology: Virtually in business - Commercial applications
of virtual reality are growing rapidly
An engineer opens the engine bay door of the aircraft, positions a trailer
under the engine bay, jacks it up and removes the bolts securing the engine.
He then connects the engine to the trailer, lowers it and removes it for
servicing.
It is the same routine as usual, involving the same steps and taking the
same time as usual. The difference is that the tools are computer-generated,
the engineer is wearing a headset and the exercise is being conducted in a
virtual world.
This is an application of virtual reality, a form of three-dimensional
computer graphics which allows users to feel as though they are looking at a
graphic, and interacting with it, from the inside. As the user manipulates
the system, using a device such as a mouse, glove or spaceball, the software
updates the image and transfers this new view of the virtual world back to
the user through a display.
This aircraft engineer's encounter with virtual reality is part of the
design process at McDonnell Douglas, the US aerospace company. It bought the
system in September from Division, a UK-based supplier, on the basis that it
would involve 'fewer mock-ups and prototypes, earlier design testing and
reduced costs'.
Examples such as this show that virtual reality is beginning to make inroads
in business, although its image is still heavily dominated by its
applications in games and entertainment. 'Overcoming the preconception of
management that VR is about hype and entertainment' remains a significant
challenge, according to Pierre duPoint, marketing director of Division.
The business market for virtual reality currently accounts for just Dollars
4.1m (Pounds 2.5m) of the Dollars 115.8m total market, according to 4th
Wave, a US consultancy. It is expected to grow strongly. By 1998 it expects
the business market to account for Dollars 95m of a total market worth
Dollars 569.9m. Research and development applications are expected to grow
from Dollars 40.3m to Dollars 64.4m in the same period.
Even now, the variety of business users and applications is extensive.
Examples range from EDF, a French nuclear power operator, which uses virtual
reality to help engineers plan maintenance programmes that expose them to
minimum radiation, to Wall Street where Maxus Systems International, a
financial consultancy, has designed a system that allows traders to
represent financial information visually by using symbols that float on a
virtual plane.
Most business uses of virtual reality fall into three categories: marketing,
design and training.
Just over Dollars 2m is currently being spent on marketing applications of
virtual reality, according to 4th Wave. A notable user is Matsushita, the
Japanese interior design company. In its Tokyo showroom, customers can view
a combination of any of the 50,000 items in its catalogue by putting on a
headset and taking a virtual tour of a house in which they are installed.
The cost of the equipment, at more than Pounds 250,000, might inhibit other
retailers from following their lead. However, the company is considering
rolling out the project to its other shops using a cheaper, PC-based system.
Similar equipment is also used in the UK, where British Gas has installed a
virtual reality system (which uses a monitor rather than a headset) to
demonstrate kitchen designs in its Coventry showroom.
Design is another application that makes good use of virtual reality's
convincing simulation of products. One of the most innovative uses of the
concept has been in drug design, where Glaxo and the University of York are
working on a Pounds 600,000 three-year project with funding assistance by
Division, the UK's Department of Trade and Industry and the Science and
Engineering Research Council.
The goal of the project is to allow chemists to manipulate molecules using
virtual reality, allowing them to get a tangible sense of how they interact.
Glaxo says that although 'the jury is still out' on how well the system will
work in practice, the concept has proved itself.
Within the field of industrial design, virtual reality may be adopted
relatively easily, since it is a variation on widely used computer-aided
design.
When CADCentre, a Cambridge-based computer-aided design business, launched
Review Reality, a virtual reality software product for designers of process
plant, recently, it was depicted as the latest in a line of products that
allow engineers to visualise their design database.
Review Reality presents petrochemical installations and offshore platforms
as life-like computer models, generated in real time. George Osborne, an
engineering general manager of Kvaerner H&amp;G, the Norwegian shipbuilding
group, is enthusiastic: 'It is highly desirable because it is more
life-like,' he says.
For complex equipment such as plants and rigs, the uses of virtual reality
go beyond design. Simulated models can also be pressed into use for
activities such as safety assessments and training.
Virtual reality is proving useful in training people to cope with complex
situations, such as in a fire.
The UK's Fire Service College uses virtual reality for training because it
provides a visual explanation of the complex mathematical theories that
underpin fire engineering. The software designed by Superscape, a UK-quoted
virtual reality company, allows trainees to see what happens to a fire in
changing conditions, such as when doors are opened or shut.
Applications are likely to expand further as virtual reality systems become
less expensive to install. Since virtual reality depends on high-performance
computing power, the hardware can cost Pounds 250,000 to create top-quality
graphics.
For many users who find the quality of the image from a PC-based system
acceptable, the costs can be much lower. For example, IBM, together with
Virtuality, a UK virtual reality company, is about to begin marketing a
virtual reality development system costing between Pounds 6,600 and Pounds
55,000.
Prices are likely to fall further. 'We want to make it accessible to more
people by bringing the costs down,' says Jon Waldern, managing director of
Virtuality.
As with many new technologies, many potential customers will be tempted to
wait until the price of virtual reality equipment falls and performance
improves. But as cost becomes less of a deterrent, virtual reality looks set
to become widely adopted as a practical tool.
