FT  19 APR 94 / Early tax cuts unlikely, says Tory
Mr John Watts, Conservative chairman of the Commons Treasury committee,
warned yesterday that tax cuts in the 'very near future' were unlikely.
Mr Watts said there were no inflation or exchange rate constraints that
would prevent Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, from making a further
reduction in interest rates if he thought it necessary to stimulate the
economy.
The Treasury has already opened this year's public-spending battle with its
own warning that there will be no room for tax cuts before the general
election unless ministers rein back a threatened overshoot in Whitehall
budgets.
'Mr Watts' comments underline what ministers have been saying privately for
some time - that there is no scope for tax cuts for the foreseeable future,'
a Whitehall official said.
While Mr Watts would like Mr Clarke to cut taxes as soon as possible, he
made clear he did not think 'that means in the very near future.
'After taking the political flak for bringing the deficit under control we
would not have much credibility if we decided to cut taxes because the
government is not very popular,' Mr Watts continued. 'Just because the
public sector borrowing requirement is not as bad as we think does not mean
we can start to cut taxes.'
However, he argued that if the government made faster progress in
eliminating borrowings then tax cuts would come return to the political
agenda.
Mr Watts argued that there was neither an inflation constraint nor an
exchange rate constraint that would prevent the chancellor from making a
further reduction in interest rates if he thought that was necessary.
Ms Harriet Harman, shadow chief secretary, said the issue of tax had
destroyed the government's credibility in the run-up to next month's local
government elections.
'The issue of tax has destroyed the Tories' credibility,' she said. 'In
1992, they told the electorate that they would cut taxes,' she said. 'Now,
as we approach the local elections of 1994, up and down Britain, people are
seeing this promise betrayed with the biggest tax hike in history.'
