FT  12 NOV 94 / Property: Spruce up, oaks down - Gerald Cadogan on the new
woodland grant regulations
It is a big disappointment that the new grant regulations for woods tilt
away from broadleaf (deciduous) trees to conifers. Pinewoods are a
depressing shroud on the landscape.
The rules have been in effect since September but the industry is still
trying to work out how they will be interpreted. Meanwhile, the Forestry
Commission, which closed the old schemes in July, is running courses to
expound its 'reforms'.
Two parallel schemes, the Woodland Grant Scheme and the Farm Woodland
Premium Scheme, offer similar planting grants. Rates for conifers are a flat
Pounds 700 a hectare; previously they were Pounds 615 for over 10 hectares
and from Pounds 795 to Pounds 1,005 for up to 10 hectares.
The new broadleaf rate is Pounds 1,350 (formerly Pounds 1,175-Pounds 1,575)
for up to 10 hectares and Pounds 1,050 (Pounds 975) for more than 10
hectares. A 14 per cent grant increase for conifers and an 8 per cent rise
for larger areas of broadleaves are the result.
It will now be considerably more expensive for a farmer to plant across a
corner of a field to make an easier sweep for the tractor as the grants for
small plantations have been cut. Sadly, the many small new farm copses,
usually of broadleaves, which are a direct result of the old scheme and are
fast improving the look of the land, will dry up.
Re-stocking grants are also down sharply, to a flat Pounds 325 (conifers)
and Pounds 525 (broadleaves). This will channel the commission's funds
towards new planting - on the implicit assumption that the owner who is
re-stocking has cash in the bank already.
The standard management grant has been scrapped but the old special
management grant stays. Now called the annual management grant and worth
Pounds 35 a hectare from the time of planting, it will have strict and
targeted criteria such as public access or, thank goodness, a specified
proportion of broadleaves.
Another constraint is that all planting must now be at 2,250 trees a hectare
(except for amenity woodlands under three hectares); the previous volume for
broadleaves was 1,100 trees. This applies even to better farmland, which
qualifies for a supplement of Pounds 600 a hectare (formerly Pounds 400 for
conifers and Pounds 600 for broadleaves).
The combined grant and supplement for conifers is now 28 per cent higher
than before, while the demand for much closer planting of broadleaves means
that an owner must buy many more young trees to plant. It is bound to lead
to more conifers such as spruce being planted - and fewer oaks, ash and
beech.
Barry Gamble, managing director of Fountain Forestry, says: 'I think it is a
straightforward commercial decision if grants are going to be sustainable in
the long haul. The commission's resources are limited.'
In the UK, the woodland market has been busier this year than last although
property prices have not gone up - or not yet. But Gamble says the recent
rise in timber prices of 10-20 per cent must be an excellent leading
indicator that now is a fine time to buy a wood.
US prices have done better still. They are up about 50 per cent - more for
hardwoods - as supply scrambles to catch up with demand. 'Black cherry and
oak are still rising there,' says Gamble. When the recession began, US
producers and users de-stocked. But with the upturn of the economy, supply
is short and prices have risen.
Back in Britain, meanwhile, as the plague of conifers spreads, the copses
planted under the old system will be ever more welcome.
