FT  30 MAR 94 / World Trade News: Aids drug price war in Portugal
Wellcome has cut the price of its Aids treatment AZT by 30 per cent in
Portugal because of competition from a Portuguese company marketing a
cheaper version in a challenge to Wellcome's worldwide patents, according to
Portuguese officials.
Mr Jose Fleming Torrinha, director of the Sao Joao Hospital in Oporto, said
Wellcome had made the cut in a bid for a contract to supply the hospital
with 6,000 250mg capsules of Retrovir, Wellcome's version of AZT and its
second biggest selling drug.
He said a small Portuguese company, Farma APS Productos Farmaceuticos, had
lodged a rival bid to supply a Canadian-made version of AZT at 33 per cent
below Wellcome's previous price. The hospital has not yet decided between
the two proposals.
Wellcome said it was 'amazed that Portugal as a member of the European Union
is not prepared to respect our intellectual property rights in relation to
Retrovir'. It would take every action possible to protect those rights.
The company said it believed failure to respect intellectual property rights
would hinder development of innovative medicines.
Farma APS is marketing Apo-Zidovudine, a form of AZT manufactured by Apotex
of Canada, which is already selling the drug in some Canadian provinces,
Senegal, South Africa, Brazil and Venezuela. This is the company's first
venture into a European market.
The Portuguese government has authorised sale of Apo-Zidovudine on the
grounds that AZT is a drug in the public domain and that Wellcome's
pioneering application of Retrovir to treat Aids did not give it the right
to prohibit sale of other versions.
In addition, Portugal's patent law on drugs protects only manufacturing
processes, not the chemical substance. This could make it more difficult for
Wellcome to prove its patents have been infringed. Wellcome has been in a
series of patent disputes with companies, including Apotex, over the right
to sell AZT. So far, Wellcome has won a case in the US and has actions
outstanding in Canada and France.
A 30 per cent reduction in the price of AZT would save the Portuguese state
more than Es150m (Pounds 580,000) a year, based on total sales of about
Es500m in 1993. Retrovir sales worldwide were worth Pounds 248m in 1993.
Wellcome is proposing to sell Retrovir to the Oporto hospital at Es423.5 a
250mg capsule compared with Es605 previously. Farma APS proposes to sell
Apo-Zidovudine at Es405 a capsule. Portuguese hospitals bought 1m capsules
of Retrovir in 1993. In Portugal, AZT is sold only directly to hospitals,
not through pharmacies.
