FT  08 JUN 94 / Concern over exports as Argentina trade deficit widens
Argentina's trade deficit widened sharply in the first four months of the
year, further raising concern over the country's export competitiveness and
the sustainability of its fixed exchange rate.
Latest figures show the deficit grew nearly five-fold to Dollars 2.4bn
(Pounds 1.59bn) from Dollars 500m in the same period last year. But analysts
expect a deficit of about Dollars 7bn for the year, roughly double last
year's trade gap. Argentina has run a trade deficit nearly every month since
Mr Domingo Cavallo, economy minister, pegged the currency to the dollar in
April 1991.
But he denied the trade figures were alarming because they showed on the one
hand a sharp increase in exports of manufactures and on the other a large
inflow of capital goods.
The deficit was due mainly to sluggish exports of agricultural and
industrial commodities.
Investment was 28 per cent higher in the first quarter compared with a year
ago, while consumption grew only 4 per cent, Mr Cavallo added.
'For the first time ever, investments have resulted in productivity gains
allowing an increase in exports despite growing domestic demand.'
In the past, when the economy grew, as it is now, exports fell. Now, said Mr
Cavallo, 'exports of manufactures are showing an increase of 28 per cent,
achieved through an increase in productivity. I have no doubt Argentina will
have a greater ability to export owing to increases in productivity.'
He emphasised that a large proportion of the imports were composed of
capital goods, indicating companies were investing more and laying the
foundations for a strong export sector. In the first quarter, government
figures show imports of capital doubled to Dollars 1.53bn.
However, analysts complain government statistics are poor, making it hard to
corroborate this. They suspect the government is over-estimating the volume
of capital goods imports.
Mr Francisco Macri, president of Socma, one of Argentina's most powerful
industrial groups, said yesterday: 'There are few imports of capital goods
and more imports of consumer goods and this is not good.'
Mr Macri, whose companies build nearly half the cars made in Argentina,
claimed car imports alone last year were worth Dollars 3bn.
Despite the disappointing trade figures, inflation continues to fall. In
May, retail prices rose 0.3 per cent, bringing the 12-month figure to 3.4
per cent, the lowest in 41 years.
