FT  21 NOV 94 / VW board wants chairman to take calmer tone in public
Mr Ferdinand Piech, Volkswagen chairman, will be told to tone down his
public statements at a meeting with senior members of the automotive group's
supervisory board this week.
Anxiety about Mr Piech's aggression was initially roused by a recent
outburst in an interview in which he accused his middle management of
cowardice and conspiring against him.
It was exacerbated at the weekend by the publication of extracts from a
letter accusing Mr Piech of being a dictator.
The letter, unsigned and purportedly from a group of middle managers, was
sent to Mr Klaus Liesen, chairman of the supervisory board, Mr Gerhard
Schroder, prime minister of VW's home state, Lower Saxony, and Mr Klaus
Zwickel, leader of the IG Metall trade union.
All are members of the supervisory board's powerful praesidium, which is due
to meet Mr Piech on Thursday, a day before a full supervisory board session.
The letter warned Mr Liesen not to be misled by the apparent recovery at VW.
'Make plain to Mr Piech that a global concern cannot be run like a feudal
fiefdom manned by serfs,' it said.
The signs of tension at VW have also revived debate among non-executive
supervisory directors on the possible need for a 'shadow cabinet', or
substitute top management, which could step in if Mr Piech did not stay for
his full five-year contract.
The proposal was first floated last year during the still-unresolved
industrial espionage allegations against VW's eccentric purchasing director,
Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua.
While the supervisory board is eager to avoid open conflicts with management
which could put VW's recovery at risk, it is also concerned that Mr Piech's
confrontational style is damaging the group's image. Its members are
understood to be more than satisfied with the benefits of the shake-out
started two years ago when Mr Piech took charge. VW last week announced its
losses after nine months had been cut to DM73m (Pounds 29.9m) this year from
DM1.53bn last year.
Although the origins of the letter, published in today's edition of the news
magazine Der Spiegel, are uncertain, the internal resistance to Mr Piech's
regime was confirmed in a recent interview in which he said he was 'still
working' on middle managers reluctant to toe the line.
He alleged that unknown VW employees had tried to bug his private telephone
and sabotaged his press office communications. The interview was widely seen
as the launch of a wholesale offensive on the next management layer.
Skoda plan revised, Page 23
