FT  07 MAR 94 / Equity Markets: Other markets
ZURICH
Ascom, the troubled telecoms equipment maker, is expected to reveal a 1993
loss of about SFr350m (Dollars 241m) at a press conference today.
Electrowatt and Baer Holding also present full-year figures today. Analysts
have been busily revising upwards their estimates for CS Holding which
reports preliminary results tomorrow, after Friday's figures from Credit
Suisse. Estimates for earnings range up to SFr2bn, compared with SFr1.03bn
in 1992. Alusuisse is seen posting a 33 per cent fall in pre-tax profits
tomorrow. SBC, giving full details of its 1993 results on Wednesday, has
already reported net income up 36 per cent at SFr1.37bn.
BBC and its parent, ABB, report on Wednesday. Hoare Govett expects net
profit to fall to Dollars 376m from Dollars 505 due to higher non-recurring
costs at ABB.
FRANKFURT
Hoechst, the first of Germany's big three chemicals groups to report, is
widely expected to cut the dividend to DM6 from last time's DM9, tomorrow. A
40 per cent fall in earnings after nine months was attributed to weakness in
the European fibres business and polypropylene manufacture.
AMSTERDAM
Fokker reports on Wednesday and there is a broad consensus that the aircraft
manufacturer, which has already unveiled plans for a drastic cut in aircraft
output and jobs, will announce a Fl 150m (Dollars 79m) loss for 1993.
Analysts are looking for a 10 per cent improvement at Heineken, reporting on
Thursday. ABN Amro's figures are expected to advance 20 per cent on
Thursday.
STOCKHOLM
A spate of results this week looks set to confirm a sharp turnround in
earnings, says UBS. Gambro and Sandvik are seen raising net profit by 27 per
cent tomorrow while Stora is expected to see a return to profit of about
SKr400m. Results on Thursday come from AGA, Asea, Ericsson with an expected
137 per cent rise in pre-tax profit, Hennes &amp; Mauritz and Trelleborg.
TOKYO
Trade tensions between Japan and the US following Washington's decision last
week to revive the Super 301 provision for retaliatory trade tariffs may
become an important influence.
