FT  30 MAR 94 / Brussels denies social policy concessions
The government was facing further trouble over European Union enlargement
last night after the European Commission rejected Britain's interpretation
of 'assurances' on social policy.
Mr John Major, the prime minister, said assurances given by the commission
met Britain's concerns that the health and safety provisions of the Treaty
of Rome were being used to circumvent Britain's opt-out from the social
chapter of the Maastricht treaty.
But Mr Jacques Delors, the commission president, said he had 'simply
clarified the programme of the commission for the present year'. Mr Padraig
Flynn, the social affairs commissioner, said there had been no concession on
social policy.
It also emerged that the assurances will cease to be valid at the of the
year, when a new commission takes office. British officials said they
believed the undertakings would be accepted by the next commission.
Mr Major told the Commons that the assurances meant that the commission's
use of the health and safety provisions would be restricted to measures
'directly and demonstrably relevant to health and safety at work'.
He said this meant there would be no repetition of the commission's attempt
to use the health and safety provisions to impose a directive on working
time, which Britain has challenged in the European Court.
The commission had also accepted that the UK would be excluded completely
from proposals under the Maastricht treaty's social chapter, he said. This
would mean the proposals to set up works councils would not be imposed on
the British operations of transnational companies.
Earlier Mr David Hunt, the employment secretary, told the cabinet that the
assurances would also block the imposition in Britain of three directives
expected to be brought forward shortly by Mr Flynn.
The directives deal with discrimination in the workplace, employment
conditions for part-time workers and parental-leave rights under the health
and safety provisions.
Downing Street officials said Britain would welcome the only two other
directives - on factory inspection procedures and mine safety - expected to
be tabled under the health and safety provisions.
The British interpretation, however, was flatly rejected in Brussels.
Officials said Britain had asked for a written assurance from Mr Delors, but
received only a tart 'verbal reminder' that previously agreed procedures for
social policy were written down in the EU treaty and in regulations - and
remained so.
Publicly, the commission merely restated three arcane references in the
'reminder', provided on Monday to Sir John Kerr, Britain's ambassador to the
EU, by Mr Flynn and Mr Delors.
But the UK's request was described privately by a commission official as
'simply intolerable. We are not going to let them imply that there is a
trade-off in social policy,' he said.
'You can't negotiate concessions from the commission on social policy; there
are 11 other member states.'
The commission told the UK that all social measures proposed for 1994 under
the Maastricht treaty's clause 118A 'are directly concerned with health and
safety'.
