FT  15 DEC 94 / Trafalgar House Stalks Northern Electric: Trafalgar action
puts industry on defensive - A hostile bid for an electricity utility has
political ramifications as well as stirring up an already agitated sector
Until yesterday the received wisdom among executives of the English and
Welsh regional electricity companies was that they were safe from hostile
predators. 'There are not enough costs left to be cut out to make it
worthwhile for an aggressor to pay a hostile bid premium,' said one chief
executive yesterday morning.
Trafalgar House, the engineering and construction group, is not convinced,
as its afternoon statement confirmed. And if it goes ahead with the takeover
bid it has been considering for Northern Electric, it will be upsetting more
than just the sector executives' sense of security about remaining
independent.
The repercussions of a bid will be felt far beyond the north-east of
England, which is the electricity company's base, and far beyond the sector.
A bid would have significant political implications, with power
privatisation a growing focus of political debate.
Yesterday, shares of all 12 regional electricity companies rose strongly as
analysts and investors digested the implications of the first moves towards
a contested takeover in the sector since it was privatised four years ago.
Other companies considered vulnerable to takeovers included South Wales
Electricity, South Western Electricity, Seeboard, based in the south-east,
and Cheshire-based Manweb.
With one prospective hostile bidder already having shown its hand, others
are more likely to emerge, either to enter the fray for Northern, or to
focus on another target before it is swallowed up.
Potential bidders could include US utilities seeking a stream of earnings
outside their own tightly regulated areas or UK conglomerates such as
Hanson.
The 12 companies may feel forced into each other's arms. Most industry
executives would prefer to get together with another regional electricity
company rather than face the risk of a non-sector company taking them over.
The urge to merge may become overwhelming for some.
But a second line of defence will be to accelerate the process of passing
out any 'hidden value' in the companies to shareholders before a hostile
predator promises to do it for them.
That makes an intensification of cost-cutting and job shedding inevitable.
It also increases the likelihood, already strong, that the National Grid
will be floated next year. Many analysts believe that the Grid's value is
not yet fully reflected in the 12 companies' share prices and will not
become so until it is fully demerged from their ownership.
All these developments will take place in the full public glare. The Labour
Party has sensed that it can win votes through its attacks on electricity
privatisation and has been on the attack this week over job losses and the
National Grid flotation, which it says will benefit rec shareholders greatly
but customers and the taxpayer far less.
The government's inclination will be to intervene in electricity as little
as possible and to let the market decide the industry's future. However, its
ownership of a golden share in each of the recs and the National Grid until
April 1 means that it has the power to intervene, and Labour may challenge
it to do so.
Even after the golden share ends, the government may have to confront wider
competition issues if merger mania leads to widespread consolidation. By
some estimates, today's 12 companies could shake down into four or five
super-utilities, possibly owning regional water and gas companies as well.
The role of Professor Stephen Littlechild, the electricity industry
regulator, will also come under close public scrutiny.
In the eyes of the Labour Party he is one of the villains of the piece,
since it is under his regulation that the companies have been able to become
so profitable and therefore so attractive to predators.
There are likely to be calls on Prof Littlechild to ensure that consumers
are protected, for example by ring-fencing cash piles accrued by the
companies so that bidders cannot use them for non-electricity purposes.
But like the government, Prof Littlechild is a strong believer in the market
and is unlikely to want to intervene simply to preserve the industry
structure introduced at privatisation in 1990.
The structure was inherited from pre-privatisation days. The government
considered various options, but in the end decided to privatise the regional
electricity structure as it was. The 12 area boards thus became 12 regional
companies.
'The whole industry was being changed,' said one former government adviser
yesterday. 'We were breaking up the Central Electricity Generation Board but
the area distribution structure seemed not unreasonable because it had been
developed over a number of years.'
If the government's decision against reforming the regional electricity
structure has proved uncontroversial, the same cannot be said of the price
regulation it put in place.
Even the executives of the companies acknowledge, in retrospect, that the
targets for cutting prices in the distribution businesses which provide
their main income have proved to be extremely lax.
The companies have been able to cut costs by far more than they expected,
largely through implementing reductions in workforces of more than 25 per
cent on average. Distribution prices have meanwhile been able to rise.
The result is that the companies have become considerably more profitable
than they were intended to be and have been able to accrue large cash piles.
The sector's shares have performed better than any other in the past four
years.
Nor is the share price growth expected to end there. Prof Littlechild is
widely viewed to have missed the opportunity to rein in the companies'
profitability in the regulatory review he announced in August, and which is
to be implemented next April.
Stockbrokers' analysts believe that virtually all companies will be able to
increase their dividends by about 8 per cent a year in real terms for the
next four years at least.
In the current results season, rises of more than 20 per cent have been the
norm. In utility stocks dividend growth is one of the key assessment
criteria.
All of this means that even following recent share price rises, many
stockbroking analysts have been advising their clients to buy at least some
of the companies in the sector.
Whichever predators move in, they will have to reckon with a steadily
toughening competitive climate. Prof Littlechild is liberalising the
electricity market so that by 1998, all the regional barriers will be gone
and each distributor will be able to sell wherever he likes. No country in
the world will have such an open electricity market, and the uncertainties
will be considerable.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTHERN ELECTRIC: ITS SIZE AND PERFORMANCE
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Share price                            Market              Customers
                   % rise Dec 1     capitalisation
                 to Dec 14 1994      (Pounds bn)           (million)
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
London                11.2             1.61                 1.94
Seeboard             20.92             1.16                 1.94
Southern             11.02             2.14                 2.53
South Western        21.29             1.04                 1.27
South Wales           8.53             0.84                 0.93
Manweb                9.78             0.99                 1.32
Eastern              13.19             1.97                 3.09
East Midlands         4.11             1.48                 2.20
Midlands             11.67             1.70                 2.16
NORWEB                5.82             1.38                 2.13
Yorkshire             9.94             1.55                 2.00
Northern             39.89             1.25                 1.42
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
