FT  10 FEB 94 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Softly, softly
approach - The French enlisted history-makers to market the Channel Tunnel,
but UK advertising has had to be coaxing and humorous
British newspaper advertisements for the Channel tunnel show cartoon-like
figures snoozing their way through the tunnel or driving down tree-lined
French roads. The French press advertising campaign, by contrast, features
Napoleon, Churchill and Queen Victoria giving their blessing to the venture.
These different approaches reflect national attitudes to the largest
European engineering project of the past decade.
For the sceptical British, used to a stream of stories about problems in the
Pounds 10bn project, including this week's announcement of another delay in
the launch of train services, the approach has had be gentle, humorous and
coaxing. For the French, who regard the tunnel with Gallic pride as a
natural extension of their record-breaking, high-speed rail network, the
tunnel must be presented with all due ceremony.
This two-pronged advertising strategy - which initially caused some
controversy on the Eurotunnel board - is part of a wider marketing strategy
which has had to address important pricing, distribution and public
relations issues.
According to Christopher Garnett, commercial director of Eurotunnel, some
people wanted the UK campaign to be triumphal about the achievement
represented by the tunnel. But research by Eurotunnel and its advertising
agency, DDB Needham, showed that with the problems completing the venture
such an approach left people cold.
'We realised our ads could not be pompous. They had to be light-hearted
while at the same time explaining why people should use the tunnel. The
board did not like that idea at first. They said that they had worked so
hard on the project. But in the end the market research swung the argument.'
The friendly image of the cartoons - intended to make the journey less of a
frightening prospect for those who fear claustrophobia, terrorism or rabies
 -appears to have worked. Awareness of the Eurotunnel name rose 15 points
after the campaign was launched in November last year, while its marketing
targets were exceeded by 3 to 4 per cent, says Garnett. Later this month the
press campaign will be followed up by television advertisements maintaining
the light tone.
Given that the success of the tunnel hinges on the operators tapping a new
market for cross-channel travel, countering fear is inevitably one of the
big challenges.
Garnett, who joined Eurotunnel from the ferry company Sealink, now Stena
Sealink, in March 1991, claims not to be concerned about surveys which
highlight this.
He points out that only 40 per cent of Britons have ever taken their car
abroad and only 16 per cent go on a foreign motoring holiday in any one
year. At the same time, he adds, relatively few continental Europeans take
their cars to the UK, partly because of fears about driving on the left.
Eurotunnel hopes to capture half the existing car passenger market of 6m
journeys by 1996. But the company believes it will also be able to create a
new class of traveller attracted by the convenience of the shuttle to spend
weekends in Le Touquet rather than Devon.
Besides press, TV and poster advertising - the lion's share of Eurotunnel's
Pounds 25m launch marketing budget - public relations has also played a
prominent, if not always constructive, role. The uniqueness of the project -
which has guaranteed extensive press coverage - has obviously helped, though
this can cut both ways.
An unfortunate choice of words by Charles Barker, the company's PR firm,
last month prompted The Sun, the biggest-selling UK tabloid newspaper, to
splash a headline on its front page: 'We don't want Sun readers in our
Chunnel. No entry to you lot.' The Sun claimed its readers were seen as too
downmarket by the 'train snobs' at Eurotunnel.
The announcement of the shuttle fares had provoked a more positive response
and a burst of coverage in the news columns, though a premature story in one
Sunday paper created a false impression that Eurotunnel would pitch its
prices at the lower end of the ferry tariffs.
In fact, the shuttle prices are towards the top of the ferries' range,
reflecting both a shortage of shuttle rolling stock which will limit
capacity in the early months and the novelty value of travel through the
tunnel. The ferry operators were relieved that Eurotunnel had not launched
an immediate price war but few people expect these prices to hold for long.
Eurotunnel had initially intended to sell its tickets directly to the
public. But because 70 per cent of Britons buy their holiday tickets through
a travel agent, Garnett decided to stick to traditional sales methods.
Apart from the lapse with The Sun, Eurotunnel's overall marketing campaign
appears to have been well received, even winning a back-handed compliment
from one of its rivals. Brian Langford, marketing director of P &amp; O European
Ferries, says Eurotunnel is right to present a friendly image in advertising
what he calls 'a fairly spartan product'.
It was clear from the outset that the tunnel would have to be sold on speed
and convenience, so there would be little opportunity to introduce on the
trains the restaurants, discotheques and shops which are available on the
ferries.
It is just these features - conjuring up the idea of cross-Channel sailing
as a leisurely experience - which P &amp; O is now using to compete with the
tunnel. It is drawing on its traditions as a cruise line, which in the early
days served to distinguish the company from its ferry rivals.
Langford acknowledges that P &amp; O cannot match the tunnel in the amounts it
spends on promotion, though it is attempting to keep its name in the public
eye with a more modest campaign. Even so, many transport specialists expect
the ferries to be forced to make sharp reductions in the frequency of their
Dover-Calais sailings.
Garnett believes the tunnel will become the natural way to travel to the
Continent and that talk of the ferries as a leisure experience will become
irrelevant. The millions spent on marketing will undoubtedly help.
