FT  22 FEB 94 / World Trade News: First steps to 'green the Gatt' - A look
at preparations for a negotiating programme for trade, environment and
sustainable development after Uruguay
Talks on a work programme to tackle the nettlesome issue of world trade and
the environment are starting to gather momentum after a slow start. Further
impetus may come from a special session today of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade's governing council to discuss the matter.
Though ministers are due to approve the work programme in Marrakesh in
April, governments appear to have only a vague notion of what should go into
it.
The 118 nations taking part in the Uruguay Round of global trade talks
agreed in December that a comprehensive work programme on trade, environment
and sustainable development should be put to ministers when they meet to
sign the final package of trade-liberalising accords.
Informal consultations since then suggest broad agreement on the need to set
up a committee to carry out the work. However, its mandate, and lifespan,
remain controversial.
No one disputes the need for Gatt, and its successor, the World Trade
Organisation, to confront the way in which trade and environment policies
interact and may conflict. There is nevertheless a wide gulf between the
views of environmentalists, who favour changing Gatt rules to facilitate the
use of trade restrictions for environmental protection, and those of
developing countries who fear that moves to 'green the Gatt' may spread a
virulent new form of protectionism.
There has thus been strong resistance among developing countries to
presenting the Marrakesh meeting with a fixed agenda which is bound, they
believe, to reflect rich-world concerns. Instead, they want the Marrakesh
declaration to confine itself to approving the principles guiding the
committee's work and for the committee to decide its own agenda in its own
time.
'Creating a committee on trade and the environment will already be a big
step,' says one influential developing country Gatt ambassador. 'I don't
think we should try to prejudge what the committee should discuss.'
The principles underlying the work programme were outlined by Uruguay Round
participants in a statement last December. They include the need to promote
sustainable development, preserve the open trading system and avoid
unilateralism while ensuring the responsiveness of the trading system to
environmental objectives.
'There should not be, nor need be, any policy contradiction between
upholding and safeguarding an open, non-discriminatory and equitable
multilateral trading system on the one hand, and acting for the protection
of the environment, and the promotion of sustainable development on the
other,' the statement says.
Environmental groups, for their part, fear that leaving the committee to
devise its own work programme will be a recipe for delay and issue-dodging.
More than 40 groups from around the world last week backed proposals calling
for an 'action-oriented' agenda aimed at reaching recommendations within two
years.
Conscious of the sensitivities of developing countries, the proposals stress
support for sustainable development and down-play the role of trade
restrictions. At the same time, however, the Gatt/WTO is urged to address
the two issues which most raise third world hackles.
The first relates to so-called processing and production methods (PPMs).
Environmentalists want Gatt rules changed to allow discrimination between
identical products produced in different ways. This would, for instance,
validate US trade curbs, now judged Gatt-illegal, which ban imports of tuna
caught in ways which kill too many dolphins.
The second concerns 'eco-dumping' - the competitive advantage allegedly
gained by countries with low environmental standards. Mr Charles
Arden-Clarke of the WWF-World Wide Fund for Nature insists that there is no
intention to oblige poor countries to adopt the high environmental standards
of rich ones.
Rather, he says, the issue turns on the more general need to make product
prices reflect full environmental costs. But the suspicion remains that in
practice 'eco-dumping' will serve as a new pretext for protectionism aimed
primarily at poor countries.
Other agenda ideas are less controversial. For the last two years, a Gatt
working group chaired by Mr Hidetoshi Ukawa of Japan has been discussing the
relationship of Gatt rules with the trade provisions of multilateral
environmental agreements, the need for transparency in trade and
environmental policies, and the vexed question of eco-labelling and its
impact on trade.
While the group did not seek to reach conclusions, the ground has been well
worked over. These areas are likely to be priority items for the new
committee even if they do not appear specifically in the work programme
approved in Marrakesh.
The US, despite its high-profile campaign for early Gatt talks on trade and
the environment, has no plans to draft its own agenda proposals. Mr Timothy
Wirth, environment adviser to the US secretary of state, said recently the
main US priority was creating a permanent committee to examine the
trade/environment link.
Washington and like-minded European governments may thus prefer to play safe
and see the committee safely established in Marrakesh before the real
haggling begins.
