FT  26 MAR 94 / London Stock Exchange: Late rally pushes Footsie into
positive territory - Market report
Dealers were happy to see the back of a week of unrelenting pressure and big
losses on the London stock market that culminated in a surprising but
powerful end of account rally.
The FT-SE 100 Index, down more than 33 points in mid-morning responding to
another worrying slide in bonds and equities in the US overnight, rallied
with sufficient power shortly after American markets opened yesterday
afternoon to close a net 7.3 up on the session at 3,129. The FT-SE Mid 250
index, however, ended 20.5 off at 3,775.2 as institutions concentrated their
attentions on the market leaders. Over the week the 100 index showed a fall
of 89.1.
The late recovery was triggered by a solid opening by Wall Street, which
moved into positive territory shortly after it opened, and a resolute
showing by US bonds which were only marginally easier at the outset of
trading in the US after a similar performance on far eastern markets.
Rumours of Federal Reserve support for US bonds and Bank of England buying
of gilts accompanied the steadier trend in bonds in mid-afternoon.
Traders were rightly nervous at the outset of trading, lowering share prices
modestly to head off any attempted selling caused by the turbulence in US
markets following the assassination of Mr Luis Donaldo Colosio, a candidate
for the Mexican presidency.
The news from Mexico produced a series of tremors across international bond
markets where south American issues were heavily sold. 'The worry was that
some of the hedge funds, which are only just recovering from the recent
spate of bond market sell-offs, would have to sell more US and European
bonds to cover their south American losses,' said one dealer.
UK gilts, already weakened this week by worries about inflation and pressure
on sterling, dropped over two points at the long end of the market,
unnerving the equity market in the process.
The slide in gilts proved too much to bear for equities where a number of
the leading marketmakers, already suffering big losses on their trading
books after the violent swings in the markets recently, began to unload big
lines of stock.
This move resulted in the FT-SE 100 dropping to the day's low of 3,088.5, a
fall of 33.2. Thereafter the market began to creep better, as cheap buyers
moved in to buy top quality defensive stocks.
The market's big recovery began just after Wall Street opened and was first
seen in the FT-SE future, which, having lingered just above its 3,080
support level, suddenly bounded ahead amid talk of big US buying and short
covering from a number of UK institutions. Marketmakers in the cash market
also reported a sudden burst of buying in the financial sectors around the
same time.
Resulting gains drove the 100 index up to a session-high of 3,133.9, a gain
of 11.8, before profit-taking took the shine of the index at the close. The
financial sectors, which have underperformed substantially in recent months,
were in the vanguard of the rally.
Turnover of 850.5m shares was easily the week's highest, while the value of
customer business transacted on Thursday was revealed as topping the Pounds
2bn-mark, the highest for some weeks. Senior dealers said there was a
widespread feeling that the new account may see a technical bounce in the
market but warned of further violent swings until bond markets settle down.
