FT  05 OCT 94 / Recruitment: Zen and the art of finding a true vocation -
The use of psychoanalytical techniques for those seeking a new career
direction
You had to feel sorry for Dermot. As much as he looked at the ceiling or
closed his eyes and tried to blot out the surroundings he could not secure
an image. His mind was blank.
'I can't see anything at all,' he confessed. Dermot was lying on a blanket
in a room with eight other people variously lying or sitting staring into
space. Had this been a forest in California with men in lumberjack shirts
pounding tom toms in a male bonding session it might have been more readily
explained.
But this was a mixed group of men and women - English to boot - on a floor
of the building that houses one of the world's biggest accountancy firms.
Outside in the City of London people were making money, doing deals,
catching cabs.
Inside, sandwiched between the upper and lower floors of the Farringdon
Street accountancy offices of KPMG Peat Marwick, its career consultancy arm
was running a visioning workshop, one of the more ethereal sides of
outplacement.
Outplacement, the structured approach to helping people in redundancy
programmes to find new jobs, is also designed to enable people to come to
terms with their job loss. A trend in the US which has now become
established in the UK has been to develop visioning courses designed to
enable people to think more deeply about their work and discover what they
really want to do in life.
Psychologists at KPMG Career Consultants have evolved a series of visioning
sessions that use self-awareness processes, drawing on Zen Buddhism and
meditation techniques. If this sounds like a throw-back to the 1960s it
might explain why visioning is proving popular with the 'thirty and forty
somethings'.
Take Dermot, for example. Aged about 40 and married to a successful medical
consultant, he had worked as an accountant for the same company for 17 years
when he was given the opportunity to take voluntary redundancy.
'My job became redundant. I was offered another position in the company but
didn't want it.' He and his wife had made a conscious decision as a couple,
he said, that her job would come first. Her earnings and his redundancy
package had offered him the luxury of taking time to consider what he wanted
to do next.
Since giving up his job he had completed an MBA course and now wanted to
discover a personal goal. 'I want to build my own vision,' he said. Sadly,
it was proving difficult.
Dermot was lying on the blanket, undergoing a guided imagery session. This
is where the consultant running the group asks those present to expel all
thoughts from their minds and concentrate on a particular image - in this
case it was a rose.
We were asked to think of the petals opening and to imagine something coming
out of the middle. What was it and how did we react to it? Poor Dermot just
wasn't receiving anything.
While some people were seeing blue roses, roses with spiral staircases going
down their stems or with women coming out of them, Dermot confessed that he
saw 'nothing at all. It was too much effort to create a picture,' he said.
This was a morning session. Fortunately for Dermot the afternoon involved
less creative thought and he did finally get the hang of it. Clients were
asked to list key events in their past, something which they considered an
important stepping stone in their life, and then to analyse the
circumstances that led up to the event and its outcome. From that they were
asked to sift out two or three important points which brought about the
change.
Another exercise was for participants to imagine themselves a year on,
having lunch with a friend or colleague and discussing particular
achievements that year.
Some of this, conceded David Royston-Lee, the consultant running the
session, might be regarded as airy fairy but those who have attended such
courses tend to be positive about their benefits.
Patricia Manning, former marketing director of Mothercare, the Storehouse
chain, who is currently on an outplacement course at KPMG, said: 'I thought
when I went in that if this was going to be one of those feel-good days I
didn't want to know, because I don't feel bad. In fact I found it very
useful.'
Coming from a solid corporate background, she is about to make a big career
change by setting up in business as a management and marketing consultant.
'One thing you do in the sessions is to look back at the most important
parts of your corporate past and draw out from them the things that are
going to be at the core of your own consultancy. That is difficult to do
sometimes on your own.'
Manning, a Californian who has lived in the UK for 16 years, said that
people seemed to value the opportunity to take some time out of their life
and look back at it in an environment where in-bred or company inspired
self-restraint is absent.
'For the British that's a difficult thing to do but there was no holding
back in our session,' she added.
One outcome was that everyone finished the day firm friends because they all
knew so much about each other.
The sessions tend to expose suppressed career longings. One bank executive
confessed that he had always wanted to be a lion-tamer. While there were
obvious practical difficulties in achieving this ambition, the counsellors
drew out qualities from the job - in this case, perhaps, it was controlling
a dangerous situation - and helped him to apply it to a career where this
ability was required.
David Royston-Leesaid that he often comes across people in well-paid jobs
who are frustrated because they really want to do something else but which
they know pays much less than they can earn in their chosen career.
He recalled a conveyancing lawyer who wanted to be an opera singer but knew
it would not pay for the upkeep of his wife and family. His personal crisis
had been caused by a fall-off in the work that had been earning him Pounds
150,000 a year.
He is now in the chorus of a London operatic company, having at least
partially fulfilled his ambition. The visioning did not solve his money
problems but it did make him realise that there was something that mattered
more to him than his day job in terms of personal satisfaction and that if
he organised himself he could do both.
'Many of us have something we want to do but find that it is too big a leap.
What we don't always see is that there are stepping stones to making these
things happen,' said Royston-Lee. 'There is a hell of a lot of guilt around
in terms of doing what we feel we should do and not what we want to do. The
visioning day simply says that it's OK to be selfish sometimes.'
Such therapy, once the preserve of Hollywood film stars, is becoming
increasingly available in companies. Jo Ouston, a former head of advisory
services at the Institute of Management, now an independent career
management consultant, has developed a series of techniques, including the
use of guided imagery and transactional analysis, a method developed in the
late 1950s by US psychologist Eric Berne.
Ouston offers a series of structured courses at her consultancy or can go
into companies to help solve a problem. These are often associated with an
individual who may have found himself in the wrong job or who is not sure
what the company requires of him.
'These people are sometimes valued by the company but difficult to manage.
It is often the rebels I'm dealing with, which I like because they are often
the most interesting people,' she said.
Jo Ouston is based at 51/52 Keyes House, Dolphin Square, London SW1V 3LX,
tel 071 821 8299.
