FT  09 MAR 94 / Spy chief seeks Scott secrecy
Mr David Spedding, Britain's new spy chief, is prepared to give evidence to
the Scott arms-for-Iraq inquiry but only if all members of the intelligence
services can continue to testify in camera.
Mr Spedding, who was last week named as the next head of MI6, owes his
promotion largely to his involvement in gathering information on Iraq's
nuclear programme. He is thus well placed to shed light on an area which has
been investigated by Lord Justice Scott and which includes the work done for
UK intelligence by former executives of Matrix Churchill.
A Scott inquiry spokesman said last night that the judge was not prepared to
comment on intelligence witnesses to his inquiry. The judge has already
taken written and oral evidence in private from several members of the
intelligence services, including some members of Mr Spedding's section
specialising in the Middle East and Sir Colin McColl, the outgoing head of
MI6.
After consultations with Whitehall officials, Lord Justice Scott decided
that the public interest in hearing evidence from an intelligence officer
was outweighed by the public interest in protecting his identity and some of
the information provided by him.
According to intelligence sources Mr Spedding is under instructions, 'like
any other member of Whitehall', to co-operate fully with the Scott inquiry.
This would include giving evidence in public if 'requested to do so by Lord
Justice Scott'. Mr Spedding believes, however, that evidence in camera best
serves a balance between a higher public profile for the service and the
continuing demand for secrecy in its operations.
The role of the intelligence services is expected to come under renewed
focus today when Mr Peter Wiltshire, a Customs officer involved in the
Matrix Churchill investigation, gives evidence to the inquiry.
The intelligence services are confident they have nothing to fear from the
inquiry. They believe the judge's report will largely exonerate those
involved in intelligence reporting and instead criticise a breakdown in
dissemination of information by non-intelligence officials and ministers.
The judge has been provided with numerous intelligence reports warning
Whitehall that Iraq was using British exports, mainly machine-tools, to
build up Iraqi conventional and nuclear capability from the mid-1980s.
