FT  17 FEB 94 / Technology: New weapon for the gendarmerie - Beating
criminals at their own game is the aim of a French mobile phone system
When police in any big city pounce on a drug dealer's hideaway there is
always a fair chance that the building will be empty, the bird flown. The
criminals have used radio scanners to eavesdrop on police conversations and
so are alerted to the swoop.
'When they arrest terrorists the police find bombs, they find arms and they
always find scanners,' says Bruno Rambaud, vice president of Matra
Communications, part of the French Matra Hachette group. The scanners can be
tuned in to the analogue radio waves transmitted by police radios and
conversations easily heard.
The latest in digital mobile communications could change all that. In Rouen,
in northern France, the gendarmerie, France's national police force, are
pioneering a radio network which uses technology similar to the newest
civilian radio. 'Now it is possible to give the police the same technology
as the people they are chasing,' adds Rambaud.
Like the latest European cellular radio services, the gendarmerie's Rubis
network uses digital technology, on which it is notoriously hard to
eavesdrop. To make it even more difficult for criminals to decipher the
gendarmes' conversations, the network uses an encryption system developed by
the French military.
The Rubis network has one further advantage: by 1998, for the first time,
the French gendarmerie will have a nationwide network with 25,000 phones
operating on the same frequency. Until Rubis was first introduced, in July
1992, all forces had to select manually a new frequency to communicate with
other groups, explains Bruno Chapuis, a captain from the Paris headquarters
of the gendarmerie who is involved in the implementation of Rubis.
By implementing a widespread digital system, the French gendarmerie have
become pioneers, closely watched by emergency services in the rest of Europe
and the US. Throughout Europe, in particular, there is a growing awareness
that crime is spilling from one police area to another. And the removal of
national boundaries has increased fears of cross-border crime.
'People are now looking at the free flow of police as well as the free flow
of criminals across borders,' explains Phil Godfrey, market development
manager for public safety at Philips Telecom PMR.
To do this, however, all European nations would need to adopt radio systems
which worked together, preferably using the same radio technology on the
same frequencies. With the French gendarmerie stealing a march on other
emergency services the adoption of one technology now looks extremely slim.
The European Telecommunications Standards Institute (Etsi), which devises
European telecoms standards, is in the final stage of defining a
trans-European trunked radio system, called Tetra, to be used by Europe's
emergency services as well as vehicle and taxi fleets. However, the
technology as defined is very different from that used in the gendarmerie's
proprietary Matra system.
The Etsi standard, which will not be mandatory, is based on a technology
known as TDMA, in which each piece of a conversation or bit of data is
slotted into a time slot within the radio channel. Several calls can be
slotted side by side within one radio channel, which is 25KHz wide. It is a
technique already widely used in cellular radio networks.
The Matra technology uses FDMA, in which each caller is allocated a chunk of
the frequency. Once the call has ended, that chunk of frequency is
re-allocated to another caller.
At a meeting of Etsi in March further technical options will be considered,
using different techniques and frequency allocations, but the Tetra standard
will go ahead in its current form, come what may, says Brian Oliver,
chairman of the Etsi committee which is working on the standard.
'The TDMA 25KHz standard will be produced; it will not be shifted. That work
will emerge.' However, he adds, if there is a strong enough requirement from
potential users, other standards might be defined.
To further complicate the issue another system, based on FDMA, is being
adopted in the US.
Onlookers believe vested interests in both the manufacturing sector and
government circles will result in the implementation of at least two
different systems.
Matra is promoting its system by offering a free licence to other
manufacturers to use its technology, arguing that it is available now while
the final development of Tetra could be some time away.
Rival manufacturers are understandably suspicious of the offer. And they are
unhappy about the indecision over a single European standard. 'It's very
uncomfortable for people to spend millions of pounds developing a system
which could never be adopted,' says Godfrey.
At Motorola, which has developed both FDMA and TDMA systems, the attitude is
more relaxed. 'We're keeping an open mind,' says Andrew Dean, UK marketing
manager for the mobile product sector. Motorola has already implemented two
police radio systems which conform to the emerging US standard, in New
Hampshire and Florida. As a result, says Dean, 'our preferred solution today
is FDMA'.
It is up to the security forces to determine their needs and up to
manufacturers to assess the market implications and decide whether they will
make the equipment, says Oliver. But he believes the adoption of several
different technologies will not necessarily prevent communications between
emergency services from different countries. 'Interworking could be arranged
between the systems. It is up to the security forces to deal with their
communications needs.'
Rambaud agrees. 'What is interesting the different police forces is
interconnection through the infrastructure.'
So far in Amsterdam the police authorities have stated that they want a
network based on Tetra. In the UK, too, the Home Office has expressed a need
for a unified system in England and Wales and stated a preference for Tetra.
Elsewhere, the Belgium emergency services have announced a shortlist of
companies to tender for their network and Luxembourg is also planning a
nationwide network.
The arguments for and against the two basic technologies are complex.
Advocates of FDMA believe it is best suited to widespread networks which
have few users - such as national police networks. Proponents of the wider
band TDMA technology argue that it gives greater flexibility in providing
sophisticated services using its extra bandwidth - while an officer is
relaying details to colleagues of an escaped criminal, say, a photofit
picture of the man could be sent alongside the phone call to a local
printer.
TDMA also gives the potential for duplex - two-way - conversations. FDMA
calls are simplex, with only one person speaking at a time.
Looking at the Rubis network, it is clear that digital technology, be it
based on FDMA or TDMA, brings numerous advantages over older analogue
networks. Because calls are automatically switched between callers the
number of people needed in the despatch centre can be reduced, putting more
police on the street.
A spokesman for the Rouen gendarmerie says the safety features are what have
pleased members of the local force the most. By pressing a red button on the
side of the phone, officers under attack can immediately alert fellow
officers to the local emergency.
There is also a wide variety in the type of calls which can be made. As well
as open conference calls, gendarmes can make person-to-person calls,
particularly useful for senior officers in charge of the logistics of an
operation. Or there can be group calls, in which up to five officers
participate.
Data can also be sent across the same radio channel, and the patrol cars and
vans are all equipped with portable PCs, plugged into the same electronic
black box in the boot of the car as the telephone. By feeding the
registration number of a car into the PC the officer can find out from the
central database in Paris within just two seconds whether a car under
scrutiny is stolen.
