FT  01 JUN 94 / States tell cigarette makers to cough up on health costs:
Fresh legal attacks by Florida and Mississippi that, if successful and
replicated, could force the cigarette manufacturers out of business
The US tobacco industry is under fresh attack. In the last few days, two
states - Mississippi and Florida - have announced plans to take US cigarette
manufacturers to court in an attempt to recoup costs incurred in treating
smoking-related diseases under medical assistance programmes such as
Medicaid.
The sums the states are seeking are vast: Florida says smoking-related
illnesses have cost the state at least Dollars 1.2bn in medical costs since
1989. If its legal action succeeds, and other states do the same, the
cigarette manufacturers could be forced out of business.
In its intensifying war against the tobacco industry, the US anti-smoking
lobby has backed many attempts to sue cigarette manufacturers for the health
costs associated with smoking. All efforts have failed: the industry has yet
to pay a cent in damages.
But these latest cases are different. Earlier suits were brought against
manufacturers on behalf of individuals or groups of individuals seeking
compensation for their suffering. Mississippi and Florida are not
representing individuals: they are asking the industry as a whole to
reimburse them for the direct economic costs of treating smoking-related
diseases.
The distinction is important because it could deny cigarette makers the
opportunity to deploy some of their most powerful defences. In previous
cases, manufacturers have successfully argued that individuals who smoke
knowingly assume all the risks associated with the habit; that those who
become ill cannot conclusively prove that smoking was the cause; or that no
one can be sure which manufacturer's cigarettes caused the illness.
Mississippi believes it will overcome these defences by filing a claim
against all 13 US cigarette manufacturers seeking reimbursement of the
health costs it incurs in treating smokers. If it wins, the damages will be
split between the companies according to their market share.
'This lawsuit is premised on a simple notion. You caused the health crisis:
now you pay for it,' Mr Mike Moore, Mississippi attorney general, said.
Florida has gone further by signing into law an act that will specifically
deny cigarette manufacturers the right to deploy their traditional defences,
arguing that they are irrelevant to the issue of how much the state pays out
to treat smoking-related diseases. This will greatly enhance the prospects
of a successful suit.
'We're going to take the Marlboro Man to court,' said Florida's Governor
Lawton Chiles, who is running for a second term in office.
The moves by the two states come against a background of growing hostility
to smoking in the US from anti-smoking groups, government officials and
legislators at local and national level. Ms Jennifer Lew, managing attorney
at the Tobacco Products Liability Project, a Boston-based anti-smoking
group, says: 'I think the tide has turned so that this sort of legislation
has become politically palatable.'
Even so, some are concerned about the implications. Associated Industries of
Florida, a business organisation for the state, says the principles
enshrined in Florida's new legislation could easily be extended to the
manufacture of dairy products, sugar, pharmaceuticals or cars. It says it
will fight for a repeal.
The cigarette manufacturers will also fight the legislative moves. They will
almost certainly challenge the constitutionality of Florida's new law; and
in the event that any suit succeeds, they will almost certainly appeal. Ms
Lew acknowledged that it could be years before the first case is settled.
Financially, that may be no bad thing. Like other states, Florida does well
out of cigarette sales. Officials concede that the Dollars 1.2bn it has paid
out in medical costs in the last five years is not as much as the Dollars
2bn it has collected in taxes on cigarettes.
