FT  09 JUN 94 / Nepal dam plan a ticket to development - or waste of money:
A look at a Dollars 770m hydro power project due for World Bank decision
soon
The World Bank is due next month to decide whether to fund a controversial
Dollars 770m (Pounds 513m) hydroelectric dam in Nepal after eight years of
debate involving the bank, the Nepalese government and the project's
increasingly vocal critics.
Bank and government officials believe the scheme will help put one of the
world's 10 poorest countries on to the path of economic modernisation by
exploiting water, its most valuable resource.
Opponents say the project, Nepal's biggest investment, is too big and too
expensive. They say the country should first tackle other smaller schemes
before investing the equivalent of more than the government's annual budget
on a single dam on the Arun river in northern Nepal. The opposition is led
by about 30 Nepalese, US, and European non-government development
organisations, which are orchestrating campaigns in Kathmandu and in
Washington.
World bank officials concede that, even though about 80 per cent of costs
will be covered by foreign aid grants, the Arun project could strain Nepal's
fragile public finances unless the government carries out a comprehensive
financial overhaul. But they say the government has already started the
overhaul, so the risk is worth taking.
The bank is promoting the project at a time of growing international concern
about evidence that big dams in developing countries often do not deliver
expected economic benefits and sometimes cause unexpected problems.
The Arun dam is to be built in a remote, rocky and sparsely populated
valley. Only about 150 families will be displaced. Local people mostly want
the dam because a 70-mile access road to be built along the valley will
connect its 450,000 inhabitants to the outside world.
Environmental concerns are not central to the argument either: the dam will
be wedged into the river bed and only a small lake will be created behind it
since the normal flow of the river will be sufficient to power the turbines.
The debate centres on economics. The Nepalese government first considered
the project in the mid-1980s and reviewed it after the overthrow of the
country's royalist administration and the establishment of democratic rule
in 1991. Early proposals for a multi-dam 1,100MW scheme were shelved in
favour of one dam with a capacity of 201MW - to be followed by a second
201MW dam later. The first dam alone will produce almost as much power as
Nepal's existing generating stations which have a capacity of just 230MW.
The government argues that Nepal must be bold if it is ever to ease its
power shortages. Only 10 per cent of the 19m population now has electricity,
and even they suffer frequent cuts. The country cannot neglect the value of
its 42,000MW of potential hydroelectric generating capacity. With the help
of the Arun project, Nepal can think of modern industries. 'Arun is our
ticket to sustainable development,' says Mr Binayak Bhadra, a member of the
government's National Planning Commission.
The critics charge that the Arun project is expensive since it costs Dollars
3.8m per megawatt of installed capacity, compared with Dollars 2.5m and less
for smaller schemes. They add that because of the time needed to build the
road, the Arun project will not produce electricity for at least eight
years, so other schemes are needed now. These include village-level
micro-dams, medium-sized dams for towns and at least one large project - a
Dollars 300m, 140MW project on the river Kaligandaki in central Nepal.
Kaligandaki is more suitable for Nepal than Arun, say the critics, because
it will cost only about Dollars 2.5m per megawatt of capacity and will be
built faster because a road is already in place.
The World Bank argues the Arun project is not expensive because the
Kaligandaki river flows strongly for only four months a year whereas the
Arun river flows at full force almost all year, so the dam's capacity would
be more fully used.
The opponents say donor countries, including Germany and Japan, which are
making large bilateral aid contributions to the Arun project, are mostly
interested in generating business for their own industries. Mr Bikesh
Pandey, Nepal representative of Intermediate Technology, a British
non-government organisation, says: 'We are being railroaded by the donors.'
In a limited-circulation report on Nepal completed in March, World Bank
officials acknowledge there are dangers. They say the successful financial
management of the Arun project depends on the government continuing the
economic reforms started in 1991, including raising tax revenues, cutting
non-productive spending and further increasing electricity charges to reduce
power subsidies.
Otherwise, says the Bank, education and health care will suffer.
'Implementing the Arun scheme without substantive fiscal reforms would
seriously undermine human resource development and broad-based growth and
development.'
