FT  08 FEB 94 / An island swathed in fog
Britain's relationship with both Europe and the US should be rethought. It
is inchoate, un-structured and in danger of becoming ineffective. These
strictures do not apply to Bosnia alone, although our record there, right up
to yesterday's belated consideration of air strikes, is to say the least
inglorious.
The problem lies much deeper than in the tragic rubble of former Yugoslavia.
There is a need to reconsider UK foreign policy as a whole. For the
foundations upon which it has rested for the past half-century have begun to
crumble. We have no empire, no European identity and no special
relationship. The Commonwealth has become a quaint memento of times past. We
are neither securely at the heart of Europe nor reliably in the hearts of
Americans. Fog has once again begun to obscure the view across the Channel.
Worse, it has lately begun to cover the Atlantic.
Look east first. The government will fight this summer's elections to the
European parliament on a platform constructed with the single purpose of
preserving the unity of the Conservatives. Never mind the precise
phraseology; what will be conveyed to the voters is that the formerly proud
party of Europe is, for the time being, the party of doubts about Europe.
This is not in itself wicked. There is a respectable case to be made for
reducing the power of the Brussels Commission, promoting the devolution of
as many functions as possible to the nation states, and facilitating
enlargement of the union until not only the Scandinavians and Austria but
also the former colonies of the former Soviet empire are included.
In negotiating and subsequently ratifying the Maastricht treaty, Mr John
Major skilfully rehearsed arguments in favour of all these propositions. The
prime minister did so well that the manifesto of the Liberal Democrats, to
be published this morning, talks of a 'democratic, decentralised and diverse
Europe' with heavy emphasis on the transfer of powers from Brussels to
national, regional or local authorities. Mr Major did not quite take up the
latter point. In the Tory mind, subsidiarity stops at Whitehall. To the two
opposition parties, if devolution is good for Brussels, it is even better
for London. There is also a difference of language. The Lib Dems are quite
happy to describe their proposed structure as 'federal'. With luck, this
will infuriate Conservative na-tionalists and Euro-sceptics. They fear this
quintessentially European word.
There is of course another, possibly larger, Conservative faction. Tory
Christian Democrats favour active participation in whatever is happening on
the continent. The most articulate member of this grouping is the trade and
industry secretary, the chap some are beginning to tip for another run at
the office of prime minister. In The Challenge of Europe, published in 1989,
Mr Michael Heseltine observed that 'there are those who fear that in moving
closer to Europe, Britain will lose her identity. On the contrary, I believe
that within Europe she will find a much greater one.' We must, he concluded,
'persuade ourselves that Britain's national interest will be served only by
the determined building up of a stronger, closer Community'. Will Mr
Heseltine campaign on such a basis now?
Somebody has to. Mr Peter Lilley, a usually intelligent cabinet minister,
has derided selected European nationals as social security scroungers. Mr
Michael Portillo, another, has said that all foreigners cheat in their
exams. He has made this absurd remark more often than his apology accounts
for. He should watch out. Single injudicious speeches killed the leadership
hopes of two previous Tory liberals of his stripe - the then Sir Keith
Joseph and the unfortunate Mr John Moore. A British government that aspires
to be influential on the continent should not allow such silliness to
continue. The question is whether Mr Major has the political strength to put
a stop to it. The omens are not good. Britain's present attitude to the
European Union is, shall we say, uncertain. Are all Europeans corrupt,
centralising bureaucrats, scroungers and cheats?
Now look west. The recent outbursts of xenophobia will diminish Mr Major's
administration in American eyes. This is of greater significance than last
week's diplomatic flurry over the admission of Mr Gerry Adams to the US. To
be sure, it appears that there is no love lost between President Bill
Clinton's gung-ho young entourage and the Tories, but that is not of
historic significance. The important point is that Britain's objections to
the Adams visit were well understood, and found to be of less weight than
immediate domestic politics. This may have been an example of either
turpitude or ineptness in the White House, but it is nevertheless telling.
The US is becoming more concerned with Pacific than European affairs. When
it does focus on the old continent, it looks for strength and finds it in
Germany and France. It seeks allies with an aspiration towards European
union, which it does not discern in London.
During most of the 20th century Britain has been adept at juggling
alliances, making friends and influencing events - in foreign office
language, 'punching above its weight'. It is something English diplomats
traditionally do very well. The consequent remnants of the glory years are
often recounted. Britain remains a nuclear power, although to what
diplomatic advantage is unclear. It still has its seat on the Security
Council, although few prudent punters would bet on it retaining this for
another decade. It is in Nato, although what that organisation is for is
unclear. It remains in the Group of Seven, several many-alphabeted European
bodies and, until 1997, Hong Kong. None of this counts on its own. Britain's
ability to influence events depends upon its skill at making bilateral
alliances, here with the US, there with the French, there again with the
Germans.
Since the end of the cold war most politicians in most countries have been
confused about foreign policy. The disorientation of Britain's perception of
its global purpose is doubtless reflected in equivalent debates in
Washington, Bonn and, would the French but admit it, even Paris. But the
others have intellectual anchors. The US has the obligations of a
superpower; continental Europeans their grand design. Britain has only
uncertainty. It must think again.
