FT  16 NOV 94 / Survey of Derivatives (24): A pitful of stress and strain -
Health hazards / A look at one of the City's most physically demanding
professions
Warning: derivatives trading can seriously damage your health.
Whether they are scrambling around a trading pit in their brightly-coloured
jackets, wildly gesticulating and shouting prices, or hunched over the
keyboard of a screen-based trading system, eyes glued to the screen in
neon-lit, smoky offices, futures traders have a tough life.
'This is one of the toughest, most physically and mentally demanding
professions in existence, apart from professional sports,' says the floor
manager of a large member firm of the London International Futures and
Options Exchange (Liffe). 'The pressure you have to deal with on a daily
basis can be unrelenting and absolutely merciless.
Being in an environment where hundreds of millions of dollars, pounds or
D-marks change hands each day, where markets can gyrate in roller-coaster
fashion and where a split second can mean the difference between making or
losing fortunes can offer an immense stimulus. 'When you're on a roll, it's
exhilarating, it's like a drug,' gushes one dealer.
But even when traders are on a winning streak, the demands of their jobs are
immense, and often take a heavy toll on their health.
For a start, there are the purely physical side-effects.
In a trading pit, such as the ones found on Liffe, dealers stand in
octagonal, tiered arenas, buying and selling futures contracts through the
use of hand signals, reinforced by vocal price dissemination - hence the
term 'open outcry'.
This exerts high demands on various parts of their anatomies, beginning with
their vocal chords. 'If you're in this business long enough, you tend to go
hoarse - as I have,' rasps one of Liffe's old-timers.
Foot problems also abound. 'When you're standing around all day, you tend to
get swollen feet, callouses and lots of dead skin,' complains one trader.
Orthopaedic shoes are hardly an option. 'If you appear in a pair of
Scholl's, you'll have the Shoe Committee on your back,' he laughs.
The so-called Shoe Committee, a regular source of hilarity for Liffe
dealers, is a self-appointed 'watchdog' made up of floor traders who derive
amusement from keeping 'unsuitable' footwear - such as Doc Martens, brown or
suede shoes - off the floor.
The tight throng of human bodies in the pits also makes them perfect
breeding ground for bacteria, which are transmitted through droplet
infection as dealers shout out prices. 'If one person comes in with a cold,
the next day half the pit will be sneezing and wheezing,' says a trader.
And then there are the odours which inevitably arise when hot, sweaty humans
are packed together in restricted space. 'Bad breath, sweat, and other
unmentionable smells,' sighs a dealer.
In an environment where tensions run high and fully grown men - for only 30
per cent of the floor population (including broking and administrative
staff) are female - jostle for space in small pits, market participants can
come to blows, a not insignificant health hazard considering some of them
are former boxers and many play contact sports such as rugby.
'There are many reasons for fisticuffs,' says a Liffe dealer. For one, he
says, 'working conditions are appalling - we're crowded into the pits like
rats in a small cage and have to perform an exacting function where mistakes
are not tolerated.' What's more, many dealers trade their own money, and
'when they lose money, they can lose their temper', he says. In volatile
markets, these factors can create a highly charged atmosphere where people
may be tempted to use physical violence - a temptation to which some
occasionally yield.
'Heated arguments tend to occur in the more volatile pits, such as bunds and
Italian government bonds,' says Dorian Hart, floor manager on Liffe for BZW
Futures.
However, the price of physical violence in the pits is high: a strict code
of conduct is enforced by close supervision of the Liffe trading floor, and
offenders face harsh fines. Liffe penalises offenders much more heavily than
a court would do for the same offence, with fines for violent behaviour -
which includes pushing and shoving - running as high as Pounds 5,000. The
ultimate sanction for repeated misconduct is suspension from the trading
floor - effectively a one-way ticket into unemployment.
'The exchange comes down very, very hard to ensure that business is not
disrupted,' says a Liffe spokeswoman.
Screen traders face different but similarly debilitating complaints. At
Europe's largest electronic exchange, Germany's DTB, dealers trade futures
and options on stocks and bonds on a screen. Unsourced bid and offer prices
appear on a screen and traders press keys on a keyboard or click a button on
a computer mouse to buy or sell. This means that dealers have to continually
monitor changes in prices, not just in the front-month but also in
back-month contracts, requiring their eyes to rove constantly around the
screen.
'Eyestrain and back strain are typical complaints,' says Karl Haeling, head
of Deutsche Bank's futures and options group in Frankfurt. 'You need to
stare intensely at the screen all the time, the lighting may not be optimal
and the chairs can be uncomfortable.'
Others complain of repetitive strain injuries which can occur when making a
certain movement over and over again. This is a common affliction among
keyboard operators, involving tendon injuries and sometimes chronic
conditions which can lead to early retirement.
In countries where smoking on trading floors is permitted - for instance in
many German banks - dealers often smoke while trading, especially when the
markets are choppy and tensions mount. 'Traders are nervous, nervous people
often smoke, hence most traders smoke,' quips Francois Bloch, a long-time
DTB trader. Obviously, inhaling smoke - be it one's own or that of a
colleague - is a further health hazard.
The psychological impact of the stresses and strains of this job can be as
serious as - if not more so than - the physical side-effects, and
psychological burn-out can lead to a variety of stress-related illnesses.
'You are on edge all day, from the moment the pit opens until the moment it
closes,' says Mr Hart of BZW. 'Often, your brain doesn't get any time to
think, it's purely reactive,' he adds.
This breeds a wide variety of stress-related afflictions, such as eczema,
ulcers, nervous twitches, heart problems and alcohol abuse, says a dealer.
'If people feel they need a drink after work, I call that alcohol dependency
 -although I'm sure not everyone would agree with me,' he says.
Moreover, 'the globalisation of financial markets and the increase in
computer technology makes for longer and longer trading days, which leads to
greater burn-out,' says Deutsche's Mr Haeling. On Liffe's bund contract, for
example, the nine-hour trading day is followed by about 1 1/2 hours of
electronic 'automated pit trading'. The creation of Globex, the 24-hour
electronic trading system jointly developed by Reuters, the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange and the Chicago Board of Trade, keeps markets going
around the clock.
There are many ways dealers try to unwind after a long day's toiling. While
some opt for less regenerative pastimes such as drinking or gambling, many
seek to improve their health and stamina with the help of regular exercise.
Cannons Sports Club, a health club located in the same building as Liffe, is
frequented by a large number of dealers who let off some of their steam by
pumping iron or thrashing a squash ball around.
However, for dealers with families it is not always easy to make time for
sports, especially if they have a long journey to work. 'As it is, I spend
12 hours a day away from home - am I supposed to tell my three-year-old kid:
'Daddy would love to play with you, but he has to go and work out',' asks
one dealer.
Alas, many of the City's stress-sufferers do not actually acknowledge that
they feel mentally or physically stretched.
'People who come to us will not necessarily present stress as their primary
problem,' says Dr John Briffa, who runs Cannons' Health Enhancement Centre.
The centre screens clients' health and lifestyles and makes recommendations
on how they can improve their physical and mental well-being.
'Working in the City is inherently stressful, but a lot of people don't
acknowledge that,' he says. For one, he says, it's because 'everyone else is
stressed, so they think it's the norm'.
But even when they are aware of the stress burden, 'there's a fair degree of
machismo in the City that doesn't allow them to admit that they can't cope.'
Although the demands of the job sound daunting, it manages to attract all
types: the huge, broad-shouldered rugby-player types with booming voices;
the small, agile operators; and a growing number of women. 'There is no one
stereotype: the types who survive and do well are at absolute extremes of
the scale,' says Alex Lamb, a former pit trader and now general manager at
Fimat in Frankfurt.
While some still feel that big is best in the open-outcry environment,
traders' physique is not as important as their social attributes, he says.
'A good trader needs a sharp memory, a high degree of numeracy, eyes like a
hawk and strong communication skills.'
Screen traders do not have to be as extroverted as their colleagues in the
pits. 'At the screen, you can be a shy and retiring guy and still wipe the
floor with the rest of the market,' says Mr Lamb.
'In some respects, you could think of it as The Revenge of the Nerds,' quips
Mr Haeling.
