FT  04 OCT 94 / Business as usual in Baltic, even with faulty door: Hugh
Carnegy sails from Stockholm to Helsinki on the world's largest
car-passenger ferry and finds few concerns for safety
If such issues as safety were bothering the 1,503 mainly Swedish and Finnish
passengers travelling on Sunday night from Stockholm to Helsinki on the
world's biggest combined passenger and car ferry, the Europa - with a faulty
bow door welded fast - they were well disguised.
It may have been a national day of mourning in Sweden for the victims of the
Estonia disaster, but the Europa's nine restaurants and seven bars were
busy; the nightclub dance floor was packed; and the cabaret show went ahead
with all its usual glitter.
Ms Harriet Johans, the cruise manager on board, said there had been few
cancellations and 'surprisingly little' concern expressed by passengers
about safety procedures.
The Europa, built in 1993 at the same German shipyard that built the Estonia
14 years ago, does not have the vertically-opening, visor-type bow door
which was at fault on the sunken ferry. Its outer bow doors instead open
outwards and backwards.
Yet in the rescue operation of the doomed Estonia on Wednesday night, the
heavy seas damaged the hinges and opening mechanism of the Europa's port bow
door, rendering it inoperable.
As the ferry had slipped stealthily out through the narrow passageways of
the Stockholm archipelago, Captain Vekko Sjolund insisted his ship's faulty
bow doors would have been safe even if they had not been welded shut after
the disaster that befell the Estonia.
'Our bow door is like a cork in a wine bottle,' said the captain as he stood
on his darkened bridge watching the navigation lights around the
archipelago's hundreds of islands sliding past the 60,000 gross tonne Silja
Europa.
'It seals tighter the more it is pushed into the hull. The bow on the
Estonia was more like the top on a cola bottle.'
Captain Sjolund and his Chief Officer Teijo Seppelin made a persuasive case
that the Europa and other Ro-Ro ferries are nothing like the deathtraps they
have tended to be portrayed as since last week if they are properly
maintained and crewed. 'I wouldn't be here if they were not safe,' said the
skipper.
The ship has a panel of 16 indicator lights prominently displayed on the
bridge connected to all the hull doors which switch from green to red if the
electronic monitors detect a breach or broken seal.
Colour television screens on the bridge scan the cargo decks and all areas
of the ship sensitive to its stability. On Sunday night, even a man enjoying
a jacuzzi in the pool room was clearly visible to the bridge officers on the
monitors.
However, the two senior officers admitted the open cargo decks of a Ro-Ro
make them quickly unstable if water does get into the ship. They agree that
building Ro-Ros with bulkheads - transverse walls to divide the deck space -
would make them less vulnerable.
'If you had bulkheads it would be safer of course,' said Mr Seppelin. 'But
it costs more money and it makes loading slower.'
