FT  08 AUG 94 / Emerging Markets: Dollar stays focus of market attention -
Currencies
Foreign exchange traders will this week continue their dollar vigil,
scouring US economic data for hints of when the US Federal Reserve will next
raise interest rates.
The employment report last Friday revealed jobs growth above market
expectations and lent support to those expecting an early tightening. The
focus now switches to the retail sales figures due for release on Friday.
Opinion is fairly split as to whether or not the Fed will choose to move
rates at the next FOMC meeting on August 16. It is also split as to what the
quantum of such a move might be, and what sort of impact this would have on
the dollar.
Mr Avinash Persaud, currency strategist at JP Morgan in London, argues that
at least three factors need to be satisfied for a dollar turnround to occur.
First, US short rates must be 50 - 100 basis points higher, as the Dollars
/Y rate has never recovered without at least a 300 basis point spread
between US-Japanese three month LIBOR rates. The current gap is about 2.5
percentage points. US short rates must also move above German rates to
reduce the incentive for Europeans to hedge their currency exposure in US
assets.
Second, the bear market in US bonds needs to reverse. 'The dollar and bond
market decline are part of the same dynamic of establishing an acceptable
foreign currency price level for US assets', says Mr Persaud. 'When
foreigners view US assets as cheap, both bonds and the dollar will rally in
tandem.'
Finally, the Japanese current account surplus has to narrow considerably.
The Dollars /Y rate historically lags turning points in the Japanese current
account surplus by several quarters. The recent change in US administration
rhetoric towards the dollar has convinced some observers that the dollar has
turned. Many analysts, however, believe the dollar still has further to
fall.
In the UK, markets are also much occupied by the prospect of higher rates
which should help sterling. Although there is little expectation of policy
being tightened before the next monthly monetary meeting on September 7,
economic data ahead of the meeting will be closely watched, starting with
today's producer price inflation figures.
The release on Wednesday of the July 6 monthly monetary meeting minutes will
shed some light on where policy has been recently. In the short term,
however, the fortunes of the dollar are likely to be the key determining
factor in the outlook for sterling.
