FT  08 FEB 94 / EU to probe Ryanair claim of unfair pricing by Aer Lingus
European Union officials are investigating claims of unfair pricing against
Aer Lingus, the Irish state-run airline, after a dawn raid on the company on
Friday in which documents were seized and staff interviewed.
Officials from the competition directorate in Brussels arrived at the
airline's Dublin head office shortly after it opened. They photocopied
several hundred pages of documents and spoke to managers and staff dealing
with fares and marketing policy
The raid follows complaints about Aer Lingus's fares structure by Ryanair,
one of the state airline's main competitors on the Ireland-UK routes.
Ryanair's principal claim is that Aer Lingus which recently completed a
painful and controversial restructuring, has sharply cut fares on its
Dublin-Birmingham route since Ryanair introduced a new service on the route
last October. Ryanair has lodged a series of complaints with the EU since
the end of last year.
Ryanair, which has been a pioneer of cheap 'no-frills' fares in the busy
Irish-UK market, says Aer Lingus is selling below cost. Ryanair itself
announced plans last week to expand its Ireland-UK route network.
The EU investigation comes just over a month after Aer Lingus received its
first tranche of IPounds 75m (Pounds 72m) of IPounds 175m in new equity from
the Irish government, to finance its restructuring. EU approval for the plan
was given last December, but conditions were imposed, aimed at preventing
Aer Lingus from using the government assistance to weaken its competitors.
Aer Lingus has recently introduced two new lower fares on its UK routes that
have eaten into Ryanair's share of the economy end of the market. It
confirmed that fares on the Birmingham route had been reduced, but as part
of a 'standardisation' of fares on all UK provincial services last month.
The airline said its restructuring at the end of last year, which has cut
IPounds 50m out of annual operating costs, 'has given us opportunities to
introduce new fare structures'. The company insists that the equity
injection is being used solely for the restructuring and that its fare
policy 'fully complies with the EC treaty provisions on competition'.
Aer Lingus was fined IPounds 575,000 by the European Commission in February
last year for refusing to accept British Midland tickets on its flights, in
breach of an agreement between the two airlines set up when British Midland
opened a Dublin-London service in 1989.
