FT  16 JUL 94 / Pounds 260bn state plan to boost cable
Japan's Ministry of Construction is proposing to build an underground cable
box network that would be able to house fibre optic cable for the country's
planned information superhighway, the ministry said.
The project, estimated to cost Y40,000bn (Pounds 260bn), would be entirely
financed by public funds.
The ministry hopes to present a bill to the next regular session of the
Diet, the Japanese parliament. It hopes that the bill will be approved by
the end of the present fiscal year and that construction work will start by
fiscal 1995.
Japanese politicians and bureaucrats alike have been keen to promote
construction of an information superhighway along the lines of the national
information infrastructure promoted by Vice-President Al Gore in the US.
They have also recognised that multimedia could provide much needed new
businesses to promote future economic growth. The Ministry of Posts and
Telecommunications, for example, believes multimedia markets will be worth
Y123,000bn by 2010.
The Japanese authorities are also concerned that Japan has lagged behind the
US in moving towards an advanced information society and have put
considerable efforts into catching up with the US.
Under the Construction Ministry's plan, the network would contain telephone
lines as well, enabling existing above-ground telephone poles to be
gradually abolished. The ministry hopes the bulk of the work can be
completed by 2020.
Telecommunications operators wanting to provide services using fibre optic
cable would be able to do so as long as they laid the cable in the box
network.
NTT, Japan's major domestic telecommunications company, has already laid
over 85,000km of fibre optic cable throughout Japan and plans to bring fibre
to homes by 2015.
The company has recently been moving aggressively to position itself as a
leading supplier of multimedia services by linking up with US companies
involved in multimedia.
Most recently it announced an agreement with Microsoft of the US, the
leading software company, to develop an interactive multimedia system.
However, the Construction Ministry's plan would, if realised, also provide
new entrants into the multimedia business an option of using a network that
is not under the control of a would-be competitor.
