FT  15 JAN 94 / Arts: From naive to native - Susan Moore admires an
Americana exhibition in London
Echoes of the Old World resound throughout the American Museum in Claverton
Manor, Bath. This remarkable but little known collection of American
furniture, decorative art and folk art was gathered in the mid-1950s by an
American, Dallas Pratt, and an Englishman, John Judkyn.
Some 18 period rooms are recreated, from a 17th century Keeping Room
constructed with beams and floorboards from a Puritan house in
Massachusetts, to an opulent French-inspired mid-19th century bedroom of a
Louisiana plantation house. Other galleries are devoted to native Americans,
the Shakers and the so-called Pennsylvania Dutch - a corruption of Deutsch -
to American pewter, textiles, silver and glass.
A representative selection of over 100 exhibits, from furniture to naive
paintings, is currently enlivening Christie's Great Rooms in London. The
glory of the show is the spectacular group of American quilts. In pride of
place is the Baltimore album quilt dated 1847, each square executed by a
different hand and brimming with cornucopias of fruit and flowers. The
stylised hearts in the borders proclaim it a bridal quilt.
There is a quilt made by slaves, another by the industrious Sarah Taylor,
one of the first women physicians in Philadelphia, and a poignant
black-darted widow's quilt - the only one on show made for a single bed.
It is hard not to see Rothko and friends in the dark geometries and floating
grounds of the Amish quilts and the bold Navajo blankets.
Furniture ranges from the simple trastero or cupboard from a Spanish
colonial adobe house in New Mexico to the refined chairs by the Boston and
Philadelphia cabinet-makers working from English pattern books. In the hands
of the Shakers, the English ladderback farmhouse chair is transformed into
something far more attenuated and elegant.
The spare, clean lines, good materials, sound craftsmanship and strictly
functional aesthetic of this furniture prefigure the productions of the Old
World's Arts and Crafts movement.
The exhibition, sponsored by Mobil, launches a major appeal to raise Pounds
3.5m for an endowment fund to secure the future of the museum and continues
at Christie's, 8 King Street, St James's, until January 27. Claverton Manor
re-opens for the summer season on March 26.
