FT  16 JUL 94 / Finance and the Family: Investors face hefty bills if they
pay late for shares - Norma Cohen previews rolling settlement, the new
dealing system which starts on Monday
Just over a year ago, the Bank of England announced the end of the two- and
three-week account settlement period for share deals. From Monday, private
investors will have to come to terms with the brave new world of 10-day
rolling settlement.
This means that each deal to buy or sell shares will have to be settled  -
either in cash or share certificates delivered - 10 business days later. And
make no mistake about it - being late will cost you money.
Private client stockbroker Capel-Cure Myers has taken to heart the
admonition of securities regulators to spell out in plain English the
additional costs investors will incur as a result of lateness.
In a pamphlet called 'How to Buy and Sell Shares Under Rolling Settlement',
the firm tells clients: 'If your money does not reach us by the settlement
due date, you will be charged interest on the outstanding balance, together
with a Pounds 20 administration charge.'
Moreover: 'Interest may be charged on all outstanding debit balances - for
example, rights, calls, fees and interest. It will be calculated on a daily
basis at UK base rate plus 3 per cent. We will advise you of any change in
the method of calculation.'
Capel-Cure's brochure might be a model of clarity but its charges are fairly
standard, as a quick telephone survey of stockbrokers found.
Killik and Co also will charge interest at 3 per cent over UK bank base
rates, although there will be no administrative charges. Senior partner Paul
Killik said that as long as the firm had the cheque in hand physically on
settlement date, it would not charge interest, even if the cheque did not
clear until a few days later. Killik noted, however, that 'we are not
advertising this fact' the firm is keen to encourage its clients to pay on
time.
Wise Speke, a Newcastle-based broker, will charge clients either 4 per cent
over UK base rates or Pounds 10, whichever is the greater. Albert E. Sharp,
a Birmingham-based broker, will levy clients 3 per cent above the base rate
charged by Bank of Scotland, where it holds clients' accounts.
Barclays Stockbrokers, meanwhile, has a different approach. 'If you are late
in paying, we simply debit your account,' says Justin Urquhart-Stuart, the
marketing director. The interest rate will depend on the overdraft rate you
negotiate with your branch manager.
The alternative for many clients, as brokers have pointed out, is to
establish a nominee account. This will certainly make life easier although
it is by no means 'free'. Wise Speke, for instance, will allow individual
clients to negotiate the cost with the account executive. Over the past
year, the firm has seen the number of its clients in nominee accounts
roughly double.
At Killiks, there is no charge at present for a nominee account although the
firm is considering levying Pounds 1.20 for each dividend collection
exercise.
At Albert E. Sharp, clients who do their own stock selection but wish to
have a nominee will need to have their shares organised into a portfolio.
There is a Pounds 200 annual fee for this and an additional charge equal to
0.1 per cent of the assets per year.
