FT  17 DEC 94 / The Lex Column: Eurotunnel
After a long phoney war, the real battle for the hearts of 15m cross-Channel
ferry passengers has begun. Eurotunnel shares rose 6 per cent on news of an
impending revenue stream from Le Shuttle, even though the latest delay means
yet another official revenue forecast will not be met.
Le Shuttle's pricing is much lower than the low-season prices Eurotunnel
announced last January. But the difference cannot be interpreted as the
start of a price war. Earlier rates did not stretch beyond 1994.
Nevertheless, the move does dash earlier indications that Eurotunnel could
charge a premium for its 'premium' ser-vice.
Eurotunnel's true intentions on competition will only emerge when it unveils
pricing plans for the summer, which accounts for two-thirds of ferry company
profits. The tunnel's fixed costs - not least interest charges - are
enormous, whereas variable costs are low. That means it is imperative to
maximise passenger volumes. Beyond a certain point, additional passengers
represent almost pure profit whatever the ticket price.
Of course, nobody wants a price war. Short-haul profits at P&amp;O, the largest
competitor, are forecast to drop to less than half the Pounds 65m estimated
for this year. P&amp;O could float its capacity elsewhere, as Eurotunnel must
hope. But it is not going to give up its revenues willingly.
Recent performance on freight suggests a potentially friendly outcome. P&amp;O's
freight traffic increased by 30 per cent in the 10 months to October.
Eurotunnel started competitive freight operations in May, but has hit its
stated target of 1,000 lorries a day without price cuts.
However, Eurotunnel has little margin for error, as Le Shuttle revenues must
finance Pounds 8bn of debt. By 1996, Le Shuttle should be carrying half the
car and coach passengers currently crossing the Channel by ferry. Any
shortfall will probably provoke price cuts and the spectre of yet another
financial restructuring. The tunnel now has to progress from forecasts to
hard numbers. Until it does, caution should prevail.
