FT  23 MAR 94 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals (9): A more selective approach -
Case study / Schering-Plough Research Institute
For US pharmaceutical companies, the impending healthcare reforms promise an
era of increased cost-containment and pricing controls. Under the weight of
such restrictive measures, how will the innovative drugs industry adapt to
survive?
According to Dr Robert Spiegel, senior vice-president clinical research at
Schering-Plough Research Institute, the market for new drugs will never
subside - 'we believe that there will always be a market and a very
profitable market for drug companies that can develop novel products that
satisfy an unmet need in an important therapeutic area,' he says.
In 1993, Schering-Plough spent USDollars 578m on research and development,
an investment which it expects to increase to over Dollars 600m this year.
Despite its continued commitment to R&amp;D funding, Schering-Plough admits that
the more cost-driven market has triggered a change of approach.
'There is a new world now that is forcing us even more to adapt our research
and development process,' says Dr Spiegel.
At Schering-Plough, most of this adaptation has been evolutionary. About
three years ago the company set up a Pharmaceutical Economic Unit designed
to assess the economic cost and quality of life benefit of potential new
drugs at the earliest possible stage.
Evaluation of exactly what Schering-Plough expects to bring to the market
when a product is fully developed is now 'a prominent part' of its core R&amp;D
process, says Dr Spiegel.
Combined with this more selective approach to R&amp;D, is the knowledge that on
the way to discovering breakthrough products, drug companies are inevitably
exposed to greater risks. This means manufacturers have to be increasingly
daring when deciding which compounds to back.
Dr Spiegel says: 'If you're only going after Alzheimer's drugs, the winner
of that in the pharmaceutical industry will have a nice pot of gold at the
end of the process, but there will be a lot more losers along the way.'
Willingness to conduct research in more high-risk areas then, is no
guarantee of commercial success. As Raul Cesan, president Schering
Laboratories suggests: 'We all want to develop something that is unique, yet
we may end up with something that is a marginal improvement.'
Development of compounds that may offer only a slightly better safety
profile over products already on the market is a luxury which research-based
drug companies can no longer afford.
In certain cases, 'that marginal improvement gives to the system exactly
what politicians and government officials want. They lower the price because
once you have two or three or four of those (products), prices collapse
immediately,' argues Raul Cesan.
Research at Schering-Plough covers six main therapeutic areas. These are:
anti-infec tives; oncology; allergy; dermatology; cardiovascular and the
central nervous system. According to Dr Spiegel, the secret of the company's
R&amp;D success lies in its balance of discovery areas. It supports both
research into 'quite comfortable' scientific fields and high risk areas 'of
great potential yield.'
He explains: 'There are times when you're in brand new areas where the
regulatory environment and clinical development environment is also unknown.
But if you're in those areas that have high potential success, it's worth
taking that risk, too.'
However, incentives to take such risks could soon disappear if the pricing
controls proposed under healthcare reform are approved - 'the proposal to
severely review the ultimate pricing of a drug, even if it's a breakthrough
product, gives a disincentive to how much risk money you would put up for
those types of activities,' warns Dr Spiegel.
In any case he believes that current market forces are taking care of price
controls within the drug industry.
In its 1993 annual report published last week, Schering-Plough announced
that between 1991 and 1993, it held average US net prescription drug price
increases to below the rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI),
and in 1994 expects price rises again to be at or below the increase in CPI.
'Prices have been moderating dramatically,' comments Raul Cesan.
While individual companies may be suffering a loss of appetite for R&amp;D
risk-taking, the US drug industry as a whole is maintaining its commitment
to R&amp;D through teamwork.
Joint ventures and alliances between university research departments,
smaller biotechnology companies or established pharmaceutical companies show
that by pooling their resources, drug companies can continue the search for
innovative products.
In future, Dr Spiegel predicts, 'there will be more incentive to form
alliances in the research area to spread your bets, and that's certainly a
concept that we embrace.'
In its annual report, Schering-Plough says that about 25 per cent of its
research dollars were targeted for biotechnology.
Another form of alliance has seen US drug companies tap into the market of
managed care. Last year, Merck &amp; Co acquired health maintenance organisation
Medco Containment Services for Dollars 6bn, in a move widely regarded as an
attempt to protect market share.
Effectively, the acquisition changed Merck's mission from being a
research-based pharmaceutical company to a major player in the healthcare
market.
Such redefinition of company business strategy is not anticipated by
Schering-Plough. To ensure long-term survival beyond healthcare reform, the
company believes continued investment in its R&amp;D pipeline is essential.
Raul Cesan concludes: 'You have to find the very successful drugs eventually
 -otherwise you cannot survive.'
