FT  04 JAN 94 / Fresh gains push markets to record levels worldwide: Asia
and Europe in buoyant mood as City returns to trading today
The City of London, Europe's main financial market, will return to work this
morning in buoyant mood after stock markets in Europe and south-east Asia
began the new year in the same record-setting style with which they saw out
1993.
Bourses in Frankfurt, Paris, Zurich, Amsterdam, Madrid, Brussels and
Stockholm rose to record highs.
The surge in European stock markets stretched from the fledgling markets of
Athens and Istanbul, in the south, to Vienna and Warsaw in central Europe.
Hong Kong led the Asian advance with a 1.7 per cent rise, while new peaks
were set in Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, Seoul, Manila and Jakarta. Bombay and
Karachi completed the record-breaking run in Asia.
Taiwan continued the strong performance as Far Eastern markets opened today,
while Seoul and Singapore also started on a positive note. Tokyo, however,
edged down slightly in initial trading.
The recent sustained rise in Asian and European markets has been underpinned
by outflows of money from the US, where many investors believe equity
markets have less potential for growth than those abroad.
In contrast to the surge elsewhere, Wall Street was subdued yesterday. The
market there largely ignored a positive report from the National Association
of Purchasing Management and instead took its lead from a weak bond market.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed up 2.51 at 3,756.6.
A surge in US demand for German stocks helped Frankfurt's DAX index up 1.3
to 2,267.98 after an early, 30-point fall, in a show of confidence on the
part of many traders who believe that the market still has further potential
to rise.
Some investors were also building their hopes that Thursday's meeting of the
Bundesbank Council will cut interest rates. However, many analysts believe
that the authorities are unlikely to act this week, with some German
financial centres closed on Thursday for the Epiphany holiday.
Paris picked up after a quiet start, the CAC-40 index adding 22.34 to
2,290.56, while Amsterdam was led higher by technical considerations in
otherwise quiet conditions. The new AEX index made its debut yesterday,
having replaced the EOE index, and closed at 420.37, up from a rating of
414.27 last Thursday.
Mr Frederick Hasslauer, an analyst at Bank Sal Oppenheim in Zurich,
confirmed that European markets were being spurred higher by inflows of US
money.
He said: 'US fund managers who are most comfortable basing their investments
on fundamental analysis, are instead buying in the European markets, because
it is the current trend.'
With the Tokyo market closed, Hong Kong remained the main Asian focus for
buying by foreign investors.
US institutions continued to fuel the market's rise, which saw turnover of
more than HKDollars 9.2bn (Pounds 805m) during the session, compared with
HKDollars 7.4bn last Friday.
The Hang Seng index, which rose by 115 per cent in 1993, added 198.1 to
close at 12,086.49. Many traditionally superstitious Chinese investors had
seen the Hang Seng's final tally for the last day of 1993 - 11,888.39 - as a
good omen; the Cantonese equivalent of 'three eights' is taken as a portent
of growth and prosperity.
Yet even at the market's current levels, many investors are reluctant to
take profits, setting their sights instead on a further rise in the Hang
Seng to the 14,000 level.
Lex, Page 12
Market reports, Pages 18, 19
