FT  27 JUL 94 / World Trade News: Daimler-Benz plans Vietnam investments
Daimler-Benz plans to invest DM250m (Dollars 159.2m) in commercial projects
in Vietnam, including vehicle production, over the next five years.
The German vehicles to aerospace industrial group expects to conclude by as
early as next month an agreement on the biggest single project - a DM70m
joint venture to produce 10,000 commercial vehicles and cars a year.
The company said yesterday it was in detailed negotiations with several
potential partners in the vehicles project, which would be based at a plant
near Ho Chi Minh City in south Vietnam. The plans provide for the plant to
go on stream at the end of next year, producing mainly light trucks and
minibuses but including annual output of around 1,000 cars.
Other projects disclosed so far within the DM250m investment are between
DM10m and DM15m in energy distribution systems by the group's AEG subsidiary
and DM25m for an exhibition centre in Hanoi by Daimler-Benz InterServices
its industrial services arm.
The Daimler-Benz venture is the latest of several Vietnamese projects put in
train by western vehicle makers keen to take part in Vietnam's accelerating
economic growth.
Renault has signed a letter of intent to begin car assembly with kits
supplied by Renault from France through Vietnam Motors, a joint venture
between Columbian Motors of the Philippines, which holds a 55 per cent
stake, Nichimen of Japan with a 15 per cent stake and a Vietnamese state
company.
Vietnam Motors already assembles some Mazda models and is to start assembly
of BMW's mid-sized 5 Series cars at its plant near Hanoi in September.
In May Mitsubishi Motors became the first Japanese carmaker to enter a joint
venture in Vietnam when it received approval from Hanoi to form a joint
vehicle manufacturing and sales venture with Proton, the Malaysian carmaker
in which it holds a minority stake, and Vietranscimex, a Vietnamese national
company.
The venture, Vina Star Motors, in which Mitsubishi Motors, Mitsubishi
Corporation and Proton will each hold stakes of 25 per cent, is to assemble
the Mitsubishi Delica minibus. Production is scheduled to start next March.
France is seeking to increase its trade with Asia to about 7 per cent of the
regional market, Mr Edmond Alphandery, the economy minister, said yesterday,
John Ridding adds from Paris.
Mr Alphandery, who was speaking in Singapore after visits to Vietnam and
Cambodia, said France must 'more than double' its market share in Asia. He
described French industry's trade with the region as 'far too small' and
said it must be brought in line with France's share of international trade,
which stands at seven per cent.
In Vietnam Mr Alphandery signed a financial agreement which provides FFr425m
(Dollars 79.3m) of preferential loans. The credit will be used to finance
work in water treatment, telecommunications, energy and health. He also
signed an agreement cancelling FFr1.2bn of debt and rescheduling another
FFr1bn.
In Cambodia, he he agreed on preferential credits worth about FFr64m. He
said Cambodia's debts to France would be discussed at the Paris club of
creditor nations.
