FT  30 JUL 94 / Finance and the Family: 'Smug and greedy trusts'
The spotlight has been on the life industry debate over the disclosure of
charges. From next year, life companies will have to reveal to private
investors the amount of commission they pay to financial advisers for
selling their products.
Unit trusts, which also pay commission to financial intermediaries have so
far escaped the same scrutiny. However, a prominent figure in the unit trust
industry, Tim Miller of Portfolio Fund Management, believes that Britain's
unit trusts are smug and greedy and need to change radically if they are
ever to become mass-market investments.
Miller used to be marketing director at M &amp; G, the UK's largest unit trust
group, after being managing director of Framlington unit trusts. He believes
that a clear explanation of the risks, rewards and costs involved is the key
to attracting a broader public.
A working party of the Securities and Investments Board, the financial
services watchdog, is studying disclosure of unit trust commissions and
charges. Miller, who used to serve on it, says it could help both investors
and the industry by recommending that unit trusts adopt the style of
disclosure used in the US mutual fund industry. This would mean showing the
effect of charges over different periods of time using a standard growth
rate of 5 per cent for total return but not distinguishing between income
and capital growth.
'For many years, the unit trust industry has preened itself in comparison
with life companies because of the transparency and apparent low level of
its charges. But I think we may have been deluding ourselves,' says Miller.
The typical unit trust makes charges of 6 per cent initially and 1.25 per
cent annually, adding up to 31 percentage points over 20 years. This is more
than twice the total of 13.25 percentage points over 20 years which was the
limit in force before deregulation in 1979.
The dubious honour of running the highest-charging unit trust goes to Fimbra
member Knight Williams, according to the Association of Unit Trusts and
Investment Funds. Four of KW's in-house trusts charge 6.39 per cent
initially and 2.5 per cent annually, making a 20-year total of 56.39
percentage points - more than four times the pre-deregulation level.
The accompanying table shows a selection of low-charging unit trusts with
minimum investment levels low enough for personal investors.
Money market funds carry the lowest charges, followed by index-trackers  -
unit trusts which mirror the performance of a stock market index.
Although unit trust managers already have to declare initial and annual
charges, Miller says investors find the long-term effect of these apparently
small numbers hard to grasp.
Part of the reason is that, until recently, high charges have been masked by
long-term rates of return of between 10 and 15 per cent a year.
An annual charge of 1.25 per cent would knock 8 per cent off a 15 per cent
return but it would demolish 25 per cent from a 5 per cent return.
'The US system makes charging policies crystal clear and the result is
widespread competition on charges,' said Miller, who suggests that applying
the US system in Britain could help unit trusts gain investor-confidence and
increase their share of the savings market from the current 3 per cent to
something more like the 17 to 20 per cent savings market share of American
mutual funds.
The leading exponent of low-cost funds in the US is Vanguard group of Valley
Forge, Pennsylvania, now ranked second to Fidelity in size, having climbed
from Dollars 7bn assets under management in 1983 to around Dollars 114bn.
(In the same time, Fidelity grew from Dollars 20bn under management to
Dollars 221bn.)
Vanguard charges 0.4 per cent annually on equity funds against an industry
average of 1.34 per cent, and 0.26 per cent on bond funds against an
industry average of 0.65 per cent.
Last year, a comparison by Morningstar Inc., the Chicago-based financial
services and information firm, found that Vanguard's bond funds had averaged
an annual return of 11.32 per cent over the past 10 years against Fidelity's
10.83 per cent, allowing for charges and expenses. Over five years,
Vanguard's return on bond funds was 11.23 per cent against Fidelity's 9.9
per cent.
But Fidelity was ahead on equity funds which had produced an average return
of 14.01 per cent over 10 years and 16.23 per cent over five years, against
Vanguard's 10.83 per cent and 12.52 per cent averages for the same periods.
Jack Bogle, chairman of Vanguard, is also a believer in the concept that a
randomly-selected portfolio of stocks often performs as well or better than
stocks picked by professional fund managers.
'Under good and bad management alike, a fund provides a gross return that is
reduced, dollar for dollar, by the cost incurred in its ownership,' he wrote
in a book published in the US (Bogle on Mutual Funds, Irwin). 'All other
things being equal, lower costs mean higher returns.'
