FT  04 MAY 94 / Bosnian Serbs test patience of Milosevic
Calls for peace and accusations of corruption against Bosnian Serb leaders
in the Serbian media are fuelling speculation that President Slobodan
Milosevic could turn against nationalists insisting on a Greater Serbia at
any price.
Mr Milosevic's opposition to the politics of the Bosnian Serb leadership has
been signalled by his wife, Mrs Mirjana Markovic, whose remarks have tended
to foreshadow the next move by the Serbian president.
'The representatives of those Serbs who are mostly outside of Serbia and
think war is their only option. . . . have no right to foist that option on
all Serbs,' she wrote last week in the popular magazine Duga.
'I am afraid that the Serbian people. . . . are at the point when they must
become pacifists, if they want to survive,' she added, making the point that
Serbs from Serbia should define national politics.
Television, tightly controlled by Mr Milosevic, last week repeatedly warned
Bosnian Serb leaders that war should not be their only option.
Implicit criticisms of their belligerent stance were accompanied by stinging
accusations that Bosnian Serb leaders and their influential Belgrade mentors
were involved in the huge financial scandal surrounding Dafiment bank, once
vaunted at the biggest private bank in the Balkans. Mrs Dafina Milanovic,
owner of the bankrupt institution, has made an 'impromptu' revelation that
even Mr Radovan Karadzic, Bosnian Serb chief, himself carried sacks of cash
out of the bank, which owes Serbia's citizens hundreds of millions of
dollars.
Such indictments of Mr Karadzic and the Bosnian Serb nationalists are being
interpreted as feelers for the famously close Mr Milosevic to change
allegiances.
But Mr Milosevic who rode to power on the mighty waves of Serbian
nationalism may find it dangerous to separate his future from theirs.
In spite of three years of war in neighbouring Bosnia and Croatia, economic
deprivation and political isolation, recent opinion polls reflect that most
of Belgrade still supports the Bosnian Serb leadership. More than 51 per
cent believe Serbs should keep the 70 per cent of Bosnia they currently
control, according to one poll.
An overwhelming majority back the unification of Belgrade with Serb-held
lands in Bosnia and Croatia. However, the pragmatic Mr Milosevic may now be
calling for something else.
His foreign minister, Mr Vladislav Jovanovic, in a weekend interview, sent a
message to the US that the 'only realistic solution for Bosnia-Hercegovina
is the creation of a wider state which would include Serbs and Croats'.
This proposal to create a 'new Yugoslavia' will set Mr Milosevic on a
collision course with Serb nationalists who insist on ethnic partition and
the creation of Greater Serbia.
