FT  22 AUG 94 / Milosevic struggles to pluck Bosnian thorn: The Bosnian
Serbs' sticking power has surprised the Belgrade president
With an unprecedented tirade against Bosnian Serb leaders, Belgrade at the
weekend began what it hopes will be a decisive push to seal an international
peace plan for Bosnia and shift blame for the war.
But President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia is finding his task more
difficult than he had calculated. An aide close to Mr Milosevic confided
that 'we did not expect it to be so hard to get rid of them.'
'Them' are the Bosnian Serbs, once equipped and nurtured by Belgrade and now
a problem as Serbia struggles to escape from the west's crippling economic
sanctions.
Mr Milosevic had begun preparing the ground for a split with Belgrade's Serb
brethren in Bosnia for a year, but he has ended up having to rush the job.
When the international community set a deadline last month for Bosnian Serb
acceptance of its plan for a partitioning of Bosnia and the Bosnian Serbs
rejected it, Belgrade ran out of time and imposed a land embargo against the
Bosnian Serbs on August 4.
Still, the Bosnian Serbs remain defiant. While playing down the conflict
with Serbia, Mr Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, insists on going
ahead with plans to hold a referendum next Sunday on the proposed partition
map. It requires the Bosnian Serbs to hand over one third of the 70 per cent
of Bosnia they currently control and the referendum is highly unlikely to
approve it.
Thus, Mr Milosevic was likely to have been pleased yesterday when the
already-isolated Bosnian Serb leaders suffered another setback when rebel
Serb leaders from Croatia - in a move orchestrated by Belgrade - said the
unification of their self-styled Serb states should be postponed until after
the war.
That pronouncement fits neatly into a broader campaign taking shape in
Serbia to destroy popular support for the Bosnian Serb leadership. In a
fierce attack published at the weekend, a senior Serb figure accused Bosnian
Serb leaders of corruption and of 'repeatedly breaking their promises to
halt the bombardment and agony of civilians in Sarajevo'. For the first
time, Belgrade accused the Bosnian Serb leadership of being implicated in
atrocities against civilians.
In the newspaper interview Mr Zoran Lilic, the president of rump Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) and a mouthpiece for Mr Milosevic, hinted that Mr
Karadzic was involved in the kidnapping and suspected murder of 21 Moslem
men - citizens of Yugoslvia - who were dragged off a train 18 months ago. He
said the incident was aimed at drawing Yugoslavia into war.
'We cannot allow three men in Pale (the Bosnian Serb mountain stronghold
close to Sarajevo) to determine the fate of all Serbs,' he said in reference
to the political troika which rules the self-styled Serb mini-state within
Bosnia.
Aides to Mr Milosevic hope that General Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serb
commander, may be at odds with his leaders and may play a decisive role in
bringing them to heel.
The accusations from Belgrade may also signal a local crackdown on suspected
war criminals - another attempt to curry favour with the international
community and win the easing of sanctions. They follow calls from the
influential communist party, which counts among its leaders Mrs Mirjana
Markovic, Mr Milosevic's wife, to bring suspects to trial, some of whom
until recently were being doted upon by state-run Television Serbia.
Reports say Mr Milosevic is poised to arrest Mr Zeljko Raznatovic, known by
his alias of Arkan, a former MP and commander of the Tigers, a fierce
paramilitary unit which is accused by Croats and Moslems of atrocities in
Croatia and Bosnia, and Mr Vojislav Seselj, an MP who also commanded an
ultra-nationalist paramilitary unit.
The interview with Mr Lillic made clear Mr Milosevic's preoccupation with
finding a scapegoat - his Bosnian Serb kin - in order to secure a positive
role in Serbian history in a land obsessed with its past. His long
preparation for the break with Mr Karadzic involved the rekindling of
historical divisions between Serbs - communist partisans and royalist
Chetniks in the second world war - and Serbs from Serbia and those from
Bosnia over the frontier River Drina.
Mr Milosevic has resisted efforts to despatch international monitors to the
Drina, Serbia's frontier with Bosnia, on the grounds that this would expose
him to criticism from opposition parties.
He may, however, be afraid of his own allies. Elected as a nationalist in
1987, the current wisdom is that he has now turned his back on nationalism.
But taking on Mr Karadzic in Bosnia is one thing. He believes it is too
early to challenge nationalists within the ruling elite in Belgrade.
