FT  09 SEP 94 / Probe demanded into rail 'near-miss'
The RMT transport union and the Aslef train drivers' union yesterday called
for an urgent inquiry into a 'near-miss' in which two cars crossed a
Derbyshire level crossing moments before an oncoming passenger train during
the 16th strike by signal workers.
Railtrack claimed that 57 per cent of the network was open yesterday. But Mr
Jimmy Knapp, RMT general secretary, said that no more than 31 per cent of
trains were running.
The two cars went over the railway line at Sawley in Derbyshire because the
automatic barriers preventing vehicles from crossing busy lines were raised.
Railtrack said maintenance contractors were working at the site when the
incident occurred. The contractors have been asked to conduct their own
inquiries, Railtrack said. Aslef said workers should have stood at the
crossing with hand-held signals to control cars and trains, but none were
present.
The driver of the 11.18am Crewe-Nottingham train was given the green signal
to cross the line at 12.44pm but said he saw two cars going over the line in
front of him.
Railtrack said there was no link between the incident and the strike. It
would not say whether the nearest signal box was operated by a manager.
In another incident yesterday the back wheels of a commuter train were
derailed in Kent. Passengers were evacuated from the 5.53pm train from
London Blackfriars to Sevenoaks at Bickley, but police said there were no
injuries.
Railtrack said of the derailment that 'the indication is that there is not
any connection with the signal strike', while British Rail said it was the
subject of an investigation and could not comment on the possible cause.
Mr Knapp said the Sawton near-accident was 'the kind of incident we have
been warning could happen'.
Mr Lew Adams, Aslef general secretary, said he would be writing to the chief
inspector of railways about the Kent derailment, and warned that signal
boxes staffed by strike-breaking workers increased the risk to his union
members and the public.
He said he wanted to know the number of dangerous incidents and signals
passed at danger during the 16 strike days.
