FT  20 AUG 94 / Mexican poll officials voice concern
Mexico's independent election magistrates have sharply criticised the
government for dragging its feet in implementing key aspects of the
country's new electoral law, underscoring concerns over the fairness of
tomorrow's presidential poll.
The election magistrates, who were approved by all the political parties and
have a controlling vote on the board of the Federal Electoral Institute,
publicly attacked the Attorney-General's Office for not giving more support
to the special prosecutor for electoral crimes.
The prosecutor has received 237 complaints of electoral violations, but has
examined only 67 of them and fully resolved only one case, finding a school
director and congressional candidate not guilty.
'It is unthinkable that the prosecutor does not have his budget,' said Mr
Santiago Creel, one of the six magistrates. 'This is undermining confidence
in the system.'
The Interior Ministry responded to the criticisms by promising that all
allegations would continue to be dealt with after the election and by
increasing resources available to the prosecutor's office.
While tomorrow's poll is expected to be the cleanest in Mexico's history,
observer groups and the election magistrates have complained the government
has not fully complied with a democratic accord reached between the main
political parties earlier this year. Apart from limited efforts by the
special prosecutor, they point to the highly favourable coverage the ruling
party continues to receive on television and seemingly unlimited financial
resources at its disposal.
The ruling Institutional Revolutionary party goes into the election strong
favourite to win. However, Mr Cuauhtemoc Cardenas of the leftist opposition
warned yesterday that there would be 'confrontation' if the elections were
not clean. Government officials are concerned Mr Cardenas will declare the
election fraudulent in the course of tomorrow's polling.
The electoral magistrates are concerned that the proliferation of exit polls
and quick counts of representative votes may contribute to confusion in the
hours after the polls close. The magistrates have urged that such results
not be released until the electoral institute's own figures are published.
Mr Creel sharply criticised television and radio for not covering the
campaign in a more balanced way in recent weeks. 'We have seen a clear
reversal of the advances we had in the media,' Mr Creel said.
