FT  03 OCT 94 / Sport: Surprise and familiarity
Apparently there used to be horse racing near my home in London. Whenever I
walk down the hill at the Holland Park end of Ladbroke Grove, the ghosts of
horses seem to collect in the air around me and I seem to see the outline of
that vanished course. Yet I find it impossible to imagine the sport in
contemporary London, even in areas like Wimbledon.
Unlike greyhound racing, whose arenas were deliberately placed so as to be
accessible by bus, Tube or on foot, horse racing in London is not - except
in betting shops - a part of daily life.
London goes to it, of course. It is a vital part of it, sharpening it up
with new money and bright clothes and bookmaking skills. But the sport in
Britain stays in the possession of the countryside, and of those who dress
themselves in the down-trodden colours of the earth.
Despite the shiny social veneer that it frequently assumes, British horse
racing has a visceral connection with certain ancient, sentimental and
powerful images, in which noble animals run eternally across vast expanses
of land.
This deception gives the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe, one of the world's
greatest races and run at Longchamp yesterday, tremendous fascination for
British race-goers. To them the Arc is, above all, an effusion of urbanity:
it belongs to Paris in a way that no British horse race belongs to a city.
Longchamp's setting in the Bois de Boulogne is green and leafy, but within
it we see the dusk and champagne colours of autumnal streets, and inhale the
scent of Gauloises. I had always wanted to go the Arc.
Nor was I disappointed. I should have been, so high were my expectations,
but the day's racing enchanted me with the combination of surprise and
familiarity I had hoped for.
Here was the beloved atmosphere of the sport: the beauty of horses tugging
at my heart, the lust for money snatching at my nerves, the breaths of
vulnerability and cynicism mingling in the air.
Here, too, finishing a close-up fourth for me in the Arc itself, was the
English-trained Ezzoud, my favourite, with his rolling eye contained within
its executioner's hood. And here was the British contingent, making up at
least one-third of the great crowd, making its own contribution to a
sophisticated scene.
It was good to be part of it, especially as it was unaccompanied by the
usual snobbish drag upon the spirit that one experiences at leading British
race meetings. Instead, there was the foreigness and the astringency I had
craved. The foolish air of uncertainty that descends upon, say, Royal Ascot,
where almost everyone present is dressed up to be something they are not -
that was nowhere to be found.
Instead, there was the mixture of pride and nonchalance which I always
associate with Paris. And the race itself was pure joy - so thrilling that I
almost wanted it over and done with.
The desire to stand in the paddock and see the best horses in Europe; the
desire to reach the grandstand and see the finest race in Europe; the desire
to race back and watch the presentation to the victorious Carnegie, owned by
Sheikh Mohammed of the ruling Maktoum family of Dubai - these accumulated
and overflowed.
After 12 previous failures in the Arc, Sheikh Mohammed went to war with four
runners, and the strategy paid handsomely. In a pulsating finish, Carnegie,
ridden by Thierry Jarnet and trained by Andre Fabre, held on by a short neck
from the 1993 French Derby winner Hernando (Cash Asmussen), with Apple Tree
a close third.
Carnegie had been fancied in France for the past three weeks and paid his
supporters 9-1 after gaining the lead in the last few seconds. First-place
prizemoney this year was Pounds 457,666. In addition to Carnegie, Fabre
trained the third- and fifth-place finishers. Carnegie is a three-year-old
son of the champion Irish-based stallion Sadler's Wells.
As the Arc reached its climax, I knew there was nowhere in the world that I
would rather have been, but this was an almost troubling feeling, since it
compelled me to attempt to extract more from the event than is perhaps
possible.
The locals, I felt, would not be doing that. For all its fame the Arc is, if
anything, a low-key occasion, centred on a race run in a park which just
happens to contain any number of classic race-winners.
Even if a comparable race were run in London's Hyde Park, it would be a very
different sort of occasion. The true charm of the Arc - the naturalness with
which it merges into its surroundings - would be impossible to reproduce in
London.
In a strange way, this also makes the Arc impossible to understand, so
impregnable is it compared with the almost touching excitability and
pretentions of British race-going. Despite this, or because of it, I have
never enjoyed a sporting event more.
