FT  09 NOV 94 / Survey of Bolivia (28): From teargas to handshakes - Richard
Bauer takes a look at the drugs problem
First it was teargas hurled from helicopters; then dialogue and handshakes
in the Presidential palace. That was the government's alternating strategy
for dealing with recalcitrant coca-growers.
With annual production of about 90,000 tonnes, Bolivia is - after Peru  -
the world's second-largest producer of coca leaf. An estimated Dollars 300m
to Dollars 600m is injected annually into the economy by the coca-cocaine
business with as many as 120,000 Bolivians directly involved either in
growing the (legal) leaf or processing the (illicit) basic paste from which
cocaine is made.
In the biggest social protest demonstration since President Gonzalo Sanchez
de Lozada took office last year, La Paz residents opened their arms to 2,000
down-at-heel 'cocaleros' when they marched on the capital in September.
Dodging police and military road-blocks, they had made their way from the
country's main coca-growing region - the sub-tropical Chapare near
Cochabamba - to clamour against stepped-up repression measures adopted by
Bolivia's drugs police who are advised by the US Drug Enforcement
Administration. They also sought more government funding for alternative
agricultural development.
Mr Felipe Caceres, number two in Bolivia's 40,000-strong Cocaleros
Federation, says the government's 'Operation Dawn' had put the Chapare under
virtual state of siege. 'They tried to intimidate us. Everyone out at night
in the bush or without proper identification was arrested.'
The government's objective was to force the coca price below production
cost, thus obliging the cocaleros to eradicate more crops and meet drugs
treaty obligations with the US, according to Mr Caceres.
Long gone are the boom years of the mid-80s when a 50kg sack of dried coca
leaves fetched as much as Dollars 900. 'At Dollars 40 to Dollars 50 a sack,
coca-growing's become bad business. We can't even pay day labourers to
harvest it,' says Alcira Perez of Quechua origin, who immigrated to the
Chapare years ago. She says she has half a hectare of coca along with a
variety of cash crops.
'The record low coca leaf price is an element in the protests,' says Mr
Oscar Freudenthal of Unido (the United Naions Industrial Development
Organisation), who oversees alternative development projects in the Chapare.
He believes coca production in Bolivia is decreasing. 'Drugs dealers prefer
to do business in Peru where repression is less harsh - here, peasants are
trapped and haven't switched to other crops.'
President Sanchez de Lozada says: 'We haven't got rid of the cancer, but at
least it's not growing,' referring to the coca issue. A senior US embassy
official in La Paz, meanwhile, sees a real reduction in the macro-economic
impact of the drug economy: 'GDP has grown and coca has been contained,' he
says.
According to the State Department's Agency for International Development
(USAID) estimates, six years ago 8.4 per cent of gross domestic product came
from coca-cocaine. By 1993 that had dropped to 2.7 per cent. Coca leaf
production has stagnated since 1988.
Bolivia's performance on drugs control is far superior to Peru's, says Mr
Sandro Calvani, representative in Bolivia for the United Nations Drugs
Control Programme. 'Drug mafias have not succeeded in undermining Bolivian
democracy - and people are not dying en masse as in Peru or Colombia. In the
past 10 years in Bolivia, only two policemen and 18 peasants have been
killed in drugs-related crimes.'
Government officials complain that popular views on coca and the drugs trade
are being manipulated locally by a handful of old-fashioned trade union
leaders - mainly laid-off miners - and the communications media who are
'romanticising' the issue. President Sanchez de Lozada terms the reaction of
his countrymen 'devastating; all the people say this is a repressive
government (acting) against poor farmers.' Many Bolivians consider straight
interdiction activities by the Umopar drugs police are a US-inspired
conspiracy to undermine their national dignity and sovereignty.
Mr David Dlouhy, US charge d'affaires in La Paz, unleashed a storm of
protest by stating publicly that 'coca-growers have turned into drugs
traffickers. They are directly collaborating with the coca producers and
cocaine dealers who sell the drug outside the Chapare.'
'When it comes to coca, everyone in Bolivia is playing a game,' says a
foreign drugs expert. 'You cannot ignore the existence of at least 7,000
coca maceration pits in the Chapare, nor the 20,000 people directly involved
in drugs production.'
The apparent hypocrisy stems from the fact that coca is a legal crop in
Bolivia, and has served peasants and miners down the centuries as a
stimulant when working at altitude. The panorama changed radically - and
illegal cultivation grew rapidly - only when cocaine became a fashionable
drug in the US and Europe of the 1980s.
Since 1988, Bolivian law has made an innovative distinction between legally
grown and harvested leaves destined to satisfy 'traditional' demand (that
is, chewing, drinking as tea or reading the leaves) and coca for other
purposes which is 'iter criminis' (on the way to illegality).
If this nice distinction is applied, most of the 50,000ha of coca fields in
the Chapare are illegal and should be gradually reduced. With the help of
satellite photography, the US has identified 40,000ha for eradication. Coca
growers get a Dollars 2,000 cash reward for each hectare they eradicate.
The results speak for themselves: between 1987 and 1993, some 26,000ha have
been destroyed, with Dollars 50m paid put in cash compensation. But, as if
by magic, another 33,000 new hectares have been freshly planted.
Mr Alfonso Alem, government adviser and representative to Conadal, the
recently-revived alternative development council, says the strategy has
clearly failed; the situation is 'schizophrenic' and coca-growers 'the
privileged', he says.
'No region in Bolivia has received so much development aid as the Chapare,
and thanks to coca, central government receives balance-of-payments support
from the US. The message is: to get money, grow coca.'
Asked if his government has a clear strategy for fighting the coca-cocaine
business, President Sanchez de Lozada's disturbingly honest answer is:
'Obviously not. Who (in the world) has a clear strategy on drugs?'
