FT  18 FEB 94 / Catalogue of disaster at BCCI: Former bank chief details
slide into insolvency
The government of Abu Dhabi was told in April 1990 that more than Dollars
3.2bn was needed to cover the losses and misappropriations at the ailing
Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
A three-page handwritten note from Mr Swaleh Naqvi, the former chief
executive currently on trial in Abu Dhabi, says that the largest losses in
the bank came from its treasury division and from the Gokal shipping group.
It also states that losses had been stemmed through Dollars 2.2bn taken from
the portfolio of cash that Abu Dhabi gave to BCCI to invest on its behalf
through its operations in the Cayman Islands.
The document is one of more than a dozen submitted by Mr Naqvi during 1990
to senior officials in Abu Dhabi, BCCI's majority shareholder.
The reports provide an insight into the circumstances leading to the
collapse of the bank, and into the mind of Mr Naqvi, who took over control
of BCCI after the health of Mr Agha Hasan Abedi, its founder and president,
had deteriorated.
It is unclear whether all the documents have come to light or whether they
present the complete picture of when and what Abu Dhabi knew about the
extent of fraud at the bank.
However, they appear to lend support to its contention that it was unaware
of the losses until Mr Naqvi confessed. Much of the information and
supporting interviews also formed the basis of a report submitted to the
Bank of England which led to the closure of BCCI in July 1991.
In a report dated September 1, 1990, Mr Naqvi says he could not previously
inform the ruler of Abu Dhabi of the financial difficulties at the bank, 'as
Mr Abedi when he was active himself was aware of its seriousness and was
trying to find some solution.'
He says he was 'caught unprepared' when Mr Abedi fell ill in 1988 and 'did
not have the courage to report immediately'. He says subsequent financial
problems 'made the bank's financial position so precarious that slightest
leakage of these matters would have caused its chaotic failure and would
have exposed the sensitivities in an uncontrolled manner.'
In other documents, he says large amounts of his time after 1988 were taken
up defending the bank against negative publicity, and he was hampered by his
lack of personal relationships in Abu Dhabi.
He says Mr Abedi came to Abu Dhabi in March 1990 to talk to Sheikh Zayed Bin
Sultan Al Nahyan, the ruler, but because of his illness Mr Naqvi instead
went with Mr Zafar Iqbal to inform Mr Mohammad Habroush, the minister of
finance, Mr Ganim Faris Al Mazrui, head of the ruler's department of private
affairs, and Mr Juaun Salim Al Dhahiri, now under-secretary in the finance
department.
It was at this point that Abu Dhabi began an investigation into the size of
the losses and ultimately drew up plans to restructure BCCI. Mr Mazrui said
last week that he did not at once inform the auditors or others because he
was uncertain of the truth of the fraud.
Mr Naqvi himself studiously avoids use of the word 'fraud' throughout his
reports, as well as in subsequent interviews he has held with investigators.
He says there was no intention to 'accumulate personal wealth'.
'The situation as it has developed is not justifiable on a rational basis,
but it developed and became out of control without any bad intention or any
motive of personal gain for any senior member of the management, including
Mr Abedi and myself'.
Mr Naqvi says Mr Abedi's objectives for BCCI were to build an organisation
to 'provide opportunities for the growth of people all over the world', and
become quickly self-supporting so it would provide steady income to
shareholders and be a source of charity and 'social good'.
He says the bank faced 'high costs', because of its small capital base, its
need for high dollar liquidity, the lack of a hard currency-denominated home
base and its lack of an official lender of last resort.
He says the decision by Bank of America, one of the initial large
shareholders, to sell its stake in 1978 caused early problems for the bank.
It was subsequently hit by the recession in the Middle East with the fall in
oil prices in the early 1980s, the property crisis in Hong Kong, the
Egyptian foreign currency crisis and the recession in the shipping industry.
BCCI had become highly dependent on the Gokal group, which he described in
April as resulting in accumulated losses of Dollars 1.3bn including
interest. His estimate at the time of other non-performing loans was Dollars
500m including interest, although more accurate calculations since have
inflated these figures further.
He says a fresh crisis was the decision of Sheikh Khalid bin Mahfouz, former
chief operating officer of the National Commercial Bank of Saudi Arabia, to
call on BCCI's pledge to buy back his shares, which led to a Dollars 435m
loan from the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority in 1988.
He describes how treasury losses climbed to more than Dollars 1.2bn
including interest, and a series of payments of more than Dollars 30m to
members of the bank who might have revealed details of the large losses.
