FT  05 MAR 94 / Books: Keeper of world peace
RALPH BUNCHE: AN AMERICAN LIFE by Brian Urquhart WW Norton Pounds 27.50, 496
pages
Ralph Bunche was one of the first black Americans to play a prominent role
in international affairs. At the height of his career he was distrusted by
the US state department and the Soviet foreign ministry. British and French
governments never liked him because, in the 1930s, he had become an early
advocate of decolonisation, made friends with such people as Jomo Kenyatta
and written a thesis, based on first hand research, on French policy in west
Africa. In the 1950s he irritated Europeans again by his handling of crises
in the Middle East and the Congo.
For Bunche was an independent man. He was one of the architects of the
United Nations Charter after the second world war and will be remembered as
one of the UN's most outstanding peacekeepers. The trouble is that after the
Six Day War in 1967, his achievements went out of fashion and it was thought
that the role of the UN must be limited. Only in the 1990s, particularly
with the break-up of Yugoslavia, has the possibility of international
peacekeeping on the grand scale come back into discussion.
It is certainly there in the Charter with its provision for a military
committee consisting of the chiefs of staff of the five permanent members of
the Security Council. And even during the cold war, Bunche had at least
three major successes to his name. He helped negotiate the armistice between
the Arabs and the Israelis in the Middle East in the late 1940s, winning the
Nobel Peace Prize for his pains. He was instrumental in putting together the
United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF), to keep the Egyptians and Israelis
apart, after the Suez war of 1956. In the Congo in the early 1960s it was
Bunche as much as anyone who ended the secession of Katanga.
True, he was often the number two. He took over as mediator in Palestine
only after the assassination his superior, the Swedish Count Bernadotte. The
concept of UNEF first came from the Canadian foreign minister, Lester
Pearson, and Bunche might have been less involved in the Congo had it not
been for the death of the UN Secretary General Dag Hammarskjold.
Yet in each case Bunche worked hard and was innovative. In the Middle East
he saw that the Israelis talked to the Arab States separately, not together,
a formula which continues to work. A footnote at the end of this book claims
that a former street gang member recently took the Bunche diplomacy as a
model for successfully negotiating a truce between the Bloods and the Crips
in Los Angeles. After Suez, UNEF became the most popular army in the world
with its theme song 'Don't Fence Me In'.
The sadness was that when President Nasser asked the UN forces to go in
1967, no one stood up to him. The Russians backed Nasser, the US did not
press Israel to keep calm, and the ambassadors representing the UNEF
participants said that the decision was up to the Egyptians. Worse than war
followed: U Thant, then the UN Secretary General, and Bunche were blamed for
their feebleness and peacekeeping was discredited.
Bunche spent much of the rest of his life wondering if more could have been
done, but concluded that without the support of the majority of the UN
members, UN officials were impotent. And as Brian Urquhart, who was to
become Bunche's successor, remarks in this biography, the Six Day War meant
that much of Bunche's life work was destroyed within a few days.
Bunche died in 1971, spending his last few years working on civil rights.
This was an old cause. In 1941 he had successfully picketed the National
Theatre, Washington for refusing to allow blacks admission to Porgy and
Bess. Nearly 20 years later he was given the key to the City of Birmingham,
Alabama, then refused a room in a local hotel. Yet he never campaigned as a
demagogue, simply as a black American demanding equality.
