FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (15): Farmers bring home the bacon -
Agriculture / At first glance, Estonia's agricultural statistics seem to
tell a story of disaster. Yet the sector is recovering steadily from the
shock of Soviet collapse, and it is already contributing substantially to
the republic's economic turnround
Estonia's hardy, practical folk have always been first-rate farmers. In the
1930s, the country foreshadowed the post-war success of Denmark as an
agricultural exporter; its seed potatoes were admired all over Europe, and
its bacon and eggs were sold in every city from London to Leningrad.
Under the Communist system, too, Estonia was an important supplier of meat
and dairy products to Russia. Its agronomists prided themselves on keeping
in touch, through their contacts in Scandinavia, with all the developments
in agricultural technology; and it is still hard to convince them that they
have something to learn from western Europe about growing potatoes.
Collective farms in the smallest Soviet republic carved out a formidable
reputation as purveyors of farming skills to the rest of the Union. Compared
with other Soviet regions where nature had been much kinder, the Estonians'
use of fertiliser was far more efficient and their veterinary knowledge
outstanding.
The Danish-built slaughter-house at Rakvere, capable of handling 800 cows a
day, meets the highest international standards, as does the dairy products
factory at Viru.
All this should have left Estonia better equipped to face the brave new
capitalist world than most parts of the former communist empire. But the
economic disintegration of the Union - and the breakdown of virtually all
agricultural trade with Russia - was, at least in the short term, a body
blow.
It was not so much the loss of revenue from Russia, which was modest enough,
as the instant creation of a huge mountain of surplus farm produce which
depressed prices on the internal market. The livestock industry,
traditionally dependent on Russian fodder, was only saved from collapse by
free deliveries of western feed-grain.
From Estonia's point of view, the ideal solution to the crisis would be a
steady increase in agricultural sales to the West. Farm goods already
account for more than 20 per cent of total exports, more than any other
single sector, and quality control and packaging are more and more closely
aligned with western requirements.
But Scandinavia and western Europe are, of course, brimming with their own,
heavily subsidised farm output. Indeed, Finland effectively dumps on Estonia
a significant slice of its domestic farm surplus, which is duly bought in
the shops of Tallinn by bargain-hunting tourists from Helsinki.
So Estonian farmers will have need to be even more canny than usual if they
are to secure a firm niche in the west. Output of some of Estonia's key
products has plunged since independence. Milk production is projected at
600,000 tonnes this year, down from 1m in 1991, and the grain harvest is
forecast at no more than 550,000 tonnes, down from 940,000 three years ago.
Last year, farm gate prices in both those sectors were barely half the
international level. Only now is the market tightening to the point where
makers of high-quality cheese are finding it difficult to obtain milk of the
right grade.
Western experts see specialist meat and dairy products - blood sausage,
gourmet cheeses, milk powder - as providing Estonia's best hope of gaining a
long-term foothold in overseas markets. The export of live animals to the
Middle East, notably sheep to Syria, is another lucrative business.
'About one-third of our farmers have already adapted their thinking to the
market-place,' says Mr Ants Laansalu, a senior official at the agriculture
ministry. 'Some of the remainder still believe in production for its own
sake. But they will gradually adapt.'
Yet two question marks hang over the future of Estonian farming. One is the
structure of ownership: how fully and how soon Estonia will switch from the
agricultural collectives of the communist system to reliance on the family
farms which seems to be in the blood of every Estonian?
There is a universal consensus on the desirability of reverting to private
farming, and of restoring as far as possible the title deeds of pre-war
farmers and their descendants. The legal procedures by which former owners
can reclaim their land do exist, although they are in need of refinement.
And yet the privatisation process has been curiously slow.
In Soviet times, Estonia had about 350 large farms, either state-owned or
collective. After two and a half years of independence, the proportion of
land farmed privately is still only 14 per cent, while the 'socialist
sector' has undergone a very limited break-up into about 1,000 co-operatives
and public companies.
No one denies the difficulties in the way of privatisation. Many pre-war
family farms have been gobbled up by expansion in forestry, and some have
been divided between collective institutions. Most pre-war farming families
will no longer want to work the land themselves; and the interests of
current users must also be secured.
The average pre-war small-holding, at 25 hectares, would not be economic in
today's conditions. Many of them consist of narrow strips - measuring, say,
30 metres by 1,000 - which were sliced out of German baronial estates in the
1920s. By now, the strips have been merged into huge fields, and it would
make little economic sense to divide them up again.
And yet the consensus among experts is that, given the political will, all
these difficulties can be overcome. Since the the pre-war land registries
are intact, it should be possible to identify pre-war farming families and
invite them to choose between selling or renting to the state or current
users. There is a mystery as to why this has not happened.
The other question mark concerns sales to Russia, which are of course linked
to the wider issue of relations with the eastern neighbour.
The absence of an inter-governmental trade agreement with Russia rules out
any revival of the old state-to-state arrangements; but with capitalism
flourishing in both countries, it ought to be possible to revive the old
trade on a strictly private sector basis.
There are two questions in the minds of Estonian officialdom: is the Russian
government willing to give Estonia the economic shot in the arm which
reviving the farm trade would mean? And if not, can it actually stop Russian
businessmen from importing Estonian produce if they want to?
Estonian eggs have returned to the St Petersburg market, and Russian tariff
barriers on Estonian fish have failed to disrupt that trade. But many
Estonians fear that if the cross-border trade in meat and dairy products
shows signs of reviving, Russia will immediately erect more tariff barriers,
for reasons that are as much political as economic.
As in every other sector of Estonian life, the influence of the Russian
factor is an enigmatic one. And indeed, there are some suspicious minds who
attribute the slowness of the privatisation process to the hidden hand of
Moscow. And it is undoubtedly true that re-establishing Estonia's yeomanry
on its ancestral lands would make the territory that bit harder to occupy.
