FT  04 AUG 94 / Clinton backs healthcare reform bills
President Bill Clinton last night threw his weight behind two bills to
reform the US healthcare system, saying they were less bureaucratic and more
flexible than his original proposals.
He urged the Senate and the House of Representatives not to break up for
their planned August recess until each had passed a reform bill.
Mr Clinton said he could support either of the two bills proposed by the
Democratic leadership in Congress - in the Senate by Mr George Mitchell, the
majority leader, and in the House of Representatives by Congressman Richard
Gephardt.
In an unusual evening news conference Mr Clinton also boasted of the
progress made by the US economy since the passage of his first budget a year
ago, and pushed for a quick vote in favour of the crime legislation which is
still stalled in Congress.
He reiterated his argument that the US has a significant interest in the
return of a democratically elected government to Haiti, but declined to say
whether he would seek approval from Congress before ordering the invasion
that a United Nations resolution last weekend authorised.
Mr Clinton, who had threatened earlier this year to veto any healthcare
reform bill that did not achieve universal coverage, rejected criticisms
that Mr Mitchell's plan, which aims to extend health insurance to only 95
per cent of the population by the year 2000, would fall short of this
condition.
'I believe it does meet the objective I set out in the State of the Union
address and I would sign it,' he told reporters gathered in the White
House's East Room.
Although public opinion in the US firmly backs the broad goals of healthcare
reform, support for the specific reforms proposed by the Democrats remains
lukewarm.
Mr Clinton tried, therefore, to throw some of the burden back on to the
opposition Republican party, which has backed away from some of its earlier
tentative proposals for comprehensive reform and is now working principally
to stop hasty passage of any bill.
'My own view is that the questions should now shift to the other party. We
have reached out to them and every time we have done it they have moved
away,' he said.
Mr Clinton also expressed his support for Mr Roger Altman, the embattled
deputy treasury secretary, who has faced ferocious questioning from
congressional committees for the last two days over his role in the
Whitewater investigation.
'The secretary of the treasury (Lloyd Bentsen) has confidence in him and so
do I,' Mr Clinton said.
Two foundation blocks emerge from Congress, Page 4
