FT  29 JUL 94 / UK Company News: Independent to cut cover price - Fall
should pave way for signing of agreement with MGN
The Independent newspaper has decided to cut its cover price and the
reduction is expected as early as Monday.
The response to the national newspaper price war is one of a number of
editorial and business decisions that should pave the way to the signing of
a formal agreement between Mirror Group Newspapers and the consortium that
owns The Independent group.
The agreement under which MGN, a minority shareholder in Newspaper
Publishing, owners of The Independent and The Independent on Sunday, will
run all aspects of the business apart from editorial has yet to be signed.
The plan was first announced in March but it has been considered impossible
to complete the deal until a new editor was appointed and a number of
editorial decisions had been taken.
Mr Ian Hargreaves, deputy editor of The Financial Times, this week accepted
the editorship. Mr Andreas Whittam Smith, the main founder of the paper,
will give up the editorship this week when he goes on holiday. Mr Ian Jack,
editor of The Independent on Sunday, will be acting editor until Mr
Hargreaves arrives in the middle of next month.
MGN was believed to be wary about signing the agreement before an editor was
in place because there are financial penalties if the company fails to reach
agreed targets. Apart from the issue of cover price - The Times is now
selling at 20p and the Daily Telegraph at 30p during the week - the issues
include the number of newspaper sections on offer and their format.
Having taken the decision on Wednesday to cut the price of the paper,
shareholders will decide on Sunday how much the cover price will be reduced
from its current 50p. The paper will remain a premium product aimed at the
top end of the market but the price will come down at least to 45p, to match
The Guardian, or possibly 40p.
The formal agreement between MGN and the other main shareholders - El Pais
of Spain, La Repubblica of Italy and Mr Tony O'Reilly's Irish Independent
group - may be signed within a matter of weeks.
Planning is going ahead as if the agreement is already in place and the
editorial staff of The Independent and its Sunday sister title are expected
to move to their new offices alongside MGN in Canary Wharf in London's
Docklands in November.
Meanwhile Mr Sergio Cellini, who became an executive director of The
Independent earlier this year, has been appointed managing director of
Newspaper Publishing.
