FT  03 MAR 94 / Malaysia softens line on trade ban
Malaysia appeared yesterday to modify its stand against British companies.
However, this came before Mr John Major, UK prime minister, made remarks
critical of Malaysia.
Mr Anwar Ibrahim, Malaysia's deputy prime minister, said the Malaysian
cabinet had reaffirmed its decision that British companies should no longer
be given government contracts but emphasised that the scope of the action
applied only to government contracts and procurements, and not to the
private sector.
In recent days several private companies in Malaysia have announced that
they would support the action. However Mr Anwar said the private sector
should not become involved.
He also denied suggestions by Malaysia's education minister that relations
between Malaysian colleges and British educational institutions should be
broken off and that Malaysian students should no longer go to Britain.
Mr Anwar said Malaysia had been forced into taking action. 'We had no
choice. Why do I have to decide in favour of British companies and then be
questioned, harassed and accused when we can give the contract to some other
company?'
Observers feel that Mr Anwar, by emphasising that the action applied only to
government contracts, was seeking to modify Malaysia's stance. Some
Malaysians are concerned that action against Britain could damage the
Malaysian economy. Fears have also been expressed that the action might
contravene Gatt and bring retaliation from the European Union.
But later remarks by Mr Major to the BBC are likely once again to infuriate
the Malaysians. Mr Major described the Malaysian move as short-sighted and
said it could damage Malaysia's interests as well as those of Britain.
'I don't believe that what the Malaysian government has done to British
companies is remotely justified,' he said.
Mr Anwar said Malaysia had not sought any link between the memorandum of
understanding on British arms sales to Malaysia and aid for the Pergau dam
project.
He repeated his government's version of negotiations on the project - that
the proposals for a British company being awarded the Pergau contract only
became competitive after the British government offered concessionary loans.
