FT  12 JAN 94 / Management: Piano gives a lesson for the workplace - Many
people suffer aches and pains from using computer keyboards. A new book
suggests tips based on a musician's experience
Barely a week goes by without news that some sporting personality has had to
'retire' or at least rest because of injury. Their high profile always
guarantees a mention. But what of aches, pains and injuries sustained by
people in the workplace and in particular those using computer keyboards?
The problems of tenosynovitis, tendinitis and carpal tunnel syndrome rarely
get any coverage unless a compensation payment has been involved.
Can anything be done to prevent the daily difficulties experienced by
countless individuals? The Hand Book, published this week* may provide some
answers.
The author is Stephanie Brown, a New York-based professor of piano who has
noted the injuries suffered by pianists. Brown has identified a direct link
between incorrect, strained finger and hand positions at the keyboard and
subsequent injury. Pianists with correct natural positions and movements had
a keyboard style characterised by fluidity and an absence of injury.
The application to computer keyboards became evident when Brown was learning
how to operate her own computer. Many of her teachers used the same harmful
positions and movements she had observed in pianists. Studying typing
manuals highlighted the need for a preventative keyboard method.
Unfortunately, many computer users have never learnt to type, which may put
them at even greater risk of experiencing aches and pains.
'It's well known that certain positions and motions can cause injury in
practically every sport,' says Brown. 'Everyone has had the experience of
watching someone swing a tennis racquet or golf club and think, 'Ouch]' It
just looks wrong. Using a computer keyboard is no different. It's a vigorous
micro-athletic workout for the hands and fingers. Do it wrong and you're
asking for trouble.'
The Hand Book aims to help computer users prevent injuries by avoiding
dangerous hand positions. These have been variously called The Dangerous
Angle, The Cobra, The Spider and The Flying Pinky.
Instead, keyboard users can experience the comfortable and relaxed feel of
the correct position by working through a series of 14 easy to follow
lessons, predominantly aimed at the hands. Other parts of the body - which
can be responsible for symptoms in the hands - are either omitted or
mentioned only briefly.
The book advises on how to care for the hands and details are given of
various stretches like the Teepee, Curl, Press and Tuck to maintain
mobility. Athletes warm up before playing and so should computer users, says
Brown.
Details of exercises and massage during rest breaks from the screen are
given for those body parts that need to be moved. There is nothing
controversial in this but there are some parts that have not been stretched
but which should be stretched to prevent some of the symptoms reported by
keyboard users
Of course there is more to preventing hand injuries at the keyboard and this
is acknowledged in the book. Unfortunately the section on workstation
adjustment is too brief and could be confusing for some readers. It also
assumes that most keyboard users can adjust the height of the keyboard
whereas the majority of users sit at desks of fixed height.
However, the visual reminder of the Do's and Don'ts ('The Golden Rules')
offers a useful summary.
Here are some of them:
Keep the natural wrist line;
Let the wrists float;
Let the elbows hang free;
Relax the ring and little fingers;
Don't squeeze the mouse;
Rest the hands when not keying.
*The Hand Book (Preventing Computer Injury), pp98. Published by Ergonome
Incorporated, 145 West 96th Street, Suite 800, New York, NY10025.
Jeffrey Boyling is a London- based chartered physiotherapist and ergonomist.
