FT  24 DEC 94 / BSkyB and Reuters on verge of partnership
British Sky Broadcasting, the satellite television company, and Reuters, the
news and information group, are on the verge of an international television
partnership deal.
The deal, expected to be finalised early next year, will give Reuters - an
organisation with an illustrious brand name in international news in text
form - its biggest push so far into television.
For BSkyB, the link will help to cut the Pounds 30m-a-year cost of the
lossmaking Sky News, the 24-hour satellite service, while greatly expanding
its network of correspondents.
The partnership will also provide the platform for Sky to go international
and challenge both Independent Television News and the BBC, which is
expanding globally through BBC World, a 24-hour satellite television news
service.
Earlier this year, Mr Sam Chisholm, chief executive of BSkyB, a consortium
in which Pearson, owner of the Financial Times, is a significant
shareholder, confirmed he had been talking to ITN but emphasised that the
organisation was only one of a number of potential partners.
ITN was offering to supply Sky News in its entirety, under contract for
BSkyB - something that would have seriously hit jobs at Sky News.
The precise structure of the BSkyB-Reuters partnership is still being
negotiated although it is believed to be unlikely that it will be a simple
50-50 deal.
One of the main possibilities that could flow from a formal agreement is a
central challenge to ITN in the UK market.
Under the 1990 Broadcasting Act, the Independent Television Commission has
to decide by the end of next year how many news suppliers there should be
for commercial television.
At the moment ITN, chaired by Mr Michael Green, the Carlton Communications
chairman and chief executive, is sole news provider to both ITV and Channel
4.
The commission will review ITN's performance towards the end of next year
and decide whether there is room for competition from a second commercial
television news supplier.
A Sky News-Reuters partnership could become a credible rival to ITN and
might be supported by a number of ITV companies which are not ITN
shareholders. They would have an obvious commercial interest in at least
using the threat of competition to reduce the cost of news supply.
In the international arena, the possibilities range from a special version
of Sky aimed at the Asian market through Mr Rupert Murdoch's Star satellite
television service, to going on DirecTV, the recently launched digital
satellite television system covering the US.
Reuters is already in the television news agency business through Reuters
Television, formally Visnews, and more recently has expanded into
specialised financial television for European dealers and marketmakers.
