FT  19 JUL 94 / Desert tribes meet to bury differences in the sand
Like two warring desert tribes, Jordan and Israel met yesterday in a modern
version of a Bedouin tented camp on their sun-baked border to settle old
scores and draw up a peace treaty.
Sheltering from the 40`C desert heat in an air-conditioned white and yellow
striped tent, Israeli and Jordanian officials and army generals sat at a
table straddling the disputed border and shook hands.
The bilateral talks, the first to be held publicly in the region, focus on
border, water and refugee issues and aim to lay the groundwork for peace.
Tight security ringed the sandy area where Israel, amid isolated palm trees
and scrub, cleared away barbed wire and land mines and constructed a small
encampment complete with generators, portable toilets and dozens of
telephone lines and faxes. In the background loomed the chocolate brown
hills of Wadi Rum from where Lawrence of Arabia descended to capture Aqaba
in 1917 and spark the Arab revolt against the Turks.
Both sides emphasised the significance of the site of the talks. Mr Elyakim
Rubinstein, head of the Israeli delegation, said: 'This meeting takes place
in a tent. The tent is tentative, but peace should and will be permanent. We
are at a very warm spot of our two countries ..it is only natural to express
the hope that the Israeli-Jordanian peaceful relations will be warm
forever.'
Ambassador Fayez al-Tarawneh, head of the Jordanian delegation, said: 'We
hope that our location which bears testimony to the imperatives of
geographic proximity and inter-dependence will inspire us to arrive at
tangible results so that the fruits of our common endeavours may be felt by
ordinary men and women in our long-suffering region.'
Israel put up a new white iron gate in the razor-wire border fence and many
Israeli officials, soldiers and journalists who passed through it were
taking their first steps on Jordanian soil in their lifetimes.
Several Israelis posed for photographs to capture the sense of history.
Outside Israeli soldiers milled around sipping cola at a portable snack bar
set up by Shechem, the Israeli army caterers.
On the Jordanian side, guests at the Aqaba Holiday Inn watched as an Israeli
television journalist talked in Hebrew on his mobile phone to Jerusalem
while issuing instructions to his Jordanian camera crew. Mobile phones and
citizens of Israel are banned in Jordan.
On the exit road an Israeli dished out a glossy promotion brochure on the
tourist resort of Eilat with a special statement from the town's mayor, Gabi
Kadosh - a long-time enthusiast of Jordanian-Israeli co-operation in
tourism. He called for urgent co-operation and sharing of facilities such as
airports, transport and water resources between Eilat and Aqaba. 'Since our
first presence in this region we have dreamed of peaceful relations with our
next-door town of Aqaba. Eventually this day has been reached.'
