FT  13 JUN 94 / Tories humiliated in Euro-poll: Labour vote surges but Lib
Dems fail to match local election result
The European elections dealt another humiliating blow to Mr John Major's
government early today as the Labour party broke out of its traditional
regional heartlands to score heavy gains in London and southern England.
The Labour surge, which gave the party its highest share of the vote for 30
years, marked the first nationwide election since 1979 in which it had
effectively challenged the Conservatives on their own ground.
Sir Christopher Prout, leader of the Conservative group in the European
parliament, was a victim, losing his Herefordshire and Shropshire seat to
Labour.
The overall outcome, which saw heavy government losses in terms of seats in
Strasbourg juxtaposed against a high-than-expected Tory share of the vote,
appeared just enough to head off an immediate crisis for Mr Major's
premiership.
But as renewed Conservative divisions over Europe and over his leadership
emerged even before the votes were counted, a second bad showing - following
last week's five by-election defeats - left in place the question mark over
his longer-term future.
As results poured in, the Liberal Democrats won their first seats in the
Strasbourg assembly, taking two from the government. But outside its West
Country heartlands, Mr Paddy Ashdown's party saw its vote slump in a mirror
image of Labour's rise.
With results in three-quarters of the 84 mainland seats declared,
projections suggested the Conservatives' representation in the parliament
would fall to about 18 seats, around half the number won in 1989. Massive
abstentions by traditional Tory voters were reflected in the estimated
turnout of 35 per cent.
Among spectacular Labour gains were victories in Essex South, which includes
the symbolically important Westminster constituency of Basildon, and in
London South East, which covers a swathe of middle-class Tory parliamentary
seats in areas such as Bromley and Bexley.
Mrs Margaret Beckett, Labour's interim leader, said the results had
demonstrated unequivocally that Labour had established itself as an
alternative government.
But the divided opposition to the Tories in the south appeared to have saved
the government from the electoral 'melt-down' predicted in some opinion
polls. Mr Ashdown acknowledged the shift to the rival opposition party with
the comment that 'Labour has saved the Tories' bacon'.
Despite their victories in the south west, the Liberal Democrats' share of
the vote fell substantially from the 27 per cent recorded at last month's
local elections. The party failed to win target seats such as Hampshire
North &amp; Oxford and Wight &amp; Hampshire South as a result of the Labour
revival.
On the basis of BBC projections after most of the results, the Conservatives
would have 27 per cent of the vote, Labour 47 per cent and the Liberal
Democrats only 16 per cent. Labour, confident of winning more than
two-thirds of the 84 British seats in the Strasbourg assembly, claimed the
election outcome marked the beginning of the end of the Conservatives'
15-year grip on power at Westminster. The Conservatives lost seats to Labour
in East Anglia and the Midlands. Leicester, Norfolk and Northants &amp; Blaby
all fell early, followed by Lincolnshire &amp; Humberside South. Formerly safe
constituencies such as Thames Valley and Cotswolds were only narrowly held,
with large swings against the Tories.
Labour victories in Essex South, Essex West &amp; Herts East and Suffolk &amp; South
West Norfolk emphasised the opposition's resurgence in the south outside
London. London South East and London North West fell to Labour giving the
party all nine constituencies in the capital.
The Conservatives were left penned within a narrow band of southern English
constituencies like Surrey and Buckinghamshire where they managed to beat
off the opposition threat. The party now holds only one European
parliamentary seat north of the Wash, in North Yorkshire.
Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, signalled the start of a cabinet
operation to shore up Mr Major's premiership. Mr Hurd, who defended Mr
Major's strategy in the European campaign, said it would be 'absolutely
crazy' for the Conservatives to think about changing leader for the second
time in four years.
But hopes that the party's warring factions would maintain the fragile truce
which held during the European campaign were shattered by outspoken
criticism of Mr Major from both the right and left.
Details, Page 10
Results, Page 11
Blair and Prescott clash over jobs targets, Page 7
 ---------------------------------------
             RESULTS 3.00 AM
 ---------------------------------------
          Seats   Gains     Losses
 ---------------------------------------
Lab         54     +10         -
Con         14       -       -12
LDem         2      +2         -
Others       -       -         -
 ---------------------------------------
84 MEPs to be elected from mainland UK
plus three from N. Ireland
 ---------------------------------------
