FT  28 JAN 94 / Recession and blunders derail SNCF: Attempts to regain
passengers and freight and reverse the rail network's losses
The line of sleek high-speed trains pointing out from the Gare de Lyon in
Paris provide a shining image of modern and efficient rail travel. But for
users of the SNCF rail network the image has been tarnished.
The state-owned railway is struggling to win back passengers and freight
after one of the worst years in its history. In 1993, traffic fell by 7.5
per cent to 48bn passenger kilometres (the number of kilometres travelled by
passengers) and the volume of freight fell by 10 per cent to 43.5bn tonne
kilometres.
Final figures are expected to show total losses for the rail system of about
FFr8bn (Pounds 900m), the biggest for more than a decade.
The reasons for the decline are partly to be found in the effects of
recession which have reduced demand for rail travel and the transport of
goods. However, the fall also reflects a series of commercial blunders,
which have disenchanted passengers, and a structural decline in the
attraction of rail freight.
Stung into action, SNCF's managers have launched a commercial strategy aimed
at restoring the railway's image and reversing its financial performance. A
new team, headed by Mr Jacques Berducou, took charge of SNCF's passenger
operations at the end of last year, and has sought to identify and rectify
the railway's problems.
Mr Richard Ange, chief assistant to Mr Berducou, estimates that more than
half the decline in passenger traffic in 1993 could be put down to economic
factors.
'Commuter services were hit by the effects of rising unemployment and
depressed demand,' he says. Inter-city traffic fell by about 9 per cent,
while cross-border travel to Italy and Spain fell victim to the effects of
currency depreciation in those countries.
It is the non-economic factors, however, which have really worried the SNCF.
'We lost customers because of commercial problems and a damaging of our
relationship with passengers,' admits Mr Ange.
The principal culprit was an automated booking service, known as Socrates
but which proved to be one of the railway's most unwise investments.
Problems in the system's software quickly became apparent after its
introduction at the beginning of last year. This, combined with a lack of
training for SNCF staff, resulted in chaos at the ticket office.
'It was a catastrophe,' says Mrs Simone Bigorgne of the FNAUT, the French
federation of transport users. She cites the example of one member of her
family who was forced to fly to Barcelona because Socrates did not recognise
the Spanish city as a destination.
The problems with Socrates have now largely been resolved. Improved software
and training means that that the system is now operating as planned,
reducing transaction times and increasing information to passengers. But
Socrates was not the only problem.
'There was a feeling we were too rigid in terms of price and access to
trains,' says Mr Ange. In particular, passengers complained about the
cumbersome system of compulsory reservations for journeys on SNCF's Trains a
Grande Vitesse and the complex pricing structure of rail fares.
On both counts, Mr Ange cites progress. The reservation fee on TGV lines has
been reduced from FFr18 to FFr3, and it is no longer an automatic offence to
board a train without a ticket.
As of this week, the pricing system has been simplified and a series of
discounts has been introduced on high-speed lines.
Attempts to improve services are, however, complicated by the group's
financial position. The need to cut jobs, which has resulted in annual
reductions in the workforce of more than 5,000 over the past few years, has
sapped employees' morale. Strikes in protest at job cuts and the difficulty
of investing in new trains, particularly on new lines, has caused delays and
dissatisfaction, says the FNAUT.
Responding to economic conditions is also hard. With French economic
recovery expected to be only gradual, SNCF is counting on the effects of new
routes and more attractive prices to offset depressed demand. A high-speed
circle line to the east of Paris is due to start operating in June, while
the Channel Tunnel to Britain will provide a new source of revenues. Fare
increases, announced this week, are being limited to an average of 1.2 per
cent, to lure passengers from the roads and the airlines.
The combination of these various measures, says the SNCF, should allow
passenger traffic to rise by its target of 5 per cent this year and to allow
these operations to break even.
Ambitions in the freight services are still more modest, with a reduction in
losses from last year's FFr2.5bn as the goal. In terms of market share and
volumes, rail freight has been in steady decline since the early 1970s. The
rise of competition from road hauliers and the shifting structure of
France's economy away from products such as coal and steel has reduced the
advantages of the railways.
SNCF is seeking to stem the decline in freight by developing its so-called
combination operations, services which allow containers to be transported by
both road and rail. Again, freight activities should receive a boost from
the extension of the rail network.
SNCF estimates, for example, that about 6m tonnes of freight will travel
through the Channel Tunnel every year from the second half of the decade.
But the problems facing freight run deep. Wooing disgruntled French
passengers is delicate, but manageable. Seducing French industry is an
altogether more difficult task.
