FT  23 SEP 94 / Technology: Drugged by the deep blue sea - The oceans may
contain the ingredients to treat a variety of diseases, including cancer and
arthritis
From the coral reefs of the Pacific ocean to the Antarctic, scuba divers are
scraping barnacles from rocks, digging deposits from the sea bottom, bagging
fish and algae and filling vials with seawater in the hope that their
findings will one day yield an important drug.
Marine biotechnology is attracting the attention of companies in the US,
Europe and Japan, many of which are searching the ocean for potential drugs.
They include Lederle, a division of American Cyanamid; the biotechnology
groups FMC and Martek; pharmaceutical groups Merck and SmithKline Beecham;
and Japanese companies Nippon Steel and Mitsui.
The US government has set up a Dollars 45m (Pounds 29m) programme for marine
biotechnology research, and the Japanese government is also investing
heavily.
Many scientists are convinced that remote regions may hold the secrets to
treating dozens of diseases. Research in the world's rainforests in recent
years, for example, has produced drugs such as the anti-tumor agents
Vinblastine and Vinvristine, both developed from the Madagascar periwinkle.
However, marine biotechnologists say the potential of the rain forests pales
in comparison with that of the ocean. 'It comes down to the numbers game, to
accessing the greatest biodiversity possible,' says Brad Carte, senior
investigator in bio-molecular discovery for SmithKline Beecham. The oceans
cover 71 per cent of the earth's surface and much of the life within them is
still a mystery. To many scientists this offers the possibility of
discovering more potentially life-saving drugs.
'The ocean is an untapped resource,' says Henry Linsert, chief executive
officer of Martek. 'It is a rich source of organisms. Algae alone makes up a
tremendous amount of the plant biomass on Earth.'
Results from marine biotechnology efforts have so far been mixed. Some of
the most promising compounds, such as the anti-cancer agent didemnen B, and
some anti-inflammatory agents have been dropped from research over the last
few years. Yet marine biotechnologists say failures in marine compound
screening, just as in terrestrial compound screening, are inevitable. In the
long run, they believe, they are bound to make some hits.
This autumn, Martek hopes to launch a fatty acid, DHA, which it discovered
in marine algae, on the European market. The product will be added to infant
formula to make it more similar to human milk.
With pollution and misuse threatening a number of ocean species, scientists
say they are concerned about losing marine biodiversity, and with it,
valuable compounds. This concern has lent their work a sense of urgency.
'The ocean has been used as a dumping ground for a long time,' says Debra
Steinberg, group leader for the Maine marine biotechnology effort at
American Cyanamid. 'Concern about pollution makes scientists feel that we
should try to find out what is there before it is destroyed.'
Marine biotechnology is still in its infancy. No leading drug has yet been
launched. A handful are in clinical trials in the US, mainly cancer
treatment hopefuls being studied by the National Cancer Institute, which in
the 1970s became one of the first organisations to engage in marine
biotechnology research.
Scientists say the small number of products in clinical trials merely
reflects past lack of interest in the sea. With more companies now involved,
marine biotechnologists believe the next two decades will see a number of
products moving on to the market and many more entering clinical trials.
Three likely disease targets are cancer, arthritis and other inflammatory
illnesses, and diseases affecting the central nervous system.
It has taken this long for companies to gain an interest in the sea, marine
biotechnologists say, because the modern pharmaceutical industry grew out of
a long-term human interest in the curative qualities of plants.
'We live on land, and we've traditionally looked at terrestrial plants for
cures,' says Gerald Weissmann, a professor of medicine at the New York
University Medical Centre. 'Most pharmaceutical companies don't have any
direct contact with the sea. They are based inland; they don't own boats,
and they don't usually have a lot of divers or marine scientists on their
staff. That's why it has taken them so long to get interested in the ocean.'
Pharmaceuticals also faced practical barriers - it is only in recent decades
that long-term, deep-sea exploration has become possible.
Scientists also had difficulty replicating marine compounds in the lab. 'It
is not that marine compounds are more difficult to synthesise,' says William
Fenical, professor of oceanography of Scripps Institute of Oceanography. 'It
is just that we haven't had as much practice in that area, and so we are not
as good at it as we are at synthesising terrestrial compounds.'
Scientists are excited by the potential of marine life. Barnacles clinging
to ocean rocks may yield a special glue that would resist salt and
temperature changes and could play a role in surgical procedures such as
joint replacement. Sponges, which fall apart so easily, could provide a clue
to the prevention of cell binding and in turn lead to a treatment for
inflammatory diseases such as arthritis.
Marine life can be used not only as a source of compounds, but also as a way
of testing drugs. The male contraceptive gossypol, for instance, relied
partly on studies in sea urchins for its development.
Yet just as scientists turned from macro-organisms, such as plants, to
microbes, many believe the emphasis in marine biotechnology will eventually
be in microbes. 'The state of the art is in microbes,' says Fenical.
Ultimately, one of the main challenges facing the industry may be political,
rather than technological. The legalities of marine drug discovery are still
nebulous. If a company develops a cure for cancer based on a compound found
only on certain coral reefs, for instance, the government concerned might
demand royalties.
On the other hand, many companies see the ocean as a far less regulated
source of compounds than terrestrial areas. 'As sovereign issues become more
important in land research, such as in rain forests, companies may turn more
to the ocean,' says Susan Clymer, managing director of the marine
biotechnology group NichiBei Bio. 'In international waters, it's still kind
of a free-for-all.'
