FT  12 JAN 94 / The Finance Bill: Accountants open attack - Inland Revenue
An accountants' body yesterday criticised a clause in the finance bill
giving new powers to the Inland Revenue to demand access to accountants'
documents as 'an unacceptable erosion of taxpayers' rights'.
The bill will give the Inland Revenue the right to examine documents held by
tax accountants who it suspects of falsifying their clients' tax affairs.
Previously, the Inland Revenue has only been able to demand documents from
tax accountants if they had been found guilty of a tax-related offence.
Mr Derek Allen, director of tax at the Institute of Chartered Accountants in
Scotland, said the clause was an important change in the balance between the
power of the Inland Revenue and the rights of the taxpayers. 'In the absence
of the Revenue giving any justification of this change, the proposal is
unacceptable,' he said.
He said that a client seeking advice from a tax accountant could no longer
be sure that his affairs would be covered by professional privilege.
Suspicion that an accountant had falsified one client's affairs would give
the right to examine all his clients' documents.
The government said that the new clause was intended to remedy a weakness in
the Revenue's power to obtain accountants' documents. It was 'maintaining
the balance between taxpayers' rights and revenue powers in this sensitive
area', it said.
The Revenue said the rules would not be open to abuse as it would need
'reasonable grounds' and the consent of a special commissioner.
Additional powers were needed as accountants had become less co-operative
after a spate of legal cases at the end of the 1980s in which clients had
sued their accountants for disclosing information to the Revenue.
Two other changes to the Revenue's powers to obtain information were
welcomed by accountants. Clause 240 restricts a commissioner's right to hear
applications for information and appeals involving the same information. It
also requires tax inspectors to give reasons underlying their application
for information.
