FT  19 NOV 94 / The FT Christmas Show Guide: The pantomime strikes back - A
report on this year's seasonal fun of dubious cross-dressing and corny jokes
Oh yes it is] Panto time is almost upon us and once again the nation will
over-indulge on a diet of corny jokes, sexist plot lines, dubious
cross-dressings, and a veritable orgy of political incorrectness.
There is something wonderfully unchanging about pantomime. Year after year
the same sets, the same costumes, the same stories, the same sweets
(provided by perennial sponsor Cadbury), the same casts are taken out of
storage to be thoroughly enjoyed by the same audiences. For many it is the
only occasion in the year they enter a theatre and, despite regular scare
stories that this is a dying art form, panto is actually enjoying a robust
revival.
According to panto king Paul Elliott, who will be masterminding around 30
pantomimes this Christmas, last season was a 'vintage' year. 'Every single
one of our pantos made a profit'. This year will be 'spectacular - bookings
are already 75 per cent of the way towards target'.
Every year Elliott invests in a new pantomime which - with a little sprucing
up - travels the nation for a decade or more. This year it is Jack and the
Beanstalk, a Pounds 400,000 investment which opens at the Birmingham
Hippodrome and has already pulled in Pounds 1m at the box office. It
features the biggest giant to stalk the boards in years, operated by a team
of four and measuring 15 feet from waist to head. There is also a 'Flight
through Space' film which should generate a few 'ooos'. Competing with the
special effects are the likes of Su Pollard, Don MacLean - and Scorpio.
Now Scorpio is a Gladiator and this year Gladiators, tough men and women
from the Saturday night television martial arts programme, are ubiquitous.
If little else changes in Pantoland every year, the latest craze is
incorporated into the format to pull in the kids. At one time it was pop
stars; then the performers from Australian soaps tested their acting skills;
then sports stars, like Ian Botham, Tessa Sandersen, and Annabel Croft, all
of whom are appearing again this Christmas, plus Kriss Akabusi making his
debut in Dick Whittington at the Mayflower, Southampton.
This year names like Trojan (at Bournemouth); Zodiac (at Crawley); Jet
(Reading); and Cobra (Swansea), Gladiators all, pepper the playbills. They
will be learning the ropes from old troupers, who have devoted their careers
to panto. Jack Tripp, for example, is well into his seventies, but still
regarded as the best Dame in the business. This year he teams up with
another old pro, Roy Hudd, in Babes in the Wood, at Sadler's Wells, the only
panto this Christmas in central London.
John Inman is another actor seldom seen at this time of the year without his
bloomers on: he will be bringing his Dame to Mother Goose at Stockport. A
younger rival in the field is Christopher Biggins who, as Widow Twankey,
will be giving Aladdin a hard time at Norwich. It will be interesting to
compare his technique with the Twankey of Danny la Rue at Plymouth.
Other old stagers to look out for are Lionel Blair, with Britt Ekland, an
enthusiastic pantomime fairy, in Jack &amp; the Beanstalk at Bath; Ronnie
Corbett (still the best Buttons in the business) in Cinderella at Cardiff;
Peggy Mount also in Cinderella - at Redhill; and Rolf Harris (with June
Whitfield and Ian Botham) in yet another Cinderella at Wimbledon.
There are the usual eye-brow raising permutations - the abrasive Dennis
Waterman and his equally feisty wife Rula Lenska in the Reading Aladdin;
Hinge &amp; Bracket sharing Beauty and the Beast at Crawley; Russ Abbot in the
rarely mounted Goldilocks at Woking: and, if you need to know, Little &amp;
Large are in Newcastle and Cannon &amp; Ball in Edinburgh. But often in pantos
it is the rarely recognised troupers in the smaller roles that steal the
show rather than the big names who get by serving up their traditional
material.
Of course, the popularity and success of panto (the box office take enables
many theatres to stay open for the rest of the year) upsets intellectuals,
and there is the usual attempt, invariably by the subsidised theatres, to
clean up the format. The Contact Theatre in Manchester is presenting a
politically correct Cinderella in which the heroine goes off with 'Buttons'
rather than the rich Prince.
There is also a trend to dramatise traditional children's stories as
alternative seasonal treats, like the multi-racial The Wiz at the Riverside
Studios in Hammersmith and tales of the Brothers Grimm at the Young Vic. And
in a real spate of Peter Pans, which offer all the hero-and-villain
excitements of panto plus some intriguing sexual and textual under-tones,
Barrie's Freudian story seems so suitable for Christmas that Richmond is
presenting a panto version starring the unlikely duo of Leslie Grantham and
Una Stubbs.
Pantomime now appeals mainly to very young children rather than parents, or
rather fathers, who a century ago were lured by the legs of the fast
disappearing Principal Boy. It remains the last bastion of family
entertainment and is surviving well. Critics of panto should ask themselves
why the packed audiences do not return to the theatre for other productions.
