FT  30 AUG 94 / Danish PM calls September poll
Prime Minister Poul Nyrup Rasmussen yesterday called a general election to
the Folketing for September 21, breaking with tradition by choosing a
Wednesday rather than a Tuesday for the vote.
Mr Rasmussen, leader of the Social Democratic party, made his announcement
despite a Gallup poll yesterday that showed two of the four parties in his
centre-left majority coalition face elimination from the Folketing.
'A Gallup poll is not the same as an election,' he said.
He hoped to be able to continue in office at the head of the present
government, which besides his own party includes the Radical Liberals, the
Centre Democrats and the Christian People's Party.
The latter two parties risk failing to qualify for Folketing seats by
attracting less than 2 per cent of the vote.
If the election result reflects the opinion polls, the next parliament will
be sharply divided into left and right as a result of the weakening small
centre parties.
Mr Rasmussen, however, has a good chance that he can stay at the head of a
minority government of Social Democrats and Radicals, but this government
would have to rely on the support of the left-wing Socialist People's party.
Together, these three parties scored 52 per cent in yesterday's Gallup, with
the Social Democrats at 33.5 per cent compared with 37.4 per cent in the
1991 election, the Radicals at 4.8 per cent compared with 3.5 per cent and
the Socialist People's party moving ahead to 11.1 per cent from 8.3 per
cent.
Mr Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, leader of the Liberal party and the leading
candidate to become prime minister in a non-Socialist coalition, welcomed
the Gallup. 'People can see the risk they run of getting a red cabinet,' he
said.
The Liberals are heading for a strong result, with Gallup showing them at
23.1 per cent against 15.8 per cent in 1991.
The Liberal party and the Conservative party, led by Mr Hans Engell, the
former minister of justice, hope to form a coalition on the basis of support
from the right-wing populist Progress party.
