FT  10 MAR 94 / Nigeria and Cameroon clash over oil-rich area
Sabre-rattling and nationalist sentiment in Nigeria and Cameroon over a
disputed oil-rich peninsula that forms their shared border disguise vital
economic interests in the area as the governments of both countries face
strident opposition from democracy campaigners and dissenting minority
tribes.
Nigeria has almost 10 times the population of its neighbour and for years
the Bakassi peninsula has been mainly inhabited by Nigerians, many of them
migrant fishermen.
Although this area of south-eastern Nigeria produces 90 per cent of the
nation's foreign earnings, the dozens of minority tribes in the region have
been, on the government's own admission, neglected. Dispossession or
pollution of their farming and fishing areas have not been offset by a share
of the oil wealth, which has been invested in the north and west of Nigeria.
Large investment in exploration deep offshore could make the region even
wealthier in the next century. Bakassi also controls the seaway leading to
Calabar, the nearest big Nigerian port and the site of a new Export
Processing zone.
As the Nigerian government prepares for its delayed constitutional
conference, the eastern minorities are arguing for a better deal and more
autonomy. The military regime suspects that talk of autonomy could lead to
secession and the loss of massive oil wealth.
Cameroon's largest and most vocal dissident political grouping, the
opposition SDF party, has its stronghold near the border region. The mainly
Anglophone region produces most of Cameroon's wealth and is home to more
than 2m Nigerians.
Bakassi was part of the British-governed southern Cameroons from the First
World War until 1961 when the territory voted in a plebiscite to join the
newly independent Cameroon. In 1975 at the Marua treaty Nigeria's Gen Yakubu
Gowon re-affirmed Cameroon's claim to the area, allegedly to thank Cameroon
for providing access to re-capture Calabar during the Biafran war.
Nigeria's federal survey department published an atlas in 1978 signed by
then head of state Gen Olusegun Obasanjo which clearly shows Bakassi to be
in Cameroon.
Squabbles over the boundary in the swamps led to a clash of troops in 1981
then the row subsided. But Bakassi became an international dispute early
this year when Nigeria moved troops into the peninsula to counter alleged
raids by Cameroonian gendarmes against Nigerian fishermen. Last month,
Cameroon demanded the withdrawal of the troops from its territory and
complained to the United Nations Security Council.
After a skirmish on February 18 between rival military patrols in the
peninsula, with reports of light casualties on both sides, Cameroon asked
France for assistance under a bilateral defence pact. France sent two
helicopters and 15 troops to the capital Yaounde, a day's drive from the
border, at the same time as a senior diplomatic mission including President
Francois Mitterrand's special adviser on Africa, Mr Bruno Delaye, to mediate
between the two sides.
Both Britain and France are advising that the dispute be resolved in
bilateral talks, possibly with some assistance from the international court
at The Hague, and both believe that a debate before the UN Security Council,
of which France this month is chairman and Nigeria a temporary member, would
be acrimonious.
