FT  14 SEP 94 / International Company News: Staying upright in a collapsing
market - Bernard Simon explains why Canadian property group Cadillac
Fairview outlived O&amp;Y
Cadillac Fairview and Olympia &amp; York Developments once had a lot in common.
Both were big, privately-owned property developers based in Toronto whose
portfolios included some of North America's most impressive buildings. Both
borrowed heavily in the late 1980s, and found themselves in trouble when the
bottom fell out of the property market.
The big difference now is that O&amp;Y no longer exists as a going concern,
while Cadillac continues to manage a stable of 70 prestige office buildings
and shopping malls, unencumbered by bankruptcy court orders and on tolerably
good terms with its creditors.
Not that Cadillac, with debts totalling CDollars 3.2bn (USDollars 2.3bn), is
out of the woods. About a dozen of its buildings have halted debt-service
payments. It is in the throes of tough restructuring negotiations likely to
take at least another nine months to finalise. Many of its creditors and
shareholders are unpredictable US 'vulture funds' which specialise in
trading distressed companies' securities.
However, Cadillac has learned several lessons from the O&amp;Y debacle. Unlike
O&amp;Y, it approached creditors early on for help. In return for them signing
confidentiality agreements, it supplied the information they asked for.
Instead of the entire company defaulting on its loans, as O&amp;Y did, Cadillac
moved quickly to segregate the cash flows and debt-service payments of its
various properties.
'They worked with the lenders prior to everyone getting angry,' says one
large creditor. 'Nobody has pushed them to seek court protection, so they
must be doing something right.'
Cadillac's holding company does not publish financial statements. It refuses
to disclose how much of its debt is in default.
The restructuring was interrupted last week by the replacement of more than
half the previous nine-member board of directors. The chairman, a Toronto
lawyer, was replaced by Mr Charles Masson, formerly head of financial
restructurings at Salomon Brothers, the New York investment bank.
The board upheaval reflects dramatic changes in the make-up of Cadillac's
shareholders and creditors.
Cadillac was taken private in 1987 by a group of 41 North American
institutional investors led by JMB Realty, a Chicago-based property
developer. One of those investors, the California Public Employees
Retirement System (Calpers), remains the biggest shareholder with a 15 per
cent stake. At about the same time, Cadillac raised CDollars 1bn in loans
from two syndicates comprising 42 North American, European and Japanese
banks.
Cadillac's troubles have prompted many of the original shareholders and
creditors to bail out. They have sold their securities at varying discounts,
mostly to US vulture funds but also to a number of European investors.
Cadillac officials estimate that about 90 per cent of its common shares and
subordinated debentures, which comprise its equity, and 75 per cent of the
syndicated bank loans have changed hands.
'They recognise that there's good value here and good upside,' says Mr
Graeme Eadie, Cadillac's chief executive.
The problem is largely on the liabilities side. According to Mr Walter
Schroeder, president of Dominion Bond Rating Service in Toronto, Cadillac
needs about CDollars 1bn in fresh capital, mainly to ease the burden of the
syndicated bank loans.
Mr Schroeder concurs that 'even with the fall in (property values), it's a
very viable company if they can get the bank loan away'. Cadillac's
portfolio includes Toronto's landmark Eaton Centre, and office buildings and
shopping malls in such cities as Vancouver, Atlanta and New Orleans.
The drive to solve Cadillac's problems is proceeding on several fronts.
Securities holders have been divided into three groups, representing
shareholders and subordinated debenture holders, senior creditors (that is,
holders of the syndicated bank loans) and lenders with loans secured by
specific properties. 'We're trying to establish the size of the pie, and
then we'll decide how to slice it up,' says Mr Geoffrey Godard,
vice-president of Quebec's Caisse Centrale Desjardins, who chairs the
syndicated debt committee.
Cadillac has sold its interest in a handful of properties, but Mr Masson
says 'we don't plan to dispose of any other assets'. The goal is to keep the
company together as a going concern.
Cadillac's management is seeking an outside investor, or group of investors,
to provide fresh capital.
According to Mr Masson, several candidates are at the due diligence stage.
'There is a high level of interest,' he says. Cambridge Shopping Centres of
Toronto disclosed earlier this year that it had submitted a bid for most of
Cadillac's assets.
The restructuring is complicated, however, by arrangements under which
Cadillac's partners in some of its choice properties have a right of first
refusal on its stake and other negotiating privileges.
On the other hand, the recent reshuffle of shareholders, creditors and
directors is expected to help rather than hinder the process. One creditor
complains that members of the former banking syndicates 'were so
dysfunctional they couldn't even agree when to meet'. Mr Godard adds that he
is 'cautiously optimistic' that the changes will speed things up.
Mr Masson is moving from New York to Toronto to oversee the restructuring.
He says he plans to stay for no more than 'single-digit months'. However, he
also acknowledges that big corporate restructurings have a habit of taking
longer than expected.
