FT  26 MAY 94 / Paris talks aim to defuse old central European rivalries
Central Europe's underlying ethnic and cultural rivalries will be under the
spotlight in Paris today at a European Union-sponsored security conference.
Mr Edouard Balladur, the French prime minister whose 'Balladur plan'
inspired the 40-nation 'conference on European stability', will open
proceedings aimed at helping would-be EU members settle their unresolved
minority and other disputes before they become full EU members.
The conference, to be chaired by Greece as current president of the EU, is
expected to conclude with a general statement of principles on the need for
negotiated settlements of frontier and ethnic disputes. But the main
business will be conducted at two 'round tables'.
These will concentrate on the specific issues of the disputed Russian
military presence in Latvia and Estonia, rights of Russian-speaking
minorities in the Baltics, and the way in which minority issues affect
broader relations between states in central Europe.
There will be specific reference, for example, to the ethnic Hungarian
minorities in Romania and Slovakia.
Most central European states have shown lukewarm support for the conference,
preferring behind-the-scenes diplomacy and patient, unspectacular
bridge-building. The defeat of right-wing nationalists in the first round of
the Hungarian elections and the removal from power of Slovakia's nationalist
leader, Mr Vladimir Meciar, have already helped to calm relations between
Hungary and Slovakia.
Romania's search for economic stability and respectability has also helped
to cool passions in ethnically-mixed Transylvania.
Poland, with only tiny ethnic minorities left after the predations of Hitler
and geographical boundary shifts imposed by Stalin, has already concluded
bilateral treaties with all seven neighbouring states. The Czechs, while
slightly apprehensive about the growing demands for compensation from ethnic
Germans expelled from Sudetenland in 1945, suspect that raking over ethnic
issues in public is a diversion from removing the economic obstacles to EU
enlargement to the east.
The round tables are supposed to produce bilateral accords of 'good
neighbourliness' which would be endorsed in a concluding session of the
conference and then be registered with the permanent 52-nation Conference on
Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE).
The EU has deliberately limited the conference's remit to potential EU
members - the six countries of central Europe, the three Baltic republics,
and Slovenia, the one peaceful fragment of ex-Yugoslavia - because it
expects the prospect of entry will spur these countries into good-neighbour
agreements.
But the conference's EU and French organisers have decided to steer clear of
the area of greatest ethnic tension - the Balkans - because the Yugoslav
imbroglio is being separately tackled by the United Nations and other
international mediators. It will also avoid any minority disputes within or
involving the Twelve.
See Editorial comment
