FT  21 APR 94 / Arts: Sunset Boulevard revised - Theatre
Is Andrew Lloyd Webber's new version of Sunset Boulevard superior to his
original? Is cyanide more effective than arsenic? If you gotta go, you gotta
go. This way is quicker and more intense.
The main difference now is that Betty Buckley plays the diva role, the
bygone star Norma Desmond. She brings it more energy and more bite; and she
wears umpteen suitably repulsive over-the-top outfits, turbans, and wigs.
Patti LuPone, who launched the role here last year, seemed to have -
Spiderwoman-like - more belief in Norma's own self-myth, and her vibrato was
less tremulous; but she had fewer frocks to wear. LuPone, whose voice opens
so powerfully at its top and can swell a phrase, reminded us that Lloyd
Webber seemed to have composed the role for Barbara Streisand; Buckley,
whose face has been made up like a staring pale mask, reminds us that he
revised Norma for Glenn Close (in Los Angeles) - in her hammy, lethal,
Dangerous Liaisons mode.
This exercise in compare-and-contrast, with its wealth of dull detail, is
not a task that can interest intelligent adults. The most curious thing is
that Lloyd Webber had to revise Sunset Boulevard at all. Though he is crass
and corny as a composer of popular music drama, he is terrific as an
inventor of blockbuster tourist attractions - usually. His canniness in
finding the right theatrical formulas for his era, and in marketing them, is
mightily impressive - usually. Like Eurodisney, however, Sunset Boulevard
was not doing good enough business. Hence revisions.
But oh] revise it altogether. Lloyd Webber's tinkerings cannot disguise the
ghastly unoriginality of his mind. Other composers borrow material, but they
make something personal from their borrowings. Lloyd Webber, however, simply
presses musical feel-good triggers in your mind. His scores have no
intention of doing anything new. He means simply to remind you
subconsciously of ways you have enjoyed yourself before.
If, alas, you become conscious of this, his method becomes eminently
resistible. The title song here harps on a phrase and a rhythm that are
crucial to a Piaf song, 'La Foule'; the central phrase of 'The Greatest Star
of All' uses material that works better in either the Warsaw Concerto or
Rachmaninov (I wish I could remember which); and the 'Let's Have Lunch'
number is merely a Sondheim pastiche. And as you get to hear each of these a
zillion times during the course of Sunset, you cannot miss how little he
makes of them.
In the original movie Sunset Boulevard you cannot miss how, when Joe escapes
from Norma to write scripts (and fall in love) with Betty, he is escaping
from a mausoleum to a world of spontaneity. Not so here. Betty's milieu is
as musically repetitious as Norma's. More so, in fact. At least Norma's New
Year's Eve party breaks out of a tango into a waltz; Betty's stays stuck in
a tango.
More important, in the movie, you cannot miss the appalling moral collapse
of Joe, as he falls reluctantly into Norma's power. Yet here he is little
better than a gigolo. Superficially, John Barrowman is an improvement on the
musical's previous Joes - especially in his virile, all-American looks (a
mix of Tom Cruise, Christopher Reeve, and Montgomery Clift.) But just look
how smoothly he enters into Norma's clutches; he actually dances the tango,
which should be too dated for Joe, with considerably more flair than she.
And he sounds and acts not like an individual but like a formula.
This is the worst staging I have ever seen by Trevor Nunn. Why does Norma
roam around constantly during her first number? And Joe during the title
song? Why are the lines of spoken dialogue paced with such predictable
rhythm? When Joe and Betty fall in love (1, 'What happened?' 2, 'You did.'
3, they kiss) it sounds like emotion by metronome.
At the Adelphi Theatre, WC2.
