FT  30 SEP 94 / Survey of World Economy and Finance - The World's Economies
 -Europe (38): Mighty leap out of recession - Germany / Critics have been
caught offguard
Critics who accuse the German economy of leaning too heavily on the rickety
crutch of out-dated industries have once again been caught off guard by its
spring-heeled leap out of the 1993 recession.
Gross domestic product in the second quarter in former West Germany grew a
real 1 per cent from the first three months, and was 2.3 per cent ahead of
the second quarter of 1993.
The east, home to 20 per cent of the population but which still contributes
less than 10 per cent of GDP, also staged a better-than-expected surge of
almost 9 per cent growth, bringing the unadjusted aggregate for all Germany
to 2.8 per cent.
Not bad for a country which, in the words of Hans Tietmeyer, Bundesbank
president, some people consider is 'on the way out, technologically
backward, administratively hide-bound, and over-taxed by the task of
building up the new federal states.
'For them, the German economic and social system is a discontinued model,'
he said recently.
While notionally addressing the great and the good during September's
ceremonial farewells to the western allies in Berlin, Mr Tietmeyer was in
effect reminding Germany that there is still a long way to go if the
Jeremiahs are to be proved wrong.
He was repeating a well-worn script to the effect that while the cyclical
upswing, led almost entirely by exports and construction, was welcome,
structural change was still needed if the next cyclical slump was not to be
even more steep and shocking than the last when growth of 1.8 per cent in
1992 was turned into contraction of 1.7 per cent in 1993.
Although Mr Tietmeyer said he disapproved of 'blanket judgments' such as the
one he cited, new challenges demanded far-reaching corrections over the next
few years, above all in the economic field. Hide-bound structures had to be
remedied.
Demands on pay and the social system had to reflect changes in 'the real
economic world. Germany had to free itself from the 'tyranny of the status
quo'.
Some of these issues were addressed in the latest report on Germany from the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Unavoidably,
the report dwelt on the financial and fiscal burdens imposed by unification.
Sure, the eastern economy expanded 7 per cent last year, and is heading for
9 per cent this time, according to the OECD.
But this progress had been made possible only via annual hand-outs of some
DM130bn - equivalent to almost 50 per cent of the east's GDP and 4.6 per
cent of west Germany's economic output.
But there was more. As the report's authors pointed out, the annual
transfers to the east were almost exactly matched by subsidies to ageing
western industries, equivalent to a further 5 per cent of GDP.
Thanks to such burdens - neither of which is likely to be lightened
significantly in the foreseeable future - German taxation is the highest in
the industrial world after that of France.
Last year's government paper on securing Germany's industrial and economic
future called for substantial tax reforms, and named cuts in industrial
subsidies as a key step towards fiscal consolidation. Also included, as the
OECD so pointedly reminded the Bonn government, were contentious issues such
as restrictive shop opening hours, state-ownership and a less-than-optimal
environment for innovative industries: all of which unnecessarily restrained
economic growth.
If government could get to grips with and push through its catalogue of
projects, 'the German model of a social economy could win back its old
strengths', the report said.
Bonn's privatisation and deregulation plans are being laid and put partly
into action. Most recently the government modestly diluted its holding in
the Lufthansa airline. Timetables have been drafted for the sale of stakes
in Deutsche Telekom and the postal service. A bargain was recently struck
allowing private competition into the distribution of mass mailings of items
such as mail order catalogues and advertising brochures.
But deregulation and privatisation are, as yet, considered matters for
concerted action only within the federal government, which controls only
part of the nation's assets. Far more extensive holdings remain in the hands
of local and regional Lander governments, including most of the country's
airports, vast tracts of forest and agricultural land. Even the country's
largest automotive group, Volkswagen, is controlled by the government of
Lower Saxony - a Social Democrat stronghold with no intention of releasing
its grip.
The path to deregulation in Germany is littered with obstacles. The
devolution of decision-making - and tax-raising - powers within the federal
structure is a significant hurdle. The concept of Mitbestimmung or
co-determination which is deeply ingrained in the national mentality,
routinely reduces decision-making to a snail's pace. But the debate is
getting under way.
Although discussion of taxation and fiscal consolidation has been halted and
blurred by election campaigns for most of this year, it will return as a
central theme when the new federal government confronts its most important
medium-term political challenge: European monetary union.
As the country which prides itself as the main driving force behind the
European Union, it faces an uncomfortable situation next year when the ratio
of public sector debt will exceed the Maastricht treaty criterion of 60 per
cent of GDP. Even worse, an independent council of government advisers has
recently warned finance minister Theo Waigel that getting back below the 60
per cent level will at best be difficult in the following years.
The experts have calculated that meeting the debt ratio guideline requires
the fulfilment of a second Maastricht point - that government deficits
should not exceed 3 per cent of GDP - and long-term nominal annual growth of
5 per cent. The snag is that economic growth at this rate implies annual
inflation of 3 per cent, which is incompatible with the Bundesbank's
insistence - not to say hide-bound attitude - that inflation may not exceed
2 per cent if its statutory obligation to maintain a stable D-Mark is to be
fulfilled.
