FT  17 SEP 94 / FT Guide for the Serious Investor (14): A-levels are the
gauge - Investing in education / Latest analysis suggests that
independent-school pupils enjoy a dramatic advantage, certainly at
sixth-form level
With the exception of a house, the most serious investment many people ever
make is in an education for their children.
Sellers of financial products are good at producing frightening projections
for future school fees, following a decade in which fees inflated at an
average of more than 10 per cent each year. This has slowed considerably in
the past two years.
But even if more conservative assumptions on future fees inflation are made,
school education is a big bill. According to the Independent Schools
Information Service (Isis), the average fee for a term at a boarding school
in the academic year just ended was Pounds 3,261. In Greater London it was
as high as Pounds 3,716.
The average day fee at a day school is much cheaper but, at Pounds 1,262 per
term, still rather more than most people can manage to pay out of their
regular income, particularly if they have several children.
Is it worth opting out of the state sector?
People have different reasons for choosing independent schools, many of them
intensely subjective and personal, and defying quantitative analysis. Nobody
has produced a league tables of schools' ethos, for example.
However, analysis of schools' public examination results, particularly
A-levels, is fast becoming more sophisticated. As the key measure used by
universities, A-levels are arguably the most important measure of a
secondary school's performance.
The FT's ranking of independent schools' A-level results is now into its
third year, and a demonstrable 'elite' of independent schools, firmly
embedded in each year's top ten, has already emerged.
These figures do not prove much in themselves. Most of the top schools are
either big-city day schools, which are able to select rigorously from a
large number of applications, or boarding schools of such immense fame -
like Eton and Winchester - that they can be guaranteed a wide range of
quality applications.
Parents with less able children who may not be up to these schools' rigorous
academic standards might be more interested to find somewhere which can 'add
value' to their children, or help them to get better results than they would
have managed otherwise.
One of the first attempts to assess a school's 'value-added', produced by
statisticians at the Department for Education, suggests strongly that
independent schools can improve children's A-level scores. It compared the
A-level point-scores that students achieved last year with the point-score
they had obtained in their GCSE exams two years earlier.
As might be expected, children who did well at GCSE were the most likely to
get good A-level grades. But the statisticians found that, regardless of a
pupil's achievements at GCSE, they were more likely to get good A-levels in
independent schools than they were at state schools.
For example, 42 per cent of the state school pupils achieving 70 or more
GCSE points (equivalent to 10 grade As) went on to get three or more grade
As at A-level. But this feat was managed by 61 per cent of independent
school pupils with similarly strong GCSEs.
At a less exalted level, 11 per cent of independent school pupils who had
only managed between 45 and 49 GCSE points - equivalent to about eight
B-grades - went on to score three As at A-level; while 56 per cent of them
managed at least 15 A-level points, usually good enough for a university
place.
In the state sector, only 1 per cent of pupils with GCSE scores in this
range went on to achieve three As or better at A-level, while only a quarter
managed 15 A-level points.
These figures suggested a dramatic advantage for independent school pupils,
and took even the independent sector itself by surprise. It is possible that
last year's performance will prove to be a fluke once the data has been
compiled for a few more years, but as it stands, the figures provide a
powerful case for independent education, at least at sixth-form level. With
each year that passes, academic league tables should become more useful
tools for parents as statistical methods are improved.
Is it possible to limit expenditure on fees?
First you should shop around schools, and, if you are confident you have
found the right one, make contact with the bursar as early as possible.
Readers of this survey are unlikely to qualify for the bursaries which many
schools offer to low-income families, but many schools have scholarships for
children with particular skills. Block payment plans, in which schools offer
a discount in return for payment of five or six years' fees in advance, are
also worth discussing.
Once you know the likely level of fees you will be paying, it is possible to
build a financial plan. The earlier you start planning, the broader the
range of options open to you.
Traditionally, school-fees planning centres on life assurance endowment
policies, as these have the advantage of a fixed-sum guaranteed. Parents can
have some confidence that their policy will grow sufficiently to pay the
fees.
However, life policies are inflexible, and carry high expense costs, and
they also require you to pay premiums for at least 10 years - not a useful
tool for paying nursery or pre-prep school fees.
More imaginative plans for those with capital build on second-hand endowment
policies, and on zero-dividend preference shares of split-capital investment
trusts.
Both have the advantage of a fixed level of uplift over the short- to
medium-term. The gains that can be made by investing in advance while aiming
for a fixed target are startling.
For example, a plan put together by Mr Michael Thompson, of stockbrokers
Gerrard Vivian Gray, uses a portfolio of 10 zeros to fund three children
through to secondary school. The plan is timed so that one zero is due to be
redeemed each year until 2004, when the oldest daughter starts secondary
school.
Total investment in the zeros this year is Pounds 43,662. Their total
redemption value is Pounds 75,078. This secures fees of Pounds 3,110 for
next year, when it would cover one child, and Pounds 13,098 in 2004. This
would pay for three children, and makes some allowance for inflation.
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
THE TOP 10 INDPENDENT SCHOOLS
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                 Average       A-level
                                                    over        passes
                                                previous     FT    per
    School                Town/county              5 yrs  score  pupil
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
1.  Westminster School    London, Greater London       4   1.54    3.6
2.  Eton College          Windsor, Berks               5   1.53    3.6
3.  St Paul's School      London, Greater London       3   1.52    3.9
4.  Winchester College    Winchester, Hants            2   1.51    3.6
5.  The North London
     Collegiate School    Edgware, Greater London      8   1.46    3.4
6.  Royal Grammar School  Guildford, Surrey           20   1.43    3.3
7.  Manchester Grammar
     School               Manchester                   7   1.42    3.4
8.  Downe House           Newbury, Berks              59   1.41    3.2
9.  King Edward VI High
     School for Girls     Birmingham, West Midlands   11   1.41    3.2
10. St Paul's Girls'
     School               London, Greater London       6   1.41    3.2
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
The table shows the top ten schools from this year's FT-500 ranking of
independent schools' A-level performance. Ranking is according to the
average result obtained in each exam, and according to each candidate's
total A-level score. The FT score shows how a school's A-level
performance compares with the average independent school, with an
average school scoring 1.00. Where two schools have the same score, the
difference between their A-level performance is very marginal.
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
