FT  17 OCT 94 / Survey of International Telecommunications (20): Global
link-ups could transform the industry - International Alliances / The last
year has seen the rise of global alliances between telecommunications
operators, the impact of which could be a transformation of the
international telecoms industry
The outlines of the new structure of the world telecoms industry are starkly
clear: three rival alliances of operators, each seeking to create and corner
the market for one-stop international telecoms contracts. Although defensive
as much as offensive in motivation, the alliances are displaying less and
less regard for the 'cartel culture' which has hitherto governed
international telecoms.
The three alliances are headed respectively by British Telecommunications,
AT&amp;T, the largest US operator, and Deutsche Telekom, the state-owned German
carrier.
Concert, the joint venture company headed by BT, is widely credited as the
most advanced of the three alliances. Its cornerstone is a Dollars 5.3bn
alliance between BT and MCI, the second-largest US long-distance carrier,
forged in June 1993. The alliance involved BT taking a 20 per cent stake in
MCI for Dollars 4.3bn, and the establishment by the two companies of a
Dollars 1bn joint venture (Concert), based in the US, to develop and market
one-stop voice and data services for multinationals.
Concert has gained regulatory approval on both sides of the Atlantic and
launched a range of voice and data services. Its main strategic priority is
building relationships with national operators to market its wares.
So far, it has signed up three of the four Nordic national operators
(Norwegian Telecom, Telecom Finland and Tele Danmark, the Danish national
operator), and Nippon Information and Communication (NIC), a small joint
venture between NTT, the Japanese national domestic, and IBM Japan.
None of these tie-ups involves equity exchanges or is exclusive, although
the Nordic alliance is more than a simple marketing agreement since the four
partners have agreed jointly to attack the Swedish corporate market where
the national operator, Telia, is a key member of a rival alliance. However,
BT does not rule out more equity partners for Concert. Its most evident
weakness is in the crucial Asia-Pacific region, where NIC is no substitute
for its parent (NTT), or for one of the larger national operators.
Worldsource/Unisource, the second of the alliances, is a more complex hybrid
formed this June between two different groupings: AT&amp;T's Worldsource venture
and Unisource, a joint venture between four mainland European operators.
The two have been growing separately - indeed, in competition - for more
than a year, but are now committed to progressing in partnership.
Worldsource involves no equity exchanges between carriers, but is a bid by
AT&amp;T to enlist a cast of leading national and regional operators to market
and help provide its international business services.
The members, who have joined with differing degrees of commitment, include
KDD, the Japanese international operator, Singapore Telecom, and Telstra,
the Australian national operator. Telstra is a significant force across
Asia-Pacific.
Until this June, Worldsource's obvious weakness lay in Europe. AT&amp;T pondered
several strategic options but for a year appeared reluctant to chose between
them. In the end, Unisource became an almost inevitable partner.
A joint venture between the national operators of Sweden, Switzerland and
the Netherlands, Unisource has direct contact with most of Europe's
multinationals and was developing a solid reputation. Its imminent expansion
 -now completed - to include Telefonica, the semi-state owned Spanish
national carrier, was a further attraction to AT&amp;T because of Telefonica's
significant operations in Latin America. And since Unisource included none
of Europe's four largest carriers, the tie-up is hard for regulators to
oppose on competition grounds.
For its part, Unisource needed a US partner urgently to be credible to
multinationals. Early in the year it joined AT&amp;T in a successful bid to
provide telecoms facilities to the EVUA, an association of more than 30
European multinationals contracting for a common corporate network for their
European traffic.
'It brings us what we needed to make a strong competitor in this
international market,' says Mr Viesturs Vucins, Unisource chief executive.
Atlas, the third alliance, comprises Deutsche Telekom, France Telecom and
Sprint, the third-largest US long-distance carrier.
As with the AT&amp;T/Unisource alliance, Atlas was preceded by a grouping of the
European carriers, who a year ago formed a joint venture called 'Eunetcom.'
In June, this was expanded to include Sprint, when France Telecom and
Deutsche Telekom signed a deal to take a 20 per cent stake in the US
operator for Dollars 4.2bn.
'There are hard and soft alliances in this industry,' says a leading
corporate finance adviser to Deutsche Telekom. 'To our mind, the lesson of
BT/MCI's marriage was that only the hard variety were durable, so we had to
go the whole way.'
However, Atlas may yet founder on the rock of regulation. BT faced a
marathon examination by US regulatory authorities, lasting over a year, when
it was pressed hard on the issue of the openness of the UK telecoms market
to competition.
The US has since formally declared the UK's telecoms regime to be
'equivalent' to the US in terms of the openness - the only country besides
Canada to enjoy that status.
By that token, Atlas is set for a traumatic ordeal before the Federal
Communications Commission and the US Department of Justice. Neither the
French nor the German public voice telephony markets are open to competition
 -and will not be until 1998.
AT&amp;T is making much of the prospect of 'monopoly' revenues being used to
'subsidise' Sprint in its US and international activities, while US
operators are unable to compete head-on in either France or Germany. Atlas
has to answer similar charges before the European Commission.
Even if Atlas is allowed to proceed, it lacks Asia-Pacific partners. Mr
Helmut Ricke, chairman of Deutsche Telekom, says Asia is 'an immediate
concern', but partnerships have yet to be announced.
If the outline of the alliances is increasingly clear, vital issues
concerning their future remain shrouded in mist. Three issues in particular,
each of which has ramifications for international telecommunications more
broadly:
Market share: the alliances proclaim multinational companies - anywhere
between 400 and 4,000 of them, depending on the interviewee - as their
target.
How fast will they gain them? And is that just the first, large step on a
road which could see the alliances corner a large part of international
telecoms business?
There is alarm among the smaller European PTTs, which fear that isolation
from the alliances could result in a haemorrhage of lucrative corporate
traffic, since their main corporate customers are almost by definition
'multinational.'
Liberalisation makes the threat more potent still: the likes of BT and AT&amp;T
are already allowed to operate private corporate networks across the
European Union; if - as appears likely - full infrastructure liberalisation
takes place across the EU in 1998, they will be able to put their weight
behind fully-fledged alternative carriers if they consider that to be the
best way into the local market.
However, for most Asia-Pacific carriers the pressure to ally is less
intense. Although the region includes liberal telecoms regimes such as
Australia, most of the market for international telecoms appears set to
remain protected by monopolies into the next century.
Cartel pricing: executives of the alliances say that they need to offer
savings on basic prices of at least 10 per cent to make their one-stop
services attractive. However, it is too soon to claim that the new regime
will undermine the cartel which keeps international prices artificially
high.
If, in a given market, the effect of the PTT joining an alliance is to keep
out effective competition, it could have the opposite effect.
Margins: is the core business of the alliances - one-stop international
corporate services - high or low margin business?
The pessimists say low margin, because multinationals are demanding large
savings for one-stop contracts. However, the optimists stress the undoubted
dynamic effect of improved networks in boosting traffic and the sale of new
services.
Furthermore, should corporate networks be the thin end of a larger wedge,
the pickings could be richer still. That, at any rate, is the view from
AT&amp;T, BT and Deutsche Telekom.
