FT  03 MAY 94 / The People Page: Gambling with the big prize - David White
examines the record of Banco Santander's Emilio Botn, the victor in the
contest for control of Banesto
Emilio Botn almost missed the boat. On the night the chairman of Banco
Santander won the bidding to take control of Banco Espanol de Credito
(Banesto) from Spain's 'bank hospital', the Deposit Guarantee Fund, he
forgot to sign the crucial bid document. The announcement of the verdict on
Spain's biggest takeover was held up by an agonising extra hour.
The runner-up in the auction, Banco Bilbao Vizcaya, considered using the
omission to challenge the decision on technical grounds.
It had reason to be peeved.
Not only had it been thwarted in its long-time ambition to become the
dominant force in Spanish banking. It also faced the prospect of losing
high-flying executives, on temporary loan to Banesto during the rescue
operation, who would now be poached by the new owner.
Overnight the 59-year-old Botn has become Spain's top banker. The combined
group, according to its own calculations, ranks number 22 in Europe and 45
in the world in total assets.
But Banco Santander's Dollars 2bn investment in Banesto is a big bite. With
a branch network two and a half times as big as Banco Santander's, Banesto
was for many years the country's biggest financial institution, the
archetypal establishment bank of the Franco regime, remaining staid, stuffy
and impenetrable for years afterwards.
In its most recent phase, with a jaunty new logo and an aggressive lending
policy, it got itself into deep trouble. A Dollars 3.7bn rescue operation
was required to put the mammoth back on its feet. While Banco Santander has
already divested almost all its industrial shareholdings, Banesto still has
a mish-mash of interests to be got rid of before it becomes an orthodox
commercial bank.
For Botn, the acquisition marks a change of approach. At the end of the
1980s, while other leading Spanish banks sought mergers as the most obvious
means of bringing themselves more into line with the dimensions of big banks
in other European countries, Botn stood aloof, preferring to build up
Santander's own business.
Far from being a buyer, he sold off smaller 'second brand' banks belonging
to the group. But he is believed to have had eyes on Banesto for some time.
And he clearly saw the auction of the restructured bank as a chance he could
not refuse.
'We have spent years storing up capital to be able to take advantage of
opportunities, peseta by peseta, patiently, prudently' - which is how be
believe things should be done in banking.
In Spanish, there are two words for banker. A 'bancario' is someone who
works in banking. A 'banquero' is someone who runs a bank. Botn - full name
Emilio Botn-Sanz de Sautuola y Garcia de los Ros - was born a 'banquero'.
The family pedigree is unique in Spanish business. His grandfather Emilio
Botn was the first permanent chairman of the bank, which had been set up in
Santander in the 1850s to finance transatlantic trade flowing through the
northern Spanish port. His father, also Emilio Botn, who took over when it
was still very much a provincial bank, oversaw its expansion further afield
during a 36-year reign as chairman.
The statue to him in the bank's headquarters on the Santander waterfront was
erected by grateful shareholders long before he was ready to leave the job.
Until his death last year, the father was still referred to as Don Emilio.
The new chairman continued to be known as 'the son'.
After studying law and economics at Valladolid and the Jesuit Deusto
university in Bilbao, he joined the bank at 24, working at a local branch.
But two years later he was already a director. When his father finally made
way for him in 1986 he set about strengthening the bank's balance sheet,
bolstering its provisions against loan risks - especially in Latin America -
and widening its customer base.
A pioneer in offering interest-bearing 'super-accounts', Banco Santander
moved up from fifth or sixth place among the country's private commercial
banks to number three.
It became a shareholder of Royal Bank of Scotland and First Fidelity in the
US and built up an international reputation for innovation - in fields such
as telephone banking - and the dynamism of its merchant banking arm,
recently renamed Santander Investment.
So why this move? The way it was going, in Botn's view, the group would soon
have been predominantly geared to foreign business - already accounting for
more than 40 per cent of its profits - and investment banking. It needed to
redress the balance by increasing its weight in the Spanish market. Banesto,
in many backwoods areas of Spain the only bank in town, would do the trick.
Some people in Banco Santander harbour private qualms about the challenge
the group has taken on, and about the price it is paying. But Botn claims
the price is 'absolutely reasonable' and shrugs off the negative impact the
deal has had on Banco Santander's own shares.
In a bank otherwise noted for its transparency, the degree of family control
is a mystery. Little is known about the full extent of the family fortune.
According to its annual report, the combined shareholdings of the family
foundation, which is the largest institutional shareholder, and Botns on the
board - including brother Jaime, who heads the associated Bankinter - come
to less than 3.5 per cent. But nobody has any doubt about who runs the bank.
Two of Botn's six children are directors - Ana Patricia, 33, and the next
Emilio Botn, 30. Either could be in line for the succession.
The family's discretion is legendary. Botn's wife is a concert pianist,
Paloma O'Shea, but otherwise little is known about his private life except
that he travels a lot and plays golf when he finds time. According to one
person in the bank's inner circle, 'nobody gets close to Botn'.
In Santander neither the family nor the bank needs to advertise their
presence; it is pervasive. However, if one were to ask in the world at large
who was Santander's most famous living son, the answer might not be Botn but
the golfer Severiano Ballesteros. But then Botn is Ballesteros'
father-in-law.
When he was promoted to the chairmanship of the bank 7 1/2 years ago, with a
solid record as managing director but still very much in the shadow of Don
Emilio the father, other bankers in Madrid reserved their judgment on how he
would prove himself in the position. 'Now they know,' said a colleague at
the bank last week.
