FT  06 MAY 94 / Survey of The Channel Tunnel (20): A financial bed of nails
 -Profile / Graham Corbett, Eurotunnel's finance director
Joining Eurotunnel in 1987 was supposed to represent a prestigious but not
too onerous denouement to a distinguished accountancy career for Graham
Corbett, the channel tunnel group's chief financial officer.
Only a year earlier, as senior partner of Peat Marwick's continental
European firm based in Paris, he had been musing to his wife that a move to
Eurotunnel, then in its infancy, would represent his ideal career move -
'the project (of building a tunnel link between England and France) was
always something I had believed in passionately,' he says.
So it seemed too good to be true when Sir Alastair Morton, Eurotunnel's
co-chairman, offered him the position, following up a suggestion from the
Bank of England. After a morning of negotiations Mr Corbett agreed to take a
four-day-per-week contract lasting 18 months.
In the event, his working week has typically been 80 hours or more -
including a regular Sunday afternoon brainstorming session with Sir Alastair
 -as Mr Corbett has played the vital though exhausting role of protecting
the interests of the group's shareholders while the company has lurched from
one financial crisis to the next.
'I suspect my contract still says four days a week', he says nostalgically.
'I haven't had the time to examine it for some while.'
He is an avid city-hopper, going from emergency bank meeting to emergency
bank meeting, propelling himself phlegmatically on crutches and seemingly
untroubled by leg braces which resemble Victorian instruments of torture.
When representatives of the group's 200 banks are asked who have played
important roles in keeping the group afloat despite its remarkable
vicissitudes, Mr Corbett is almost always cited.
'He has been a rock,' comments a banker, who recalls ruefully that Mr
Corbett has not given an inch when convinced that banks have demanded too
high a price for supplying new funds - 'no, we have not always seen eye to
eye,' the banker says. However, the job almost became one of the shortest on
record - 'I arrived a week after Black Monday' (in October 1987, when the
stock market crashed), Mr Corbett recalls. 'That was two weeks before
'equity three,' (Eurotunnel's code name for its third share sale, to raise
Pounds 770m needed before tunnelling could start).'
In the light of the stock market's volatility - and the enormous losses made
by underwriters on the British Petroleum share sale - there was concern that
Eurotunnel would be unable to underwrite its share issue and thus that the
project would be stillborn.
However, the company just succeeded, thanks to the combined marketing skills
of 13 French and British securities houses. For the first and last time, Mr
Corbett had to sit on the sidelines and watch while the City decided
Eurotunnel's fate. However, in Eurotunnel's two subsequent refinancings, Mr
Corbett has been a leading protagonist. In the first refinancing, Mr Corbett
knows better than anyone how close the group came to bankruptcy.
'In early 1990 we were down to our last Pounds 1m,' he says. For a group
which will have consumed Pounds 10bn in debt and equity by the time normal
passenger services are being provided, that was tantamount to insolvency.
The costs of building the tunnel had been escalating sharply. However,
Eurotunnel had thought in early January 1990 that it had persuaded
Transmanche Link, the consortium of contractors working on the project, to
take a greater share of the cost over-runs.
But until this new contract with TML was signed, Eurotunnel's banks refused
to allow the company to draw any further funds. Giving no explanation, TML
simply refused to sign. By February 20, Mr Corbett was forced to contemplate
calling in the receivers.
In due course, however - and following the intervention of the Governor of
the Bank of England, Robin Leigh-Pemberton, now Lord Kingsdown - TML signed
and Eurotunnel was given access to its bank facilities again.
After a nerve-wracking summer of that year - during which it appeared that
some banks would block a much-needed increase in its banking facilities -
Eurotunnel secured access to a further Pounds 1.8bn of commercial bank
loans, a Pounds 300m loan from the European Investment Bank and Pounds 566m
from a rights issue.
Having pulled that one off, Eurotunnel and Mr Corbett are hopeful they can
raise Pounds 1.3bn in debt and equity in a second refinancing taking place
at the moment.
However, being Eurotunnel's finance director is probably the corporate
equivalent of appearing on Friday the Thirteenth - just as one horror is
out-manoeuvred, another pops out of the black hole.
