FT  20 MAY 94 / International Company News: Telecom Italia has hopes of
being a world leader
Telecom Italia, created yesterday, is laying plans to become one of the
world's leading telecommunications operators during the next decade,
according to Mr Ernesto Pascale, chairman.
Shareholders in Sip, the quoted domestic network operator of which Mr
Pascale is also chairman, gave the go-ahead yesterday to a merger with four
other state-controlled telecoms units, to form Telecom Italia.
'After the year 2000, only a few companies will manage to operate at a
global level: Telecom Italia will do its utmost to be one of them,' Mr
Pascale told shareholders.
The complex merger, which involves the conversion of shares in the four
other companies into Sip shares, is the prelude to the eventual sale of the
Italian government's stake in Stet, the national telecoms utility. Stet will
own just over 55 per cent of Telecom Italia after the merger.
The Stet privatisation should take place before the end of the year and is
likely to be the largest in the ambitious Italian programme of state sales,
and the most important challenge for Mr Silvio Berlusconi's new right-wing
government.
This week, Mr Berlusconi promised to accelerate the privatisation programme,
but he will have to resolve complex and controversial questions about
whether to spread ownership of the utility widely or allow it to come under
the control of a few groups, including suppliers such as Pirelli.
The likely popularity of the sale has been reflected on the Milan stock
exchange where shares in both Stet and Sip have performed strongly this
year. Shares in Telecom Italia will begin trading on the Milan exchange on
August 18.
Telecom Italia is expected to have share capital of over L7,000bn when its
shares are first quoted on the Milan stock exchange in August. Turnover is
expected to top L27,000bn (Dollars 17bn) and net profit L1,000bn, making the
group the sixth largest telecoms operator in the world.
Yesterday, Sip shareholders were set to approve results for 1993, which show
a pre-tax profit of L1,471bn, up 47 per cent on 1992, and a net profit of
L657bn, an increase of 43 per cent.
The other companies to be amalgamated with Sip are Telespazio, the satellite
operator, SIRM, the maritime telecoms operator, Iritel, the long-distance
operator, and Italcable, the international telecoms services company, which
also approved the merger at separate assemblies yesterday.
