FT  31 DEC 94 / Swedes count the European costs of bananas and whisky: Hugh
Carnegy reports on a nation already unsettled by changes, violence and
unemployment as it takes on membership of the EU
After the fiery debates of autumn when Sweden held its referendum on joining
the European Union, the occasion of accession tomorrow (with Austria and
Finland) will be notable chiefly for its effect on the price of bananas
(going up) and whisky (going down).
The Social Democratic government plans no special ceremonies to mark the
day. For most citizens, the biggest effect in the coming weeks will be a mix
of price changes; the price of bananas, rice and some clothing will rise
because of imposition of EU tariffs, while the prices of other food imports
and spirits will fall as local trade barriers come down.
The act of joining the Union, although a significant strategic shift for
Sweden, is causing little excitement among Swedes. Rather, the country ends
the year in a mood of introspection after a series of recent events have
combined to induce an unsettling feeling of change in a society which has
long prided itself on its stability, prosperity and social cohesion.
Most dramatically, this year has seen a spate of brutal violence that has
provoked an anguished public debate over such highly sensitive issues as
child care and immigration. In December alone a gunman shot dead four people
and wounded more than 20 outside a Stockholm nightclub; two former soldiers
lobbed grenades and opened fire on police in a Hollywood-style aborted raid
on an army weapons store in the Arctic Circle; and a Vietnamese immigrant
shot and wounded five relatives in a domestic row in south Sweden.
Although a quite different event, the sinking in September of the Baltic
ferry Estonia, with the loss of 900 lives, had an even more profound effect
on a neutral nation with very little experience in this century of violent
death.
In the meantime, the country has grown all too familiar with the
double-edged economic crisis of record levels of unemployment and a yawning
budget deficit which has left Sweden with the fastest growing public debt in
the industrialised world. To tackle the deficit, the government is having to
impose tough tax rises and public spending cuts that slice at the heart of
the welfare system.
'Even if some of the things happening don't have anything in common, lots of
things have happened in the last year that suddenly give us the feeling that
this is not the Garden of Eden any more,' is the wry comment of Ms Ursula
Berge, the political editor of the Norrlandska Socialdemocraten, the Social
Democratic daily newspaper in northern Sweden.
Certainly, the adjustments now under way in the economy involve a real turn
for the worse. Total unemployment has jumped since the turn of the decade
from about 5 per cent of the workforce to more than 13 per cent. The Social
Democrats, architects of the welfare state, are engaged in a painful
internal struggle to agree on the scale of cuts necessary in such core
programmes as universal child allowance payments to bring the budget deficit
under control. The vast majority of Swedish families will have lower net
income in 1995 than in 1994. 'People are having to realise that these
problems will not be solved overnight,' says Ms Berge.
To those who supported joining the EU, membership is part of the solution.
The hope is that being part of the Union will help cement the investment and
produce the coherent economic policies needed to secure growth and reduce
unemployment.
The question is, however, to what extent Sweden can return to the cosy
certainties of the past, as many Social Democrats clearly wish. With public
spending now accounting for 70 per cent of GNP, far above the European
average, a permanent reduction in the scope of the welfare state seems
unavoidable.
The nature of Swedish society is also undergoing a challenge, chiefly
through the effects of the country's own generous refugee policy, which has
led to a significant immigrant population. About 1.5m of Sweden's 8.8m
people were born outside Sweden, or their parents were. Although Sweden has
not experienced the scale of anti-immigrant reaction seen in Germany or
France, the issue of reconciling the integration of immigrants with the
preservation of traditional Swedish society is a recurrent theme in public
debate.
By no means everyone takes a pessimistic view of the way things are going,
however. Mr Lars Christiansson, formerly chief spokesman for Mr Carl Bildt,
the reformist prime minister from 1991 until September this year, says it is
a 'myth' to believe that Sweden had ever achieved a state of perfect
equilibrium.
Rather he stresses that since the late 1980s there has been a growing
realisation that Sweden has to adjust - particularly to swing back the
balance in the economy towards the private sector and halt a trend that has
seen Sweden slip since 1970 from third place in the world league of GNP per
head to 16th place.
'Swedish society is not that homogenous any more,' says Mr Christiansson.
'Change is inevitable. It is there and it will go on. There are bad social
effects - but they are exaggerated.'
The most powerful new recruit to the EU will be at home round the table in
Brussels, where its new colleagues have their minds on problems at home and
only half an eye for Europe.
