FT  20 APR 94 / Japan rethinking use of plutonium in power stations
Japan is considering reducing the use of plutonium as a fuel for commercial
power stations, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry announced
yesterday.
Mr Hiroshi Kumagai, minister responsible for Miti, said 'discussion is
proceeding in that direction' in a ministry advisory panel on energy,
expected to produce an interim report in June and a final opinion by the end
of the year. 'Discussion so far by the committee seems to be convincing,'
said Mr Kumagai.
He gave no detail, but Mr Kumagai's statement confirms rumours Japan is
having second thoughts about the scope of its controversial billion-yen
nuclear recycling programme.
This could help defuse North Korean allegations that Japan is stockpiling
plutonium to make nuclear bombs. The Tokyo government has frequently denied
having nuclear weapons ambitions, pointing out that this would contravene
its own constitution. Yet the North Korean regime frequently cites its
nuclear suspicions of Japan as a reason for not divulging full information
about its own suspected nuclear weapons programme.
Mr Kumagai's announcement could also make it easier for the Social
Democratic party to co-operate with the rest of the government coalition.
The socialists are environmentally sensitive and espouse a soft line on
North Korea.
Japan's Atomic Energy Commission plans to lift Japan's dependence on nuclear
generated electricity from 28.2 per cent of the total now to 40 per cent in
the next 20 years.
Until recently, it planned to reach that target partly by using
plutonium-fuelled fast breeder reactors, which produce more fuel than they
burn.
A prototype fast breeder named Monju, based on the west coast, began a
self-sustaining nuclear reaction early this month. For the time being, it
uses plutonium supplies from reprocessing plants in France and Britain.
The most recent delivery of French plutonium, halfway round the world to
Tokyo by sea, raised an international outcry. On present energy policies,
the next delivery will come from British Nuclear Fuel's Thorp reprocessing
plant and Cogema's La Hague plant in northern France in three years.
Japan's own reprocessing plant, to extract plutonium from spent fuel from
conventional uranium-fed reactors, is due, on present government policies,
to come into operation early next century. However, the unexpectedly low
price of plutonium on the world market has provided an economic as well as
political reason for a rethink on fast breeders.
