FT  19 DEC 94 / Turkey's rights record jeopardises customs union: A crucial
meeting in Brussels today is under threat
Greek intransigence and anger at Turkish human rights abuses are threatening
a crucial meeting in Brussels today between the European Union and Turkey.
EU foreign ministers, senior European Commission officials and a Turkish
delegation are scheduled to take a final decision on establishing a customs
union, due to come into force on January 1 1996.
But the sentencing earlier this month of eight Kurdish MPs to long jail
terms for violating Turkey's strict security laws has crystallised
opposition to the union in the European parliament and some national
governments. Foremost among the opponents is Greece, which, after failing to
persuade Germany, the EU's current president, to postpone today's meeting,
appears determined to veto the deal.
Officials hope the meeting will still go ahead, with a decision postponed
for a few months to allow tempers to cool and negotiators time to reach a
compromise. However, were the meeting to be cancelled at the last minute,
there could be an angry confrontation between Turkey and Europe which would
damage an already troubled relationship.
Ankara state security court's verdict on the MPs on the eve of the European
Union's Essen summit could scarcely have come at a worse time. It
embarrassed the German presidency, which had lobbied for customs union.
European Commission President Jacques Delors said in a French television
interview that jailing the Kurdish MPs was 'scandalous'. He added he was
against customs union without 'guarantees' that Turkey would respect human
rights.
Last Thursday the European Parliament adopted a non-binding resolution
calling for today's meeting to be suspended and demanding the jailed MPs'
release. Support in some EU governments for Turkey all but evaporated after
the trial.
To make matters worse for Turkey, a Kurdish human rights lawyer was murdered
last week, and Ankara's security court begins proceedings today against two
human rights campaigners accused of violating anti-terrorism laws by writing
a booklet on torture. The booklet was partly financed by the EU.
Greek opposition to customs union is linked more closely to the Socialist
government's efforts to secure EU entry for Cyprus by the end of the 1990s
than to its traditional hostility to Turkey.
Mr Andreas Papandreou, Greek prime minister, failed at last week's EU summit
to win agreement on a definite date for starting talks on Cypriot accession.
Together with customs union, Greece will continue to block the release of
Ecu600m (Pounds 472.2m) in EU aid to Turkey, held up for eight years by lack
of progress on reuniting Cyprus.
While the European Commission is committed to including Cyprus in the next
EU enlargement, membership negotiations are likely to be complicated by the
island's division into separate states.
However, France, which assumes the EU's rotating six-month presidency next
month, is determined to see customs union adopted and will press Greece to
abandon its objections and Turkey to make concessions on human rights.
Customs union would give European companies free access to a market of 60m
people and an economy that until this year was the fastest growing in the
OECD. Half Turkey's trade is already with the EU and two thirds of its
foreign investment comes from Europe.
Turkey would in effect join the single European market, with some of the
rights and obligations of an EU member. Yet in contrast to the position of
the post-communist countries of eastern Europe or even Malta or Cyprus,
Brussels has told Turkey that membership is not on the agenda. It has twice
rejected Turkish applications for full membership.
For Turks, who see themselves as Europeans, rejection is deeply wounding.
They believe concern for human rights is a smokescreen for Europe's
anti-Moslem prejudices. President Suleyman Demirel says: 'Turkey is a
European country. Europe is not only a geographic area, but a system of
values. I think Turkey should be part of Europe, it should not be ousted.'
Prime Minister Tansu Ciller says customs union will 'anchor Turkey to the
west in a definitive and irreversible way'. Rejection, she and many European
officials argue, would halt Turkey's progress to full democracy. It would
benefit extremists, marginalise democrats and stunt the economic growth that
could foster stability.
However, Mrs Ciller bears great responsibility for Turkey's present
predicament. It was she who urged parliament to lift the eight Kurdish MPs'
parliamentary immunity, allowing them to be prosecuted. Parliament has still
not approved a political reform package her coalition government promised
three years ago.
Yet diplomats believe a bill introduced into parliament on Friday creating a
human rights ministry indicates that pressure from Brussels is having a
positive effect.
But there is no sign of an end to violence in the mainly Kurdish south-east,
where fighting between security forces and the Kurdistan Workers' party
(PKK) has claimed more than 13,000 lives in the past 10 years. The battle
against PKK guerrillas both entrenches the military's political power and is
used to justify security laws that punish 'crimes of thought'.
As Mr Klaus Kinkel, Germany's foreign minister who has supported customs
union, put it last week: 'If Turkey wants to join Europe, it must not turn a
cold shoulder to everything Europe stands for.'
