FT  22 JUL 94 / International Company News: Saudi banking boom nearing end
First-half figures for the majority of Saudi Arabia's commercial banks show
profits generally moving ahead, but signs of a marked slowdown in the
second-quarter indicate the kingdom's post-Gulf war banking boom has drawn
to a close.
Bankers and economists in the kingdom say the results show tighter liquidity
across the market, with deposits flat, assets up by little more than 5 per
cent, operating costs rising and provisions also higher.
With the Saudi government determined to cut public sector spending and the
recent rise in oil prices yet to filter through to an economy still feeling
the effect of the crude price slide of late last year, bankers and
economists say bank profits look set to remain under pressure. 'It's the
most testing time for the Saudi banking market since the mid-1980s,' said
one economist.
Among the latest results, Saudi American Bank, 30 per cent owned by
Citibank, reported an 11 per cent rise in first-half earnings over 1993,
with net profits up to SR522m (Dollars 140.87m). Al-Rahji Banking and
Investment, formerly the kingdom's biggest money changer, reported a 16 per
cent increase in net profit to SR434m.
Saudi Arabian Investment Bank, the kingdom's smallest, has reported a 21 per
cent rise in the half to SR39m.
However, Saudi French Bank, 31 per cent held by Banque Indosuez, said its
first-half earnings were up only 1.3 per cent over 1993 to SR175m, while
Saudi British Bank, which is 40 per cent held by Hong Kong and Shanghai
Corporation, also reported a slight rise in earnings of just over 1 per cent
to SR195.3 over a year earlier, according to unaudited figures.
Saudi Hollandi Bank, 40 per cent owned by ABN Amro, the Dutch bank, said
first-half earnings had increased 1.6 per cent to SR93.6m.
Only two banks have had outright profit falls for the first half, with Riyad
Bank reporting a 12 per cent decline to SR374m over last year. Arab National
Bank posted an 8 per cent decline to SR216m for the period.
However, more than half of the banks to have issued results so far show
marked declines in earnings for the second quarter compared with the first.
Bankers and economists in the kingdom attribute this partly to exchange rate
losses taken as a result of the dollar's recent weakness and to falls in
world bond and equity prices.
Analysts also cite the contraction in public sector activity as a factor,
with the Saudi government committed to cutting all government departments's
spending by 20 per cent for the 1994 fiscal year.
Cuts are being made largely by cancelled or postponed projects and often
through delayed payments by government agencies to private sector
contractors, according to bankers in the kingdom, who say the government
appears to be 'doing its best' to meet its spending target.
According to Mr Henry Azzam, chief economist at National Commercial Bank,
lending to the private sector remains firm, with all the banks to have
reported so far showing bigger loan portfolios - with the Saudi American
Bank's having increased by 25 per cent.
'In the domestic economy the demand for bank loans remains firm and margins
are firming,' he says, adding that continued growth in the private sector
looked set to improve bank figures slightly in the next two quarters.
Some of this lending, though, reflects cover to companies stretched by
delays in government payments.
'Banks will be looking more closely at the quality of their lending over the
next few months,' says one banker, who said there would also be increased
pressure on banks to increase provisions over the next six months.
