FT  31 JAN 94 / Survey of the World's Young People (2): Reality remains
taboo / A look at world population projections
According to United Nations forecasts, the population of the world is likely
to double - to more than 10bn people - by the middle of the next century.
This will be one of the biggest forces shaping living standards of future
generations. Although growth will take place almost entirely in developing
countries, few countries will be able to insulate themselves from the
effects.
However, population growth was a taboo topic at the Rio Earth Summit in
1992, although it is the source of increasing pressure on natural resources
and the environment in many regions. Governments felt that the sensitivity
of the issue was so great - provoking debates about differing cultural and
religious values - that it would frustrate attempts to reach agreement on
other fronts.
Even at the time of the summit the omission appeared a serious weakness, as
Prince Charles pointed out. In retrospect, that is clearly true. Although
countries put their names to Rio's two treaties on climate change and
bio-diversity (the variety of the world's wildlife), many have found
difficulty in drawing up realistic plans for curbing environmental damage.
The omission has also allowed the notion of 'sustainable development' to
remain confused. That principle, which governments attending Rio pledged to
observe, does not define whether resources are to be preserved at a certain
level for each person or simply for each country. Countries with rapidly
growing populations will find it almost impossible to preserve resources -
however defined - on a per capita basis.
But although the projected increase in the world's population is formidably
large, it is much less than many people feared two decades ago.
Prominent among 1970s doomsters, the Club of Rome (an international group of
industrialists, scientists, economists and statesmen) predicted that food,
energy and raw materials would run out. Since then, food production has
increased while population has slowed. The drop in the birth rate in many
countries now looks like one of the development successes of the past two
decades. Many Asian and Latin American countries have had particular success
in bringing down the rate of population growth.
India, for example, now has a fertility rate - the average number of
children per woman implied by the current birth rate - of about four. That
figure shows a fall of about one third over the past two decades - although
still higher than the figure of just over two children per woman which would
maintain a static population.
However, across much of sub-Saharan Africa, fertility rates have been
running at more than six children per woman. Demographers studying why some
countries have had more success than others point out that there is no
straightforward formula to apply. Longstanding assumptions that as a country
develops, its birth rate falls, fail to explain some of the patterns now
observed.
Sri Lanka, Thailand, Bulgaria and Kerala in India have all shown sharp falls
in family size despite relatively low prosperity, while the Gulf states have
maintained fertility rates of more than three children per woman during a
period of fast economic growth. Instead, demographers are having to put
together a more complex picture, in which access to contraception, the level
of female education and the availability of jobs for women all play a part.
There has also been international concern about the measures sometimes
employed to restrain birth rates, particularly in China, which has fiercely
applied limits on family size. The scale of China's problem is undeniable:
China now has nearly a quarter of the world's population on about 7 per cent
of the world's arable land.
According to government figures this year, the fertility rate has fallen to
about 1.9 from 2.25 children per woman in 1990. That is nearly as low as
western European and US rates, and less than half that of India. But the
measures used by the Chinese government - including limiting urban families
to one child - have provoked criticism that the Chinese government is
infringing human rights.
Despite those qualifications, the falls in many countries' birth rates have
outstripped expectations. But demographers and environmentalists warn
against complacency, even if the doom-mongers have not been proved right.
They point out that even at current rates, population growth will still put
severe pressures on natural resources and on the quality of the environment.
They also argue that the ageing of the populations in industrialised
countries and the steady fall in the average age of the population in
developing countries will bring further pressures. Children under 15 years
old currently outnumber the elderly by one third in Europe and North
America. But pensioners will soon outnumber children in Europe and North
America for the first time, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) has
said.
Mr David Coleman, a demographer at Oxford University, says that
environmental degradation, pressure on resources and the search for jobs
will cause industrialised countries to be confronted with an unprecedented
influx of immigrants from poorer countries. Mrs Nafis Sadik, director of
UNFPA, has also warned of these pressures - even taking account only those
who have already been born. More than 2m immigrants are believed to have
entered both Europe and North America over the past two years alone. So far,
Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia have taken the brunt of Russians, gypsies
and Romanians from the east, but political chaos in Russia could intensify
westward migration.
Governments and international agencies for aid, development and the
environment may still be coy about addressing issues of curbing population
growth. But they will increasingly find the subject unavoidable. Worries
about consumption of resources and degradation of the environment are
well-established. But migration may be the factor which finally makes
countries worldwide - industrialised as well as developing - face these
questions.
