FT  08 DEC 94 / Survey of Vietnam (2): Completing the transformation -
Obstacles hinder further growth
Three years ago the Vietnamese capital Hanoi was a city of quiet avenues
frequented by cyclists, pedestrians and the occasional army lorry; at night
the gloom was pierced only by flickering lanterns and low-wattage light
bulbs.
Today the city is experiencing its first taste of traffic congestion and
noise pollution. New hotels, karaoke bars, pizza restaurants and massage
parlours, adorned with multi-coloured lights and signs, are springing up
across the town; motorcycle delivery men speed along the streets with
towering cargoes of television sets and cigarettes.
Ho Chi Minh City, the southern commercial centre has already undergone this
transformation; now it has chic bars, fashionable boutiques and traffic
jams. Danang in central Vietnam is also developing fast.
Vietnam's economy has gone from strength to strength since the ruling
communist party decided to loosen central control and encourage private
enterprise with its doi moi programme in the late 1980s.
Remarkably, the first reforms - including devaluation - were undertaken
without financial help from multilateral institutions, because the US had
vetoed such assistance.
Since the lifting of the veto last year, Vietnam has sealed agreements with
the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the Asian Development
Bank, as well as bilateral donors such as Japan.
The benefits of reform are not in doubt. Latest Vietnamese government
estimates suggest that real gross domestic product will grow by 8.8 per cent
this year, rising to nearly 10 per cent in 1995 and perhaps more than 10 per
cent per year thereafter.
Foreign donors have heaped praise on Vietnam for its handling of
macro-economic issues. Firm control of the money supply helped bring
Vietnamese inflation down to 5.2 per cent by the end of 1993 from nearly 70
per cent in 1991.
Inflation has recently risen to more than 11 per cent - above the
government's 10 per cent target - but most economists say Vietnam is
unlikely to face the surge of inflation experienced by neighbouring China,
whose much larger economy is undergoing similar reforms.
A rise in Vietnam's retail prices this year on the back of high demand for
everything from consumer goods to construction materials was regarded as
inevitable.
The current account showed an alarming deficit of Dollars 1.1bn or 8.3 per
cent of GDP in 1993, after being nearly in balance in 1992, but that was
partly due to a sharp rise in imports of equipment for foreign investment
projects which will help to increase exports in the future.
Furthermore, the current account deficit was brought under control in early
1994 with the help of tighter fiscal and monetary policies. Import growth
slowed while exports continued to rise, and the current account deficit is
predicted to fall to about 5 per cent of GDP this year.
The government spending curbs have also reduced the budget deficit to an
estimated 3 per cent of GDP this year from a worrying 6.2 per cent in 1993.
'This reflects the fact that they have been able to respond to reality,'
said an official from one international donor agency. 'They were put to the
test this year and they responded well at the macro-level.'
The government and donors agree, however, that several obstacles to rapid
economic growth will have to be removed in the next few years. Ports, roads,
railways and power and water utilities are all in urgent need of improvement
and foreign aid is pouring in for this purpose.
But probably the most important challenge facing Vietnam's leaders is the
need to reform and educate the government bureaucracy so that it can rid
itself of corruption, shake off the old-fashioned mentality of central
planning and restrict itself to establishing laws and regulations that will
allow business to flourish.
'It is still very common that scarce (state) funding resources are used to
build offices, buy expensive equipment and organise showy activities,' Vo
Van Kiet, the prime minister, told the National Assembly in October.
'Corruption and bureaucratism remain serious . . . Public administration
reform is becoming an urgent issue.'
While the broad outlines of government policy may promote economic growth,
government officials are often reluctant to implement it. 'What needs
attention today is not so much the identification of new policies but rather
a wholesale renovation of public institutions to make them more efficient,'
says Roy Morey, resident representative in Hanoi of the UN Development
Programme.
A typical crisis of economic management arose in August when the government
suddenly announced that transactions in Vietnam would have to be in dong,
the local currency, rather than the US dollar, which is widely used.
Although businesses and donors sympathised with Vietnam's desire to restore
the dong to its rightful place, the initial announcement was so vague that
foreign investors feared they would not be able receive dollar earnings and
meet hard currency obligations abroad.
'There was total panic here for several weeks,' said one foreign banker. It
subsequently turned out that the decree appeared to affect only domestic
transactions, and that it was being enforced only gradually.
The World Bank, in its latest report on the Vietnamese economy, suggests
that the government is attempting to keep too much central control of
decision-making, a tendency which it believes will strangle investment and
growth and breed corruption as the economy becomes more complex.
The answer, according to the World Bank, is to decentralise, for example by
allowing local authorities to raise and spend taxes for local services.
However, the recommendation is controversial. Some local communist
authorities have proved to be extremely corrupt and are already being
accused of running their own fiefdoms, defying national laws on everything
from prostitution to investment.
Several senior members of the government also have an ideological bias in
favour of central control, and the public sector is still officially
supposed to play a leading role in the economy.
While farmers and small traders have flourished under the economic reform
programme, there are still only a few substantial Vietnamese private
companies.
All over Vietnam, the communist people's committees, the armed forces and
various ministries which control most of the country's assets have used
their influence to enter into joint ventures with foreign companies. Foreign
investors have little choice, because in most cases there is no-one else
with whom they can do business.
Managers of state enterprises and government officials still tend to think
in terms of quotas, plans and volume of production, rather than profit or
rates of return.
For the time being, Vietnam is a hybrid economy in which the state -
represented by the communist party, the army and various ministries - will
continue to play an important role.
'This period in Vietnam is transitional,' says Do Duc Dinh of the Institute
on the World Economy in Hanoi. 'We have not yet up set up a very clear
framework, unlike other countries where they have built market economies for
three or four decades.'
