FT  18 MAR 94 / Paris and Bonn play down row: Ambassador's criticism of
foreign policy angers Germany
France and Germany struggled yesterday to limit the damage to their
relationship after the French ambassador was summoned to the German foreign
ministry to explain highly critical remarks about Bonn's foreign policy.
The row has brought into the open growing concern in Paris about both the
style and substance of Germany's post-unification policies, in particular
over the enlargement of the European Union to the north and east.
More fuel was added to the tensions being caused by enlargement yesterday by
an attack on the process from the Greek minister for European Affairs, Mr
Theodoros Pangalos, who said he had regretted having had to lead the
negotiations allowing Sweden, Norway, Finland and Austria into the union.
Greece currently has the EU's rotating presidency.
In what appeared to be a coded attack on the heavy-handed role Germany
played in bringing the talks over entry terms to a conclusion earlier this
week, Mr Pangalos said: 'Now this is done, now that I have done my duty, I
honestly want to say that this decision was wrong.'
He warned that the prospective new entrants would make decision-making more
difficult and their entry should have been delayed until the end of the
decade. His remarks are likely to further weaken confidence in the Greek
presidency of the EU
Mr Pangalos's outburst appears to have been prompted by fears that further
pressure to open up the EU to eastern European countries would be championed
by Germany with just as much vigour as Bonn's foreign minister, Mr Klaus
Kinkel, has displayed over the past two weeks in the enlargement talks.
Greece fears the entry of more poor countries could weaken its access to EU
funds.
In Paris, a French minister admitted yesterday that Mr Kinkel had 'irritated
us with his dynamism' in Brussels.
But senior German officials said their government was both 'irritated and
annoyed' about an off-the-record interview given to German newspaper
correspondents by Mr Francois Scheer, the French ambassador in Bonn. In it,
he called for clarification by Bonn of its commitment to western Europe, and
apparently criticised German heavy-handedness in the enlargement
negotiations.
The official line of both governments, however, was to squash any suggestion
of serious dissent.
The German foreign ministry said that Mr Kinkel had held a 'detailed
telephone conversation' yesterday with Mr Alain Juppe, his French
counterpart, covering all aspects of Franco-German relations. Both ministers
had agreed that they 'attach the greatest importance to Franco-German
relations, which are characterised by deep mutual confidence', the ministry
added.
Mr Scheer also issued a statement in which he appeared to retract his
reported statements, although they have been widely confirmed by
participants in the discussion. French officials seemed considerably less
disturbed by the dissent than their German counterparts.
An undiplomatic voice, Page 3
Odd couple's tiffs, Page 19
