FT  13 APR 94 / Russia, Belarus agree on monetary union
Russia and Belarus yesterday unexpectedly concluded a monetary union treaty
which will reintroduce the Russian rouble to the small Slav republic within
the next few months.
The treaty was signed by Mr Victor Chernomyrdin, the Russian prime minister,
and his Belarus counterpart, Mr Vyacheslav Kebich, after a day of
last-minute negotiations.
It has been fiercely attacked by Russian reformers and ultra-nationalists
alike as giving too much away to a country which has everything to gain but
little to offer.
Mr Chernomyrdin and Mr Victor Gerashchenko, the Russian central bank
chairman, see the deal as helping Russian enterprises to restore
Soviet-style trading links. But progress has been held up by the need to
resolve objections from both sides.
Mr Sergei Alexashenko, Russian deputy finance minister, said the agreement
was supposed to be carried out in stages, although he also said 'everything
may have changed in the 24 hours leading up to the signing'.
In a first stage Russia and its neighbour, most of whose enterprises depend
on trade and energy supplies from Russia, would abolish customs barriers and
unify the two countries' tariff regimes.
In a second stage, Mr Alexashenko said Belarus had promised  - at Russia's
insistence  - to hold a referendum on its people's willingness to limit the
republic's sovereignty and liquidate its central bank. This would be needed
for Russia's central bank to take over the functions of the Belarus central
bank.
The third stage would tackle the crucial issue of the exchange rate at which
roubles would be substituted for Belarus's ailing surrogate currency, the
'zaichik'. Belarus initially insisted on a one-to-one exchange rate, while
Russia said the true exchange rate was closer to 3:1. Belarus then sought a
separate but more generous rate for individuals' savings, but Russia opposed
this as open to abuse by enterprises.
The final sticking point  - Belarus's demands for subsidised energy prices
from Russia  - was due to be postponed until the end of the year, by which
time Russian prices may almost match world prices.
The conservatives leading Belarus, who have achieved very little in terms of
economic reform so far, are clearly hoping the deal will boost their chances
of retaining power in the country's first presidential elections. Such a
deal would conveniently postpone the implementation of terms costly to
Russia and cumbersome for Belarus.
