FT  05 MAR 94 / Outdoors: An open door policy - Country View
If your bird table has been abandoned and you cannot remember when you last
saw a blackbird, a song thrush or a robin, try leaving your garden shed
open.
According to Chris Meades, of the British Trust for Ornithology, all three
species, together with wrens, will be quite happy to nest in there and, more
importantly, those much-feared serial killers of smaller birds, magpies,
will not dare to enter.
'Magpies prefer to forage in the open. If they are after smaller birds they
will look for a hedge to plunder,' Meades says.
Meades also advises those worried about the black and white marauders to
protect any songbird's nest they find with wire netting.
'It's quite possible to create a ball of chicken mesh that smaller birds can
get through but a magpie cannot,' he said.
When a fully-grown blackbird is killed it is bad news for the species,
Meades says.
'The chances of a chick growing to full maturity are about one in 10, so we
should do all we can to protect adult blackbirds.'
One way both country and town dwellers worried about declining blackbird and
other bird populations can help is to provide more habitat. 'So often we
destroy birds' habitat without realising it,' he said.
'In many cases gardens have been landscaped and there is therefore far less
cover for the small birds.
'The answer is to plant - particularly shrubs. Spiky bushes such as
pyracantha are hard for the magpies to penetrate.
'A few prickles will do an awful lot to deter cats too. Basically the more
cover there is, the harder it is for the magpies to seek out nests and kill
fledglings.' Meades does not blame magpies alone for the decline in
Britain's bird species over the past few years.
'Monoculture has a great deal to do with it,' he said. 'Thirty years ago a
field of barley contained about 5 per cent weeds. These were good for the
birds because they produced seeds that were winter fodder for a variety of
species. Today, chemicals have made sure that that field is 100 per cent
barley, and this is bad news for species such as the corn bunting, the reed
bunting and the skylark.'
However, magpies have been multiplying as much in the country as in the
towns, the reason being that there are fewer gamekeepers.
There are all sorts of reasons - not least the recession - for the decline
in the latter species, but it has meant fewer magpies are killed by man.
'Magpies are therefore attracted to the towns because they do not associate
humans with shooting any longer,' Meades said.
'However, magpies are not entirely the bad news for garden birds that so
many seem to think. They are omnivorous: even in the breeding season they
only take a few chicks.
'People who have seen and heard the commotion when a magpie attacks an
exposed blackbird's nest and slaughters chicks often get unduly uptight over
magpies and blame them for more deaths than they actually cause.
'Magpies are beautiful and fascinating birds that have been around for
thousands, if not millions, of years.
'Probably because their numbers have increased threefold in the past 30
years they have had a pretty bad press. Although magpies have no predator in
the natural order of things the chances of them making any particular
species extinct is nil.'
