FT  03 MAR 94 / International Company News: CRA near doubles profit, but
warns of year to come
CRA, the Australian mining house in which Britain's RTZ holds a 49 per cent
stake, yesterday reported a sharp increase in full-year profits, to ADollars
806.7m (USDollars 576.7m), on an equity-accounted, after-tax basis, but
warned that it might be difficult to repeat this performance in the current
year. The year-ago figure was ADollars 411.4m.
The advance came partly from strong performances in a number of CRA's
businesses - including iron ore, coal, gold and salt - and partly from
pension fund surpluses, and some abnormal gains.
'Higher sales volumes for iron ore, gold and coal combined with the weaker
Australian dollar, contributed to the improved earnings,' said the group,
adding that weaker US dollar prices for iron ore, aluminium, zinc, lead and
coal offset some of this benefit.
Nevertheless, operating profits, before any of the one-off items, rose to
ADollars 886.2m, compared with ADollars 746.3m in the previous year. The
pension funds' surpluses added ADollars 114.4m above the line, compared with
a ADollars 47.2m charge in the previous year, while abnormal items
contributed ADollars 57.4m, against ADollars 31.6m. This last figure
resulted from the sale of investments in An Mau Steel and Kloeckner Werke.
After some favourable tax changes, net operating profit was left at ADollars
815.7m, compared with ADollars 410.5m. On an equity-accounted basis, taking
in CRA's share of profits from Kaltim Prima Coal and Coal &amp; Allied
Industries (before it became a subsidiary) plus a portion of the losses at
Pasminco, the figure stood at ADollars 806.7m, against ADollars 411.4m.
Looking ahead, CRA warned that prospects for commodity prices in 1994
remained weak, and that 'fundamental market circumstances remain unchanged'.
'The steady improvement in the world economy is unlikely to reduce the large
inventories of metals. Some bulk commodity prices will be lower, reflecting
the continued weakness in the Japanese economy in particular,' it said. CRA
also noted that the presence of large stocks would hold back price
improvements.
Even Australia, whose growth rates are expected to outstrip many other
countries in 1994, will 'continue to feel the impact of weaker demand . . .
for bulk commodities from Japan'. The group warned that the rise in the
Australian dollar makes export earnings harder to achieve.
The combination of these weak commodity prices, and the uncertain outlook
over the Australian currency, caused Mr John Ralph, chief executive, to
sound a warning note on prospects for the current year. 'It will be
difficult to replicate 1993 in 1994,' he said yesterday.
