FT  06 APR 94 / Beckett blunts Labour attack on tax changes
Labour yesterday seized on the increase in employees' National Insurance
contributions and cuts in some income-tax-related allowances to accuse
ministers of raiding wage packets to pay for their mismanagement of the
economy.
But the force of its message was weakened when Mrs Margaret Beckett, the
party's deputy leader, hinted that Labour might shy away from detailed
policy pledges on tax before the next general election.
As the war of words on tax between both parties escalated, Mr Stephen
Dorrell, financial secretary to the Treasury, said Labour would lose the
argument.
Asked how many of Labour's tax plans would be spelt out before a general
election, Mrs Beckett said: 'My own counsel would be that we should seek to
set objectives and to say what we will aim towards as the money is there,
rather than to be too detailed.'
Her comments appeared to conflict with a pledge by Mr Gordon Brown, shadow
chancellor, to 'set out the necessary detail nearer the time'. Mr Brown said
millions of voters faced a fall in living standards this year and next.
Taxes were rising because of the costs associated with high unemployment,
economic decline and social deprivation, he added.
Moreover, problems over tax codes had created 'chaos' and had resulted in
more than 5m taxpayers complaining to the Inland Revenue.
Mr Brown suggested that Labour might take a leaf out of the Liberal
Democrats' book by considering in some areas taxation 'hypothecated' or
dedicated to specific types of public spending. 'We will link the taxes
people pay to the benefits they receive,' he said.
Mr Dorrell said Labour would lose the argument on tax because at the heart
of its 'false prospectus' was priority for consumption by the state. This
would pre-empt the fruits of economic growth, push up tax rates, push down
economic growth and ultimately involve real spending cuts.
He said the effect of tax increases introduced as a result of the last two
Budgets would be Pounds 9 a week for a 'typical household'. This compared
with Pounds 5.75 for the average household and Pounds 1 for the 7.5m
pensioner households.
Mr Dorrell refused to accept that adding 1p to National Insurance
contributions was more regressive than a 1p addition to income tax.
