FT  14 JUN 94 / European Elections '94: German presidency has new dimension
 -Overcoming structural weakness and unemployment heads the agenda
The German government assumes the six-monthly presidency of the European
Union next month - at the same time as the fourth directly elected European
Parliament takes up its duties. It does so at at time when, in line with the
Maastricht treaty, the decision-making and supervisory powers of the newly
elected parliament have been enlarged.
EU policies have taken on a significance for Germany that in many spheres is
equivalent to that of national policies. More than 60 per cent of the
legislation affecting business and consumer affairs is now determined at a
European level, and is thus dependent on the European Parliament's
decisions. To give the parliament a broad democratic basis, German industry
made clear during the campaign that it favoured a high turnout in the
elections on Sunday.
The German presidency and the new parliament will be starting their work at
a time of great political and economic challenge.
After the large-scale upheavals which have taken place in Europe during the
last few years, including the reunification of Germany, the task now is to
press forward along the path of European integration.
The main item on the agenda is to strengthen Europe's position as a centre
for economic activity by overcoming points of structural weakness and
reducing unemployment.
Last December, the European Council drew up an action plan based on the
Commission's white paper on growth, competitiveness, and employment. That
provides the foundations for a successful common strategy during the medium
term, which should reinforce companies' competitiveness and increase
employment.
Broad-based investment and a clear reduction in unemployment can be attained
only if companies are able to stand up to increasingly intense international
competition.
To achieve that aim requires: a reduction in the burdens of taxes and other
levies on European companies, which are very high by international
standards; more flexibility in labour markets; deregulation and
privatisation of many important areas, such as telecommunications, energy,
and transport; improvements in infrastructure, making use of private as well
as public sector capital; and promotion of innovation by means of
well-coordinated and application-orientated research and development
policies.
From the point of view of German industry, the German presidency of the EU
should aim to press forward speedily and consistently with the aim of
completing the single market programme.
Of the measures putting the programme in place, 95 per cent have now been
agreed. However, across the EU, only 87 per cent of the measures have been
placed on the statute book, so the single market cannot yet said to be fully
operational.
Moreover, only 50 per cent of the measures have come into effect in all 12
member states. Partnership and co-operation are necessary to ensure that
single market rules are applied in an efficient and even-handed manner. That
is the only way to overcome competitive distortions.
Consolidating the single market also requires harmonisation of tax policies
and reduction of fiscal hindrances. Action is called for to end burdens on
industry stemming from provisional VAT rules. This would require a decision
on a new system for country-of-origin VAT collection.
Fiscal barriers for cross-border capital transactions and corporate
restructuring must also be removed. A well-functioning joint export control
regime is also needed, encompassing so-called 'dual use' goods ie. those
capable of both military and civilian applications.
Another priority is cross-border environmental protection. Common policies
are required to control and to prevent environmental problems, particularly
with regard to waste disposal but also with recycling and with the re-use of
materials.
There is further need for action in the European Union's external relations,
of utmost importance for assuring competitiveness. There may well be
important landmarks here in the application of the Gatt Uruguay Round
agreement, as well as in the establishment of the World Trade Organisation.
The EU needs to assume a leadership role in this respect alongside the US.
The Union's trade policy must be strongly geared to the principles of
multilateralism and openness towards the rest of the world. The leading
industrialised countries' trade policy will be credible only if they refuse
to countenance one-sided, discriminatory measures or threats of sanctions.
A decisive point for Europe's external relations will be the extension of
trade and industrial co-operation with the reform-minded states of central
and eastern Europe. The German EU presidency should devote special energy to
supporting these countries' economic reform efforts.
In line with the principle of 'self-help', trade and economic co-operation
can provide the right conditions to allow these countries themselves to
generate the revenues needed to finance these reforms.
Another central issue for the German presidency will be preparing the
conference to review the Maastricht treaty in 1996. Here I anticipate
improvements on the details of the treaty as well as decisive steps towards
developing European integration. In particular, we must meet the challenges
associated with enlargement towards some of the Efta states and further
economic and political rapprochement with central and eastern Europe.
It is important to extend the European parliament's co-decision rights. Such
reinforcement forms an essential part of efforts to strengthen the EU's
democratic structures and to increase further the parliament's involvement
in the European integration process.
The author is president of the Bundesverband der deutschen Industrie
(Federation of German Industries).
