FT  01 OCT 94 / Liu spells out reform programme
China plans to accelerate economic reform with the aim of establishing a
'socialist market economy' by the end of the century, Mr Liu Zhongli,
Chinese finance minister, said in Madrid yesterday.
Mr Liu told an International Monetary Fund and World Bank conference, that
the Beijing government's priorities were to establish modern enterprise
systems and speed the reform of macro-economic management 'in fiscal,
taxation, financial and investment areas'.
He said China would establish a legal framework for a modern market economy
to govern and regulate the new corporate culture. China would also take
steps to control inflation and maintain stability.
Mr Liu pledged to step up China's exchanges with countries abroad. 'Opening
up to the outside world constitutes an integral component of our reform
programme,' he said.
Mr Liu acknowledged that China was still in transition from the old highly
centrally planned system, which was 'deficient in discipline and
risk-containing mechanisms', to one in which market mechanisms played the
dominant role in allocating resources.
'We envisage that by the end of the 1990s a socialist market economy will,
by and large, have been established, which will develop into a mature and
stable system in another 20 years or so.'
Mr Liu's comments marked the first time a senior Chinese official had
spelled out to an international audience China's plans to speed reform. They
were seen as likely to boost confidence among international investors who
last year poured more than Dollars 20bn (Pounds 12.6bn) in direct investment
into China, making it the largest single recipient of foreign direct
investment in the developing world.
Senior World Bank officials also gave China a vote of confidence yesterday
when they disclosed that the bank, which committed more than Dollars 3bn to
China in regular and concessional loans last year, could without difficulty
continue lending at this rate for five or 10 years.
Mr Nicholas Hope, director of the World Bank's China and Mongolia
department, said the bank had three priorities in China: to help implement
its reform programme; ease infrastructure bottlenecks, especially in the
power and transport areas; and to help in the plan to eliminate absolute
poverty, afflicting 80m people, by the year 2000.
