FT  01 NOV 94 / RJR to float 19% of Nabisco food business
RJR Nabisco, the US tobacco and food group, is to float 19 per cent of its
Nabisco food subsidiary.
It will also pay dividends for the first time since it was acquired in a
Dollars 25bn (Pounds 15.3bn) leveraged buyout by the Wall Street investment
house Kohlberg Kravis Roberts (KKR) in 1989.
But the group is to back out of an agreement to buy a 20 per cent stake in
Borden, the US food group, which is presently the target of a Dollars 2bn
bid from KKR.
RJR said it had been unable to reach agreement on accounting and other
issues, but would not give further details.
The flotation, clearing the way for demerger, will involve 45m shares of
Nabisco stock, priced at between Dollars 23 and Dollars 26 and carrying
dividends of 55c a year, to raise between Dollars 1bn and Dollars 1.2bn.
RJR said it will use the net proceeds to pay down bank debt. The sell-off
will value the whole of Nabisco, the biggest US biscuit maker which also
owns Planters nuts, LifeSavers confectionery and Fleischmann's margarine, at
Dollars 5.4bn to Dollars 6.2bn.
RJR said any eventual break-up would not be considered for at least two
years. Ownership of over 80 per cent of Nabisco is meanwhile required as a
condition for a tax-free spin-off.
KKR said it was 'completely committed' to the Borden bid, despite RJR's
decision, and was happy for Borden to continue being run by its existing
management. Borden has been among the least successful big US food companies
in recent years, and some management input from the more highly regarded
Nabisco had been envisaged as part of the deal.
KKR proposes to pay for the Borden purchase with RJR shares, halving its
stake in RJR, in which it is at present the dominant shareholder, to just
over 17 per cent. Wall Street analysts said RJR's refusal to become involved
with Borden could be seen as a show of independence.
An earlier demerger attempt by RJR, valuing Nabisco at Dollars 6.7bn,
collapsed last summer because it failed to protect Nabisco sufficiently from
the risk of litigation over tobacco.
In contrast to that plan, which left the tobacco company with title to
Nabisco's assets, the new version makes Nabisco wholly independent.
Although RJR's announcement was welcomed on Wall Street, the stock fell
Dollars  1/8 to Dollars 6 1/8 .
Analysts attributed this to news that a state court judge in Florida had
given the go-ahead to a class action against cigarette makers by all smokers
who had become addicted to nicotine and had become ill as a result.
Lex, Page 22
World stocks, Page 41
