FT  02 JUL 94 / Rational choice on the menu: Christina Lamb asks Gary Becker
about his theories on everyday life - Lunch with the FT
There is something disconcerting about having lunch with a man who can
explain your menu selection in terms of rational economic choice. I thought
mere whim had decided my choice of the exotic-sounding fettucine with sea
scallops. But not according to Gary Becker.
The soft-spoken, 63-year-old professor from the University of Chicago
pioneered the application of economic theory to everyday life. For the past
40 years, while jeering colleagues concentrated on lofty matters such as
trade policy and market behaviour, Becker has devoted himself to devising
economic models for why we fall in (or out of) love, get depressed, commit
crimes, become drug addicts or buy fast cars.
He was vindicated when he became a surprise winner of the 1992 Nobel prize
for economics. His latest work, on the formation of preferences, aims to
explain why someone like me would order fettucine with sea scallops.
We are sitting in Printer's Row, a yuppyish restaurant in a renovated part
of downtown Chicago. Actually, with its inoffensive green and red decor, a
waitress from Lyons, a Mozart violin concerto on the sound system and an
absence of scowling gangsters, it could have been anywhere. Initially,
Becker had suggested the university faculty club - but then changed his
mind, concerned perhaps that this would seem unimaginative.
We each elected to start with the ragout of wild mushrooms, after which he
went for the day's special: grilled grouper with a colourful array of
oriental vegetables. Recalling that Becker had written: 'Every death is to
some extent a suicide' - that is, we are responsible partly for when we die
through the foods and drinks we ingest - I took defiant enjoyment in
ordering a crisp Californian Chardonnay. He stuck to mineral water and tried
to rationalise my taste for sea scallops.
'Like the Freudians, I stress early childhood,' he explained. 'What foods
you were given growing up and how that influenced your later preferences.
Peer pressure is also important - maybe it was 'in' in your group in England
to like shellfish. By eating scallops regularly you keep up, and even raise,
your taste for scallops.'
'Is that economics?' I asked, incredulously.
From his resigned smile as he answered, I could see Becker was used to this
question. 'My view is that economics deals with more than stock prices or
inflation. It's a way of thinking about the world and is not confined to
material things.'
Becker originally wanted to be a sociologist but claims it was 'too hard'.
As a graduate economist, he saw potential for applying the more rigorous
science of economics to social problems. His basic insight: most people act
rationally most of the time.
I said this seemed nothing more than common sense. Becker liked that. 'I
take it as a compliment. My approach is based on common sense - what's new
is where you take the analysis from there, which may give you surprising
conclusions.
'Take divorce, for example. Most people think rich people are more likely to
divorce than poor people. In fact, it's the opposite. My theory explains
that what matters is the gain from staying married.
'In a poor family with the husband unemployed, hanging around, the wife may
decide she's better off throwing the bum out. The richer family get much
more out of marriage. The wife is contributing - if not in income, then in
providing a good home. So, it's more rational to stay married.'
An avowed romantic, I was uncomfortable with such dispassionate analysis;
Becker, after all, has a wife and four children. 'But what about falling in
love. Surely that can't be explained by equations?'
He was ready for that one. 'Rational choice can handle that. I can't say
that individual A is going to fall in love with B or C, but I can say why
people tend to marry people with clear similarity in terms of background,
education etc. Moreover, why is it that love doesn't last? I don't deny that
people fall in love, I try to incorporate it.' (L represents love in his
equations.)
I was not about to give up so easily. 'How do you explain people falling in
love with the 'wrong' person? If we are concerned only with behaving
rationally, why would we ever get involved in difficult relationships like
inter-racial marriage?'
'Well,' he replied, 'that's where love etc comes in. But tell me why
inter-racial marriages have such an unusually high divorce rate. Rational
behaviour does not rule out mistakes.'
The sea scallops were no more and I felt I was not getting through to this
endearing figure with the domed forehead and detached expression. So, I
tried a new tack: 'What about public figures indulging in extra-marital
affairs? How could it be rational for someone like (President) Clinton to
risk jeopardising a successful career for a one-night stand?'
'I don't have any difficulty understanding that,' he replied. 'The
opportunities you're exposed to in a powerful position are enormous, while
the risks of being caught are very low . . . My bet is that for everyone
brought down, there are a lot who have no trouble at all. Now it's becoming
much more risky, I think it will decrease.'
Frustrated by the range of human behaviour that fits into Becker's rational
choice models, I asked if nothing was sacred. 'Say I decide to squander my
pay cheque on a Donna Karan dress, leaving me with no money to live on?'
Laughing, he said: 'I have a paper on that. Why do some women want a Chanel
suit when they can buy something that looks the same for a sixth of the
price? The fact that they know they're wearing a Chanel suit is the
important thing for them. That's perfectly rational.'
'Sounds irrational to me,' I said.
'Now you're being too much of an economist,' he replied. 'I fight with my
colleagues about this the whole time. Who's to say that the only reason you
wear a suit is because it covers your body? What you're wearing is conveying
something to the outside world about you as a person, your choices, what you
belong to, how successful you are. It's perfectly rational to be interested
in that.'
I wondered if he could go round the entire restaurant and explain, in terms
of rational choice, everything people were eating and wearing, and the
relationships they were having. 'That's not my goal. My goal is to try to
understand the phenomena of people falling in love, buying Chanel suits or
designer jeans. There are a lot of things we can't yet understand through
this approach, such as religion or war, though that may be a matter of
time.'
Over coffee, I ventured to inquire if the Nobel prize-money had tempted him
into a little irrational spending. 'Well, it wasn't so much money. It was
announced as Dollars 1.2m but declined immediately because the Swedish krona
devalued, so I ended up with Dollars 700,000 after tax.
'We've done some modest things, re-modelled the house, acquired a place on
Cape Cod. But we still drive a five-year-old Audi. The irrational thing
would have been to have spent it.'
'But surely more fun?' I asked.
The arrival of the bill left the question hanging. Ever the gentleman,
Becker offered to pay before deciding it was more rational to let the FT
pick up the tab.
A nice man, but his theories seemed suddenly to have made the world less
interesting.
As he strode away, I changed my mind about splurging the fee for this
article on an expensive jacket for fear that it might indeed be a rational
act.
