FT  09 MAR 94 / Recruitment: Pegs in round holes need not be square -
Performance targeting and appraisal is stifling innovation in the
marketplace
Stories that cast doubts on the value of the most thorough processes of
recruitment should be treated with caution, but they are very tempting to
relate nevertheless. This one I am told is true and I have a name for the
man involved, Dante Montalbetti, a former head of Eurobond trading in the UK
at Merrill Lynch, the US securities house.
The story goes that, impressed by his mental agility at calculating the
weekly quota, Montalbetti hired a milkman to work as a trader around the
time of Big Bang in the mid 1980s. The milkman enthusiastically swapped his
electric milk float and a modest wage for a telephone-digit salary and a
Porsche. Then came the 1987 crash and he was made redundant in one of the
clear-outs. Today he has returned to his Surrey milk round where the only
traded options are whether his customers order one pint or two.
The story sounds too good to be true and certainly Merrill Lynch was unable
to provide any supporting evidence, so it may have to be discarded into the
apocryphal bin. But what is to be learned from it anyway? Does it mean that
milkmen make good bond traders or that bond traders make good milkmen?
Its main point here is to demonstrate that there will always be cases of the
individual whose career path has wavered from conventional routes. Surely
this reflects the diversity of backgrounds that many employers would wish to
encourage. Not so, apparently. A contributor at a recent business forum
spoke of an Oxford college tutor seeking placements for four of his
graduates taking degrees in music, history, Latin and geography. The
qualifications were dismissed as useless by a company recruiter who was only
interested in business studies degrees.
Such attitudes are not unique. Further evidence of a polarity of approach
was volunteered by a headhunter who said that one securities company in the
US designed a psychometric test to search for the principal personality
traits exhibited by its most successful trader. The very idea of such
vocational cloning might seem like kindling for a bonfire of vanities to
some but it has attracted interest, particularly in sales areas.
Less finely tailored selective recruitment procedures, using structured
interviews instead of pencil and paper tests to sift out desired personality
traits, are available and used in the UK. B&amp;Q, the UK do-it-yourself chain
has started using them and Joshua Tetley, the Leeds brewer, has used them in
its selection of public house managers.
The kind of structured interviews that can find successful sales people can
also single out innovators, says Terry Lunn, managing director of Talent
Plus (UK), a company that administers structured interviews. But some
occupational psychologists believe that creative people are being neglected
by recruiters and managers.
A new report from the British Psychological Society says that if we really
want innovators in our organisations, we are going the wrong way about
encouraging them. The authors say that modern performance-orientated
incentives threaten to suffocate the individuality and creativeness which
once made British industry the envy of the world.
Kay's Flying shuttle, Arkwright's loom, Hargreaves' Spinning Jenny and
Crompton's mule all played their part in revolutionising the textile
industry upon which much of the UK's 19th century wealth was founded. Where
are their equivalents now and would we value them in our workplaces if we
could find them?
Michael West, an occupational psychologist at Sheffield University and one
of the report's authors, believes that innovators today are getting a raw
deal. In many organisations their potential is stifled by performance
appraisal and targeting, he argues. They need to be identified, nurtured,
and given the time and space they need to make things happen.
He points to 3M, which gives each of its research and development staff the
option to spend 15 per cent of their time at work to use as they wish in
their own projects and experiments. This may help account for the fact that
30 per cent of the company's turnover is from products introduced in the
last four years. 'If the project fails then their job is not on the line,'
said West.
With co-authors Professor Clive Fletcher, of Goldsmith's College, University
of London, and John Toplis of the Post office training and development
group, West has written a paper entitled 'Fostering Innovation'*, demanding
greater emphasis on identifying and encouraging innovators.
It is true, say the authors, that innovators can be unconventional people,
unattracted by routine work requiring attention to detail. Their thinking
may challenge orthodoxy, threaten general managers and be impractical.
'However, organisations also have to recognise that the complete exclusion
of such people could lead to stagnation,' they warn.
Much of their argument reflects a growing dissatisfaction among many
employers with performance-related pay. Up to now one of the main objections
to PRP has been that it is divisive. Some have argued additionally that it
can be demotivating. This new paper goes further, suggesting that it can
actually stultify the natural creativity of individuals.
Fletcher says: 'When you look at all those companies in the private sector
which have gone through downsizing and de-layering and introduced
performance management practices, performance-related pay and appraisal
systems, it has led to leaner fitter organisations . . . The cost has been
to their capacity to innovate.'
'As you make increased demands on each individual the pressure increases and
it becomes difficult to get the time to reflect on what you are doing.'
The trend in many organisations, he argues, has been to place too strong an
emphasis on short-term business goals that provide the reward, with
redundancy or dismissal often the price of failure.
Fletcher suggests that too much emphasis on PRP tends to shift people's
focus away from the task and on to the money they receive for its
accomplishment. 'A manager of a clearing bank told me: 'People here never
used to think about money. Now they think of nothing else.''
'People need to be encouraged to feel confident. Managements should get rid
of PRP. It has not been an effective motivator. We have to start rewarding
innovation and put it on the agenda.' Fletcher's comments would suggest that
while performance-related pay is by no means dead as a form of reward, it is
clear that some are already digging its grave.
The report also seeks to promote the potential of teams built of diverse
skills. It draws on a footballing analogy to make the point that a team will
be ineffective if comprised solely of attacking players or conversely of
defensive players. It needs a balance. This same observation has been made
during a research programme at Roffey Park Management Institute focusing on
the management of creative individuals in areas like music, theatre, sport,
and corporate research and development.
Joanna Howard, director of research notes that while the idiosyncrasies and
insecurities of creative people can be taxing on managers, the reward in
terms of innovation for those that persevere can be incalculable. But she
also warns that matching their abilities with equally spectacular financial
rewards is not necessarily motivating. 'Putting extrinsic rewards to things
that people do for their intrinsic love of it can be terribly damaging,' she
says.
* Fostering Innovation: A Psychological Perspective can be obtained from The
British Psychological Society, St Andrew's House, 48 Princess Road East,
Leicester LE1 7DR, tel: 0533 549568.
