FT  15 JUL 94 / Berlusconi economic plan given cautious approval
Italy's business community has given a cautious but positive response to the
first broad outlines of the Berlusconi government's economic policy.
The Milan bourse yesterday rose more than 2 per cent after the government's
decision on Wednesday to ease tax assessment procedures and introduce the
principle of a pardon on certain types of property development carried out
without proper permission. These are intended to be the two main vehicles to
raise an extra L5,000bn (Dollars 3.2bn) this year to keep the 1994 budget
deficit to L159,000bn as planned. But there will also be a spill-over effect
from these measures into 1995.
Economists yesterday preferred to withhold judgment on the policy outlines
until next Thursday when the government is due to unveil details of its 1995
budget.
The government has merely said it intends to reduce next year's budget
deficit to L140,000bn, below 10 per cent of gross domestic product. This
will be done by finding L40,000bn in spending cuts and new taxes - but not
by an increase in fiscal pressure. Mr Silvio Berlusconi, prime minister, has
made it clear again this week he will not raise the overall level of
taxation which he regards as already too high.
Mr Lamberto Dini, treasury minister, said in unveiling his plans that the
government would be relying largely on holding down the increase in current
expenditure to 2.5 per cent in 1995. Continued disagreement over the nature
of spending cuts, especially in the health and pensions field, are still
delaying finalisation of the economic programme.
Indeed, the government had originally promised to reveal the outline
macroeconomic plan before last week's Group of Seven summit in Naples. The
release of the policy outlines on Wednesday was primarily intended to
reassure the financial markets which have become nervous about the
government's failure after two months in office to spell out its economic
policy.
Pushing the 1995 deficit down to L140,000bn signals the government's
awareness of the need for continued surgery on Italy's public finances. But
the debt stock is still only expected to level off in 1996 at 127 per cent
of GDP, double the norm set by the Maastricht treaty.
Despite promises of innovation, the main measures being used to raise extra
funds this year have been much discussed for several years. Previous
governments have shied away from making tax assessments more flexible for
fear they would undermine the system of collection and lead to corruption.
Equally, a pardon on the thousands of properties constructed without proper
permits has not been implemented for fear of endorsing development which has
blighted most city suburbs.
However, the government has recognised these measures will be popular with
its supporters and easy to implement. They also resolve serious outstanding
problems.
A backlog of more than 3.2m tax assessment cases involving L85,000bn has
accumulated as a result of rigid bureaucratic procedures. In return for
payment of a fixed percentage of the sum in dispute (10 per cent of sums
between L2m and L20m) matters can be settled immediately. This is a thinly
disguised tax amnesty, the ninth of its kind in the postwar era.
The illegal building pardon can be seen an attempt to come to terms with the
large number of property alterations and developments carried out without
proper permission often because bureaucratic procedures are so slow. The aim
is to regularise some, but not all.
