FT  11 JAN 94 / International Capital Markets: Improvement in credit ratings
of European issuers
European issuers' credit quality declined further in 1993, but the
deterioration is set to slow in 1994, according to Standard &amp; Poor's, the US
credit rating agency.
Although downgrades outpaced upgrades in 1993, fewer ratings were lowered
than in the previous two years, S&amp;P said yesterday. In 1993, 48 European
issuers were downgraded and seven upgraded, compared with 65 downgrades and
no upgrades in 1992.
But while ratings should be more stable this year, Europe is not likely to
see the turnround that is taking place in the US, where upgrades now outpace
downgrades.
European downgrades last year were concentrated in Sweden, Finland, France
and Italy. The banking sector accounted for the bulk of the European
downgrades, with 23 out of a total of 48. In most European markets, economic
recession and weak real estate markets played a part in declining credit
quality.
However, the sector also suffered from fundamental changes in the industry,
involving deregulation and internationalisation which increased competition.
Moreover, in some European countries, moves to sell state-owned banks put
pressure on ratings, said Mr Barry Hancock, head of S&amp;P's banking group. He
said bank downgradings would probably fall in 1994 but warned that ratings
were unlikely to bounce back to pre-recession levels.
Although the European credit outlook for 1994 is more positive than in
recent years, the agency warned that recovery has been relatively weak and
the recession in Germany could stall recovery elsewhere.
Last year's improvement in credit quality among many US bond issuers could
be threatened by a resurgence of borrowing, in part to finance takeovers,
the two largest US credit rating agencies warned.
S&amp;P said it raised more ratings than it lowered for the first time since
1980, while Moody's reported upgrades outnumbering downgrades for the first
time in nine years.
An improvement in the financial structure of many US companies, rather than
an upturn in the economy, had accounted for the improving credit picture,
Moody's senior economist John Lonski said. Many companies had taken
advantage of the strong stock market to raise equity and reduce their
gearing.
Both agencies pointed to banking as the sector where the greatest number of
upgrades had been achieved. Non-investment grade (or junk) bonds also saw
strong improvements, the first overall increase in credit quality in this
market since 1980.
Both warned, though, that increased borrowing to back takeovers could weaken
the balance sheets of some companies this year.
Mr Leo O'Neill, president of S&amp;P, said: 'Size does not equate to strength;
perceived synergies do not automatically create products and services
consumers need, or even want; and acquiring companies using a surfeit of
debt may leave the combined operation too weak to confront unexpected
contingencies.'
