FT  28 DEC 94 / Arts: Playwright's talent for angry words - Obituary
John Osborne, who has died at the age of 65, made an unforgettable mark in
the British theatre with the first performances of Look Back In Anger at the
Royal Court in 1956. Although he went on to write other memorable plays and
produced two volumes of autobiography, nothing can compare with that first,
heady triumph.
Osborne had been a reporter and an actor. By the early 1950s he had also
written several plays, though without success. Even Look Back In Anger had
been turned down by agents and managements throughout the country. Then
Osborne saw a notice in the Stage, saying that the newly-formed English
Stage Company under the artistic direction of George Devine was looking for
new works.
Along with some 750 other applicants, he sent in his text. Look Back In
Anger, which Osborne said he wrote in 12 days in May 1955, was the only one
selected for performance. Even then acclaim was not immediate. Derek
Grainger of the Financial Times was one of the few critics on a national
daily to admire the piece on the first night.
The Sunday papers treated Osborne better. In a famous article in The
Observer, Kenneth Tynan wrote of the play presenting 'post-war youth as it
really is, with special emphasis on the non-U intelligentsia who live in
bed-sitters . . . All the qualities are there, qualities that one had
despaired of ever seeing on the stage - the drift towards anarchy, the
instinctive leftishness, the automatic rejection of 'official' attitudes,
the surrealist sense of humour'.
Jimmy Porter, the hero or anti-hero of the play, began to be seen as the
spokesman for the younger generation. Yet Osborne had been lucky in his
timing. Neither he nor Jimmy Porter was the first of the 'angry young men',
as they came to be called.
Kingsley Amis had already established a new post-war irreverence with his
novel Lucky Jim in 1954 and for a while the angriest young man of them all
seemed to be the now almost forgotten Colin Wilson for his literary and
philosophical study, The Outsider. Where Osborne scored was to do it on
stage: where all of them gained in publicity was in the way they were taken
up by the popular press.
Tynan was also wrong in one main respect: there was no 'instinctive
leftishness' about Osborne. Like most of the other angry young men, he moved
steadily to the right and may not have been far away in the first place.
Look Back is about changes in generational and social attitudes; there is
nostalgia as well as anger. An important line comes when Alison, the upper
class wife of Jimmy Porter, explains to her father, who has spent most of
his life in India: 'You're hurt because everything is changed. Jimmy is hurt
because everything is the same. And neither of you can face it. Something's
gone wrong somewhere, hasn't it?'
The success of Look Back led to suggestions at the time that there had been
a revolution in the British theatre: the kitchen sink was in, the drawing
room was out, and certainly the plays of Terence Rattigan and William
Douglas-Home fell out of fashion.
Osborne went on to other successes. He attracted great actors: Laurence
Olivier in The Entertainer, a play comparing the decline of the music hall
to the decline of Britain, the young Albert Finney in his most cerebral
play, Luther, and Nicol Williamson in Inadmissible Evidence, recently
revived with a different actor at the National - a theatre that Osborne
claimed never much to have liked. He also wrote the screenplay for Tom
Jones.
Much of his reputation was for invective: from the tirades of Jimmy Porter
to some of the passages in his autobiographies about his mother, whom he
publicly disliked, and ex-wives. Yet at his best he was simply a good writer
with a talent for the stage. His last play, Dejavu, a revisiting of Jimmy
Porter more than 35 years on, was performed at the Comedy in 1992 and
received less praise than this critic thought it deserved. Fashion had
changed; by then Rattigan was back in London.
A small annual tribute will continue to be paid to him in the St Valentine's
day messages from bears and squirrels in the newspapers. That was just like
Alison and Jimmy when they clicked, though for that Osborne was derided by
some at the start.
He is survived by his fifth wife, Helen Dawson, and one daughter. He was
previously married to Pamela Lane, Mary Ure, Penelope Gilliatt and Jill
Bennett.
