FT  15 APR 94 / Survey of Austria (5): Global expansion - Manufacturing
profile / Lenzig
It is always a surprise to find 'the largest' of anything in a small country
such as Austria.
Lenzing, the viscose, plastics and papers group based in the eponymous
Austrian town near Salzburg, for example, is the world's largest producer of
viscose, the wood pulp-based fibre that is the raw material for rayon and
other woven and non-woven products.
Viscose has not been a growth sector for some time. On the contrary, the
world market has long hovered around 2m tonnes a year, and prices are
frequently under pressure as a result of competition with other fibres and
low-cost producers in developing countries.
But Lenzing, in which two Austrian banks have large minority shareholdings,
has followed a deliberate policy of increasing its concentration on viscose
 -which now accounts for three quarters of its Sch8bn annual revenue.
In the past two decades, the number of viscose producers in Europe has
dropped from 25 to seven, but Lenzing believes the remaining three majors,
including Courtaulds of the UK and Hoechst of Germany, can thrive on the
basis of high quality products and service.
So it has consistently built up its capacity, and last year surpassed Birla
of India to become the world's largest producer, with annual capacity of
268,000 tonnes in plants in Austria, the US and Indonesia.
The group has combined this expansion with a big commitment to research and
development of new products, and is on the verge of large scale production
of a new cellulose-based fibre called Lyocell.
In the early 1980s, the group was looking for ways to make better fibres
from dissolving pulp. Viscose has a relatively poor image and an unpleasant
smell and the production process requires a number of nasty chemicals,
including carbon disulphide and caustic soda. Lenzing has had to spend
Sch2.1bn since 1988 to make its mills environmentally friendly.
The answer, it hopes, is Lyocell, a fibre developed in the early 1980s by
Akzo, the German chemicals group, that uses N-Methyl-Morpholine-Oxide (NMMO)
as a solvent.
For one thing, the production process is an energy-efficient closed loop,
with both the NMMO and water being recycled. Lyocell fibres also have
greater wet tenacity than viscose and better form stability.
Lenzing is one of only two companies - the other is Courtaulds - that have
licences to use the basic Lyocell technology. Courtaulds has developed a
fibre called Tencell, which has soft, peach fuzz characteristics.
Lenzing has been moving in a different direction, trying to perfect a fibre
that will enable it to compete effectively against cotton and silk in
high-quality, high-volume clothing lines, such as shirts, blouses and
dresses.
In 1990, it started up a pilot plant in Lenzing to produce what it calls
Lyocell by Lenzing.
By last year, the product was so good that the group could sell the 200
tonnes annual capacity at roughly two times the price of viscose.
Within the next few weeks, the group hopes to win approval of its
supervisory board to invest more than Sch1bn in a full-scale 20m
tonnes-a-year plant. A rights issue to finance it would be necessary, as the
group's balance sheet has been weakened in the past few years by its heavy
investments in pollution control equipment.
Moreover, in 1992, weak fibre prices undermined margins and the group fell
into loss and a further loss occurred last year.
Undaunted, Lenzing continues to develop its viscose business. In August,
1992, it bought a 45,000 tonnes-a-year viscose plant in Tennessee from BASF
and has since boosted capacity to 60,000 tonnes. Expansion of its plant in
Indonesia was also completed in 1992 and a further Dollars 100m expansion is
under consideration.
Last autumn, it won a Sch350m contract to build a 20m tonne viscose plant in
China, with options to participate in the sector at a later stage.
And last month, it entered a 100,000 tonnes a year dissolving pulp joint
venture in Brazil with Klabin Fabricadora de Papel e Celulose and the
International Finance Corporation to secure raw material supplies for its
viscose plants throughout the world.
