FT  07 APR 94 / Survey of Danish Banking and Finance (5): Technology helps
build bridge to the future - Profile of Laan &amp; Spar
For five years Mr Peter Schou has been preparing Laan &amp; Spar, a medium-sized
Danish retail bank, for a listing on the Copenhagen stock exchange.
The delay has been necessary first, to convert the bank to a limited company
from a self-governing institution. This was done in 1990 through a closed
issue of shares bought by 131 investors, including trade unions, pension
funds and other institutional investors.
The share issue was followed by a far-reaching transformation of Laan &amp; Spar
into a direct bank. To increase productivity distribution channels have been
changed. Three of nine branches have been closed and earlier investments in
information technology fully utilised. As a direct bank, L&amp;S' target
customers - white collar workers and academics - have been given access to
the bank by telephone, telefax, mail and later via modem.
Because of the bank's high interest margins, the bank realised that the new
distribution channel had to provide better prices than that of competitors
to attract new customers, even though it would be impossible to offer the
new discount pricing scheme to all existing customers.
The new distribution channel has made it possible for L&amp;S to make its system
more efficient. At the same time, the bank's line of products has been
reduced to create greater simplicity and transparency. Corporate customers
were excluded from the bank's targeted customer base.
Last year L&amp;S introduced a new service channel through diskettes. These
include application forms for loans, an interest rate survey of the top 37
banks, covering a period of four-years for all main products, information on
the costs of changing banks, personal tax calculation programmes and a
personal budget programme.
The diskette is run on a standalone personal computer and is distributed
free to existing and potential customers. Later this year in August, L&amp;S
plans to introduce Denmark's first home banking system on diskette.
Before the bank's transformation, the bank's profitability and capital base
were weak. Mr Schou has introduced a very tight risk management policy
permitting only limited currency dealing - foreign exchange currency is
limited to buying/selling of travel currency - and interest risks.
A structure was designed around the corporate leadership which would
implement the bank's changes. 'The cornerstone should be participative
management. The organisation itself should develop the process and changes
on a continuing basis,' Mr Schou explains.
This strategy was very successful and the profitability of L&amp;S allowed the
bank to facilitate the change in its ownership structure the following year.
'The average interest margin has been lowered to three per cent from 10 per
cent and, at the same time, distribution, production, credit and sales costs
have been reduced. This has led to bigger volumes and increased
profitability.' Mr Schou explains.
L&amp;S' capital base grew by more than 100 per cent through the closed share
issue, the company's name was changed and the direct bank concept was
launched publicly. The bank's new owners have indicated two main intentions:
to achieve as big a return as possible on the capital which they invested
and to maintain a decisive influence over the bank after it became listed on
the stock exchange.
Last year the bank's old programme and the new direct programme were merged
into a slimmed direct programme. At the same time the reduced number of
branches transformed into local direct banks which could attack their
regional markets while offering the same prices as the regional branches.
In 1873 Discount and Advance Payments Bank, as L&amp;S was earlier known, failed
in its first attempted launch on the stock exchange. According to Mr Schou,
a small circle of civil servants sought to benefit from attractive market
conditions to raise capital for lending activities directed towards their
peers.
The result was dismal. The bank attracted just DKr40,000. Seven years later
it merged with a thrift society. This month, L&amp;S expects to raise an
estimated DKr130m to add to the bank's reserves and to see its first trading
day on May 6 on the Copenhagen stock exchange.
Until 1960, the level of the bank's activity was relatively modest and it
did not experience any real growth until during the period 1960-88 when it
achieved assets of DKr1.4bn and was ranked number 42. Following the
management change and restructuring of the bank, L&amp;S has improved its
ranking to number 14 and its assets have grown to DKr4bn.
The first move by the new management team which took over following the
retirement of Mr Schou's predecessor as chief executive in 1988 was to
attempt to turn L&amp;S around. But this coincided with the start of a
recession. 'The missing profitability and capital base clearly showed that
everything had to be changed,' according to Mr Schou.
But the turnaround had to be undertaken in steps for it would have been
impossible for L&amp;S to attract fresh capital until profitability and
productivity could be documented over a period of a number of years.
Although a few of the bank's competitors have sought to imitate L&amp;S none
have managed to offer the same mix of distribution entities. The imitations
are purely telephone banks, he maintains.
'Laan &amp; Spar sees the mix of branches and the centrally-placed direct branch
as a bridge to the future. We believe that customers below 50 years of age
will get used to the direct bank (concept), while customers beyond 50 years
of age will be reluctant to become direct customers,' he said. The most
profitable private customers remain however, those older than 50.
This year L&amp;S' distribution and production systems are being trimmed further
and efforts have been directed towards quality improvements while
maintaining price competitiveness.
Earlier this year the bank's competitors introduced new fees, but L&amp;S was
able to maintain its four year-old fee level due to the success of its
streamlining concept.
The bank has budgeted for a 1994 pre-tax profit of DKr52.7m against DKr62.5
in 1993. The decline is mainly attributed to an increase in costs due to
expansion of production capacity and a fall in net interest income due to a
drop in interest levels from 1993 to 1994.
L&amp;S future strategy is to maintain its ability to convert large investments
in information technology into cost reductions, to continue to attract,
maintain and develop motivated and committed employees, to maintain its
ability to listen to its customers and the capability and quality of the
management in managing a company undergoing changes.
