FT  31 DEC 94 / On The Front Line: Rabin the soldier - War and Peace
(Warmongers and Peacemakers)
Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's prime minister, may have been awarded a one-third
stake in this year's Nobel peace prize, but it is still to men in uniform he
instinctively turns for advice. The long-time soldier measures every
proposed step towards peace against the potential risk to Israeli security.
It has been Shimon Peres, the foreign minister and fellow Nobel peace prize
winner, who over the past two years has provided most of the vision, while
Rabin has made the daily calculation about levels of violence and their
impact on the electorate.
Nothing better summed up Rabin's approach to peace with the Palestinians
than his initial reluctance to attend the White House signing ceremony in
1993, and his obvious distaste at having to shake the hand of Yassir Arafat.
But it was the price which had to be paid for getting Israeli troops out of
the Gaza strip. A year earlier Rabin had remarked that he wished Gaza 'would
sink into the sea', a comment which he claimed had originally been made by
David Ben-Gurion, Israel's first prime minister. But, Rabin added, as Gaza
was unlikely to drop into the sea, it had to be dealt with.
One attraction of the 'Gaza first' option was that it did not require Rabin
to make many tough decisions on more contentious issues such as the future
of Jewish settlements in the occupied territories. The settlements remained
in Gaza under Israeli military protection. The arrangements for the far more
numerous and highly populated settlements in the West Bank were to be the
subject of future negotiations, while the opening of talks on their
long-term status was at least two years away.
Although not explicitly stated, the chances of those talks proving fruitful
rested to a large extent on Arafat doing what Israeli governments had for so
long failed to achieve and bring a halt to attacks on Israelis by
Palestinian radicals, and especially by Hamas, the extremist Islamic group.
Predictably, Arafat and his inexperienced police force have not succeeded.
Worse, the failure of the peace process to bring visible economic benefits
to the impoverished Gaza strip is tilting the political balance away from
Arafat and towards his opponents.
The Palestinian leader needs help, and the man best placed to provide it is
Rabin. But he is already balking at undertaking the next stage of the peace
process: the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the main Arab population
centres in the West Bank to allow elections to be held. Rabin now says he
does not see how this can be done while ensuring the safety of Israeli
settlers, a comment which brought howls of protest from Palestinian
negotiators.
Rabin is also moving with caution in his contacts with Syria, insisting that
President Hafez al-Assad commits himself to a timetable for establishing
full relations before Israel announces how much of the Golan Heights it is
willing to withdraw from, and when. Even if US mediation produces an
improbable breakthrough, Rabin has promised Israeli voters the final say in
a referendum.
In spite of the loss of momentum and the stand-off with Syria, Rabin will
have been satisfied with his year, if only for the peace treaty signed with
Jordan, an achievement that won almost universal acclaim in Israel. His
place in history is assured, but whether it will be primarily as a man of
peace has yet to be decided.
