FT  10 MAY 94 / Technology: Weightless, but gaining ground - Leyla Boulton
examines Russia's attempts to convert space anddefence projects into
civilian money-spinners
Whether it is to make mashed potato flakes at a top-secret weapons
installation or simulate zero-gravity for tourists, Russia is bursting with
plans for turning its cash-strapped space and defence industry into a source
of lucrative civilian projects.
Some are capital-intensive and have yet to attract investment, others are a
reality.
One is the bizarre experience of weightlessness training, originally
designed for astronauts and now made available to anyone who can pay.
'Military pilots - you must always remain in a state of combat-readiness,'
reads the faded billboard at an airfield outside Moscow as a busload of
Japanese travel agents and US journalists arrives for a gravity-suspending
flight.
'Welcome on board this Ilyushin-76,' says Victor Rein, chief of the Russian
Space Agency's micro-gravity unit, as his 15 foreign passengers clamber on
to a transport plane specially equipped for simulating weightlessness. They
are about to sample a 90-minute out-of-mind experience on offer to any
potential 'space-tourist' with Dollars 4,000 (Pounds 2,740) to burn.
With an individual trainer to instruct and watch over each 'tourist', the
seatless aircraft, complete with padding for a soft-landing after each burst
of zero-gravity, simulates weightlessness by performing undulating flight
manoeuvres in the shape of a parabola.
It is the movement of passengers relative to that of the aircraft at the
'apogee' of the parabola which creates the feeling of free floating. Some 14
parabolas are flown, generating as many weightlessness sessions, each
lasting 30 seconds, during which passengers can pretend to fly like
Superman, or simply hang to the handrails while the rest of their body goes
up in the air.
While Nasa and the European Space Agency have only one such aircraft each,
the Russians have three but a dwindling number of astronauts to train in
them. A cut in the once-lavish state subsidies means the agency is eager to
use the space programme's excess hardware to generate extra revenues as well
as advertise Russian technological prowess.
In an attempt to reach a wide audience, the agency is marketing the
weightlessness flights in the west through a Florida-based company called
MIGs Etc, which already has a track record offering tourists the chance to
fly over Moscow on MIG-29 fighter planes.
The same financial crunch has hit the Russian defence industry which for
decades produced masses of weaponry for the state without regard for its
cost.
But after more than five years of talking about the need to convert excess
defence capacity to civilian output, industry has experienced mixed
successes in its efforts to carry out so-called conversiya.
The main obstacles have been not so much the cost of such projects but
Russian authorities' inability to create a welcoming investment climate and
managers' dearth of marketing skills. Many managers have trouble both
selling existing output and putting together attractive investment
opportunities for would-be investors.
'Our people have golden hands,' an official from the defence-dominated Urals
industrial region told western bankers last month in what was meant to be a
serious pitch for western investment. 'They can make everything except
money.'
In a self-interested attempt to help, a group of Russian entrepreneurs and
bankers recently put together a consortium called the Russian Aerospace
Corporation. Konstantin Borovoi, one of the organisers, says the aim is to
match Russian investment resources with promising opportunities in the
defence and space industries.
In a renewed attempt to attract western capital to previously top-secret
reaches of Russian industry, Russia is presenting 14 investment projects at
the Central and East European Technology and Investment Exhibition at Earl's
Court in London this week.
Yuri Tichkov, the deputy atomic energy minister in charge of helping part of
the Russian nuclear weapons industry switch to peaceful purposes, will be
heading the delegation. 'We are trying openly to describe directions of
conversiya in this sensitive area,' he says.
He believes that the projects, five of which are based in 'closed cities'
where nuclear weapons are made, are attractive because of the high-quality
workforce and technology available at the plants in question.
The government is offering foreign investors a 50 per cent stake in joint
ventures which it sees as important for creating jobs and restructuring
industry to the needs of consumers. Using the big numbers of which Russian
officials and old-style factory managers are fond, he says one project
requires Dollars 100m to set up manufacturing facilities for fibre-optic
cable on equipment designed at the closed city of Chelyabinsk-70.
Other projects are aimed at producing special materials such as pure
aluminium, silicon and gallium arsenide for the electronics industry. At a
plant in Tomsk-7, a closed city which was the site of a small nuclear
accident last year, the aim is to make high-energy magnets instead of
weapons-grade plutonium.
Also on display in London is 'Project Potato' - a pilot project launched
with a US food processing company called Concord - to produce machinery to
save Russia's potato harvest from going to waste by converting surplus
potatoes into instant mashed-potato granules.
A first example of successful conversiya in a closed city is Krasnoyarsk-45,
which last year set up production facilities to make 30m video-cassettes and
25m audio-cassettes with some help from the Russian government and from
BASF, the big German chemical group.
But recognising that Russian officials and managers had so far done a poor
job in attracting investors - 'we are still lousy as market operators' -
Tichkov hopes that the Russian government will make the projects
irresistible by attaching special tax breaks to them in a few months' time.
Acknowledging that many western companies were not interested in projects in
which they could not have the controlling interest, he also said the
government would let foreigners have control if they offered 'really good
terms'.
He shied at the question of why Russian investors had not already flocked to
take advantage of the projects, saying their 'mentality was geared towards
short-term profits'.
