FT  07 NOV 94 / The US Goes To The Polls: Democrats on the very brink of
survival - Politics under fire as campaigning comes to a bitter and negative
finale
Even if America were a land veritably flowing with milk and honey, President
Bill Clinton and his Democrats would lose seats in tomorrow's congressional
elections. This is how it always is when a new president, regardless of
party or personality, meets the wall of reaction, protest and downright
indifference that characterise his first midterms.
What makes tomorrow important is the prospect of something relatively
unusual happening - a change of power in one, or conceivably both, chambers
of Congress. This has not happened in the House of Representatives since
1954, when the Democratic hegemony was established, and in the Senate since
1986, when the Democrats ended a brief six year Republican interregnum.
The significance of such a change to President Clinton and to the conduct of
US policies at home and overseas can be overestimated. Post-war Republican
presidents have far more often than not been saddled with a Democratic
Congress, yet the country has not always found itself in a state of
paralysis. Many Americans believe there is a natural order to the presidency
resting with one party and the legislature with the other.
Yet the angry tenor of the campaigns now lurching to a bitter and negative
conclusion suggest stirrings in the woodwork far beyond normal political
cut-and-thrust.
Cynicism about government itself and those who work in it has reached a
pitch that dwarfs rational consideration about what it, and they, should be
doing about national problems.
In a sense, it may not matter so much whether Republicans take control of
one or the other chamber than that those who inhabit the next Congress, old
and new members, Republicans and Democrats alike, may have been so scarred
by their confrontation with the electorate that the term 'do nothing
Congress,' so successfully coined by President Harry Truman in the 1948
campaign, may come to be seen as an understatement.
Democratic command of the legislature does hang by a thread. This is most
easily discernible in the 35 more visible races, 22 of them defended by
Democrats, in the 56-44 Democratic Senate than in all 435 House contests,
where the majority party holds a 256-178 edge, with a lone independent (Mr
Bernie Sanders of Vermont).
Needing to lose no more than six seats to retain control, the Democrats seem
certain to drop three - Ohio, Maine and Arizona - and are at severe risk in
as many as 10 more.
They could afford to lose more than six if there are offsetting gains from
Republicans. But local polls, admittedly not always reliable, point to only
one realistic chance, in Minnesota. Once hopeful prospects in Delaware,
Wyoming and Montana now seem longer shots, though one survey last week in
the state of Washington found a surprising surge for Mr Rod Sims, previously
running well behind Mr Slade Gorton, the Republican incumbent. Another
survey found that Mr James Jeffords, a leading party moderate, was not quite
secure in Vermont.
The pundit consensus, for what it is worth, generally hovers around
Republican gains of 5-9 seats, either not quite enough, or just enough. In
the event of a 50-50 tie, the presence of Vice-President Al Gore means the
Democrats retain command of the chamber and its committees, unless Senator
Richard Shelby from Alabama, who often votes with Republicans, can be
persuaded to switch parties.
It is much harder to get a national handle on the House races, where the
Republicans need a 40-seat gain to form a majority in their own right. But
Congressman Newt Gingrich, certain to be the next Republican leader in the
House and, with party control, the next Speaker, is openly talking of
forming new alliances. He wants to link with conservative Democrats from the
south and its borders, giving him de facto, if not de jure, command.
The Democrats started with the assumption that they could lose 25 seats,
greater than the average post-war loss but not by much. Mr Gingrich raised
the stakes by talking about 40 and more, before lowering them somewhat and
focusing on ideological majorities.
It does appear that some apparently very endangered Democratic incumbents,
many of them in their first terms like Pete Strickland in Ohio and Jane
Harman in California, are on the brink of survival. Special interest money
also tends to favour sitting members, with one study last week finding
incumbents with a 15-1 fundraising advantage in House races. Again, the
pundit consensus foresees Republican gains of 25-35 seats.
The obvious Republican advantage is derived in part from the fact that the
midterms always attract a low turn-out - nationally about one-third of
eligible voters. There will be wide variations, depending on the heat
generated by local candidates and issues, but Republicans, more committed if
smaller in numbers, seem more motivated to vote.
A recent Washington Post-ABC poll sought to identify likely voters and found
them evenly split between the two parties. Earlier surveys had actually
found the Republicans ahead, but parity is a plus because, in recent
elections, the Democrats have generally enjoyed about an eight point
advantage.
The impact of the religious right may be more visible in individual contests
like the Senate races in Virginia and Minnesota than nationally. But the
Christian Coalition's get-out-the-vote drive, invariably behind conservative
candidates and causes, cannot be overlooked. This weekend, for example, it
will be distributing across the country no less than 33m 'election guides',
the contents of which have already drawn fire from liberal quarters.
Yet the sad and indelible memory of virtually all the contested campaigns is
that money and negativism have been identified as the keys to electoral
success. The California Senate race between Ms Dianne Feinstein, the
Democratic incumbent, and Congressman Michael Huffington has already set
national records - Dollars 30m and counting - for a single contest, most of
it from the Republican's own pockets. The Robb-North slugfest in Virginia is
not far behind.
It has been hard to find a single campaign in which conventional policy and
social issues have been given an airing in the welter of name-calling.
Discussion of crime - a hot button subject - invariably is reduced to who
would execute murderers first and fastest. Democrats, in particular, have
seemed at a loss to respond, with, perhaps, only Governor Mario Cuomo of New
York secure enough in his own opposition to capital punishment not to bend
with the prevailing tempest.
The most important ballot issue in any state - the Californian proposition
to deny social services to illegal immigrants - is the perfect manifestation
of this public discontent and the consequent search for scapegoats. There is
no doubt that illegal immigration poses costs and problems, but the proposed
solution, probably both illegal and unconstitutional, seems motivated by the
desire to take matters out of the hands of government, state and federal.
The impact of all this, as personal experience and acres of reportage and
polling in the American media attest, is of a polarised electorate genuinely
disgusted with politics in all its manifestations. Yet tomorrow the country
votes and, in January, a new Congress, the result of that exercise of the
franchise, will take office. Regardless of who runs the legislature, no easy
times lie ahead.
