FT  15 APR 94 / HK press shocked at Beijing jailing: Simon Holberton on
reaction to a 12-year sentence for printing 'secrets'
Editors and journalists in Hong Kong have always known that the colony's
reversion to Chinese sovereignty in 1997 posed special problems for the
maintenance of a free press.
But the 12-year jail term meted out two weeks ago to Mr Xi Yang, a
mainland-born reporter for Ming Pao Daily News, a leading Hong Kong quality
daily, has cast a long shadow over the media in the colony, shocking even
those who believe the Chinese takeover in 1997 will be relatively benign.
Over the past few years proprietors have faced the implicit threat from
mainland-funded companies that advertising will be withdrawn if their
editors overstep the mark. For their part, journalists are frequently called
into the New China news agency, Beijing's unofficial embassy in Hong Kong,
to account for their stories.
Self-censorship is a growing problem, with newspapers finding it easier to
ignore issues - such as the growing role of the People's Liberation Army in
business in Hong Kong, or the business connections of senior Beijing
officials in the colony - than to run the risk of offending Hong Kong's
future ruler.
Now journalists and academic lawyers openly express doubts that the
guarantee of press freedom - promised in the Basic Law, China's
mini-constitution for Hong Kong - will be robust enough to withstand the
Chinese Communist party's distrust of critical media. To some there is an
unreconcilable contradiction at the heart of 'one country, two systems',
China's formula for ruling Hong Kong.
Yesterday Mr Nihal Jayawickrama, of Hong Kong University's law department,
told a media conference in the colony: 'It seems to me that Beijing would
find itself not only in a wholly untenable position, but also pursuing an
unattainable goal if it were to attempt to permit a small number of its
citizens to conspicuously enjoy a high degree of freedom so vehemently
denied to others' in China.
Others are less gloomy, though no less concerned. There is pressure building
on the Hong Kong government from local legislators to enact a freedom of
information law, and to do more to promote human rights in the colony.
Earlier this week a British House of Commons select committee threw its
weight behind the establishment of a human rights commission, underpinned by
an equal opportunities law, recommending that one be set up before British
administration ends.
Mr Xi was arrested in Beijing on September 27 last year for allegedly
stealing state secrets. Under pressure from public opinion in Hong Kong,
Beijing has released some details of the charges against him and the
judgment of Beijing's Intermediate Court.
It appears that Mr Xi was responsible for a Ming Pao report last summer
which said the government planned to sell gold on the international bullion
market to help fund intervention to support the yuan. The report also
speculated about interest rates.
In the six months since his detention the Chinese authorities have allowed
Mr Xi only one visitor - his father, once, for one hour. Beijing has
rebuffed all Ming Pao's attempts to provide him with legal representation or
find out the precise details of his alleged offences.
Ming Pao feels especially affronted by his sentence. Its owners were given
to understand that if the newspaper kept a low profile and offered an
apology for Mr Xi's behaviour, which they did, then the Beijing court would
exercise leniency. 'Six months of self-restraint and he got 12 years,' said
Ms Daisy Li, chair of the Hong Kong Journalists Association and a senior
Ming Pao staffer.
Another aspect of Mr Xi's case which has disturbed many is the prison term
given to his apparent informant at the People's Bank, China's central bank.
Tian Ye (whose sex is unknown) was sentenced to 15 years in prison.
The effect of the Xi case is already being felt among Hong Kong's
journalists. It led to the resignation of a number of Chinese journalists
from newspapers in the colony. One, who covered China's austerity programme
last summer, resigned out of fear for his own safety earlier this week.
'His sentencing has had an immediate effect,' says Ms Li. 'Those who cover
China have become more cautious. They are worried for their personal safety
and for the safety of their contacts in China.'
She also noted that China has not observed its own judicial procedures in
the Xi case. Chinese criminal law states that even where a case has been
tried in secret the judge's verdict has to be publicised. In Mr Xi's case
this has not happened, Ms Li said.
Mr Xi has been allowed to appeal against his sentence but Ms Li said she was
pessimistic about his chances of having the verdict overturned.
At yesterday's media conference Mr Tsang Tak-sing, editor of the
Beijing-controlled Ta Kung Pao, lashed out at critics of China's legal
system. Mr Tsang, who is also a delegate to China's National People's
Congress, said Hong Kong standards could not be applied across the border.
After 1997, he said, he was confident the two legal systems could co-exist
as promised in the Basic Law; those who doubted that might as well make
their preparations to leave Hong Kong now.
'The verdict handed down in Beijing will in no way affect things in Hong
Kong,' he said. 'The only impact will be on the coverage of news from the
mainland; we should have been aware from the start that that was another
ballgame.'
If Mr Tsang is right about the constraint on Hong Kong's media to report
about affairs on the mainland then the colony will lose one of its unique
qualities: its position as a window on China.
