FT  15 FEB 94 / Choice of cuts or catastrophe: Europe's unaided steel
companies are on a collision course with their subsidised rivals
Nobody ever said it would be easy to pull the west European steel industry
out of its latest crisis. But in trying to alleviate the sector's problems,
governments, steelmakers and the European Commission seem to be thrusting
themselves deeper into a furnace of controversy.
The European Union's largest steel producers will meet Mr Martin Bangemann,
the industry commissioner, and Mr Karel Van Miert, competition commissioner,
today - ostensibly to discuss cuts in EU steel production. Private
steelmakers, and those publicly owned producers that no longer receive
subsidies, made tentative pledges last year to reduce their steel production
by a total of 25m tonnes to about 135m-140m tonnes. Brussels considers this
the vital last element of the EU's complex and politically sensitive plan to
restore the industry's health after years of overcapacity, slowing demand
and competition from cheap imports. Moves, which emerged last night, to fine
leading European steel manufacturers for operating a cartel in heavy steel
beams appeared timed to step up the pressure on private steel manufacturers
to come to heel.
But producers not receiving aid are unhappy about continued subsidies to
state-owned competitors in east Germany, Spain, Portugal and Italy. In
December, EU industry ministers agreed unanimously to limit that aid and cut
production capacity in the subsidised sector, in the hope of levelling the
playing field. But the deal has opened a rift between the non-aided sector
and the subsidised producers.
Since December, the attitude of unsubsidised producers has hardened further.
Their most vehement attacks have been reserved for the German city-state of
Bremen and its plans to keep Klockner-Werke's steel mill in the city alive,
a proposal being investigated by Brussels for possible illegal state aid.
So at today's meeting, instead of co-operating to cut capacity and relieve
the crisis, individual steel chiefs could find themselves pitted against one
another as well as against the Commission - only 16 months after they stood
shoulder to shoulder calling for EU action.
The meeting could mark the beginning of a dangerous stand-off between public
authorities - in Brussels and national capitals - and the unsubsidised
steelmakers, in which both sides seem ready to gamble with the fate of the
industry itself. 'It's a poker game,' said one Commission official last
week. 'We have done our part and it was clear from the end of last year that
(unsubsidised) industry had to do its part.'
The problem is that, since the December subsidies deal, the non-aided
producers - led by big west German steelmakers and backed by British Steel
and Usinor Sacilor of France - have shown no intention of fulfilling their
part of the bargain.
When EU steelmakers first called for action in October 1992, they seemed
prepared to offer capacity cuts in return for help from the Commission and
national governments. Brussels has tried to comply with the other elements
of that request, negotiating with east European governments to reduce cheap
imports, promising cash to help cover redundancy costs, issuing forecasts of
market conditions and allowing certain steel companies to club together to
reduce capacity.
But by withholding cuts in production capacity, the Commission believes the
private and non-aided sector risks sacrificing the benefits of those other
measures, prompting a drop in the steel price and, in the worst cases,
provoking bankruptcies and a new race for state subsidies.
The non-aided producers are worried that the December agreement is
unenforceable. Under the deal, governments were allowed to pump subsidies of
Ecu6.8bn (Pounds 5.1bn) into state-owned companies, provided the same
producers cut capacity by more than 5m tonnes. But observers claim the
effective cut in capacity will be nearer to 2.5m tonnes, and they doubt
whether the political resolve exists to ensure that the main public
companies involved in the December agreement - Ilva in Italy, Ekostahl in
east Germany and CSI in Spain - receive no further subsidies, as promised by
the ministers.
As a result, the non-aided producers are reluctant to push through
restructuring which the Commission itself forecasts could lead to the loss
of more than 33,000 jobs in the industry during 1994. As British Steel puts
it, the unsubsidised steelmakers are prepared to share in the cost of
restructuring the industry, but they will not put plants and workers at risk
while others continue to receive subsidies.
Preussag, the German company, says it cannot close any capacity without
unbalancing its entire integrated operation: cutting capacity in one part of
its production line would merely lead to overcapacity in another, the group
claims. Thyssen, another of the German steelmakers, says it has done enough,
at least on flat products: it is laying off 15,000 workers - more than 30
per cent of its workforce - between 1992 and the end of this year.
Mr Van Miert is prepared to listen to such arguments today. But he will
insist that December's subsidy deal cannot be reopened. He has always said
the compromise was not ideal, but points out that ministers would never have
reached unanimous agreement on a tougher subsidy package.
He and Mr Bangemann will also resist any pressure for the Commission to use
special powers to declare a 'manifest crisis' in the industry and impose
production quotas. The commissioners believe such measures, used during the
steel slump of the early 1980s, would simply postpone necessary longer-term
restructuring of the industry.
The commissioners are counting on subsidised producers and their governments
to demonstrate that the December agreement on subsidies and capacity cuts
will stick. The timetable is tight, but governments previously known for
procrastination are already acting. On Friday, the outgoing Italian
government approved a decree providing L800bn (Pounds 324m) to restructure
the state-owned steel industry in order to comply with production cuts, and
is pressing ahead with privatisation of large parts of the industry.
However, that is unlikely to be enough to mollify the unsubsidised steel
producers, which will cite the Klockner subsidy case as the best example of
how the Commission's plans are unravelling.
The Commission is investigating the sale of 75 per cent of the Klockner mill
for just DM4 (Pounds 1.50) to a consortium led by Bremen and made up mainly
of publicly controlled companies. That has angered non-aided producers in
west Germany and beyond, which hoped that when the Klockner-Werke parent
company went into receivership last year the hot-strip mill would be closed.
Some 3m tonnes of annual production would then have been cut and
overcapacity eased in the sensitive sector of flat products. Critics say the
mill will only survive because of a capital injection from the consortium
partners, and warn that the chances of further cuts in flat products are
remote if the sale is approved by Brussels.
Klockner's chief executive, Mr Hans Christoph von Rohr, claims his
restructuring plan has turned the plant round, and made it profitable. It
would be quite wrong to close one of the most modern integrated steel plants
in Germany, he says: 'We would be slaughtering the wrong pig.' But he admits
he cannot see any easy alternative - except to close another entire plant,
if possible one of the oldest.
Mr Van Miert and his officials have indicated they are likely to take a
tough line against the Klockner plan, to ease the confrontation with the
private and non-subsidised steelmakers. If it is not, then the chances of an
easy solution are probably slimmer than they were when a united west
European steel industry approached the Commission in October 1992. The only
hint of a concession on the part of the non-aided producers is a possible
reduction of capacity in long products, such as beams used in construction.
In trying to persuade them to go further, the Commission's only lever is the
threatened abandonment of other elements in its rescue package, such as
redundancy aid and protection against cheap imports.
Brussels still insists that it is calling the steelmakers' bluff and not the
other way round. Officials say the choice for the industry is capacity cuts
or catastrophe. But if the steelmakers are prepared to push negotiations to
the brink, it is hard to imagine that the politicians in the Commission and
national governments will stand by and watch the steelmakers throw
themselves off the edge.
Additional reporting by Andrew Baxter, Robert Graham and Quentin Peel
