FT  07 JUN 94 / Booked for an easy ride to Westminster: Kevin Brown previews
Thursday's four by-election battles where low turnouts appear to pose the
only danger to Labour's strong grip on the seats
In the East End they are calling it the District Line election, after the
London Underground service that links the three constituencies of Barking,
Newham North East and Dagenham.
The line - the green one on the London Tube map - also passes through
Westminster, which is where Labour's three by-election candidates will be
heading on Friday morning.
The elections follow the deaths of Ron Leighton (Newham), and Jo Richardson
(Barking), and the resignation of Mr Bryan Gould (Dagenham), to return to
his native New Zealand.
All three seats are Labour strongholds, held with more than 50 per cent of
the vote at the last general election in 1992. Defeat would be unthinkable.
Labour is also certain of victory in Bradford South, the fourth seat it is
defending in Thursday's by-elections, which was won with 47 per cent of the
vote by the late Bob Cryer.
But the elections are not free of danger for Labour. The biggest fear is a
repeat of the low poll in Labour's successful defence of Rotherham last
month.
In that election Labour's majority fell from 17,561 to less than 7,000. The
proportion of voters supporting Labour also fell, from 63.9 per cent to 55.6
per cent.
Similar results in the east London and Bradford elections would do much to
remove the gloss from the victories Labour expects to record in the European
elections.
The real losers, however, are likely to be the Conservatives, who came
second ahead of the Liberal Democrats in all four constituencies in 1992.
The Conservative candidates have little chance of improving on the party's
1992 performance, and in the current political climate none can rule out the
humiliation of finishing third.
The danger is greatest in the three east London constituencies, where the
Conservatives won no seats in the May local government elections.
The Liberal Democrats are hoping for good results to ease the pain of the
loss of Tower Hamlets, their former East End stronghold, which fell to
Labour in May.
The party finished well behind the Conservatives in all three constituencies
in 1992, but hopes are highest in Barking, where they took 20 per cent of
the vote in May.
All the main parties fear a resurgence of extreme rightwing support, in
spite of the defeat in May of the British National party's sole councillor
in Tower Hamlets.
Overall, the ultra-right achieved its best results in a decade in east
London, prompting the BNP to put up a candidate in Dagenham, and the
National Front to stand in Barking.
Fortunately for the mainstream parties the BNP and the NF are bitter rivals
for the extremist vote and are unlikely to maximise their prospects by
pooling their resources. Most attention will focus on Mr John Tyndall, the
BNP leader, in Dagenham.
Neither party has put up a candidate in Newham North East, one of the UK's
most ethnically diverse constituencies, where the BNP nearly won a council
seat in May.
The main candidates are:
Barking: Labour - Margaret Hodge, 49, former leader of Islington council;
Conservative - Theresa May, 37, banker; Liberal Democrat - Garry White, 21,
unemployed.
Dagenham: Labour - Judith Church, 40, union official; Conservative - James
Fairrie, 46, former army officer; Liberal Democrat - Peter Dunphy, 27,
recruitment consultant.
Newham NE: Labour - Stephen Timms, 38, former Newham council leader;
Conservative - Philip Hammond, 38, company director; Liberal Democrat - Alec
Kellaway, 40, economist.
Bradford S: Labour - Gerry Sutcliffe, 41, council leader; Conservative  -
Ronnie Farley, 49, chartered accountant; Liberal Democrat - Helen Wright,
37, health clinic manager.
