FT  06 MAY 94 / Survey of The Channel Tunnel (12): On guard against
accidents and terror - Security
The financial pressures on the tunnel to open on schedule have taken second
place to the key commercial imperative of ensuring - to the maximum extent
possible - that it cannot permanently be crippled by an accident or
terrorist attack.
Among the numerous security staff, intelligence officers, police, fire
brigade, ambulance, and army personnel on both sides of the Channel engaged
in the project is Tony Blyth, a former British Rail operations manager who
is the tunnel's safety director. 'If we have a major accident, we are dead
as a company,' he says.
Two other key people are Detective Superintendent Cliff Grieve, the UK head
of ports and tunnel policing, and Commissaire Principal Marc Haem of
France's Police de l'Air et des Frontieres. They share responsibility for
security of the tunnel itself and of the shuttle terminals at Folkestone and
Coquelles.
Together they claim to have developed a culture of transnational police
cooperation to try and ensure, says Grieve, 'that people on a daily basis do
not escape justice through the Chunnel'.
In aiming for maximum efficiency, Blyth, Grieve, and Haem have had to
grapple with a complex mixture of private and government personnel,
binational agreements and internal committees developed in the run-up to the
opening of the tunnel.
The structure includes an Anglo-French Safety Authority set up for the
tunnel project and the existing official safety watchdogs in both countries,
the UK's Health and Safety Commission, and France's Inspecteur du Travail.
The operation of safety and security comes under the political umbrella of a
lengthy protocol agreement. This was initialled at Sangatte by the UK and
French governments in November 1991 and technically came into force in
August last year.
The Sangatte Protocol takes its cue from the Schengen trans-European
policing agreement, of which France but not the UK is a signatory. It thus
represents a totally new experience for the British police who have tended
to resist encroachment on to their territory by any of their European
counterparts.
The Protocol gives extraterritorial powers to British and French police
officers in specially designated control zones at the international
terminals in London and Paris, and in the shuttle terminals at Cheriton and
Coquelles. The through trains are also control zones where both police
forces will have powers of arrest.
Article 10 of the Protocol states: 'The officers of the adjoining State
shall, in exercise of their national powers, be permitted in the control
zone situated in the host State to detain or arrest persons in accordance
with the laws and regulations relating to frontier controls of the adjoining
state or persons sought by the authorities of the adjoining state.'
In spirit the Protocol, as defined in Article 5, aims to simplify and speed
up the formalities which normal law abiding passengers either travelling by
train or the Shuttle will have comply with when using the tunnel.
At the same time, it aims to harmonise security and safety arrangements so
as to ensure that any emergency or threat is reacted to speedily and
effectively without getting bogged down in disputes over sovereignty.
In the run-up to the opening of the tunnel, the application of the Protocol
has been put through a trial run in joint exercises and interminable
meetings.
The exercises have shown up failures in a number of areas including
fire-fighting equipment and communications. The meetings have produced some
stormy sessions in which British and French officials have argued over
issues ranging from whether some dangerous goods vehicles should be allowed
through the tunnel to the use by French police of small arms in and around
Waterloo station.
Eurotunnel says the set-backs form part of the inevitable teething problems
of any engineering project of such a size and complexity.
'We want to get it right before letting the general public in,' insists Tony
Blyth.
On the policing side, Kent officers and their counterparts in and around
Coquelles say they have developed a good working relationship over a number
of years.
But they are only cogs in the large security and judicial machinery which
will be truly tested only when the tunnel is fully operational.
A recent risk assessment commissioned by the London based Research Institute
for the Study of Conflict and Terrorism concluded that the Channel Tunnel
was probably the least vulnerable to major damage of any under-sea tunnel in
the world.
However, several experts believe that the biggest threat to the tunnel stems
from its being a prestige target for terrorists.
Much of the burden of responsibility will lie with Eurotunnel, however, in
ensuring that the commercial pressures do not lead to greater laxity over
security and safety checks.
