FT  09 AUG 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Forecast of good Indian jute
harvest offers relief to mills
India, the world's biggest producer of jute, is expected to harvest a bumper
jute crop of 9m bales of 180kg each in the 1994-95 season (July to June).
This should provide some relief to the local jute mills which paid a
substantial premium over the minimum support price (MSP) for jute last year
after a sharp setback in fibre production.
A spokesman for the Indian Jute Mills Association said the realisation of a
price almost double the MSP during January to March had motivated the
farmers in all centres to commit additional land under the crop. The jute
commissioner's office says the land under jute in this season is up at least
30 per cent over 1993-94.
While the pre-monsoon showers allowed timely sowing, the good progress of
the monsoon, except in parts of Bihar and north Bengal, has led to a quick
and healthy growth of the crop.
'In most centres there is enough water in the tanks and canals for doing
proper retting of jute,' said a spokesman for the Jute Balers' Association.
The quality of Indian jute has often suffered due to improper retting
resulting from inadequate water. The crop's quality this season will be
particularly good in Assam and south Bengal.
The new season jute has started coming to the market in small quantities.
Since the market arrival of the crop will start picking up from the middle
of next month, the raw jute prices have remained firm.
TD-5, the benchmark grade, is quoting Rs700 (Dollars 22) a quintal, ready
delivery, against the MSP of Rs470 a quintal. In anticipation of a big crop,
however, the forward delivery prices are quoting around Rs600 a quintal.
In spite of the big crop, the growers hope to realise 'remunerative prices
for the fibre' throughout the season, because the year has opened with
stocks of only 800,000 bales.
The total availability of fibre is estimated at 10.1m bales, including the
likely import of 300,000 bales of high-quality fibre. The total fibre supply
last year was 9.5m bales.
Industry officials say that while the jute mills will process about 8.2m
bales, the requirement of the other sectors, including the paper mills, is
around 600,000 bales. The next season will, therefore, open with stocks of
1.3m bales, or just over two months' requirement of fibre by the jute mills.
Bangladesh, the world's largest exporter of raw jute and jute goods, is also
heading for a large crop of at least 5m bales, compared with 4.5m last year.
Bangladesh exports regularly at least 1.5m bales of jute a year.
