FT  08 APR 94 / Survey of East Kent (8): Stimulus for development - Channel
Tunnel's impact
Clustered around Ashford - long picked out as one of the chief growth
centres in the UK - are vast sites near the M20 motorway waiting for a tidal
wave of new buildings. And waiting, and waiting . . .
'Businesses in this country have a habit of refusing to act until major
infrastructure projects are finished,' says Jon Barrett, Kent County Council
director of inward investment.
'We saw that with the Dartford Bridge, which did not attract jobs until it
was opened. And that was an obvious project compared with the Channel
Tunnel, which is just a hole in the ground.'
In other words, the impact of the largest private sector infrastructure
project ever attempted in the UK will not be seen until it opens. But plenty
of informed guesswork has happened during seven years of gestation and
construction, writes David Lawson.
Forecasts suggested that employment from construction work on the tunnel
would have little lasting impact on the local economy, and any employment
generated would be dwarfed by other structural decline, producing a net loss
of 10,000 jobs. This hard news gave impetus to setting up the East Kent
Initiative and led to the successful campaign for assisted area status.
Jon Barrett might be expected to wilt under the weight of gloom, but two
factors keep him remarkably sanguine. The first is not the tunnel itself but
the terminal due to open at Ashford in 1996. The rail link - already put
back by more than a decade - could so easily have slipped through the region
with hardly a trace left around the edges - 'but the station means trains
will stop here on the way to and from Brussels and Paris,' he says. 'That
will stimulate surrounding development.'
Secondly, he cites new companies already moving into the area - 'mainly
small businesses wanting to take advantage of the European connection,' he
says. 'They will grow much faster than indigenous industry. 'Across the
county as a whole, 250 jobs were created by new businesses in the year to
last March. Those same companies now employ 320 people.'
The danger, however, is that this growth will draw investment away from East
Kent, already facing a shortfall of 40,000 jobs because of structural
decline of industries like mining, fishing and now the ferries. But the six
district councils have combined to fight back through the East Kent
Initiative.
A regional boost comes from qualification for the European InterReg
programme, which will give East Kent yet more access to grants for joint
promotion with the Nord-Pas de Calais. This has already led to inquiries for
space, so East Kent should get more of these fast-growing companies, helping
build further momentum - 'it shows the success of local authorities working
together for a common aim - even when some are in a different country,' says
Mr Barrett.
The obvious hope is that some of those concerns will come from overseas  -
'one factor rarely mentioned about the tunnel is the psychological fact that
it ties us physically to mainland Europe,' he says.
