FT  18 FEB 94 / Survey of Asian Aerospace (8): Starting small, aiming high -
Malaysia
Ten years ago Malaysia started its own car manufacturing industry. The
critics said the plan was too ambitious. Yet today the home-produced Proton
has a 70 per cent share of the domestic market and exports, particularly to
Britain, have expanded rapidly.
Now Malaysia, buoyed by the success of an economy which has grown at more
than 8 per cent in each of the past six years, is taking steps to develop
its own aerospace industry. The beginnings are modest - initially, Malaysia
plans to manufacture two small two-seaters and a 14-seater amphibious
aircraft. But Malaysia has big ambitions.
'These are undoubtedly small beginnings,' said Dr Mahathir Mohamad,
Malaysia's prime minister, in a speech opening Malaysia's inter- national
maritime and aerospace exhibition on the island of Langkawi in early
December.
'But then, the US entered the aerospace industry with the Kitty Hawk . . .
in a century's time we may have our Boeing and McDonnell Douglas
counterpart, God willing. A beginning has to be made and three small
aircraft make a good beginning, modest though they may be.'
The three aircraft will be produced in collaboration with foreign companies.
Last year, Malaysia took control of the Eagle Aircraft company of Australia,
which produces the Eagle X-TS two-seater. There are now plans to manufacture
it entirely in Malaysia.
The Swiss designed Datwyler MD3-160, also a two-seater, will be produced
under a joint venture with the Malaysian state-controlled company, SME
Aerospace. The third project - production of the Dornier Seastar amphibious
aircraft - is a joint venture between various Malaysian companies and
Dornier of Germany. Production of the Seastar is due to start at a factory
in Penang next year.
Malaysia already has a substantial aerospace maintenance and overhaul
industry. Malaysia Airlines, the national carrier, has rapidly developed the
facilities and expertise for high-grade services on a wide range of
aircraft.
Airod, formerly the Royal Malaysian Air Force aircraft repair and overhaul
depot, was partially privatised in the mid-1980s and, in a joint venture
with Lockheed of the US, now leads Malaysia's push into the aerospace
industry. From having one hangar in 1985, Airod now has five, including a
clear span wide body hangar that can accommodate two B747s at one time.
The bulk of Airod's business at present is concerned with the Lockheed C130
transport aircraft for which it has the main regional servicing contract.
Airod now wants to carry out more commercial work and has already won a
sizeable amount of servicing and maintenance work from regional and
international carriers.
But Airod's main focus is likely to stay on defence for some time to come.
In recent years Malaysia has been increasing its military spending. Last
year it placed orders for 18 MiG-29s from Russia and eight F/A-18Ds from
McDonnell Douglas of the US. Previous to that, it bought 28 Hawk jets from
British Aerospace.
All of these sales included substantial 'offset' agreements, guaranteeing
that part of the work involved in the manufacture and maintenance of the
fighter planes is undertaken in Malaysia.
Malaysia is not only keen to lower the costs of such aircraft through the
offset agreements. More importantly, it wants to learn the technology
involved. Malaysia's aerospace and high technology companies are now gearing
up to take advantage of the opportunities made available through the defence
purchases.
For example, Airod is expected to service and maintain the airframes and
engines of the MiG-29s, helped by a team of Russian technicians who will be
stationed in Malaysia.
Meanwhile Sapura, a diversified Malaysian conglomerate involved mainly in
the telecommunications industry, is likely to be trained to handle the
maintenance and overhauling of the MiG cockpit avionics.
The Malaysian government sees involvement in aerospace as a way to increase
the country's overall industrial capabilities, particularly in areas of high
technology. Recently, Dr Mahathir announced an all-out drive to promote the
industry and said a special aerospace industry park would be set up on the
island of Langkawi.
Mr Najib Tun Razak, Malaysia's defence minister, says Malaysia has
calculated what steps are necessary to attain a viable aerospace industry.
'We have to learn the basics first and not just follow blindly . . . we aim
to develop a viable and high technology aerospace industry to meet
Malaysia's needs and also be a part of the world aerospace sector,' says Mr
Najib.
