FT  12 MAY 94 / North Yemen hints at mediation
Yemen's northern leadership would consider mediation in an effort to end the
country's civil war, now in its second week, the newly-installed prime
minister, Mr Mohammad Said Attar, said yesterday. But any mediation must
take place within the framework of a unified and democratic Yemen, he
insisted.
Mr Attar's comments followed reports of an apparent halt in the advance of
northern military units towards Aden and in other parts of the former South
Yemen.
Observers in Sanaa said the halt may reflect a slightly more conciliatory
attitude among the northern leaders, although General Ali Abdullah Salheh,
the northern leader, last night vowed to avenge the 'cowardly, treacherous'
Scud missile attack on Sanaa which yesterday killed 23 people and injured
30.
The presumed target of the attack was a nearby palace belonging to Gen
Saleh. Northern officials claim that the south has now launched some 20 Scud
missiles against targets in the north.
Arab League officials were due to arrive in Sanaa last night in an attempt
to broker a ceasefire. The small delegation, led by Mr Mohammed Said
al-Bereqdar, the league's assistant secretary-general for military affairs,
left southern Saudi Arabia by road yesterday. League officials said the
delegation would also attempt to contact leaders in the south.
Egypt, Jordan, Syria and Oman have each in the past few days appealed to
leaders in north and south Yemen to resume dialogue. However, in Aden
yesterday Vice-President Ali Salem Al-Baidh, Gen Saleh's rival, said he did
not expect the war to end soon and said northern forces should retreat to
their positions before the start of the war.
Military observers in Sanaa confirmed yesterday that northern forces had
been beaten back as they tried to enter Aden from the east. One observer
said the northern Amaaliga Brigade had come under heavy attack from a
combination of southern air, sea, and ground forces. The northern brigades
had also been halted about 30 miles north of Aden.
In Sanaa, despite the new attacks, life is returning to normal. Electrical
supplies have been restored, but the authorities have yet to resume direct
telecommunications links in an effort to control sensitive military
information. Links between Aden and the outside world appear to be fully
restored, with reports indicating the mood remains calm.
Mr Attar claimed yesterday that northern forces had so far shown
considerable restraint towards the south, particularly Aden. He said the
northern leadership had no animosity towards the southern people, or the
southern-based Yemen Socialist party. He insisted the northern government
was opposed only to certain elements within the YSP.
But Mr Attar also referred to the southern opposition as rebels and
secessionists. The northern leadership, he said, was the party of
constitutional legitimacy. Gen Saleh last week insisted that the conflict
was an internal affair and he warned against any outside intervention.
