FT  02 FEB 94 / Markets Report: Dollar under pressure
The dollar traded lower yesterday following Monday's testimony by Mr Alan
Greenspan, chairman of the US Federal Reserve, indicating that no tightening
of monetary policy was imminent, writes Philip Gawith.
This represented a continuation of the fairly bearish sentiment seen towards
the dollar in recent days. The currency has also come under pressure against
the yen, which strengthened in anticipation of the Japanese government
announcing a large fiscal boost to the economy later this week.
With most of the important data bunched towards the end of the week,
analysts said most of the main currencies had been range trading.
The dollar closed in London at DM1.727, down from DM1.7444 on Monday. It
also finished lower against the yen, at Y107.640 from Y109.005, and was
weaker against sterling. It ended New York trading at DM1.7310 and Y107.64.
Commenting on the dollar's weakness, Mr Steve Barrow, economist at Chemical
Bank, said: 'The market has discounted the strong growth story. That is
unlikely to give any further momentum to the dollar.'
Although Mr Greenspan's comments were seen as giving dollar bulls reason to
pause, there was little support for yen strength lasting much longer. This
view was shared in the US, where the chairman's speech was seen by some as
preparing congress for a tightening of policy.
Mr Avinash Persaud, head of currency research at JP Morgan, said the
market's initial focus had been on Mr Greenspan's comments about the
favourable inflation outlook. He predicted, however, that the most durable
remark would be that which suggested policy was currently too accommodating.
The market appeared to take the resignation of Mr David Mullins,
vice-chairman of the Federal Reserve, in its stride. 'His departure seems to
be a political move and not a consequence of any policy rift within the Fed
governors or the (policy-making) Federal Open Market Committee,' said Mr
Barrow. Mr Mullins, who was appointed by President Bush, was regarded as a
hawk within the Fed and his replacement by a Clinton appointee could have
been seen as heralding a looser monetary policy.
The recent strength of the yen reflects market optimism that a
Y11-15trillion (million million) fiscal package, expected to be announced
later this week, will be good for the Japanese economy.
But Mr Chris Turner, currency strategist at BZW, argues that in the longer
term it will be the behaviour of Japanese investors, rather than foreigners,
which will determine the value of the yen. He believes low bond yields will
probably cause a large outflow of capital, thus weakening the currency.
One possible casualty of yen strength has been the Canadian dollar, which
closed yesterday at CDollars 1.3315 to the US dollar compared to CDollars
1.3263 on Monday. Some analysts attribute part of the curr-ency's recent
weakness to seasonal capital repatriation by Japanese investors who, inter
alia, have large holdings in Canada.
Another factor is that short rates have, unprecedentedly, fallen close to US
levels. Mr Turner notes that three-month rates have dropped to 3.6 per cent,
from almost 8 per cent at the end of 1992. The gap with US short rates has
fallen to 30-40 basis points, from 300 basis points a year ago.
Although the Canadian dollar is regarded as cheap at current levels, there
is nervousness about buying the curr-ency until rates have stabilised. With
little inflationary pressure now, or likely in the near future, there
remains further scope to cut rates.
Sterling fell against the D-Mark, ending in London at DM2.6028 compared to
Monday's close of DM2.6145.
The weakening reflects a slight shift in sentiment away from the Bundesbank
council cutting rates at tomorrow's meeting. Today the market will be
watching the monthly monetary policy meeting between Mr Kenneth Clarke,
chancellor of the exchequer, and Mr Eddie George, governor of the Bank of
England, for any clues about rate movements. The pound closed almost a cent
higher against the weak dollar at Dollars 1.5071.
The market remains unsure what to expect from the Bundesbank. The D-Mark's
recent stabilisation against the dollar will have eased the central bank's
fears of cutting rates against the backdrop of a weak currency.
Many analysts, however, argued that the anticipated poor money supply
figures for December would cause the Bundesbank to hold off, even though the
Bank has made it clear that these will be treated as aberrant. Others warned
that the greatest risk for a weaker D-Mark would be further delays in easing
rates.
Mr Mark Geddes, treasury economist at Midland Global Markets, commented: 'If
the market perceives that the authorities are deliberately postponing an
easing of monetary policy in order to support the D-Mark, recent history
tends to show that this generally leads to further currency weakness.'
The Bank of England provided the UK money market with a further Pounds 200m
assistance yesterday afternoon, bringing total help for the day to Pounds
1bn. This compared with its forecast of a Pounds 1bn liquidity shortage,
revised upwards from an earlier Pounds 950m estimate.
