FT  17 DEC 94 / Leading Article: Policing the utilities
There is a palpable sense of national unease about the activities of many of
Britain's privatised utilities.
It is symbolised by the decision of British Gas to station security guards
outside its showrooms to deflect the wrath of customers angry at the
withdrawal of services. Something seems awry in a world where senior
managers get 75 per cent salary increases while seeking to cut the pay of
their employees; where massive redundancy programmes run alongside
accelerating profits; and where shareholders - yesterday it was the turn of
Yorkshire Electricity's lucky investors - receive large payouts while
consumers feel they are paying over the odds to what remain monopoly
suppliers of essential services.
Not all the privatised companies are in the dock. British
Telecommunications, after a period of deep unpopularity in the late 1980s,
attracts favourable ratings.
The contrast between BT and the gas, water and electricity companies
explains the unpopularity of the last three. The salary of BT chairman Sir
Iain Vallance was notorious while BT was an inefficient, expensive monopoly.
Now BT's prices are falling fast; telecoms regulation is seen to be tough;
competition between phone operators is a reality in the consumer market; and
although a heavy BT redundancy programme is in progress, consumers, not
shareholders, are regarded as the main beneficiaries.
By contrast, water prices have gone up sharply since privatisation. Gas
prices are to rise for many consumers over the next year. Electricity prices
are falling somewhat, but by nowhere near the decline in the cost of
distribution - the main source of the regional electricity companies'
profits. And in none of the three industries is competition yet a reality
for most consumers. In water, it will never become so.
Caught in the cross-fire
In addition, jobs have been shed at a dramatic rate, while dividends and top
managers' salaries have risen sharply. It only took the egregious
provocation of Mr Cedric Brown's 75 per cent salary increase as chief
executive of British Gas, at the same time as the company is seeking to cut
the basic pay and holiday entitlement of its showroom staff, for MPs to
start calling for public inquiries. The employment select committee this
week decided to investigate executive pay in the new year.
How justified is the concern?
In some respects, the utilities are doing no more than ministerial bidding.
The gas and electricity companies were caught in the cross-fire over the
government's unpopular decision - now partially abandoned - to levy 17.5 per
cent value added tax on domestic fuel. The increase in water charges has
been caused in part by onerous EU directives on water quality, which the
government tried too late to persuade Brussels to reconsider.
That still leaves the fundamental issues of executive pay and the balance
which the gas, water, and electricity companies have struck between their
employees, shareholders and consumers.
Unconvincing claims
The arguments about executive pay have been extensively rehearsed in our
letters column with respect to Mr Brown. Managers must be paid according to
responsibility, and multi-billion industries need to be able to attract
top-flight executives. But it is hard to claim that large salary increases
and generous share options are required to 'incentivise' individuals who
were already willingly in post. It is equally unconvincing to claim that
executives need to be rewarded for managing a shift towards competition and
business abroad, which has largely still to happen. The public feeling that
it comes down to greed is difficult to resist.
On cost cutting, the utilities should be offered nothing but applause. In
almost all cases, redundancies have been voluntary and on generous terms.
The benefit to the nation as a whole from lower utility prices must outweigh
any temptation to use the utilities as a source of unproductive employment.
Britain has the lowest business telecoms prices of its main European
competitors - a significant factor in the competitiveness of its financial
services sector, upon which hundreds of thousands of jobs depend.
However, in other utilities too much of the gain from improvements in
efficiency has gone to shareholders instead of consumers. This is manifestly
the case with the regional electricity companies. Interim dividends up to 47
per cent higher than last year are currently being announced. The water and
electricity companies have done far better than expected in their cost
cutting, but virtually all independent observers believe the regulatory
regime established at the privatisation of the two industries was unduly
slack, and has been insufficiently tightened in the latest reviews.
The boards of the utilities should have greater regard for public
sensibilities in setting their salary levels. But it is the regulators who
ought to ensure that a fairer balance is struck between consumers and
shareholders.
