FT  16 MAR 94 / International Capital Markets: Regulatory pact marks new era
in derivatives trade - The UK-US agreement comes at a vital time
Yesterday's news of a pact to co-ordinate regulatory overseeing of
over-the-counter derivatives trading in the US and UK came as two of the
world's most influential groups of traders prepared to open annual meetings
in the US.
The International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) opens it meeting
in Chicago today, while international derivatives regulators, and
representatives of the exchange-traded derivatives community are meeting in
Boca Raton, Florida.
Both organisations have put regulatory issues and international co-operation
at the top of their agendas. Although the two groups see themselves as
distinct and often at odds in competing for the world's risk-management
business, yesterday's regulatory announcement shows that the borders between
the two groups have blurred considerably.
The future, and the sustained growth of global derivatives trading - on and
off listed exchanges - hinges on the regulatory decisions of a variety of
countries. International bank regulators are busy formulating capital
adequacy requirements, disclosure rules, and special accounting that
includes transaction netting.
With their agreement, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the UK's
Securities and Investment Board, and the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission have demonstrated they want to join the bank regulators'
discussion, and have put the over-the-counter swaps dealers on notice that
they (the regulators) must be reckoned with.
For the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, which is facing
reauthorisation this year, its co-operative efforts with the SEC and the SIB
may help head off Congressional criticism of its handling of exemptions for
certain energy derivatives. Added to this is the fact that it has, at times,
seemed ill-prepared to deal with a truly global futures and derivatives
crisis.
After four years of fractious debate, Congress gave the CFTC limited
overseeing of OTC derivatives in 1992, and promised to revisit their
regulatory treatment this year. The CFTC's initiative with the SEC may give
legislators, who have grown to understand the value of derivatives, more
confidence in the agency.
Taken unawares by the securities regulators' initiative, ISDA leaders had
been bracing this week for the release of another regulatory study on the
derivatives business.
Washington's General Accounting Office is overdue to release an extensive
examination on the industry. The GAO is known for its tough and
controversial reports, and is not expected to soft-hand derivatives dealings
like reports by industry groups such as the Group of Thirty.
After a year of such reports, and much discussion by legislators and bank
regulators, the SIB-SEC-CFTC pact smacks of action and provides an agenda
for co-operation on global OTC derivatives regulation.
