FT  31 MAR 94 / International Company News: Recharged VW faces remaining
obstacles with confidence - But the German car maker must not underestimate
the scale of the task
Like freshly-minted charm school graduates, the Volkswagen board oozed
self-confidence and solidarity. The inescapable message, trotted out
eloquently by all seven at a recent outing before the press, was that
Europe's biggest volume vehicle maker was out of the mire.
A break-even or better result was likely for this year. And within three or
four years, the phoenix emerging from the ashes of 1993's record DM1.94bn
(Dollars 1.1bn) net loss would have new plumage and continue rising to
undreamt-of levels of productivity and profitability.
Forecasts and boasts flowed freely. Japanese competitors had exhausted all
their potential for improving productivity, according to Mr Martin Posth, in
charge of the Asia Pacific region.
Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, production director, believed VW would
leapfrog over the productivity levels of Europe's current indigenous stars,
such as Renault, in 1996.
Even Seat, the battered Spanish subsidiary blamed for most of last year's
loss, would break even in mid-1995, he said.
Mr Ferdinand Piech, chairman, said payroll savings were sufficient for him
to pocket a DM1,000 note for every VW marque car sold.
German labour costs had been reduced by 15 per cent this year, claimed Mr
Peter Hartz, the mastermind behind the so-called four-day week.
Younger workers were not simply twiddling their thumbs in their free time.
About 10,000 were being trained into Olympians, who would soon be building
cars in less than 10 hours. According to Mr Piech, production times for the
flagship Golf model will be cut from 30 hours to eight hours by 1997.
By then, Mr Lopez estimated, new models and lower prices would have helped
VW to a 10-fold increase in US sales, regaining the 5 per cent of the US
market captured during the glory days of the early 1970s.
The roots of this extraordinary outburst of self-confidence lie in the
arrival in January 1993 of Mr Piech. Blooming optimism has emerged after a
year of turmoil, in which Mr Piech ejected most of the old board after
blaming it for the mess he had taken on.
He has consolidated his front-rank management in a triumvirate comprising
himself, the controversial Mr Lopez - hijacked with a gaggle of his
so-called warriors from General Motors a year ago - and the ingenious Mr
Hartz.
Mr Piech has led the drive to seize full control over the group's flabby
structure. To his overall responsibilities he has added control over the
flagship VW marque.
Seat has been stripped down, and effectively has one factory instead of
three. Its new, largely German board, is shedding 40 per cent of the Spanish
workforce.
Mr Franz-Josef Kortum, the independently-minded chairman of the Audi quality
car subsidiary, has been sacked and replaced by a so-called spokesman in
another move seen as shifting more power to the group's centre.
VW is a manufacturer firmly fixed in the overcrowded volume market for
mid-range vehicles and its best chance of recovery lies in its ability to
beat all competitors. This includes the likes of BMW, which recently
launched a compact 3-Series car aimed at top-end Golf buyers, and broke out
of its prestige niche with the purchase of Britain's Rover group.
As Mr Piech said, savings within the group were to be passed on to
customers, either as lower prices or enhanced equipment. He noted last week,
in relation to the original target price of a possible new model, 'DM19,000
is not a VW'. The target was now DM4,000 less.
The group's price problems, analysts said, were highlighted last year when
VW underperformed in the only mainstream markets to show any growth.
In Britain, where total car sales rose 11.6 per cent, VW managed a rise of
only 7.6 per cent. In the US, up 5.3 per cent, and where VW had to cope with
quality and delivery problems, its sales fell 35 per cent.
According to figures presented to analysts last week, the cost of materials
at the parent company had fallen to 52.7 per cent of sales, compared with
61.5 per cent in 1992. Group-wide, the ratio fell from a record 64 per cent
to 62 per cent.
However, indications of the scale of the task ahead emerged in a one
percentage point increase in group personnel costs to 25 per cent of sales,
compared with the 2.2 per cent reduction to 20 per cent achieved by BMW.
Other obstacles confronting the group include a bloated workforce. The
company admits it has 30,000 more workers in Germany than it needs. In
addition, some 4,000 laid-off Spanish employees are due to be taken on again
in two years.
Meanwhile, Mr Lopez's aim of increasing group productivity by 25 per cent in
the next 24 months will further accentuate employment problems unless a
sales jump allows the surplus to be re-employed. Mr Piech has warned that
the four-day week programme will need to be extended beyond its initial
two-year run.
More urgently, Mr Piech still has to turn a group deficit of DM400m in the
first quarter into the heralded 1994 break-even when VW's core German market
is expected to continue to shrink.
The possibility of criminal charges against his main ally, Mr Lopez, under
investigation in Germany and the US in connection with allegations that he
and several colleagues stole large volumes of General Motors' industrial
secrets, may yet disrupt his boardroom dream team.
However, the chairman refuses as always to contemplate such a prospect.
The mood has reached Mr Klaus Liesen, head of the group's non-executive
supervisory board, who recently proclaimed he saw virtually no risk of
charges of industrial espionage against Mr Lopez or penalties against VW's
US business. Mr Liesen, hitherto VW's leading sceptic on issues relating to
Mr Lopez, believes no GM documents made their way into VW.
