FT  20 APR 94 / Business Air Travel (21): Airports of the world - Best and
worst of the terminals / Heathrow
London's Heathrow is the busiest international airport in the world. But
whether you enjoy the experience of using it depends largely on which
terminal you use.
Like Air France at Charles de Gaulle in Paris, British Airways has the best
terminal almost to itself. Terminal Four is a model of spaciousness which
even when busy causes no more stress than queueing to buy an ice cream on a
summer's day.
Terminal Two, on the other hand is a ghastly outdated construction where
even users of business class check-in desks have to manoeuvre their bags
around concrete pillars that could not have been better placed by the demon
of travel frustration. Take medical advice first if you suffer from
claustrophobia.
Terminals One and Three are in-between, but have a distinct Terminal Two
tendency at busy times.
Getting to the airport is never quite satisfactory. The Underground is cheap
and reasonably quick, but inconvenient and awkward if you have heavy bags.
Central London stations usually have steps rather than escalators at some
point. The airport bus is of variable reliability while taxis cost at least
Pounds 30 and are a guaranteed way of missing the aircraft if you leave in
the rush hour.
Parking costs Pounds 12 a day close to the terminals in 'business Car Parks'
close to the terminals and Pounds 7 a day further away in the long-term car
parks. At Terminal Four the best deal is the Hilton Hotel car park.
There are more than 25 business and first-class which, especially for long
haul, are generally well kept and spacious. The exceptions at busy times are
the British Airways club class and executive club lounges, which are victims
of their own success.
Thomas Cook has a business lounge between Terminals One and Two aimed at
short haul business passengers who travel on economy tickets.
Undoubtedly, Heathrow's strong point is its shopping. Once again, Terminal
Four is best, although Terminal Three is close behind. There are 59
duty-free and tax-free shops, so do not buy anything until you have gone
through passport control.
Such has been the overcrowding at Heathrow that some airlines have clubbed
together to pay for separate security and passport checks for business and
first class passengers. This 'Fast Track' service is genuinely useful and
operates at Terminals Three and Four with seven airlines participating.
