FT  15 JUN 94 / UK Company News: Central Railway seeks Pounds 6m for
start-up
The first railway company to seek private finance to build a modern rail
route in mainland Britain for more than 50 years yesterday announced plans
to raise between Pounds 5m and Pounds 6m from private investors.
Central Railway Group plans to create a 180-mile railway line from Leicester
to the Channel tunnel entrance to carry trucks on flatbed wagons.
The total cost of the project is estimated at Pounds 3bn, but Pounds 5m to
Pounds 6m is needed to fund the obtaining of parliamentary approval.
The route will consist of disused track, parts of the existing network in
the Chilterns and new track in tunnels under London. Tunnels and bridges
would have to be widened to take the trucks.
Trucks-on trains are common in continental Europe but the smaller loading
gauge of the British rail network has meant it has not been possible to
transport complete trucks in the past.
Central Railway believes the offer will prove more attractive to private
investors than to institutions though there will be no dividends for at
least seven years.
Some investors may also be put off, however, by the repeated refinancings
needed to raise the Pounds 11bn required to build the Channel tunnel.
Central Railway is making an offer to the public of up to 6m Pounds 1 shares
in minimum subscription amounts of Pounds 500. The offer has not been
underwritten and, given the small size of the issue, a Stock Exchange
listing will not be sought.
Subscriptions are open between June 10 and July 19.
The company believes it can capture 15 per cent of international truck
traffic, about 1.75m trucks, travelling between the UK and the Continent by
2005.
It plans to build terminals in Leicester, west London and in northern
France.
Crucial to the project is for Central Railway to acquire ownership of all
the track. This would require the agreement of Railtrack, which owns the
former British Rail track and signalling and which, in general, plans to
retain ownership of the track. Initial talks have been held.
The project has been under preparation for four years and has provoked
scepticism among some people in the transport industry.
Central Railway is the brainchild of Mr Andrew Gritten, a former political
analyst who developed an interest in rail projects while working as a
researcher at the Centre for Policy Studies.
