FT  17 FEB 94 / Bundesbank warns over public debt
The indebtedness of the entire German public sector is likely to reach
almost DM2,000bn (Pounds 785bn) or roughly 60 per cent of gross domestic
product by the end of the current year, from 56 per cent the year before,
the Bundesbank warned yesterday.
The public sector debt is therefore 'approaching by leaps and bounds' the
critical point according to the economic convergence criteria laid down in
the Maastricht treaty, which sets a debt ceiling of 60 per cent of GDP for
member states of the European Union seeking to create an economic and
monetary union.
Germany is already outside the Maastricht criteria as far as the narrowly
defined public sector deficit is concerned, with net borrowing running at
3.4 per cent of GDP in 1993, according to the central bank's latest monthly
report. The Maastricht criterion for the public deficit is 3.0 per cent.
By the end of last year, the total public sector debt had reached DM1,510bn,
or 48.5 per cent of GDP, compared with DM1,345bn, or 44.5 per cent at the
end of 1992, the report says.
If the outstanding debts of the German railways are included, as well as the
liabilities of the Treuhand privatisation agency in east Germany, the public
debt at the end of last year amounts to DM1.74bn, or 56 per cent of GDP. The
railways debt burden falls on the central exchequer from last January 1,
while the Treuhand's liabilities will be taken over from January 1, 1995.
The Bundesbank's calculations confirm those of private sector economists,
who have warned about the 'mountain of debt' being accumulated by the entire
German public sector, as a result of the costs of German unification,
compounded by the current sharp recession.
The latest analysis by the Dresdner Bank, for example, estimates that the
debt burden will rise over DM2,000bn in the course of the year, with the
inclusion of the Treuhand debt, and the assumption of part of the debts of
the east German housing sector, estimated at DM400bn.
The Dresdner Bank warns that without far more drastic cuts in public
expenditure than the recent DM25bn savings package for 1994 - it suggests at
least DM70bn - it will be impossible even to stabilise the debt at that
level.
In spite of its gloomy prognosis, the Bundesbank remains moderately
complimentary about the efforts of the public authorities to curb their
spending but reiterates that continuing rigorous savings measures must focus
on spending cuts, and not tax rises.
It warns that recessionary tendencies in the economy have still not been
entirely overcome.
