FT  25 JAN 94 / Survey of International Legal Services (7): The neighbours
start to encroach - Accountancy's role in legal matters
There has been discreet surveillance over the last year of the London
offices of Arthur Andersen, the accountancy firm, by its curious
competitors.
The reason is an intriguing new extension to the premises which looks
strongly as though it is part of the firm, and yet which maintains an
independent stance.
It reflects a powerful new development in the growing trend for accountancy
firms to be involved in legal issues, in a way that has put some law firms
on the defensive.
The entity is Garrett &amp; Co, a small firm of lawyers based in Andersen's
building, sharing its logo and given initial financial support by the
accountants who have taken it under their wing.
But Garrett is registered with the Law Society, and practises independently
as a firm. Its partners are economically detached from their accounting
neighbours.
It gains from the relationship by having work referred work from Andersen's
worldwide network. Clients are not automatically sent to Garrett if they
need a lawyer in London, but those without any other strong preference may
well be steered in its direction.
Garrett is one of the more advanced attempts in the UK to link accountants
and lawyers. Intrigued rivals across much of the rest of Europe would be
less surprised and more bemused by the interest in changes in London.
Andersen already has well-established links in France and Germany. Several
other firms have similar links in more sympathetic jurisdictions.
The extreme position is reached in France. In spite of the presence of a
highly-regulated, segmented market for professionals in different
specialisms, KPMG Peat Marwick is linked to Fidal, the largest law firm in
the country. It also has links with law firms in Belgium, Italy, Spain and
Switzerland.
Roger White, senior tax partner with KPMG in the UK, stresses that Fidal
remains independent but that there is a great deal of cross-referral of
work. 'It reflects the desirability of delivering a whole range of services,
and ensuring a client does not go elsewhere,' he says.
In Germany, a more relaxed regime prevails than in France. Mixed
partnerships are widespread, particularly among medium-sized firms. They are
permitted provided each of the professions represented is governed by a
satisfactory set of ethical codes.
In the UK, the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales has
since 1992 allowed non-accountants to be partners in chartered accountancy
firms - up to one quarter of the total number.
Firms - which traditionally got around the barrier by hiring non-accountants
as partners in all but name - have taken advantage of the relaxation to
bring in actuaries, consultants, and large numbers of both barristers and
solicitors.
Some institute officials argue that they would have no problem allowing the
introduction of full legal services into accountancy firms. That points the
finger towards the Law Society as the stumbling block for change.
However, it is unlikely that even the institute would allow the majority of
partners in a firm to be non-accountants, at which point its own ability to
regulate would be called into question, and its professional monopoly
sacrificed.
There are signs of dissatisfaction with the current arrangements. An inquiry
by the Office of Fair Trading expressed concern that the existing
restrictions on professional practice might be anti-competitive.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has also
expressed concern in the past about the anti-competitive nature of the
status quo, with little apparent effect.
Equally, across the European Union, senior officials had suggested the idea
of a new cross-border, multi-disciplinary partnership. But Mr John Heggarty
of the Federation of European Accountants in Brussels says the proposals
were too restrictive and seem now to have withered away.
As a result, it would seem that, despite some political rhetoric, there is
far more likelihood that commercial pressures rather than governmental
regulation will most affect the position of links between lawyers and
accountants over the next few years.
Part of the problem for lawyers is that they have traditionally been
reluctant to market themselves. Accountants were helped by a far earlier
relaxation in professional restrictions on marketing in the early 1980s in
the UK, which gave them a head start.
As one observer puts it: 'In Germany it was difficult enough until recently
to have the same firm operating in Cologne and Bonn. The lawyers seem more
afraid of each other than of accountants. They have been much less willing
to work in large practices.'
That is not the case in the US, of course, where lawyers have tended to be
far more aggressive, leaving accountants as second-class 'bean-counters'.
Law firms in North America have grown enormously during the 1980s, and tend
to take the lead in both insolvency work and tax advice, for example.
The shift of accountants into the preserves of the law does not mean that
lawyers themselves are necessarily under threat, so much as the way in which
they have traditionally organised.
There are distinctive ways in which each group of professionals can find a
niche. Many areas of the law are of no interest to accountants. Even in
areas where there is a strong appeal, most notably tax work, the lawyers may
still often be needed to deal with interpretation of law, and the
accountants more with computations.
Equally, accountancy firms are hiring growing numbers of lawyers to work
alongside their own specialists in providing work to clients. However, their
ability to practise law is then restricted: notably they are not able to
make representations in courts, although they can before bodies such as the
Inland Revenue Commissioners.
That is not to say that the accountants do not want to encroach further.
Roger White of KPMG says: 'I find it difficult to believe that we would
become a major law firm. But we would like the ability to deliver some basic
legal services that might enhance our tax practice, such as the ability to
buy and sell land and draw up employee contracts and sale agreements.'
