FT  25 AUG 94 / Launch of 150-channel TV nears
Plans to introduce 150-channel television will come a step closer next month
with the first demonstrations of a system that can squeeze eight television
channels into the space now occupied by one.
National Transcommunications, the privatised engineering division of the
former Independent Broadcasting Authority, plans to demonstrate the digital
system at the International Broadcasting Convention in Amsterdam on
September 18.
NTL has a development deal with Mr Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation and
Pace, the consumer electronics group which specialises in satellite
television equipment.
All the signs are that News Corporation is planning to launch a number of
digital television channels in the UK by next autumn and possibly even
earlier on its Star Television system in Asia.
The system will use compression technology to transmit eight television
channels on to half a satellite transponder - the capacity normally used for
a single channel.
NTL is establishing an international reputation in digital compression
technology. Many specialists believe the organisation, which eventually
plans a Stock Exchange flotation, is in the lead in establishing technical
standards for digital television.
The Amsterdam demonstration will use professional television receivers
costing about Pounds 5,000 but it is believed the cost of a unit for
consumers could be lowered to Pounds 500 for the launch of the service. The
costs would then be expected to fall rapidly once volume orders were
received.
The main new use of the vast number of channels would be to introduce 'near
video-on-demand'. This involves devoting a large number of channels,
possibly as many as 50 or 60, to a small number of the latest top movies.
Separate showings of the same films are staggered so that the viewer is only
15 or 20 minutes away from the start of a recent film.
In addition there would be an increasing number of specialist channels.
SES, the Luxembourg-based company which runs the Astra satellite system,
plans to launch two new satellites next year devoted entirely to digital
television signals.
The introduction of 150-channel digital systems involves a big risk for
BSkyB, a consortium in which Pearson, owner of the Financial Times has a
significant stake, as no one knows whether consumers will be prepared to pay
for receiving boxes for the services.
