FT  07 APR 94 / Technology: No cure for risk - Setting up a manufacturing
plant is a particular gamble for drugs companies
More and more biotechnology companies are crossing the perilous line from
pure research and development to manufacturing, a move which could lead to
the graveyard for some.
Those with strong roots in science and academia often have little or no
experience in production. Even the most astute companies have trouble
assessing if, when and how much they should be investing in manufacturing
facilities.
Chiron, the US biotechnology company which last year received approval for
Betaseron, the multiple sclerosis drug developed jointly with Schering of
Germany, failed to build sufficient manufacturing facilities to accommodate
demand for the drug, and has faced repeated shortages. At the other extreme,
both Synergen and Centocor invested in manufacturing for drugs which were
later rejected by the US Food and Drug Administration.
'It's a fine balancing act you have to pull off,' says Amy Factor, vice
president of Immunomedics, which has started expanding its research
laboratory into a manufacturing plant for a still-to-be-approved cancer
imaging product. 'You have to walk the tightrope created by the uncertainty
of not knowing whether your drug will get approval, what the demand will be
if it is, and what your other options are.'
Making life more difficult for US biotechnology groups are FDA regulations
specifying that the drugs must be manufactured in the same way they were
prepared for clinical trials. If the process veers from the original course,
approval for the product may be revoked. As a result of this restriction,
firms often sink millions of dollars of what they call 'risk money' into
manufacturing facilities they may never need.
Sometimes the gamble pays off. Amgen, for instance, invested millions of
dollars on a plant for Epogen, a red blood cell stimulant, prior to its
clearance by the FDA. 'We'd started investing in the facility even before we
had obtained any data from human trials,' says Dennis Fenton, senior
vice-president in charge of sales. 'We were encouraged enough by the early
trials to be optimistic.'
Adding to the dilemma is the fact that most manufacturing plants can only
accommodate specific types of products. Constructing a facility for
bacteria-based products, for example, will not help much if a company later
discovers a drug based on mammalian cells.
Some companies are seeking to gain flexibility through facilities that can
handle more than one type of drug. The California-based giant Amgen is
putting millions of dollars into an FDA-approved multi-purpose facility.
'The FDA doesn't really like multi-purpose facilities,' says Fenton, 'but we
showed them we had trained staff and sophisticated equipment so that the
chance of any mix-up between the drugs was small.'
Other companies are looking to resolve their manufacturing troubles by
contracting out their production. This eliminates the need to invest money
up front, but raises a number of other risks.
'There is a concern about proprietary rights,' says Ken Bate, head of sales
for Biogen, which uses an unnamed group to put out Hirulog, an
anti-coagulant. 'If the process is enhanced, who does that part of the
patent belong to, the biotech firm or the manufacturer?' Biogen turned to an
outside manufacturer because Hirulog was a bigger molecule than it usually
dealt with and, therefore, could not be produced in the same facility as its
other drugs.
There are other pitfalls involved in contracting out. For one thing, many
companies are wary of handing so much information over to potential
competitors. The relationship also has to be established early, prior to FDA
approval, to ensure that clearance for the drug is not endangered. Another
risk is that the manufacturing partner may later decide to stop putting out
the drug, leaving the patent holder with no way to get its product to
market.
Despite these concerns, the lure of a contract manufacturer is strong. The
British company Celltech says it has been doing such good business on its
contract production side that it will soon open a new US manufacturing
facility in New Hampshire.
'We've stayed in this business by following some strict rules,' says Iain
Ross, president of Celltech Biologics. 'First, there is no question of a
breach of confidentiality with us. We have strict Chinese walls and the
research side of our company, which is in competition with our manufacturing
customers, does not receive any information on drugs we are making for other
groups.'
Commitments to manufacture products for outside firms are also taken
seriously. 'If our research and development side wants us to make a drug for
them, they have to abide by the same rules as other groups,' says David
Jackson, vice president of US operations for Celltech. 'That means they have
to reserve capacity ahead of time. If there's no capacity available, they go
on the waiting list.'
There may be other ways, too, of minimising the risks of contracting out
production. 'We've made sure our partner has an interest in the drug doing
well, and we trust that they will do a good job,' explains Bate.
For many groups, however, the appeal of building their own facilities is
overwhelming. A shiny new manufacturing plant is often seen as a status
symbol in the industry, a sign of the company's coming of age. Moreover, a
manufacturing plant gives groups full control of quality and output.
Besides the risks associated with FDA approval, companies face hurdles in
building their own facilities. One serious obstacle is the severe shortage
of managers and workers with any experience in making biotechnology
products.
'Not many companies moving from research into manufacturing have the
necessary management skills on hand,' says William Young, senior vice
president at Genentech, which has invested heavily in manufacturing
facilities. 'And to hire people with experience can be prohibitively
expensive for the smaller firms.'
Yet Young concedes that many companies may have no choice. The number of
companies capable of producing drugs for others is limited. 'Those of us
with the facilities, like Genentech, are usually busy making our own
products,' he explains.
Start-up biotechnology firms, facing cash constraints, limited abilities to
recruit the best people and uncertainty over drug approval, are particularly
vulnerable. Indeed, the move to manufacturing may be one of the most
difficult problems the industry faces. 'The move to manufacturing is a
tremendous challenge that most biotechnology companies haven't even begun to
address,' says Factor. 'For many, this is a make or break decision.'
