FT  18 NOV 94 / British Gas sets prices to reward good payers
British Gas yesterday fired the first shot in the battle to retain its
dominance of the domestic gas market, due to be opened for competition in
1998.
Only a day after the government said it would introduce legislation to
abolish the company's monopoly on supplying 18m mainly residential users,
the company announced a price restructuring that will reward British Gas'
best customers, while recovering some of the costs of dealing with those
with poor payment records.
The restructuring includes a 2.9 per cent increase in the standing charge
and the cost of gas for those customers who do not take up British Gas'
offer of a 5 per cent discount in exchange for agreeing to pay by direct
debit.
British Gas expects 5m households to join the scheme. It said that 92 per
cent of its customers had access to a bank or building society account, and
could therefore take advantage of the savings.
But there was criticism that it did not cover prompt payers who preferred to
deal in cash, or who did not want to give the company access to their bank
accounts.
The Gas Consumers Council said: 'We had hoped that British Gas would have
offered discounts for prompt payment by any method.'
The company said it would extend the scheme to such customers later next
year, when its new national billing system was in place.
It said the removal of cross-subsidies and the establishment of
cost-reflective pricing for various categories of customers was essential if
it was to compete in a liberalised gas market.
It noted that it cost 10 times more to deal with customers who delayed
paying their bills, compared with those who paid on time.
Ofgas, the industry regulator, said the new pricing policy appeared to be
fair. The price increase is the first since 1991.
An additional price adjustment is likely next year when British Gas
implements a regional pricing policy approved by Ofgas. Customers could face
variations of plus or minus 2 per cent to 4 per cent. British Gas yesterday
said it expected that any rises would be closer to 2 per cent.
The shift to more cost-reflective pricing is likely to affect the company's
policy on debt and disconnection.
