FT  16 DEC 94 / Councils Shake-up: Target date for most now 1997 - Timing
Most of the new councils in England will now start in April 1997, as the
parliamentary timetable looks too tight for all the necessary orders to be
passed in time for the original target of April 1996.
Orders for Cleveland and the Isle of Wight will be debated in parliament
next month. Officials hope that orders for reorganising Avon and Humberside
can also be introduced.
For councils reorganising in 1996, 'shadow councils' must be elected in May
next year to oversee the establishment of the new authority. The shadow
councillors will decide on staffing and accommodation before taking over as
the first elected council.
However, preparations for shadow elections cannot start until orders making
the reorganisation law have been passed by both houses of parliament. In the
case of yesterday's recommendations, Mr Gummer must wait for six weeks after
he has received a proposal from the commission before laying a parliamentary
order, to allow for further consultations.
The shadow authorities will need to take important decisions, and there is
fierce political opposition to any attempt at establishing a new authority
without a formally elected group of councillors.
Personnel decisions will cause the greatest problems. There is contrasting
legal advice over whether all employees of out-going authorities are
guaranteed new jobs with their successors under the Transfer of Undertakings
(Protection of Employment) regulations of 1981, known as Tupe. Unions are
sure to back any redundant employees who claim that Tupe does apply, which
could create years of legal wrangling.
Personnel, plus investment in new information technology systems and, in
some cases, new town halls, will make transition very expensive. Costs could
be greatest in counties where new unitaries and two-tier authorities will
exist side by side. In these cases the commission estimates that there is no
potential for annual savings. Such arrangements will not lead to any cuts in
staff numbers and cannot make any long-term savings, but they will still
cost money to establish.
The Audit Commission predicts that these arrangements will create the
greatest management problems. The counties will have little incentive to
help the unitary city appearing in their midst, and there could be
competition for staff. Government funding, based on needs and current
spending, will also present problems because counties will have an incentive
to understate the amount spent on the new cities.
As cities tend to be more needy than the rural areas around them, the 'rump'
counties will probably have to budget for substantially less government
grant per head of population than they have now. In areas with a solely
unitary structure the costs will still be high. Replacing the relatively
small county of Buckinghamshire with four unitaries, for example, would cost
between Pounds 10m and Pounds 13m.
