FT  12 SEP 94 / Survey of The Philippines (5): Compromising for Cairo -
Population growth has divided government and church
This summer's flare-up in relations between the government and the
Philippine Roman Catholic church was bound to happen eventually.
In a desire to show that overall economic growth is actually touching the
lives of its 66.5m people, the government has sought to slow the population
growth rate.
At the rate of expansion that was running at 2.3-2.4 per cent when the Ramos
administration took over, population growth was an obvious priority. It set
out to reduce the figure to less than 2 per cent by the end its six-year
term.
High population growth has been identified as one reason why the Philippines
has remained a laggard in a region of rapid economic region. Since 1980, for
instance, the economy has recorded a net growth of only about 1.5 per cent,
while the rest of its neighbours live in prosperity. About half of the
Philippine population is estimated to live in poverty. The government hopes
to cut that to 30 per cent by 1998.
In its medium-term plan, it has declared a family-planning programme as a
key component of its 'health, nutrition, and family planning services'.
Herein lies the heart of the conflict.
In contrast to the laid-back response of his predecessor, Mr Fidel Ramos has
pursued an aggressive population programme that promotes the use of
contraceptives. This has escalated over the last few months, with government
commercials on radio and television advocating the use of condoms, pills and
other contraceptive devices. The campaign was recently widened to include
sex education among schoolchildren.
Mr Ramos, the Philippines' first Protestant president in a predominantly (85
per cent) Catholic country, was apparently gaining some headway, since
latest official estimates showed that population growth in the first half of
1994 was about 2.1 per cent. This, government estimates show, has led to an
increase in per-capita output in the first half, for the first time since
1990.
In late July, Cardinal Jaime Sin, Archbishop of Manila, issued a 'letter to
parents', in which he accused the government of a 'destructive' policy on
population, including the promotion of abortion and the use of pornographic
materials for sex education among children.
The outburst was triggered by the government's apparent support, church
leaders said, for a document presented at this month's United Nations
conference on population and development, in Cairo.
However, the government expressed surprise. Health officials said it had not
been promoting abortion or 'sexual propaganda', but had been 'providing
natural and artificial methods, but we rest the decision on the woman, her
reproductive rights and her choices.'
Cardinal Sin asked the government to send to the Cairo conference delegates
'with sane minds', and to oppose moves to introduce abortion. While other
church leaders have singled out the US as being behind moves to push
abortion at the conference, the cardinal said: 'Global forces . . . are
poised to bombard our children . . . with reading materials and films
containing all sorts of pornographic, perverse and poisonous sexual
propaganda as part of their 'education'.'
The church followed up its harangue with a protest rally that drew hundreds
of thousands (local press estimates put the size of the crowd at 1 million)
to lambast the population programme and the government's stand over the
Cairo conference.
Mr Juan Flavier, health secretary, has remained calm during the raging
debate. He has also dropped the 'pro-choice' slogan in promoting the various
methods of family planning. He said he agreed with church leaders that 'it
was not the proper phrase to use on such as sensitive issue'.
The debate has recently been joined by the Protestant United Church of
Christ of the Philippines, where Mr Ramos attends Sunday services. It said
that 'women should have the power of choice' in such cases as rape or
possible complicated deliveries.
Another local denomination, the Iglesia Filipina Independiente (Philippine
Independent Church), has accused the Catholic leaders of 'dictatorial'
methods in promoting their objections to artificial family planning.
'Supposed to be a defender of freedom, the church does not allow its members
to practise freedom,' complained Bishop Javier Gil Montemayor, a former
Catholic, who heads the independent church.
Where the conflict will end remains unclear. But the Malthusians in the
Ramos government face their greatest challenge yet. The Catholic leaders and
the government subsequently had two meetings, which reached agreement on a
common stand against abortion at the Cairo conference. They also agreed to
tackle the Philippine population issue itself after the UN gathering.
