FT  01 MAR 94 / Why IRA eyes are smiling
The peace plan for Northern Ireland put forward by Mr Albert Reynolds and Mr
John Major has so far benefitted only the IRA and Sinn Fein, its political
wing. Optimists chirp that this is part of a process that may lead to a
ceasefire. The rest of us can only grit our teeth and bear it.
The Irish and UK prime ministers will say that their joint declaration of
December 15 stands. It is a permanent invitation to the terrorists to lay
down their arms and pursue their aims by democratic means. Maybe they will,
but there is no obvious reason why they should hurry. The president of Sinn
Fein, Mr Gerry Adams, is floating high on the oxygen of publicity. The IRA
has not ceased its violence. Its political front resists every opportunity
to condemn the use of the bomb and the bullet, let alone undertake to secure
their abandonment. While the nationalist side stands armed and firing, the
equally reprehensible 'loyalist' terrorists retaliate. Yet London, Dublin
and soppy liberals everywhere dance around Sinn Fein, in a ritual of
courtship that must bring a smile to the face of their president.
The list of concessions wrung out of the Irish and British governments is
depressing. Restrictions on broadcasts which had been in force for 23 years
have been lifted by the Irish government. This leaves the UK exposed, as it
maintains the absurd rule that Mr Adams and his cohorts may be seen, but not
heard, on TV. The use of dubbed actors' voices is a propaganda victory for
Sinn Fein every time one of its spokesmen appears. This 'censorship' has
enhanced Mr Adams's reputation in US eyes.
He was crowned media king for 48 hours after being granted a visa by US
President Bill Clinton, against the wish of the British, but not the Irish,
authorities. It may be that he will not be given a second opportunity to do
the rounds of the New York TV studios unless he first renounces violence.
Perhaps Mr Major is being assured of that during his visit to the White
House this week. It matters not, either way. Mr Adams has the cameras at his
fingertips. If he cannot go to them, they will come to him. His ability to
say that his voice may not be heard in Britain helps, not hinders, his
performance.
For the moment, he is a star of global communications. About a thousand
delegates attended the Sinn Fein conference in Dublin at the weekend. The
proceedings at-tracted 260 journalists from all parts of the world. Mr
Adams's leng-thy address was peppered with protestations of a desire for
peace. He said that 3,290 lives had been lost in 'the war' since 1969. He
calculated that the IRA was responsible for precisely 53 per cent of the
total deaths. His striking arithmetic omitted only the few words necessary
to end the killing.
Mr Adams had asked for 'clarification' of the Reynolds-Major declaration.
The Irish prime minister had responded amply; his British counterpart not
so. Yet Mr Major did his best in an article in the Irish News last Friday.
Mr Adams wants Britain to 'persuade' the Protestants to join a united
Ireland; Mr Major cannot agree. Would the same be true of a Labour prime
minister? Mr Adams demanded that the Unionist 'veto' on any future
constitution be lifted; the UK continues to explain patiently, as has Mr
Reynolds, that self-determination means that no solution can be imposed.
Most Irish voters support that basic principle.
All of this must be music to Sinn Fein ears. It is not getting its way, but
it is promoting its arguments. It is stringing the rest of us along,
squeezing the last drops of advantage out of the declaration. A small
minority party both north and south, it has repeatedly failed at the ballot
box. In general elections in 1992 it won less than 2 per cent of the vote in
the Irish republic and less than a tenth of the vote in Ulster. That is
barely a third of the potential Catholic turnout. Recent opinion polls
suggest that an overwhelming majority of the Irish people want the violence
to end.
Mr Adams protests that Sinn Fein is not the IRA, but if he had no influence
over the latter there would be no reason to pay attention to him. His tiny
party has been out in the cold, excluded from democratic politics by its
relationship with the men of violence. Now it is a player on the
international stage, the subject of respectable-sounding discourse, albeit
at arm's length, with the two prime ministers who carry responsibility for
the future shape of Ireland.
There was a further setback yesterday. Mr Major, with wobbly support from Mr
Reynolds, has been careful to maintain the acquiescence in the whole
strategy of the principal unionist party. By not opposing it, the Ulster
Unionists, led by Mr James Molyneaux, have kept the so-called peace
initiative afloat. In so doing he has risked losing the votes of his natural
supporters. Yesterday Mr Molyneaux pointedly rejected the notion of
multi-party talks at which representatives of his party and of Dublin were
both present. He prefers to get on with the establishment of an Ulster
assembly which, once elected, could do the talking. One strand of the
London-Dublin strategy has thus been snapped. It may eventually be restored.
Meanwhile such unionist posturing helps make Mr Adams's point for him.
In Irish eyes the above picture may seem less dismal than it does in London.
The real debate may be within Sinn Fein. The leaders of the latter are
masters of delay, but they need time in which to extract what they can from
the two democratic governments. Then, say the starry-eyed, they will call a
ceasefire. Only unionist impatience, or emotional outbursts by influential
Tory backbenchers, could upset that timetable. Perhaps. Meanwhile London and
Dublin will search for a move they can make on their own. It could be hard
to find.
There is no case for withdrawing the Major-Reynolds declaration, which is a
statement of principle that removes all props from the arguments favouring
violence. Talking to Ulster's democratic parties about a devolved assembly
was made more difficult by Mr Molyneaux yesterday, but it is not impossible.
Publishing the proposals worked up by Mr Adams with Mr John Hume, the leader
of the mainly Catholic Social Democratic and Labour party might help. What
else? Britain and Ireland can only wait for peace. They have waited 25
years. How-ever awful, they could withstand another.
