FT  28 MAR 94 / Survey of Risk Management (7): Bermuda is top domicile -
Captives
Gone are the days when a risk manager set up a captive during the hard
insurance market when rates were high, only to let it rot when the market
softened. Gone, too, are the days when a UK risk manager could afford to
establish a captive in Bermuda in order to qualify for an annual jaunt to
its temperate climate. So where are today's most popular captive domiciles
and why?
Bermuda is the favourite among US parents and remains the international king
of captive domiciles. Tillinghast Captive Insurance Company Reports lists
1,173 captives in the island in 1993, way ahead of the next in line - the
Cayman Islands with 360. Bermuda's registrar of companies, Mr Malcolm
Butterfield, has overseen an influx of property catastrophe reinsurance
companies over the past 12 months which he believes enhances the reputation
of Bermuda's captives. But the island is already overcrowded and Mr
Butterfield predicts only moderate growth in captive numbers in the future.
The top 100 UK companies place Bermuda second on their list of domiciles.
The Isle of Man tops the list with 24 captives, thanks largely to its
proximity to mainland Britain and its established credentials. Guernsey
recently changed its tax laws for the benefit of UK parents and comes in
third place with 19 captives. Guernsey's proven willingness to accommodate
the needs of UK parents make it a captive domicile to watch. According to
Tillinghast, it scooped first prize for net gain on the captive register in
1993.
But captive domiciles do not come in and out of vogue like hemlines. 'The
choice of domicile depends first and foremost on the location of the parent
company. Other selection criteria include accessibility, political and
economic stability, captive start-up and operating costs and the domicile's
regulatory and fiscal regimes,' says Mr Roderick Strutt, managing director
of Sedgwick Management Services. Wary risk managers also look to the
domicile's track record and credibility for support.
'A UK parent will, more often than not, establish a captive in the Isle of
Man or Guernsey. A US company automatically heads for Bermuda or the Cayman
Islands, the French feel more at home in Luxembourg and the Japanese incline
towards Singapore,' explains Ms Christine Douse, director of Willis Corroon
Europe Limited and the doyenne of the captive community. There are more than
30 listed captive domiciles, from Turks and Caicos to Tennessee, and Ms
Douse warns newcomers and hopefuls of the difficulties of gaining a firm
foothold in a saturated market. 'Malta is currently trying to drum up
support, but what can it offer a UK company that is not already available
closer to home?' she asks.
Dublin burst into the captive arena in the late 1980s and has drawn 87
captives, only two of which have UK parents, although a UK-parented group
captive is in the pipeline. A Dublin captive can apply for a direct writing
licence and gain access to the EC insurance market and promoters of the
centre proclaim this facility as the way forward.
Mr Paul Cronin, manager of the Financial Services Programme at the
Industrial Development Authority of Ireland, says: 'It is now part of North
American culture that a direct licence in Dublin is the way to cover
European risks.' Heinz, McDonald's and Coca-Cola bear him out. But a direct
licence gets a lukewarm reception in the UK. 'UK companies already enjoy
purchasing freedom, so a direct licence may be of little benefit. Captives
that follow the direct route should also remember that what they save on
fees paid to a fronting insurer, they may spend on claims handling and
customer service,' warns Ms Douse.
US companies are pioneers of the move onshore. Successful locations such as
Vermont are tempting risk managers to keep the captive native. Vermont made
room for 23 new captives in 1993, including the prestigious Pepsi-Cola,
bringing its total to 240.
Mr Crawford Paul, executive director of Willis Corroon Europe Ltd, is
enthusiastic about the development but cautions risk managers not to drop
their business objectives as they jump on to the bandwagon. 'An onshore
captive is more expensive to set up and run than an offshore captive. Its
licensing and operating procedures are also complex.' But an onshore captive
eliminates fronting fees and ceding commission and allows the parent to
exploit double tax treaties.
Risk managers also use onshore captives as a weapon in their fight for
greater parental control. 'Captives that write parent company business and
spend more than Pounds 3m on premiums and companies that write customer
insurance programmes - both should take a look at the onshore alternative',
advises Mr Paul.
Customer risks are the boom market of the 1990s. In the ceaseless search for
new sources of revenue, manufacturers are marketing customer warranty,
credit and maintenance and service contracts that are underwritten by a
captive. The market breathed a collective sigh of relief when the High Court
recently ruled in favour of Thorn EMI and Granada, wiping VAT from service
and maintenance contracts and saving them Pounds 50m of VAT on insurance
premiums for all risks and breakdown cover. According to the latest figures,
their onshore captive, Consumer Electronics Insurance, writes an annual
premium income of around Pounds 17m.
If customer risks are the wunderkind of the 1990s, employee benefits should
come into their own as the millennium nears. The gradual erosion of the
welfare state has placed the responsibility for life insurance and
healthcare firmly on the shoulders of the country's employers, but only a
small percentage bring a captive into play on the employee benefits field.
The Cayman Islands welcomed their first employee benefits captive in 1993
and Dublin is aggressively marketing its ability to handle employee benefits
risks.
Captive domiciles bask in the glory of the parent company country. Bermuda
and the Cayman Islands benefit from the size and sophistication of the US
market and Guernsey and the Isle of Man owe much of their success to the
captive tradition in the UK. Continental Europe has resisted the call of the
captive, but there are signs that this is changing. The rise in German
insurance rates is motivating a number of companies to consider establishing
a captive.
 --------------------------------------------
  CAPTIVE INSURANCE COMPANY DOMICILES 1994
 --------------------------------------------
Bermuda                            1,200
Cayman                               350
Barbados                             190
Bahamas                               30
British Virgin Is                     30
Guernsey                             250
Luxembourg                           170
Isle of Man                          120
Ireland                               78
Singapore                             47
Vermont                              241
Other US domiciles                   112
Other US states                      185
All other non-US                     222
Total                              3,225
 --------------------------------------------
Source: Tillinghast estimates
 --------------------------------------------
