FT  04 JAN 94 / Yeltsin pledges tough foreign policy to please nationalists
President Boris Yeltsin of Russia will adopt a more assertive foreign policy
following the serious setback for radical reformers in last month's
parliamentary elections, Mr Yeltsin's spokesman said yesterday.
The president's priorities for 1994, set out by Mr Vyacheslav Kostikov,
underline Mr Yeltsin's intention to try to accommodate the hardline
nationalists in the new parliament. The tough foreign policy line will be
combined with continuing market reforms.
Mr Kostikov told Itar-Tass news agency: 'Undisputed emphasis in foreign
policy will be given to protection of Russia's national interests and the
rights of Russians and Russian-speaking people . . . on the basis of
pan-national solidarity.'
The far right and nationalists have campaigned for the protection of ethnic
Russians living abroad. About 20m Russians live outside Russia in other
former Soviet republics. Some have been deprived of the vote and of the
right to sell their housing, or have felt threatened in their jobs.
Mr Kostikov added that the Russian leader, armed with sweeping new powers to
override parliament if necessary, was prepared to co-operate with deputies
'who are interested in the protection of Russia's interests and the
promotion of reforms'.
But he warned that such co-operation with the new parliament would depend on
its respect for the new constitution and its ability to 'draw lessons from
previous experience' - an unmistakable reference to the old parliament,
shelled out of existence on October 4 after a protracted power struggle with
Mr Yeltsin.
On economic policy, Mr Kostikov said: 'Securing financial stabilisation,
lowering inflation, strengthening the rouble and support for healthy
production forces will be among the priorities of economic policy next
year.'
But Mr Sergei Vasiliev, a radical economist who heads the government centre
for monitoring economic reform, was cautious yesterday on prospects for
further progress. He said that the electoral success of Mr Vladimir
Zhirinovsky, the neo-fascist, would frighten away investors, including
Russian ones, and promote further capital flight.
'In the next two years no large-scale foreign investment will come to
Russia,' he told the Russian Information Agency, referring to the
uncertainty that is likely to prevail until new parliamentary and
presidential elections are held as planned in 1996.
Mr Vasiliev also expressed doubt, given the pressure of from a parliament
dominated by nationalists and communists, that Russia would achieve a
standby agreement with the International Monetary Fund. Russia's Choice, the
radical reform alliance, drew up plans and for other radical steps in
anticipation of better results in the elections. But Mr Vasiliev said
yesterday: 'There is now little chance of any large-scale agreement with the
IMF.'
A standby agreement setting tough reform conditions for further financial
assistance from the Fund already looked in doubt before the election. It now
looks even more unlikely that the IMF will step in to compensate for western
failures to influence Russian reforms.
Russian reform prospects should become clearer with the appointment of a
revamped cabinet, expected before the new parliament gathers on January 11.
Yesterday the government began its move into the White House, the old
parliament building, after repairs were completed.
Call for reform in Russian air industry after crash, Page 12
