FT  19 APR 94 / Revival of US 'open skies' talks urged
United Airlines, the largest US carrier, yesterday urged the US and UK
governments to link their approval for the proposed partnership between
Virgin Atlantic Airways and Delta Air Lines of the US to the revival of
broader negotiations on a new transatlantic aviation agreement between the
two countries.
Mr Stephen Wolf, United chairman, said yesterday that the proposed
Virgin-Delta deal required changes in the bilateral aviation agreement
between the US and the UK.
The Virgin-Delta ticket code-sharing partnership, which requires the
approval of both the US and UK governments, should provide the impetus to
produce 'substantive amendments' to the bilateral agreement to correct 'a
variety of long-standing deficiencies in the agreement', Mr Wolf told the
Aviation Club of Great Britain.
United's position is likely to strengthen UK efforts to revive the bilateral
talks after the US walked away from them earlier this year.
The US has insisted on greater access immediately for all US carriers into
London's Heathrow Airport as part of any new 'open skies' agreement with the
UK. The UK, which is seeking further access to the US domestic market for UK
carriers as well as the lifting of restriction on foreign ownership of US
airlines, proposes a three-stage approach to 'open skies' and access for US
carriers to Heathrow.
Mr John MacGregor, the transport secretary, hopes to hold preliminary talks
with Mr Federico Pena, his US opposite number, in the next few days to
follow up the opportunity the Virgin-Delta deal has given the two
governments to reopen negotiations.
Passenger traffic at BAA's seven airports reached a record 82m in the
financial year to April 1, up 5.6 per cent on a year earlier. The highest
growth was at Stansted Airport, up 42 per cent on the previous year.
Cargo traffic through BAA airports rose 17 per cent in March compared with
the same period last year, taking traffic in the financial year to 1.2m
tonnes, 13 per cent higher than the previous year.
