FT  12 APR 94 / Tensions fired by seizure of Black Sea fleet ship
A 'bandit attack' on a Black Sea fleet ship has raised tensions to their
highest level yet in a two-year dispute between Ukraine and Russia over the
fleet's property and national allegiance.
At the end of last week, Russian sailors defied Ukrainian orders and left
Odessa with one of the fleet's ships, carrying Dollars 10m-worth of
radio-navigational equipment. According to a Defence Ministry official in
Kiev, they took a senior Ukrainian military officer hostage and cut tow
ropes in the middle of the night to take the ship to sea. A coastguard boat
which tried to stop them was fired on with tracer bullets and water cannon.
Russian television countered that the 'defection' of the ship, the Cheleken,
was prompted by Ukraine's failure to meet its share of the cost of the
navigational equipment.
Ukraine, however, called the ship's seizure 'an act of piracy' and condemned
the Russian officers for creating 'a precedent of a sharp escalation of
tensions which might have led to grave consequences'. The Russian commander
of the Black Sea fleet, Admiral Eduard Baltin, also condemned the action as
'an act of uncontrolled bandit formations'.
The two countries agreed after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 to
split the Ukraine-based Black Sea fleet within three years. Last September,
under pressure of massive energy debts, Ukraine then agreed to sell its half
to Russia. Later, however, the agreement, already unpopular in Kiev, fell
apart and new negotiations on dividing the ships have stalled. These more
violent confrontations over the past few days reflect the precarious nature
of the currently unresolved arrangement.
Russian fury was aroused yesterday over a Ukrainian attack on the
Russian-controlled naval base in Odessa in retaliation for the seizure of
the Cheleken. It accused Ukrainian special forces of storming the base,
wounding servicemen and their families, and of blockading a second
installation. A navy spokesman in Moscow said 120 soldiers had attacked the
base, which is a reserve yard for the fleet, on Sunday night, seizing the
shore area, armoury, communications and security sections.
Police in Ukraine confirmed that an attack had taken place, but Defence
Ministry officials denied force had been used. They said paratroopers had
entered the base to arrest three Russian officers wanted in connection with
the seizure of the Cheleken.
The commander-in-chief of the Russian navy, Admiral Felix Gromov, said the
attack was a flagrant violation of agreements on joint control of the fleet
and had created an 'explosive situation'.
The fleet has been the most acute source of tension between the two former
Soviet republics. Disputes over bases and control of ships have repeatedly
clouded relations, Ukrainian nationalists accusing Moscow of 'imperialist'
bullying.
Moscow has repeatedly complained that Kiev, beset by worse economic problems
than its northern neighbour, is failing to pay its share of the cost of the
fleet. Though the situation was calm yesterday afternoon, a senior Russian
diplomat said Kiev could expect a tough response and he hinted there could
be further cross-retaliation.
