FT  19 JAN 94 / Business and the Environment: Castle casts a chemical spell
 -A UK cement maker is turning waste into fuel
Close to Pendle Hill, the bare limestone outcrop where the celebrated
Lancashire witches are purported to have cast their spells, Britain's second
largest cement manufacturer has been working on its own brew.
Castle Cement, which supplies about 3m tonnes of cement annually in the UK -
about a quarter of the country's production - has developed a formula to
turn waste industrial chemicals into a safe fuel at its Ribblesdale works.
The fuel is used to fire kilns which bake limestone and clay to produce a
clinker which is ground to produce cement.
Castle says its new product, called Cemfuel, could cut its energy costs by
up to 30 per cent. It has reduced the company's sulphur dioxide emissions by
20 per cent and nitrogen oxides by 50 per cent.
In spite of some local protests about burning a fuel derived from chemical
waste, the process has been approved by the pollution inspectorate, which
has been involved with the project throughout. Peter Weller, general manager
for Castle in charge of the development, says there has been no increase in
halogens, metallic and hydrocarbon emissions or dioxins as a result of the
experiment.
The company, which has invested Pounds 1.5m in the project, expects a
pay-back within three years. It says that US companies, which have developed
similar formulae, burn up to 80 per cent industrial wastes in their kilns,
although it does not expect to achieve this rate in the UK.
The waste chemicals used in Cemfuel are hydrocarbons, including solvents,
mostly produced by pharmaceutical, chemical, paint and printing ink
companies. The fuel is supplied to Castle's recipe by the solvent recovery
companies Solrec, CMR and Safety-Kleen. The cement company is paid to use
the fuel. If the waste materials were not converted to Cemfuel they would
have to be disposed of expensively by being burned in an incinerator or
buried at a landfill site.
Cement kilns operate at more than 1,400'C compared with 1,100'C for waste
incinerators. Tests initially involved the company burning 25 per cent
Cemfuel to 75 per cent traditional coal fuel. It is now experimenting by
burning half waste-derived fuel to half coal.
Cement manufacturers have worked hard in recent years to reduce costs by
closing uneconomic plants and cutting labour forces. Filter presses have
been introduced to remove the higher water content found in chalk which had
made it more costly to process than limestone.
Sophisticated electronic temperature and moisture controls have also been
installed to reduce manufacturing costs during the worst recession to hit
the UK construction industry for more than half a century.
Energy accounts for a quarter of the price of a tonne of cement, prompting
companies to investigate alternative fuels in a bid to reduce overheads
further. Castle has also used petroleum coke, widely used in the US as a
substitute for coal. German cement manufacturers burn a wide range of
detritus in kilns including domestic waste, says Castle. Paper sludge is
burned in Denmark while some US companies burn rice husks.
Castle, which is owned jointly by Aker of Norway and Euroc of Sweden, says
that chemical industry waste has the potential to supply up to 150,000
tonnes a year of the new fuel, although it does not expect it will be able
to obtain all of this.
Castle consumes about 400,000 tonnes of solid fuel annually. In total, UK
cement manufacturers burn about 2m tonnes a year. Weller says: 'The aim has
been to reduce costs in the most environmentally beneficial way possible. It
is very pleasing that we have been able to achieve this objective so
successfully.
'There are a number of possible fuels which could be used in kilns.
Continuity of supply is as important as the energy and environmental
efficiency of the fuel.'
