FT  31 MAR 94 / Arms For Iraq - The Scott Inquiry: Probe lifts the lid on
government secrecy - Lord Justice Scott's inquiry into the export of defence
equipment to Iraq has provided an unprecedented window on the secret
workings of Whitehall. Jimmy Burns examines the evidence behind an affair
which has caused deep political embarrassment and threatened the reputations
of senior officials and ministers / The evidence
The Scott inquiry has concluded its main public hearings, which have frayed
nerves in Whitehall and threatened to do serious damage to the government.
The inquiry was set up after the November 1992 collapse of the trial of
three executives of the Matrix Churchill machine tool company on charges of
breaching export regulations by selling arms-related goods to Iraq. The
court heard evidence that Mr Paul Henderson, managing director, was keeping
British intelligence informed of their actions.
Lord Trefgarne, who finished giving evidence yesterday, was the latest
witness called by Lord Justice Scott over the past 11 months. Other
witnesses have included former and present members of the cabinet, prime
ministers, senior government law officers, intelligence and Customs officers
and Whitehall officials. Mr John Major's appearance was the first time a
serving prime minister had given evidence in public to such an inquiry.
The inquiry was set up to establish whether the government connived in
breaching its own regulations restricting defence-related exports to Iraq
and whether it used Public Interest Immunity (PII) certificates to cover up
its policy - at the risk of sending innocent men to jail.
The judge's main achievement has been to force ministers and officials to
account for their actions in a way that they have never been required to do
before in public.
He and his counsel, Miss Presiley Baxendale QC, have consulted thousands of
documents and employed a relentless style of cross-examination to elicit
information from even the most un-cooperative witnesses. Their detractors
have accused them of being inquisitorial - others wonder whether the inquiry
would have got anywhere with a gentler touch.
The result is that Britain's machinery of government has been shown to be
over-secretive and less than respectful of the need for parliament to know
the whole truth, while extraordinarily deft in exploiting legislative
loopholes in pursuit of policy objectives.
The evidence so far appears to prove beyond reasonable doubt that:
Britain's arms licensing system was designed to allow the export of
potentially lethal equipment. The onus was on the exporter to describe goods
accurately - although in practice licensing decisions often followed wider
political considerations which had nothing to do with the nature of the
goods exported.
Ministers and officials breached their own guidelines - never intended to be
law - by approving exports of machine tools to Iraq, knowing that they were
going to be used for munitions manufacture.
The government kept its guidelines from MPs for nearly a year and later gave
misleading answers to parliamentary questions which tried to elicit the
truth about relations with Iraq in the 1980s. Ministers and officials
approved the export of arms to countries such as Jordan and Saudi Arabia
after ignoring intelligence information that those countries were being used
as a diversionary route to Iraq.
There were serious failings in the way intelligence was disseminated between
departments.
Inadequate procedures were followed by government lawyers during the
prosecution of the Matrix Churchill case. This raised serious questions
about the conduct in particular of Sir Nicholas Lyell, attorney-general.
Documents made available to the inquiry show that if ministers never
deliberately lied to parliament they acted on advice from their officials
which covered up policy.
In preparing his report, Lord Justice Scott will have to judge whether this
catalogue of failings is the product of the nature of government or whether
it underlines political culpability for which individual officials and
ministers deserve to be held accountable.
Ministers have told the inquiry the guidelines formulated by Lord Howe,
while foreign secretary at the end of 1984, contained an 'inherent
flexibility' - any decision on arms exports would be judged according to
political and military circumstances.
Thus the decision to loosen guidelines to allow more machine tools to go to
Iraq following the ceasefire in the Iran-Iraq war was not seen as
necessarily contradicting the guidelines' main stipulation that: 'In future,
we should not . . . approve orders for any defence equipment . . . which
would significantly enhance the capability of either side to prolong or
exacerbate the conflict.'
Sir Nicholas Lyell has dismissed as 'utterly untrue' the allegation that
ministers tried to use PII to protect the government by preventing
publication of embarrassing material.
In a statement supported by Mr Gilbert Gray QC, a senior defence barristers
in the Matrix Churchill trial, Sir Nicholas told the judge the use of PII
certificates was in accordance with guidelines laid down by senior judges in
previous cases.
Yet, as Sir Nicholas put it to the judge last Friday, 'there were a number
of things that did not happen as they should'.
Sir Nicholas went further than any of his cabinet colleagues in assuming
some measure of responsibility, although he pointed the finger at civil
servants who had handled the PII claims. Crucially, he admitted that
government lawyers under his supervision had not told the judge or the
prosecuting counsel that Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary,
had objected to signing a PII certificate.
Sir Robin Butler, cabinet secretary, was forced to admit that no attempt was
made to stop the Matrix Churchill prosecution even though senior Whitehall
officials knew that it was on shaky ground.
Mr Alan Moses QC, Matrix Churchill chief prosecutor, said he doubted whether
he would have gone ahead if he had seen documents demonstrating the
'clearest possible indication of (government) knowledge' of Matrix Churchill
military-related exports to Iraq.
The government insists that only one person is really to blame for the
Matrix Churchill debacle: Mr Alan Clark, former trade minister, who misled
colleagues and Customs and Excise in a way that made a mockery of
ministerial accountability and the system of justice.
Yet it was Mr Clark's evidence to the inquiry which seemed to point to the
circularity of Whitehall's conduct in the affair: 'Intelligence was telling
you that machine tools had to be provided to protect the source that was
telling you about the machine tools.'
Unlike other officials, intelligence officers - including the departing head
of MI6, Sir Colin McColl - have been allowed to give their evidence in
private.
The extent to which the intelligence agencies may have been part of a
conspiracy to pervert the democratic process or whether, as they appear to
have indicated, they provided information which others failed to
disseminate, is another issue for Lord Justice Scott.
The role of the intelligence agencies in the supergun affair remains to be
clarified, as does the reason why Customs abandoned its prosecution of those
involved.
Ultimately, where the protestations of ministers and officials have have
seemed less convincing is in arguing that this was how it was done because
the demands of realpolitik willed it so.
The common thread which runs through many of their statements is
justification, based on a notion of political convenience and a refusal to
accept responsibility for getting it wrong.
A minority of civil servants believed from the outset that the government
seriously misjudged the nature of Iraqi president Saddam Hussein's regime.
Their opinions were ignored by Whitehall and the arms which the licensing
system was unable and unwilling to prevent going to Iraq came to be used
against the west following the invasion of Kuwait.
As he sifts the evidence in the coming weeks, the judge will have to decide
at what point, if at all, the arrogance of power misplaced accountability in
Britain's dealings with Iraq.
Editorial Comment, Page 21
