FT  06 SEP 94 / Loyalist gunmen 'will not dance to IRA tune'
Loyalist paramilitary groups remain reluctant to back a ceasefire because of
continuing fears that Sinn Fein and the IRA are dictating the pace and
direction of government policy towards Northern Ireland.
Sources close to the paramilitaries said Sunday night's bomb attack by the
Ulster Volunteer Force on a Sinn Fein office in Belfast was a 'warning shot'
aimed at underlining their resolve to defend Protestant interests.
'The situation is still being analysed but the message for now is unchanged
from what it was after last week's IRA ceasefire. We are not going to dance
to the IRA's tune,' said one source.
The view was confirmed yesterday by a Presbyterian minister who has acted as
intermediary for the paramilitaries.
The Rev Roy Magee said: 'The loyalist paramilitaries are saying, 'We are
still here and as far as we are concerned the war goes on'.'
While the IRA's ceasefire appears to be holding, loyalist paramilitaries
believe they have the capacity to exploit uncertainties and anxieties within
unionist communities.
Community workers meeting in the Shankill Road yesterday backed an end to
all terrorist violence, while expressing fears about Sinn Fein's call for a
campaign of civil protest by the Catholic community.
To some Protestants the campaign - which has already led to the illegal
reopening of cross-border roads by demonstrators - has resurrected memories
of the campaign of Catholic civil disobedience in the early stages of the
troubles.
Mr Alfred McClory, who runs a community centre in the Shankill and liaises
with loyalist prisoners, said yesterday: 'We are living from one day to the
next. Peace is here today but it could just as well be gone tomorrow.'
He said many working class Protestants wanted to see what reassurances, if
any, the Rev Ian Paisley gets from his planned meeting in Downing Street
with Mr John Major today.
In the Shankill, as in other Protestant strongholds, the fear remains that
the IRA and Sinn Fein, together with Dublin, are moving the peace process
inexorably towards Irish unity.
Mr Jim Rogers, an Ulster Unionist party councillor in Belfast, said: 'We
want to see no change in Northern Ireland's constitutional position as part
of the United Kingdom.'
He added that while he did not condone violence, he could understand the
logic behind the continuing existence of loyalist paramilitaries.
'Some of our people are saying they will need the actions of paramilitaries
before the battle for real peace is won,' he said.
Mr Rogers conceded that loyalist paramilitaries risked becoming isolated
from their communities if they launched a full-scale military offensive. 'If
they do that the loyalists will increasingly look like the baddies in the
film and the IRA the goodies.'
Such an assessment is understood to be shared by some members of the UVF and
the Ulster Freedom Fighters, the two main paramilitary organisations.
