FT  12 OCT 94 / Software companies offer rewards in anti-piracy drive
Leading software companies are offering rewards of up to Pounds 2,500 to
informers prepared to shop companies in the UK illegally copying software,
in a bid to crackdown on piracy estimated tohave cost them nearly Pounds
333m last year.
The British are law-abiding compared with the French and the Spanish when it
comes to software piracy in Europe, according to the Business Software
Alliance (BSA), which represents software groups including Microsoft, Novell
and Lotus.
It claims that Spanish companies pay for hardly any of the software they
use, with the piracy rate - in the form of applications copied illegally -
last year equal to 88 per cent of software consumed.
Piracy rates are calculated by comparing hardware sales and average software
consumption against payments for software. France, it says, has a piracy
rate of 66 per cent of consumption, while in Britain the rate is 49 per
cent, with only Austria and Switzerland having better records in the
European league.
Italy used to be a piracy black spot, but the BSA says it is reforming. Its
piracy rate has dropped sharply - to 50 per cent last year from 86 per cent
in 1992. The BSA attributes the change to new copyright legislation, not a
reform of public morals in the wake of political corruption scandals.
Piracy rates are calculated by comparing hardware sales and average software
consumption against payments for software.
To counter piracy in the UK, the alliance is offering rewards of up to
Pounds 2,500 for information leading to successful prosecutions.
The alliance is encouraging staff to phone a piracy hotline if they believe
their company is using illegally copied software. With only a tiny number of
successful prosecutions to date, it hopes that rewards will have the same
impact in the UK as in Australia, where the introduction of rewards for
informers led to six successful prosecutions within six months.
Mr Evan Cox, BSA's European counsel, said: 'Software theft continues to
plague the industry: the software crimeline is going to hit thieves very
hard.'
Piracy in Europe is far lower than in parts of the world with lax copyright
or enforcement rules. According to the alliance, four countries had a 99 per
cent piracy rate last year: Indonesia, Thailand, Pakistan and the United
Arab Emirates.
The 1992 EU software directive designed to outlaw software piracy has led to
the tightening of copyright laws in many European countries. But policing
the copying of software is a big problem for suppliers.
The BSA says that in North America the industry lost Pounds 1.6bn last year
through piracy, and in Asia losses totalled Pounds 2.6bn. In Europe, the
figure was Pounds 3.2bn.
