FT  22 OCT 94 / Finance and the Family: A quick guide to doing the splits -
A look at the complications
Split-capital investment trusts are complicated enough to understand at the
best of times, with their multitude of different share classes entitled to
varied portions of capital and income. But recent events have highlighted a
further area of complication: what happens when a split-capital trust is
nearing the end of its life?
Shareholders in Sphere, due to wind up in a year's time, are considering a
bid by Dartmoor, another split-capital investment trust. Meanwhile,
shareholders in Gartmore American Securities, due to wind up in March, voted
this week not to block an extension of the trust's life  - so thwarting an
anonymous American investor (or group) who had worked out a clever plan to
get a larger share of the assets on wind-up.
These situations arise because split-capital trusts have limited lives. When
the trust is created, a provisional wind-up date is written into its legal
structure - usually seven or 10 years away. But this does not mean the trust
will necessarily cease to exist on that date. Fund managers make their
living by charging a percentage on the funds they have under management, so
they are understandably reluctant to wave goodbye to a pool of money if
there is any way they can avoid it.
The main options are: for the fund to be wound up; for its life to be
extended; or for another trust to bid for it. Proposals are made up to a
year in advance, so that shareholders can decide. The most attractive option
for them will depend on which class of share they hold, and their
priorities.
The two most common types of split-capital trust share are zero dividend
preference shares and income shares (or ordinary income shares). Zeros pay
no dividends, but their capital entitlement grows by a fixed amount each
year and is paid out in one go when the trust is wound up. Income shares get
all the trust's income and can yield very highly, but their capital
entitlement is less generous. It often depends on what is left when the
zeros have been repaid.
Income share-holders may not mind carrying on with the same trust, or
accepting a bid from a similar trust, if it gives them a continuing income
stream - but zero-holders are another matter. Zeros are used as financial
planning tools for items such as school fees: investors buy zeros from a
series of different trusts so that lumps of capital become available at
regular intervals. If, rather than winding up, a trust is rolled over, that
could throw out all the careful planning.
Zeros do not usually have voting rights, but trusts usually are structured
to give them a vote if a deal that would affect their fixed cash
entitlement, or its date of payment, is being considered. Most
re-structurings and bids give zero-holders a cash option on or before the
scheduled date.
One exception was the re-structuring last year of the City of Oxford trust,
which made no cash offer to zero-holders when the life of the trust was
extended. At the time, the board explained that because the extended life of
the trust would add value to the shares, zero-holders would do just as well
by selling in the open market after the re-structuring.
While that might have been true in that instance, it will not always be the
case. Indeed, James Hart, a split-capital specialist at broker Olliff &amp;
Partners, says he does not think this approach will be used again as it
caused a lot of bad feeling among shareholders and drew heavy criticism from
fund managers and corporate financiers.
The strategy used by another Gartmore split last year met with more
approval. As Gartmore Value was nearing the end of its life, a newly-created
trust, Gartmore Shared Equity, bid for its shares. This gave investors two
options: to sit tight until wind-up and get their scheduled entitlements, or
swap their shares for others in the very similar new trust.
Most of the income-share holders opted for the new trust, as did a fifth of
the zero-holders, while the rest are still in the rump of Gartmore Value,
which should wind up in January, as scheduled. The new trust also raised
extra cash with a public offer. The success of this scheme could mean it is
imitated by other trusts over the next few years.
The takeover battle for Sphere illustrates a different approach again.
Dartmoor is offering eight of its new income shares for every 25 Sphere
income shares.
The offer has been accepted provisionally by Exeter Fund Managers
(Dartmoor's manager) and Abtrust Fund Managers which, between them, hold
more than half the ordinary shares.
The Sphere board yesterday recommended other shareholders to consider either
retaining their shares in Sphere until the wind-up, or selling them in the
market. It advised accepting the offer for warrants.
Hart also favours holding on to the Sphere shares. He points out that while
Sphere has an international general portfolio, Dartmoor's portfolio of
mainly highly-geared instruments is not such a safe prospect.
