FT  19 JAN 94 / National curriculum cost Pounds 469m
Implementing the national curriculum in England and Wales cost the
government Pounds 469m from its introduction in 1988 until April last year,
it was revealed yesterday.
Since Sir Ron Dearing started his review of the curriculum last April, about
Pounds 35m has been spent on attempting to implement national curriculum
tests, which were widely boycotted by teachers' unions.
Sir Ron has now recommended radical reductions in the curriculum's content.
It is to be cut by 20 per cent up to the age of 14 and virtually abandoned
after that.
Mr John Patten, the education secretary, said in a written parliamentary
answer that the total cost was Pounds 469m.
This included almost Pounds 100m attributed to the National Curriculum
Council, which devised the curriculum, and to the Schools Examination and
Assessment Council, which devised the tests to assess it.
Most of the planned tests have now been abandoned, and children will only
face compulsory testing on the core subjects of English, mathematics and
science at the ages of seven, 11 and 14.
Mrs Ann Taylor, shadow education secretary, claimed this meant that more
than Pounds 500m had been wasted.
She said: 'The Dearing process has been a costly exercise in finding out
what we already knew: that the Tory national curriculum was nothing of the
sort. It was an attempt to impose a national syllabus and has involved waste
on a massive scale.
'Mr John Major claims to be going back to basics. Sir Ron has gone back to
the drawing board. John Patten, for all our sakes, should go back to the
back benches.'
The bulk of the expenditure was paid to schools directly in grants for the
general education support programme.
However, these costings do not include any estimate of the cost in terms of
lost teacher time spent filling in 'tick-lists' for pupil assessments rather
than teaching.
Sir Ron said he was shocked by the 'tick-list' system which required a
typical teacher to make 20,000 separate reports on pupils each year. He
urged teachers to 'burn their tick-lists'.
Sir Ron will answer questions from the Commons education select committee
today, where the question of the cost of the national curriculum is likely
to be raised again.
Baroness Blatch, the education minister, said Labour and the Liberal
Democrats 'arrogantly dismiss our emphasis on the basics in education as
'the product of fanatical doctrine' - that's how out of touch they are with
the aspirations and instincts of the British people'.
She said the government had employed 'bold, imaginative and much-needed
reforms'.
