FT  13 OCT 94 / Tokyo hits Hoechst for Y4.4bn extra tax: German company is
appealing against assessment of transfer price manipulation
Hoechst Japan, a unit of the German pharmaceuticals company, has paid the
Tokyo regional tax bureau Y4.4bn (Dollars 44m) in additional taxes for
allegedly transferring to Germany income taxable in Japan, it was disclosed
yesterday.
The Japanese tax authorities charged Hoechst with the additional taxes,
claiming the company had shifted Y6.4bn in taxable income to Germany between
1990 and 1992. It did so by paying more than reasonable sums for raw
materials the Japanese unit imported from its German parent, the tax
authorities allege.
Hoechst has denied the charge and countered that the Y4.4bn it has had to
pay represents double taxation, since its parent company has already paid
tax on the same amount in Germany. 'We do not believe this is fair
treatment. We do. . . . not accept the tax statement,' Hoechst said
yesterday.
The company was not making any more profits than leading Japanese
pharmaceutical companies but its gross profit ratio was in line with the
average.
German and Japanese tax officials are discussing the issue. As stipulated by
an agreement the two countries have to avoid double taxation on profits made
by companies operating in both countries. The German company was required to
pay the extra taxes before it could appeal.
Hoechst's additional tax burden in Japan was disclosed as tax authorities
from the US, Canada, Australia and Japan gathered in Sydney to discuss the
application of transfer price taxation. Under this, companies suspected of
transferring profits to the parent company through excessive payments for
materials and royalties are subject to additional taxes.
The Japanese tax authorities have become increasingly aggressive in charging
foreign companies with extra taxes. Ciba-Geigy, the Swiss pharmaceuticals
group, has been charged with Y5.7bn in additional taxes, while Coca-Cola
(Japan) this year suffered a Y15bn tax penalty.
The Japanese stance comes amid concern that tax revenue will fall short of
the government target. Corporate taxes have been adversely affected by
Japan's weak economy over the past few years.
The Japan Research Institute, a private think tank, for example, is
forecasting a Y1,000bn shortfall from the government's target of Y13,800bn
in corporate tax revenue for this fiscal year.
