FT  31 MAR 94 / MMC lifts price control on condoms
The government yesterday lifted price controls on condoms supplied by LRC
Products, manufacturers of the Durex brand, after the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission said concern about Aids had created an increasingly competitive
market.
However Mr Neil Hamilton, corporate affairs minister, said LRC, a subsidiary
of London International Group, would have to undertake not to enter into
agreements under which wholesalers or retailers stocked only its condoms.
Mr Hamilton said he had written to Sir Bryan Carsberg, director-general of
fair trading, asking him to negotiate such an undertaking with LRC. Sir
Bryan asked the commission to investigate the condom market in March last
year.
Controls on LRC's prices were introduced in 1982 after an earlier inquiry.
LRC, which has about 75 per cent of the UK market, told the current inquiry
that it would over time raise its prices to average European levels if the
controls were lifted.
The commission said, however, that changes in the market meant other
suppliers would challenge LRC if it raised prices. It said the easing of
condom advertising restrictions and government publicity campaigns had
resulted in a sharp increase in demand in 1987-88. Although growth later
slowed, the commission said it appeared to have picked up again in the past
two years.
Mates condoms, owned by Pacific Dunlop of Australia, were launched in 1987
and have a UK market share of 14 per cent.
The commission said condoms were now stocked in an increasingly wide range
of outlets, including supermarkets. Last year Superdrug Stores started the
first condom price war by cutting its prices by a third. The commission said
greater competition between retailers meant that an increase in LRC trade
prices would not necessarily be reflected fully in retail prices.
Mr Hamilton said he had considered the position of the National Health
Service, which purchased 23 per cent of UK condom supplies for free
distribution. He said the commission felt there would be sufficient
competition to protect the NHS. The NHS was in a position to look for
quality suppliers worldwide, he said.
London International Group said: 'Competition, supported by advertising and
marketing, could substantially increase the number of condom users, helping
further to reduce the number of unplanned pregnancies and to combat the
spread of HIV/Aids and other sexually transmitted diseases.'
