FT  29 APR 94 / Whites contemplate a volkstaat bolt-hole
of many Capetonians, proud of the city's liberal traditions, they face the
prospect of becoming the nearest thing to a volkstaat, or Afrikaner
homeland, that the new South Africa can constitutionally encompass.
If the ethnic arithmetic is correct, Mr FW de Klerk's National party could
emerge, if not the majority party, at least the largest single party in the
Western Cape, one of the nine provinces which will have their own
legislatures.
Most of the province's 1.3m 'coloured' (mixed race) electors appear likely
to support the National party, the 658,000 white voters are divided between
it and the liberal Democratic party, and the bulk of the estimated half
million black residents support the African National Congress.
A city that saw itself as a bastion of liberalism will have Mr Hernus Kriel,
the outgoing minister of justice who now leads the party's provincial list
of candidates, as the regional premier. It was no accident that Mr de Klerk
chose to wind up his election campaign last Saturday with a rally in the
city, or that Mr Joe Slovo, one of the ANC's big guns, was sent to reassure
a coloured community clearly nervous about the prospects of black majority
rule.
On the face of it, Mr de Klerk won the day. The packed audience at the
centre was overwhelmingly coloured, and responded warmly to the National
party leader's appeal to them to return to what he called their traditional
home.
It was a poignant event, given the tortured relationship between white South
Africa and the coloured community. Despite relegation to second-class
citizens, and their eviction in the 1960s from District Six, their
historical home at the heart of Cape Town, much of the coloured community -
bound as kith and kin, and speaking Afrikaans as their first language -
seemed to have responded to Mr de Klerk's appeal.
In theory the Western Cape could become a cultural as well as political
redoubt of the National party.
And though in the new South Africa it is not always considered polite to say
so, many whites are starting to see the province as a physical bolt-hole,
one which they have no immediate intention of using, but are nonetheless
taking comfort from its presence.
The ANC, however, may yet take the Western Cape. It has the support of many
coloured voters, and - judging by the long queues outside polling stations
in Nyanga, Crossroads and other townships - the number of black voters may
have been underestimated.
These sad urban slums have become home to many thousands, if not hundreds of
thousands, of black settlers, who have come into the city environs since
influx controls on migrant labour were eased from the late 1970s.
Here, say optimistic ANC officials, is their heartland where there may be
enough support to confound the pollsters. These shanty dwellers were among
thousands of Western Cape ANC supporters who gave a huge eve-of-election
boost to the party's hope in the region by swamping the ceremony marking the
hoisting of South Africa's new flag in Cape Town this week - their cheerful
chants virtually drowning out the speeches at the ceremony. They underlined
the vigorous battle for control of the new province being fought with the
National party.
'This is a great moment,' said a jubilant ANC supporter. A white man next to
him expressed a different emotion: 'It's kind of sad to see that flag go.
It's got a lot of history behind it, not all of it bad. But we must look
forward.'
Predictions that the Western Cape could be the NP's stronghold appeared to
galvanise into action voters who massed at the polling stations in spite of
drizzle and chilly temperatures. Queues of enthusiastic voters up to three
miles long formed on Wednesday at Mitchell's Plain, a predominantly coloured
area outside Cape Town, where the National party sees strong support.
'I won't tell you who I'm voting for, but I bet there's going to be a few
surprises,' said Mrs Sophie Cupido, who had waited patiently since before
dawn.
In the suburbs on the slopes of Table Mountain, the queues contained voters
for a mix of parties. An ANC table, set up at a discreet, and legal,
distance from the polling station, was doing brisk business.
'We're not surprised by the level of support. It's to be expected. We're
confident of success,' an ANC official said.
