FT  27 AUG 94 / Finance and the Family: Protect yourself against market
losses - Peter John recommends options
If a Pounds 100,000 windfall had arrived last Christmas and you had invested
it in a broad range of blue chip UK shares traded on the FT-SE 100 index, it
would have lost around Pounds 15,000 of its value just three months later.
There is a way of insuring against all or part of such losses by 'hedging'
through traded options. These are financial instruments carrying the right,
but not the obligation, to buy or sell shares at a fixed price during a
fixed period.
There are two types of option. A 'call' option gives you the right to buy
shares, and is useful as a speculative tool. A 'put' option gives you the
right to sell shares, and is often used to protect a portfolio.
If, for example, you bought 1,000 Glaxo shares in March, you could have paid
Pounds 7,000 - or 700p a share. At the same time, you could have bought an
October 650 put option - the right to sell 1,000 Glaxo shares at 650p
between March and October, thus setting a floor on potential losses. The
premium for the put option would have been 42p a share, or Pounds 420 in
total for a contract covering 1,000. This is, effectively, 42p of insurance
for every 700p share from March to October, and equates to an insurance
premium of around 10 per cent for the year.
This might seem expensive: very few people would spend Pounds 20,000 a year
protecting a Pounds 200,000 house. But it largely depends on the inherent
risk, which is reflected by the volatility in the market. In this case, the
caution would have paid off.
By the end of June, Glaxo's underlying share price stood at just over 550p.
The options could have been 'exercised' and shares sold for 650p. After
deducting the 42p a share option price, the options limited the maximum loss
to 92p a share - rather than 150p - allowing you, in effect, to sell at
608p.
The main difference between options and conventional insurance, however, is
that an option can also be sold on at a profit.
An option's price is made up of two elements. First, 'time value' is
calculated from the length of time left before the option expires, and how
volatile the share price has been. Second, there is 'intrinsic value' - the
difference between the option's exercise price and the underlying share
price. A put option has intrinsic value if its exercise price is higher than
the share price.
In the case of a 650p put, it has only time value when the underlying share
price is above 650p; but for each penny the shares fall below 650p, the
intrinsic value rises. Glaxo shares fell to 550p recently and the price of
the October put option rose consequently to about 135p. So, if you thought
the stock had turned the corner, you could sell your option back into the
market for about Pounds 1,350.
Of course, big investors usually have a varied portfolio of shares so,
rather than protecting each share with an individual put option, a more
likely scenario would be to hedge through a put option on the whole FT-SE
100 index.
Index options are different from individual equity options in that
exercising the contract involves only cash, not shares. Thus, rather than
selling off shares, you are compensated for their loss in value.
When the market was at its peak of 3,520, a put option at 3,500 (ie, one
that provided almost total protection) might have cost 6 per cent of the
portfolio value. But derivatives' analysts estimate that protection at 3,200
would cost only 1 per cent.
Options traders say the best time for an investor to buy derivatives is
after the market has moved (whether upwards or downwards) by more than 10
per cent over a short period, as there is a strong chance of that move being
followed by a correction. As the FT-SE 100 has recovered by 300 points since
the end of June, now might be a good time to ensure that the recent
300-point gain is not lost.
(The price of index options is shown on the London stock market report page
of the FT. Individual stock option prices are shown inside the second
section, generally on the World Stock Markets page).
See pensions, page VI
