FT  14 JAN 94 / Property: Reversal of fortune: Small companies are tipped to
outperform their larger competitors in 1994
Last year UK property shares went through the roof. The sector topped the
London stock market performance league, with a total return on capital and
income of 89.2 per cent. Its performance relative to the market as a whole
has rarely, if ever, been bettered.
But in the past month, property shares have faltered, posting a decline of 6
per cent relative to the market as a whole. Does this signal the end of the
bull run for property shares? Or have they merely paused for breath, before
resuming their headlong rise?
Analysts are divided in their views. 'Property shares may have moved too
far, too fast,' says Mr Chris Turner of BZW, the securities house. Mr David
Tunstall of stockbrokers Smith New Court is more sanguine. 'There has been
scope for profit taking but it doesn't alter the fundamentals which are
stronger than they were nine months ago.' Mr Tunstall thinks the sector is
still locked into the upswing of its cycle, which, he adds, 'does not
dissipate overnight'.
Even the optimists do not expect a repeat of last year's performance. The
bull run in 1993 stemmed from a potent combination of an unexpectedly sharp
improvement in the prospects for property, together with significantly
improved sentiment towards the sector.
The scale of the market improvement last year took many people by surprise.
At the beginning of 1993, many of the fundamental factors affecting property
were arguably poor: the tenants' market remained depressed as a result of a
glut of unlet buildings, falling rents and a reluctance on the part of
tenants to commit themselves to moving to new offices.
At the same time, there was concern about the impact of the gilts market on
property, because the burden of financing the public sector borrowing
requirement of an estimated Pounds 50bn in 1993-94 threatened to push the
yield on gilts even higher.
In the event, the bond market reported a strong performance which, in turn,
influenced property yields. The relationship between gilt yields and
property yields is currently particularly strong. This is because investors
have been focusing on the high yielding, secure income aspects of property.
The prospect of rental growth re-emerging at the end of the year was an
additional incentive to investors.
The result of the strong performance of the bond market was that property
yields plummeted, from an average of 9.1 per cent to 7.8 per cent at the end
of the year, pushing up average property values by 10.2 per cent, according
to chartered surveyors Richard Ellis.
For property companies, the effects of rising asset values are, of course,
greatly magnified by the level of their gearing, the ratio of borrowing to
assets. Consider, for instance, two companies with gearing of 100 per cent
and 50 per cent respectively. A 15 per cent rise in property values would
generate a rise in net asset value of 30 per cent for the first company and
a rise of just 22.5 per cent for the second.
Not surprisingly, the best performing shares last year were generally those
with above-average gearing or those that had experienced financial troubles.
Greycoat came top with a 346 per cent gain in share price performance,
followed by Development Securities, Chesterfield, Scottish Metropolitan,
Wates, Allied London and British Land.
Another important factor behind the strong performance of property shares
was the emergence of a premium to net asset values, an important yardstick
of share performance. Traditionally shares are valued at a discount to net
assets of more than 20 per cent, to compensate for capital gains tax
liabilities and investors' lack of direct control over their assets. But
investors' expectations of growth in property values over the next two years
have pushed shares onto a 20 per cent premium to their net asset values,
according to estimates by UBS, the stockbrokers.
Investors face a difficult task in deciding whether share prices reflect a
correct assessment of the improved prospects for the property market. Much
depends on the trend in bond yields. 'Any improvement in (property) values
over the next three years will almost entirely be yield driven and therefore
is critically dependent on long bond yields and a narrowing of the margin of
property yields over bond yields,' says Kleinwort Benson, the securities
house.
But, as Kleinwort Benson points out, its forecasts of property values are
highly sensitive to variations in its projections of bond yields. A
forecasting error of about 100 basis points on gilts for a company that is
50 per cent geared would result in an error of more than 20 per cent on the
net asset value.
Kleinwort Benson's property analysts say gilts could yield less than 6 per
cent by the end of 1994 or early 1995. Others, such as BZW's Mr Turner, are
more sceptical about the prospects of another significant improvement in the
gilts market.
Moreover, Mr Turner thinks that property stocks may fall out of favour this
year because their prospects for earnings growth are dull at a stage in the
cycle when investors want to buy shares with sharply rising earnings.
Already, the property sector's prospective dividend yield of about 3.7 per
cent is close to that of the market as a whole. But as the prospects for
earnings growth are poor, so dividend increase is likely to edge below that
of the market as whole.
Mr Selwyn Jones of Credit Lyonnais Laing voices another common reservation
about prospects for property shares this year. He thinks that the industry
is over-optimistic about the prospects of substantial rental growth
re-emerging, given a background of low inflation. He also points to the
large number of prospective flotations which could dampen the market's
enthusiasm for property shares.
Selectivity, therefore, may be the watchword for investing in property
shares this year. For analysts, gearing, management ability and flexibility
will be the primary themes behind their share choices.
Smith New Court backs Land Securities, Great Portland and Brixton Estates
because of their proven management ability. Credit Lyonnais Laing believes
that British Land, Bradford and Great Portland will be the best performing
shares among the leading property companies in 1994; Bourne End and Helical
Bar look the best value of the medium-sized stocks, it adds.
Smaller companies are tipped by some analysts to outperform their larger
counterparts. UBS favours smaller companies such as Cleveland Trust, Dwyer,
Five Oaks, Town Centre, PSIT and Allied London Properties. Kleinwort Benson
also favours a clutch of small companies - Bradford, Burford, Frogmore, Town
Centre, Asda Properties, Helical Bar, St Modwen and Shaftesbury.
Small companies are well-placed because they are generally more highly
geared (at levels of between 75 per cent and 300 per cent) than their larger
competitors, whose gearing is generally between 40 per cent and 80 per cent.
According to Kleinwort Benson, small companies can also benefit from greater
flexibility of operation than their bigger competitors: small companies can
carry out deals in an imperfect market, they can manage gearing and operate
in small niches areas. 'Small is beautiful,' it says.
