FT  25 MAR 94 / International Company News: Paris unveils Credit Lyonnais
rescue deal
The French government has unveiled details of its long-awaited rescue
package for Credit Lyonnais, the troubled state-controlled bank. The plan
includes a FFr4.9bn (Dollars 857m) capital injection and the transfer of
FFr40bn of bad debts into a new company partly guaranteed by the state.
Mr Jean Peyrelevade, who last autumn was drafted in as chairman to
orchestrate Credit Lyonnais' restructuring and prepare it for privatisation,
said the package should enable the group to almost break even this year
after a devastating FFr6.9bn net loss for 1993.
The bank's problems stem from the aggressive strategy on loans and
international acquisitions pursued by Mr Jean-Yves Haberer, chairman from
1988 to 1993.
Mr Peyrelevade also announced plans for radical cost-cutting which will
involve shedding 10 per cent of the group's 38,449-strong French workforce
over the next three years, and 4 per cent of its 32,861 staff outside
France.
Credit Lyonnais will sell at least FFr20bn of assets by the end of next
year, and intends to raise additional capital through a share issue later
this year.
The scale of the rescue package and depth of Credit Lyonnais' 1993 losses
were worse than analysts' expectations. However, observers last night seemed
confident the FFr23.3bn deal would be sufficient to stabilise the bank's
finances.
Mr Sasha Serafimovski, European banking analyst at Merrill Lynch, said the
figures were 'much, much worse than anything we imagined'.
The state aid for Credit Lyonnais has to be vetted by the European
Commission in Brussels, where it was announced that Mr Pascal Lamy, chief of
staff to President Jacques Delors, would shortly be joining the bank.
Credit Commercial de France last year withstood the pressures on the French
banking sector to lift net profits 10.2 per cent, to FFr1.08bn from FFr978m
in 1992. The gain came in spite of losses at the recently-acquired Banque de
Savoie.
Mr Charles de Croisset, who last summer replaced Mr Michel Pebereau as
chairman when he left to head Banque Nationale de Paris, said he expected
the group to continue improving this year, and record its '11th consecutive
year of profits growth'.
Credit Lyonnais feature, Page 19
