FT  12 OCT 94 / Curbs on US flights removed
The government yesterday lifted all restrictions on transatlantic flights to
regional airports in an effort to revive talks with the US on liberalising
air services between the two countries.
Dr Brian Mawhinney, the transport secretary, called the decision 'the most
sweeping unilateral liberalisation move in the history of transatlantic
aviation'.
But UK and US airlines regarded the announcement as only a 'welcome gesture'
which did little to advance the core issue of liberalising access to
Heathrow and Gatwick, the two main London airports.
The US government walked away from 'open skies' negotiations last December
after the UK refused to grant immediate access to all US carriers to
Heathrow, the world's busiest international airport.
Dr Mawhinney also called on the US government to agree the liberalisation of
so-called code-sharing arrangements between UK and US carriers. These
marketing tools enable airlines to combine their respective networks by
using each other's ticketing codes.
This would clear the way for US government approval of the proposed
commercial and code-sharing partnership between the UK's Virgin Atlantic
Airways and Delta Air Lines, the third-largest US carrier.
Dr Mawhinney said the move showed the government's commitment to eventual
total liberalisation of transatlantic air services. However, airline
industry officials suggested that the decision was aimed at winning
political support in the regions which have been seeking to expand air
services to boost economic development.
American Airlines, the second largest US carrier, said: 'The nub remains
access to Heathrow and beyond Heathrow'. The US carrier is also opposed to
code-sharing because it sees these arrangements as a device to circumvent
restrictions imposed by bilateral agreements it wants changed.
UK and US carriers have not been rushing to start new services from regional
airports, but have continued to concentrate their operations at Heathrow and
Gatwick.
Mr Richard Branson, Virgin's chairman, said Dr Mawhinney had made 'a bold
gesture without asking anything in return from the US'.
