FT  22 JAN 94 / When savers don't prosper
Everyone is talking about how wonderful it is that interest rates are coming
down. But what about people who took early retirement and invested their
lump sum in a building society?' Mr Peter Hutchings, 62, an ex-BTR
executive, speaks for many retired people. Over the past two years, he has
seen the gross return from his building society account fall from more than
11 to less than 5 per cent.
Government ministers say they receive more complaints when they cut interest
rates than when they increase them. It was partly to placate retired savers
that the government this week produced a Pensioners Guaranteed Income Bond,
offering a fixed rate of 7 per cent paid monthly for five years.
Mr Hutchings is not impressed. Because he is less than 65 years old, he will
not be eligible to buy the bond. As he points out: 'A lot of people have
been retiring early over the last few years' and will not be able to
benefit.
Nevertheless, it is likely that the bond, which offers over 1 percentage
point more than similar building society products, will attract those who
like the security of a government-backed investment. Mr Herbert Maddocks,
77, a former chemical engineer from Chester whose income has fallen as a
result of lower rates, says he is impressed by the terms of the bond.
The elderly middle classes, a bedrock Conservative constituency, have not
all been hit. Most have corporate pensions, which have steadily increased
year by year, offsetting the effect of falling interest rates. Others have
diversified into bonds and equities, and have seen their capital rise
sharply in value as rates have declined.
However, caution has prevented some from reaping the full benefit. 'Our
investment income from the building society has dropped a hell of a lot over
the past few years,' says Mr David Burgoyne, 66, a retired civil servant
from Lincolnshire. He has mitigated this by moving some funds into equities,
but his wife, concerned about the safety of their capital, persuaded him to
limit his share purchases.
Falling interest rates are not the only problem for the retired. The tax
increases introduced in the two 1993 Budgets will start to affect their
incomes in April, particularly the imposition of VAT on fuel.
Mr Colin Firth, a retired accountant from Lancashire, has had second
thoughts about holidays after the effect on his income of interest rate
cuts. He calculates VAT on fuel will cost him a further Pounds 180 a year -
far more than the compensation package announced by chancellor Kenneth
Clarke in November. As a result, Mr Firth says he will have to cut back on
'luxuries' such as restaurant meals. Mr Burgoyne feels the same way: 'We may
have to cut back on luxuries such as package holidays and wine.'
The government will also be watching the reactions of a different set of
savers - those in work. As the tax increases kick in, it hopes consumers
will absorb the impact on their incomes by reducing their savings. There is
some sign of this already - the savings ratio fell from 11.7 per cent to
10.6 per cent between the second and third quarters of 1993 - but it has a
long way to go until it reaches the 5.4 per cent recorded in 1988.
Interest rates on many instant access accounts are now so low that many
consumers may decide it is no longer worth saving. But the effects are hard
to predict: some people may still be so concerned about the prospects of
unemployment that they continue to build up their nest egg.
