FT  05 MAR 94 / Wrinkle, wrangle eastern Star: Simon Holberton and Kieran
Cooke on Murdoch's Asia problems
Rarely has Mr Rupert Murdoch had to tread so carefully as in Asia this week.
Attention has focused on the role of the Murdoch-owned Sunday Times in
provoking Malaysia into curbing trade with British companies. The
London-based newspaper alleged that UK businessmen, anxious to win contracts
in Malaysia, were involved in discussions about possible under-the-table
payments to Malaysian politicians, including the prime minister, Dr Mahathir
Mohamad. The Sunday Times denies suggesting Dr Mahathir sought, or was paid,
a bribe.
But eight months after his News Corporation paid Dollars 525m for a
controlling interest in Star TV, the Hong Kong-based satellite broadcasting
company, Mr Murdoch's involuntary role as Dr Mahathir's bete noire is not
the only problem facing the media mogul, whose plans for global expansion
focus largely on Asia.
In Hong Kong this week, Star has in effect been excluded from the nascent
cable TV market after a dispute with Wharf Cable, the colony's only cable-TV
provider. The row centred on the terms on which the latter might have
carried its programmes.
In Taiwan, an important business partner has pulled out of an agreement to
provide Star with up to Dollars 120m of advertising revenue over four years.
Mr Murdoch's problem is not a lack of viewers. An estimated 200m people in
39 countries across Asia and the Middle East - including India and China,
the two most populous countries in the world - tunes in to Star daily. His
difficulty is in making the venture profitable. And that requires Mr Murdoch
 -who has made a virtue of thumbing his nose at the establishment - to find
a modus vivendi with Asia's political leaders.
Many of them, like Dr Mahathir, who has tried to block Star broadcasts to
Malaysia, oppose the free flow of information. They are sceptical about
western popular culture and have the political power to hinder Star's
expansion into new markets. With China this week announcing tighter rules on
access to satellite television, the likelihood is increasing that Mr Murdoch
will drop the BBC's World Service news from Star's network as a sop to
political leaders unused to unfettered news programming.
The News Corp chief does not have much time. The head start Star had, as the
first satellite broadcaster in Asia, is being challenged. Time-Warner, the
US media company, hopes to forge an alliance with Television Broadcasts
(TVB) of Hong Kong, the biggest terrestrial broadcaster in the colony, to
launch a competitor satellite network. The US company is discussing
investing about Dollars 150m in TVB for a 9.9 per cent shareholding.
Mr Gary Davey, Star's newly appointed chief executive, says: 'Almost
everyone in the world media industry is talking to each other about business
ventures in this region. This will be the year when some of those ventures
firm up and we have a clearer idea what the long-term picture will look
like.'
Media observers believe that a combination of Time-Warner's management
expertise, TVB's contacts in Asia and its Chinese-language programme library
will be a powerful rival to Star.
Given the importance of Asia to his business strategy, Mr Murdoch's decision
to set up a home in Hong Kong is characteristic. He moved from Australia to
the UK in the 1960s after his acquisition of The News of the World; and to
New York and Los Angeles after he embarked on a series of US acquisitions in
the late 1970s.
Each venture has brought its own set of worries, and Asia is no different.
This time, the immediate problems include:
The setback to Star's hopes of introducing pay-TV caused by its dispute with
Wharf Cable. Star needs to be carried by a Hong Kong cable system, as cable
is the most profitable way of distributing and collecting fees for
programmes. In theory, Hong Kong, where incomes are on first-world levels,
should have been the easiest country in which to launch such a service. A
decision in January by Satellite Television Marketing, Star's advertising
sales agent in Taiwan, to use the change in the broadcaster's ownership as
an excuse to terminate an agreement to provide advertising revenue
equivalent to about a quarter of Star's forecast income over the next four
years. STM wanted to end the agreement, because the target sales figures
were proving over-ambitious.
The failure of the STM alliance is a particularly savage blow, because Star
has, as a result, lost its association with the Koo family, which owns STM
and is one of Taiwan's most powerful business empires. Star is believed to
get the largest share of its revenues from Taiwan, a country where western
companies face difficulty in doing business without a local partner. Star is
now trying to sell its own advertising space in Taiwan, having decided
against forming an-other alliance.
The vulnerability of Star's broadcast lic-ence, which Mr Murdoch does not
own outright. He owns 63 per cent of a company, which in turn owns 48 per
cent of Hutchvision, the holder of the licence to 'uplink' Star's signal
from Hong Kong to a satellite.
Mr Li Ka-shing and Hutchison Whampoa, the conglomerate he controls, own the
remaining 52 per cent of Hutchvision. This lack of control probably explains
why, on his recent trip to India, Mr Murdoch canvassed the idea of a
separate 'uplink' from the sub-continent.
Star is also susceptible to political interference. Mr Murdoch is well aware
of the hostility some Asian leaders have towards western television. Last
September, he wrote in The Times of London, which News Corp owns, that
advances in communications had proved 'an unambiguous threat to totalitarian
regimes everywhere'.
Subsequently, Mr Murdoch has been buffeted by a stream of criticism from
Asian leaders about Star's programming. On a visit to India last month,
where Mr Murdoch met Mr PV Narasimha Rao, India's prime minister, a
government spokesman said the country's image was often tarnished by bias in
the foreign media.
Mr Lal Krishan Advani, president of India's opposition Bharatiya Janata
party, complained that many of Star's programmes were unacceptable and
'could have a serious impact on the cultural outlook of the people'.
Dr Mahathir says Mr Murdoch and the western media are trying to incite
unrest: 'Their main idea is how to create friction and instability, so that
if we are unstable, they can compete with us.' Indonesia, where Mr Murdoch
was last week talking to local companies about joint ventures, is also
taking measures to control satellite broadcasts.
But the biggest threat to Star could come from China, both in Hong Kong and
on the mainland. When Hong Kong reverts to Chinese sovereignty in 1997,
Beijing will hold the whip hand over the colony's regulatory framework. If
Star wishes to retain its broadcasting licence, which expires in 2003, it
will have to beware of disseminating programmes that offend Chinese
sensitivities.
On the mainland, the tighter rules announced this week by Beijing's Ministry
of Radio, Television and Film will, for example, allow access to foreign
satellites only to hotels catering for foreigners and public institutions,
such as financial, media or educational organisations.
The China Communist party's concerns are likely to have been exacerbated by
research conducted for Star by the Chinese State Statistical Bureau, which
showed that the service may have up to 100m viewers on the mainland.
Ms Chen Zhili, chief of propaganda for the Chinese Communist party in
Shanghai, said recently: 'The main task is to preserve the national culture
against pornography and negative programmes.' Star's repeated transmission
of BBC footage from the Tiananmen demonstrations of June 1989 was an 'insult
to the Chinese people', she said.
During his India trip, Mr Murdoch began the process of rapprochement with
China, saying: 'The Chinese are very sensitive about international news and
we have to work out a way of dealing with this. We haven't yet been able to
do that.' An indication of how far Mr Murdoch is prepared to go to reach an
agreement will come when he decides whether Star should continue
transmitting the BBC's World Service news. The News Corp chief is
considering dropping the BBC, and either airing no news service on Star or
carrying an international version of his European Sky news service.
But complaints about Star by Asia's rulers appear to extend beyond its news
service, encompassing the Simpsons, a comic cartoon series about an
anti-establishment family, and much of its predominantly US programming.
As Mr Murdoch roams Asia from his new base atop Victoria Peak in Hong Kong,
it is tempting to write off his regional ambitions. That may be rash, given
his reputation for pulling off successes in difficult circumstances. But the
range of political and business obstacles he faces make his task formidable.
