FT  01 MAR 94 / World Trade News: Wood row goes against Gatt grain - US
pressure on Japan to cut timber import tariffs
When the Ohashis, a family living in Yokohama, built their house, they chose
to use an American-style structure and imported wood from Washington state.
'We really liked the design - it's warm in the winter, cool in the summer
and keeps the moisture out,' the Ohashis say.
They are among a growing number of Japanese who are choosing North American
lumber for their homes rather than the traditional cedar found throughout
Japan's mountainous landscape. The trend has helped to fuel a bustling trade
in wood products imported into Japan not only from the American continent
but from as far off as Finland and Sweden.
This trade in wood products has become the focus of a row between the US and
Japan that has cast a shadow over the Uruguay Round of trade liberalisation
talks under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The US is unhappy with an offer by Japan to reduce tariffs on wood products
that was made last year to conclude the Uruguay Round talks.
The Japanese offer was to reduce tariffs by 51 per cent on a trade-weighted
average and on certain products by 33 per cent in accordance with a separate
US-Japan agreement in 1990. It was accepted last year by the US and other
countries.
Since then, however, the US has called on Japan to eliminate tariffs on wood
products altogether. This has upset Japanese officials. 'We don't want to
re-open negotiations, we don't want to unravel the package,' one Japanese
official said.
On Friday Japan duly submitted its tariff schedules to Gatt on the lines of
the offer made during the Uruguay Round negotiations.
However, pressure on Japan to reduce its tariffs on wood products further is
unlikely to be eased.
In a recent newspaper advertisement, the American Forest and Paper
Association noted that, were the Japanese government to remove its tariffs
on imported wood, it would improve the lifestyle of the people, stimulate
the economy and take leadership on the international stage of trade.
The association noted that by some estimates, if tariffs were removed, the
cost of constructing a wooden house in Japan would fall by about 20 per
cent.
It is an argument that is likely to find widespread support among the
Japanese public, frustrated at being charged several times more for a house
than would be the case in most other countries.
The bureaucrats and industry officials who consider US demands unreasonable
argue that there are sound reasons for not giving in.
The first is that the Japanese wood industry could be driven to annihilation
if tariffs are removed entirely. The industry has already been damaged by
the flood of imports which now dominate the market.
In the early 1960s, the Japanese government, faced with a construction boom
and a shortage of domestic wood supplies, decided to encourage imports by
reducing tariffs.
Since then, the share of foreign wood products has surged to 75 per cent of
the Japanese market, of which US wood comprises 28 per cent. Together with
Canadian wood, the 38 per cent market share of North American products far
exceeds that of domestic supplies. The value of imports has doubled from
Dollars 5.36bn in 1986 to Dollars 10.89bn in 1992.
'Our campaign for the greater use of wood has benefited foreign wood
products more than domestic ones,' says Mr Motohiko Wako, vice-president of
the All Japan Federation of Lumber Associations.
Mr Wako explains that North American wood has become popular in Japan
because of lower prices and reliable quality.
Mass plantations reduce costs while the yen's rise has contributed to the
competitiveness of foreign products.
North American wood is also uniform in quality and distribution is
efficient, so that it is possible for buyers to order wood from the west
coast by phone without seeing the product. Japanese wood varies
significantly in quality, so that buyers are required to go to a lumber
market to check on quality, Mr Wako says.
A second argument is that because of environmental movements in the US and
elsewhere, Japan cannot rely on imports to supply its huge appetite for wood
products.
The US already imposes export restrictions on its wood and the Clinton
administration has announced a policy to limit logging to protect the
environment. As a result North American lumber prices have doubled since
1992.
Japan also has its environment to think about when considering how far it
can reduce tariffs. The plantation of trees prevents landslides in Japan's
mountainous terrain, ensures clean water and helps prevent global warming,
Mr Wako says.
