FT  05 AUG 94 / Spanish fishermen attack British ships
Spain's tuna fishermen appeared set yesterday to drag the Madrid government
into a confrontation with its European Union partners by vowing to continue
their hit and run tactics against rival EU fleets allegedly using illegal,
oversized drift nets to land their catch.
'It's like starting a war,' said Mr David Scott, president of Britain's
National Federation of Fishermen's Organisations.
For much of yesterday navy patrol boats from Spain, the UK and Ireland
seemed to be bobbing on the swell of the Bay of Biscay powerless to prevent
the Spanish fisherman 'taking the law into their own hands,' as one EU
diplomat in Madrid said.
Ship to shore radio reports from the Spanish vessels, as well as from the
British and Irish ones that they had attacked, indicated that the Spaniards
had cut drift nets that they judged to be longer than the 2.5km limits
imposed by Brussels and drawn close to other offending EU trawlers,
threatening hostile action.
Recalling the violence at the end of last month when Spanish fishermen
boarded a French tuna trawler and towed it to a Spanish harbour, two British
vessels and an Irish one were said at the end of yesterday's confused high
sea clashes to be limping back to their home ports. A British fisherman
compared the attacking Spaniards to a 'wolf pack'.
The British fishermen stress they are not breaking EU rules. 'It's totally
unacceptable. Tuna presents a tremendous opportunity for our fishermen and
we want to hold on to it,' said Mr Scott.
The Spanish fishermen seem equally determined. 'Our navy boats threaten to
machine gun us, which of course they daren't do,' said Mr Anton Garay, a
Spanish tuna fleet spokesman. 'What they should be doing is defending our
livelihood. Our government is doing nothing and forcing us to act.'
The Spanish fishing boats, which make up by far the largest fleet in Europe,
use rods and lines to catch tuna, unlike the larger vessels of other EU
nations which are adapted to use long drift nets to land bigger catches.
British fishermen are angry with the confusion they say has arisen because
some nets have lines longer than 2.5km. This is because they are constructed
with 'dolphin doors' to enable dolphins to escape through large holes in the
nets.
The British have only pursued tuna fishing since 1990, as quotas for
catching other white fish in EU waters have been tightened. The EU imposes
no quota on tuna.
The Spanish Agriculture and Fisheries ministry appealed for calm and said
that EU inspectors aboard Spanish patrol boats would report oversize nets.
'We cannot confirm that violent incidents have occured and we are doing
everything possible to ensure that everybody abides by EU rules,' said a
spokesman.
The UK government said that 'appropriate action' would be taken against any
British vessel found to be using oversized nets.
Mr Michael Jack, fisheries minister, said he insisted, in a message to the
Spanish government, that they ensure their fishermen do not take the law
into their own hands. He said he would pursue claims for compensation by
fishermen.
Representatives of Spain, France, Ireland and the UK were meeting yesterday
in Brussels in an attempt to resolve the conflict.
The Spanish tuna fleet warned that any reprisals by the Madrid government or
by Brussels could lead to renewed use of the blockade tactic that last week
sealed off Spain's northern ports for three days.
