FT  22 JAN 94 / The Long View: Profits take the lead
Rotation can make you giddy. There have been some big structural shifts in
the London equity market recently, with the big blue chips racing up over
Christmas, for instance, but the middle-sized stocks producing a spectacular
upsurge this week. With share prices on average at fairly giddy heights
there is a desperate search going on for value that might justify further
appreciation.
The underlying theory is that at a certain point in a bull market the main
driving force ceases to be the push from excess liquidity and begins to be
the pull from profits growth. Although profits have been rising for a year
or so now - the consensus expectation is that earnings per share for 1993
will have shown 15 per cent growth on average, against zero for 1992 - it is
primarily the fall in interest rates that has generated the higher
valuations.
That this is still the case was shown by the market's economically perverse
reaction on Wednesday to the news that December retail sales were supposedly
lower than in November. Never mind that peculiar seasonal adjustments
probably make the official Yuletide retail sales statistics almost
meaningless. The stock market fastened on to the idea that weak activity
would encourage the government to make an early cut in interest rates. If
business was indeed poor the impact on company profits would presumably be
negative - but about this the market appeared to care not one jot.
Nevertheless investors are exploring various sector themes. In the early
part of a bull market interest-rate sensitive sectors such as financials,
property and construction tend to shine. Somewhat later, consumer goods show
well and then, late in the cycle, capital goods sectors are likely to be
boosted by rising physical investment as output bumps up against capacity.
Recently many investors have been captured by the theme of rising commodity
prices as the global recovery gathers pace: hence, for instance, the success
of Mercury Asset Management's World Mining Trust in pulling in Pounds 426m
when launched last month.
But how great is the scope in general for British companies to achieve
significantly higher profits? Although in some parts of the world companies
are suffering severely from the recession - in Germany, for instance, and
especially in Japan - British companies weathered the last economic downturn
relatively well. According to the national accounts the profits of
industrial and commercial companies had already rallied to a 14.3 per cent
share of national income by the third quarter of 1993, making a sharp bounce
back from 1991's low point of about 11.5 per cent.
Stock market analysts are projecting further earnings per share gains of
about 15 per cent in 1994 and 13 per cent in 1995. The interesting point is
that these compare with much lower expectations for the growth of earnings
of employees, now running at only about 3 per cent and unlikely to rise very
substantially over the next year or two.
If the City analysts are right then the share of profits in income is set to
rise to around 16 per cent in 1994 and perhaps 17 per cent in 1995 - well
ahead of the 15 per cent share reached at the peak of the last cycle, in
1987. Part of the explanation may be the impact of the hugely profitable
privatised utilities which have progressively expanded the company sector
since the early 1980s (they account for about 22 per cent of the earnings of
All-Share Index constituents). But there is also the implication of a
substantial shift in economic power from labour to capital.
Over many years in the UK the growth of wages has been slightly higher on
average than the growth of company earnings per share: since 1960, in fact,
pay has grown at 10.2 per cent annually, and earnings per share at 9 per
cent (price inflation, incidentally, has averaged 7.8 per cent).
One explanation for the collapse of the inflation rate in the UK and many
other western countries has been the growth of competition from
newly-industrialising countries. But such brutal competition would surely
have produced more pressure on profits than has been seen (although it is
true that most of the impact would be focused on the relatively small
manufacturing sector). As it happened, however, the margins squeeze in
manufacturing was relaxed by sterling's sudden dive after Black Wednesday in
September 1992. The puzzle was that, contrary to historical experience, pay
inflation was not stimulated by that episode, so we have to assume the
development of an underlying labour surplus of a kind not seen since the
1930s.
If business is indeed becoming exceptionally profitable in the UK, there
will be other positive effects beyond a booming stock market: for instance,
the stimulation of output should quickly cure the capacity shortages which
have produced balance of payments problems even in the depths of recession.
But we also have to bear in mind that such conditions have not been
sustainable in the past; rising corporate income has quickly been
transmitted to wages, and sterling has tended to rise to less competitive
levels. This time, we have to project that slow growth of consumers' incomes
will be topped up by a fall in savings (or in practice, a rise in
borrowings) in order to sustain demand; and that climbing exports will not
send the pound too high.
It is also worth mentioning the importance of raw material input costs,
which have recently been exceptionally low - with the oil price, for
instance, back in real terms to where it was before the first oil shock in
the early 1970s. The investors who are piling into commodity shares to
exploit the first signs of an upturn in the commodity price indices ought
also to think of the possible impact of raw material price inflation on
corporate profits elsewhere.
In these tricky conditions you may need to perform a few gyrations to find
your way to the sectors where the best of these profits are going to be
earned.
