FT  08 NOV 94 / China explores the merits of regional economic links: The
background to President Jiang's four-nation South-east Asian tour
When China's President Jiang Zemin leaves today for visits to Singapore,
Malaysia, Indonesia - where he is to attend the Asia Pacific Economic
Co-operation forum - and Vietnam, he will be engaging in what Chinese media
aree describing as a 'new diplomatic drive'.
This probably overstates the case, but there is also no doubt that Mr
Jiang's mission is one of his more important forays abroad. His meeting with
President Bill Clinton during the Apec summit will be the centrepiece of his
four-nation tour.
The two last met in Seattle at the first Apec summit a year ago under less
auspicious circumstances. Then human rights issues predominated. The US had
not severed the link between renewal of China's Most Favoured Nation trading
status and human rights. With that irritant removed it should be possible
for leaders of the two Pacific powers to talk more constructively about such
issues as the future of Apec itself and its evolution into a trade
liberalisation vehicle which depends on active Chinese involvement.
But any concessions on that score are likely to come at a price. In the
lead-up to Apec, Chinese officials have made it clear that Beijing would
look more favourably on an Apec free trade zone proposal, however nebulous
that proposal may be, if lingering argument over its application to re-join
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade were resolved.
As the Apec summit draws nearer Chinese officials are making the link
between the two issues even more explicit. In a weekend newspaper interview
Mr Long Yongtu, an assistant minister in the foreign trade ministry, asked:
'Is China's Gatt accession good for trade liberalisation advocated by the
Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation forum?'
This is an argument that Mr Clinton is likely to hear directly from Mr
Jiang. China, in seeking Gatt entry, is playing the Apec card, knowing that
influential Apec members, such as Australia, wish to secure broad
endorsement for the implementation by 2020 of the proposed Asia-Pacific Free
Trade Zone proposal.
Mr Jiang is likely to stop short, however, of backing a timetable except in
the vaguest possible terms. This reflects Beijing's caution about committing
itself to regional institutional arrangements unless it can be sure that
these will work to its advantage. China's persistent fear is that such
forums could be used to assert pressure on issues such as human rights and
trade liberalisation.
Chinese foreign policy research institutes, including the Academy of Social
Sciences, recently advised the government to join efforts to broaden Apec,
but to avoid specific commitments to a free trade zone timetable. Professor
Zhang Yunling, director the academy's Asia Pacific Studies Institute, and
one of the authors of the study, said that while China saw growing regional
co-operation as an 'irreversible trend', it was not yet clear whether Apec
was the most appropriate framework for such a process.
'China is improving gradually its understanding of the region. It has no
choice but actively to participate, but at the same time it has to find ways
not to harm itself,' he says.
Mr Jiang's visits to Malaysia and Singapore will be largely ceremonial,
although in Kuala Lumpur China's president will feel obliged to repeat
Beijing's endorsement of a Malaysian proposal for an East Asia Economic
Caucus. Beijing has indicated at best a tepid enthusiasm for the EAEC.
Mr Jiang's visit to Vietnam on the last stop of his Asian tour may require
some nimble diplomatic footwork, but Prof Zhang does not expect the
continuing dispute over territory in the South China Sea to mar the visit.
He said that the two sides had no interest at this stage in allowing
relations to deteriorate. He noted that cross-border trade was flourishing
and that both countries were intent on developing their economies after
barren years. This dictated a stable regional environment.
At a personal level, Mr Jiang's extensive tour also assumes importance. He
will be hoping that his appearance on a world stage at the Apec forum will
bolster his stocks at home in this transitional phase to a new generation of
Chinese leaders.
