FT  12 DEC 94 / UK Company News: KPMG fee income advances 5% - Strong growth
reported in all sections except for corporate recovery
KPMG Peat Marwick, the accountancy firm, recorded a 5 per cent growth in fee
income from Pounds 491.8m to Pounds 516.4m for the year to September 1994 in
what could be its last set of results in the traditional partnership format.
It is consulting clients, investors, and regulators on a plan to create a
limited company to audit its public limited company clients.
The firm has said that if it went ahead it would not only publish financial
results for the audit arm but for the whole UK business. These would include
bottom-line profits and earnings per partner.
In its results published today the firm showed strong figures for all parts
of the business except corporate recovery, a reflection of the drop in
insolvency work during the economic recovery.
KPMG said that its core audit and accounting business grew by 6 per cent and
reported new audit customers in Booker, Hepworth, North West Water, and
First Choice Holidays.
Senior partner Mr Colin Sharman said: 'We have won audit proposals, often
when not the lowest tender, by demonstrating a combination of high quality
technical and client service.
'Accountancy is coming out of the doldrums and provided we continue to
deliver a highly professional service and value for money then next year
should see even stronger fee growth.'
The corporate finance business showed 15 per cent growth as the firm
reported increased involvement in mergers, acquisitions, management
buy-outs, privatisation work and new issues. The firm acted as reporting
accountants for 55 company flotations.
Since the start of the decade corporate finance has grown 50 per cent and
now represents 14 per cent of fee income.
Fee income from tax services rose 4 per cent to Pounds 108.5m. Growth was
seen in tax work linked to corporate transactions, international tax, profit
related pay, and international executive tax.
If incorporation of the audit arm does go ahead, and a decision is expected
in the new year, then next year's results for audit will themselves be
independently audited. Other large accountancy firms, some of which are
discussing incorporation, will await the results with interest.
