FT  06 SEP 94 / Business and the Law: Warning note is sounded - The
implications of labels on computer keyboards
The recent decision by Compaq Computer of the US to put a health warning on
the keyboards of its personal computer products is expected to have a
significant impact on computer-related personal injury litigation worldwide.
Compaq's label draws users' attention to the risks of repetitive strain
injury (RSI) - an umbrella term for disorders with symptoms including
swelling and chronic pain in the hands, arms and shoulders. In the US, more
than 2,000 law suits have been filed against computer manufacturers by
individuals who claim to have been injured through using keyboards.
The UK and Australian courts are also handling numerous injury claims.
Unlike in the US, where employers are largely protected from liability for
workplace injuries by workers' compensation insurance, employers are the
primary target of litigation in countries such as the UK.
US lawyers say that Compaq, the world's largest personal computer
manufacturer, has started using the warning label to limit its liability to
future claims. However, Compaq's action may increase the vulnerability of
other computer makers, as well as employers, to injury claims.
The US version of Compaq's keyboard label reads: 'WARNING] To reduce risk of
serious injury to hands, wrists and other joints read the Safety &amp; Comfort
Guide.' The guide reinforces the message in even stronger terms: 'There may
be a risk of serious injuries from working at your computer workstation'
(Compaq's emphasis). It then gives guidelines on minimising the risk.
The warning 'represents an acknowledgment that there is an association
between keyboard use and injury', says Mr Arnold Lakind, a partner in the
New Jersey firm of Szaferman, Lakind, Blumstein, Watter and Blader, which is
representing about 200 plaintiffs in RSI complaints against computer
companies in the US.
Lawyers acting for people bringing RSI cases against employers in UK courts
also regard Compaq's statement as significant. They say it is the first
explicit admission by a manufacturer that the use of keyboards can be
dangerous.
According to Mr Lakind, Compaq's move is wise. The label 'will help Compaq
immensely because, to the extent that somebody uses the keyboard after the
warning, they may be assuming the risk of further injury. It is a very
positive move by Compaq.'
He points out, however, that Compaq's action may have repercussions for
other manufacturers. 'In several respects, Compaq's warning labels increase
the liability of other manufacturers that do not put labels on their
products.'
Compaq has demonstrated that there is an effective way to alert users to the
risks of keyboard use, says Mr Lakind. 'Other companies now have a greater
likelihood of being sued, because Compaq has shown that it is feasible to
warn users while other companies have declined to do so.'
Similarly, UK lawyers acting for insurers or employees say warning labels
will undermine the argument that employers are unaware of the dangers of
keyboard use, making it more difficult to defend against injury claims.
Mr David Scrutton of Kennedys, a law firm that often acts for insurance
companies, says that employers will be under increased pressure to abide by
the European health and safety directive which compels them to take a number
of precautions to avoid injuries to staff. 'Just plonking a computer on a
desk and relying on the manufacturer's warning will not be sufficient to
satisfy these regulations,' he says.
Claims by medical experts that there is no link between RSI and keyboards -
a feature in some cases currently before the courts - will now scarcely be
tenable, says Mr Peter Woods of London law firm Stephens Innocent.
Mr Tom Jones of Thompsons, an-other London firm, believes warning labels on
PCs will shift the direction of court cases. Rather than arguing about the
link between keyboards and RSI, they are likely to concentrate more on the
efforts undertaken by employers to protect their staff - a move that could
make litigation even more complex.
In what appears to have been a last-minute change prompted by legal
concerns, Compaq has said that the warning label on PCs sold in the UK and
Australia will be toned down. It will read: 'IMPORTANT NOTICE: For
comfortable and safe use please read the Safety and Comfort Guide.'
The purpose of this label and of the US one is the same, according to Compaq
 -to draw users' attention to the guide book, which will be the same
throughout the world. The different wording is a 'cultural' issue, the
company says.
The variation, however, also reflects the different legal climates. In the
UK and Australia, where employers have been sued, computer manufacturers
must balance concerns about liability with the interests of corporate
customers.
In the US, it is computer manufacturers which are being accused of failing
to warn customers about the alleged risks of injury. These cases will
revolve around the question of 'what the computer companies knew and when
they knew it', says Mr Lakind. To date, no damages have been awarded in
these product liability suits, although there are rumours of out-of-court
settlements.
Because there is no definitive scientific evidence linking keyboards to
injuries, other computer manufacturers have so far been reluctant to issue
warnings. 'A warning suggests that there is a problem with the product,'
says one official at IBM, the computer giant. IBM maintains that it is the
way that some people use the products, rather than an inherent feature of
keyboards, that can cause injuries. The company has no plans to put a
warning label on its keyboards.
However, Microsoft, the leading supplier of software for PCs, which is soon
to introduce its first keyboard, will put a warning label on the product, a
company official says. And members of the Center for Office Technology, a US
PC industry group that has focused on RSI problems, plan to meet this month
to reconsider the labelling issue.
The outcome of an RSI claim against IBM, due to go to trial in Rhode Island
next month, may determine whether warning labels become a standard feature
of PCs.
If they do, and the link between RSI and keyboards becomes more explicitly
acknowledged, it will be increasingly incumbent on employers worldwide to
provide safeguards against keyboard-related injuries.
Additional reporting by John Mason
