FT  03 JUN 94 / 29 killed in RAF helicopter crash: Disaster claims lives of
top Ulster security officials
Britain's security effort in Northern Ireland suffered a heavy blow last
night when a helicopter containing senior policemen, army officers and civil
servants crashed on the west coast of Scotland.
The 29 victims, who included the top members of the Special Branch of the
Royal Ulster Constabulary, were on their way from Belfast airport to
Inverness for sensitive discussions about security in the province.
The crash of the 51-foot Chinook transporter with twin rotors is likely to
prove a serious setback to the authorities' struggle against terrorism.
Apart from the four crew, 10 RUC men, nine army personnel and six civil
servants were killed.
While the incident prompted questions about possible sabotage, heavy fog and
poor visibility appeared to be the most likely cause of the crash. 'It seems
almost certain this helicopter hit some kind of steep terrain,' said Mr
David Learmount, a writer on aviation safety.
It is understood that the RAF's Chinooks have not been fitted with the
latest weather radar equipment, an optional extra that would cost several
hundred thousand dollars per machine.
The incident occurred near a lighthouse on the Mull of Kintyre, about 10
miles from the port of Campbeltown, shortly after 6pm. A local woman raised
the alarm after hearing a loud explosion and seeing a fireball.
Asked about the possibility of sabotage, Mr Ian Lang, the secretary of state
for Scotland, said on ITN's News at Ten: 'That's speculation at this stage.'
A senior Scottish policeman, Chief Constable Leslie Sharp, told reporters
later: 'At this time there are no reasons whatsoever to suspect that we are
dealing with anything other than a terribly tragic accident.' He said the
bodies of the four crew and 25 passengers had been taken to a temporary
mortuary in the town of Machrihanish.
The crash comes at a time when the British government is engaged in delicate
moves to bring about a ceasefire in Northern Ireland. The ability to wage
continued war against terrorism, in the event that peace moves fail, has
been vital to the government's credibility. One senior RUC man said: 'The
force is devastated. It seems the upper echelon of the special branch is
missing.' Up to 10 members of Special Branch were thought to have died.
In November 1986, 45 people were killed when a Chinook pitched into the sea
while ferrying oil rig workers back from a platform in the North Sea.
However, Mr Jack Satterfield, a spokesman for Boeing Helicopters, defended
the performance of the Chinook, a model which has been in service for 30
years and is used by about 20 countries. He said the Chinook had 'one of the
better safety records'.
The machine which crashed had recently been upgraded at the headquarters of
Boeing Helicopters. The RAF Chinook fleet is half-way through a
modernisation programme which is intended to prolong their working lives by
up to 20 years.
