FT  24 NOV 94 / UK Company News: RJB has 'overestimated demand for coal by
20%'
RJB Mining, the coal company bidding to take over the English mining assets
of British Coal, has overestimated by 20 per cent the demand for coal by
English power generators in the late 1990s, according to an analysis
published today.
Coal UK, the Financial Times newsletter, says the company has also made too
little allowance in its calculation for the role of private coal producers
which will be its competitors.
Coal UK estimates the generators will buy 23.9m tonnes of coal from English
coal suppliers in 1998-99, whereas RJB says a conservative projection should
be about 28.9m tonnes.
'While the RJB case is its pessimistic view, our forecast is our most likely
scenario,' says Coal UK. 'Beyond 2000 difficulties will increase with the
prospect of tighter sulphur limits.'
The newsletter's analysis comes as RJB prepares to publish within the next
few weeks its pathfinder prospectus for a flotation aimed at raising up to
Pounds 425m. The company has offered Pounds 914m for the three regions for
which it is preferred bidder, although this figure is likely to decline in
final negotiations.
In the newsletter, Coal UK says RJB fails to take account in its market
projections of 3.6m tonnes of coal equivalent a year of heavy fuel oil burn
and appears to ignore supplies from other English mines. It also says RJB
under-estimates the amount of electricity that can be imported.
RJB's prediction of an industrial market of 6.4m tonnes in the late 1990s is
described as 'unaccountable'. Its ambitions to take 2m tonnes of the
domestic market assumes RJB will capture all the Scottish and Welsh
customers as well as the English.
Coal UK also criticises RJB for its high valuation of stocked coal. RJB
estimates total stocks (including non-coal) at Pounds 314m with Pounds 250m
of that for 9m tonnes of coal. This suggests Pounds 27.28 a tonne, says Coal
Investments.
Recent prices obtained by British Coal suggest that Pounds 14.40 to Pounds
24 would be more appropriate, says the newsletter.
