FT  17 FEB 94 / International Company News: Troubled sector learns to live
with recession - Paul Abrahams looks at changes facing Japan's chemicals
companies
Sumitomo Chemical, like most of the Japanese chemicals industry, is
suffering the worst recession since the second world war. A high cost base
and strong yen, combined with a migration of the industry's customers to
other Asian countries, are creating a secular change that is making Japan an
impossible base for manufacturing commodity chemicals.
Most of Sumitomo's problems centre on the basic chemicals division, which
plunged to an operating loss of Y6.9bn (Dollars 67m) in 1993 from profits of
Y554m in 1992. Turnover at the division, which principally manufactures
petrochemicals products such as plastics, synthetic rubber and methyl
methacrylate, fell 13.2 per cent from Y422bn to Y367bn.
The division, like the rest of Japan's petrochemicals industry, is
struggling with a collapse in domestic demand, massive over-capacity and
falling prices. Nearly all petrochemicals groups are in loss. The industry's
12 largest manufacturers of ethylene, the basic building block of plastics,
are expected to report combined losses during 1993 of Y51.6bn, according to
analysts.
Mitsubishi Kasei, which because of its problems is to merge with Mitsubishi
Petrochemical, yesterday announced it would report a Y2bn operating loss for
the 12 months to the end of March. That compares with a profit of Y10.8bn.
The collapse in plastics prices has been particularly severe. Sumitomo
estimates poor demand from the automotive sector has driven polypropylene
prices down 20 per cent over the last 12 months. Similarly, PVC prices have
fallen 10 per cent because of poor demand from the construction sector.
Customers have been using the low prices of imported products - assisted by
the strong yen - to drive down domestic prices.
The petrochemicals sector is incapable of exporting itself out of trouble
because of the strength of the yen, according to Mr Yukio Murakami, director
of Chem Systems Japan, the specialist consultants.
Instead, petrochemicals companies are looking to construct capacity
overseas, says Mr Murakami. This week Mitsubishi Petrochemical announced it
was forming a joint venture with Royal Dutch Shell to construct south-east
Asia's largest styrene monomer plant in Singapore. That followed Sumitomo's
decision last week to acquire a small equity stake in Petrocap, a joint
venture in the Philippines which is building a 160,000-tonnes-a-year
polypropylene plant near Manila.
Meanwhile, Sumitomo's speciality chemicals division, which theoretically
should be less affected by the recession, also suffered last year. Operating
profits fell from Y49.6bn to Y38.5bn on sales down 2.7 per cent from Y512bn
to Y498bn. Nearly all the operating profits were generated by Sumitomo
Pharmaceuticals, which posted profits of Y37bn (Y38bn) on sales unchanged at
Y239bn.
The division's dyestuffs operations suffered particularly from cheap imports
from China and India, according to the company. The domestic market was
depressed as textile manufacturers shifted production to south-east Asia.
The agrochemicals business also had a bad year, as it struggled against
low-price competition from the US and Europe.
Sumitomo must be grateful that it decided to diversify into pharmaceuticals
in 1984. The business generated operating profits of Y37bn, compared with
group trading profits of Y36.8bn. However, Sumitomo Pharmaceuticals expects
to report static turnover this year at Y239bn, and only modest profit growth
because of price cuts due to introduced by the Japanese ministry of health
in April.
To achieve its break-even target this year, Sumitomo is launching a
cost-cutting programme. It said it is willing to import low-cost raw
materials even at the expense of stopping production at its own plants. It
also plans to improve margins by reducing manufacture of low-cost products
such as PVC, dyestuffs and agrochemicals intermediates, importing them from
China and India.
In spite of its troubles, European petrochemicals groups may look enviously
at Sumitomo. If the Japanese group's position continues to deteriorate, it
can always raid the Y319bn unrealised profits on its securities portfolio.
