FT  10 MAY 94 / Survey of Kenya (14): Living with low consumption - Industry
has been forced to look to export markets for growth
Manufacturing industry, emerging from three difficult years of sluggish
growth and escalating inflation, is restructuring to face the challenge of
increased foreign and domestic competition.
Kenyan industry has traditionally played second fiddle to agriculture in
terms of employment and contribution to GDP, and been in third place behind
tourism in foreign exchange earnings.
Manufacturing accounts for more than 13 per cent of GDP - about half that of
agriculture - and 13 per cent of wage employment, compared with
agriculture's 19 per cent. In 1991, its foreign earnings were estimated at
Dollars 250m, way below agriculture's Dollars 620m and easily outstripped by
tourism's Dollars 440m.
The sector is dominated by food-processing, beverages and tobacco, which
between them account for 40 per cent of value-added. Drought and weak
agricultural performance impacts directly on manufacturing in two main ways
 -reduced volumes for processing, and depressed rural demand for locally
manufactured consumer goods.
With sliding domestic living standards, mounting unemployment and depressed
levels of investment, industry has been forced to look to export markets for
growth opportunities. In 1992, manufactured exports accounted for less than
20 per cent of the total, but preliminary central bank numbers for last year
suggest an increase to over 25 per cent.
In 1991, more than 90 per cent of Kenya's imports were raw materials,
intermediate goods and capital equipment. Almost 40 per cent of imports were
industrial supplies, underlining the extent to which industry was vulnerable
to import curbs. While liberalisation and devaluation have made these more
costly, access to inputs has improved dramatically. As a result, production
scheduling and inventory management are more efficient.
Industrialists have two main complaints: infrastructural deterioration, and
the absence of a level playing-field. The latter is chiefly a reference to
corruption at customs - the evasion of tariffs and VAT by importers, who are
able to bring in and market finished goods at prices well below those of
Kenyan manufacturers who pay duty in the normal way. Government hopes that
the introduction of pre-shipment requirements for imports will close this
loophole. The Kenya Association of Manufacturers (KAM) is also seeking a 25
per cent to 30 per cent duty differential between raw materials and imported
finished products.
In a recent paper on the problems that deter investment in manufacturing,
the KAM pinpoints infrastructural inadequacy. It wants the management of
Kenya Railways - like the airline - to be entrusted to 'management experts'
in the short term, followed by privatisation. The same formula is advocated
for the ports.
A third cause for complaint is the legislation precluding manufacturers from
owning and operating their own distribution networks. Bata, the
multinational shoe manufacturer, says it could bring down costs and prices
in the Kenyan market if it were allowed to operate its own retail network.
Bata is less critical of the infrastructure than other industrialists.
'We've not had to stop working because of power cuts,' says the managing
director, Mr A. Fernandez, though he agrees that the roads are poor and that
it's often easier to make an international telephone call than to get a
Nairobi number.
Other industrialists speak in similar vein. As market growth has slowed, so
companies are finding new, more cost-effective, ways of reaching customers.
Output growth, which averaged 5.5 per cent annually in the late 1980s, fell
below 2 per cent in the 1991-93 period, forcing industry to re-engineer its
domestic market strategy as well as to seek export outlets.
To succeed in a low-consumption economy, says another manufacturer, is not
to downgrade technology, but to make it more functional 'so that we can
deliver what people want at a lower price'.
Some, such as Glaxco, investing Pounds 4m in a plant to manufacture its
ulcer drug Zantac for the African market, also see Kenya as a favourable
location for new investment, infrastructural deficiencies and political
imponderables notwithstanding.
Interestingly, there is little enthusiasm among established industrialists
for export-processing zones. 'They are only a gimmick,' says one, adding:
'If you have a level playing-field and reasonable taxes, as we do here
(profits are taxed at 35 per cent), free zones don't add any value.'
There is still much to be done to create the necessary enabling investment
climate. A recent World Bank report notes that a company needs an average of
15 licences a year, the processing of which costs an average of 233
man-hours annually. Large businesses need 49 licences at a processing cost
of over 800 man-hours.
