FT  22 APR 94 / International Company News: Earthquake pushes Allstate into
loss
Allstate Insurance, swamped by catastrophe claims from the recent southern
California earthquake, yesterday reported a loss of Dollars 275.2m for the
first quarter of this year.
The loss was a dramatic reversal for the US insurance group, which in the
same quarter of last year made a profit of Dollars 320.1m.
The insurer said the earthquake, which struck the Los Angeles area on
January 17, was the second costliest catastrophe in its history, after
Hurricane Andrew in 1992. The company recently revised its estimate of
earthquake losses from Dollars 600m to Dollars 950m.
Mr Wayne Hedien, chairman, said the lesson of the California earthquake was
that, with so many people unable to afford earthquake insurance, the
financial impact of large natural disasters needed to be addressed at a
national level. He said the company was supporting the Natural Disaster
Protection Act before Congress.
The act proposes that the public and private sector jointly provide
homeowners with affordable insurance against natural disasters.
Although Allstate's revenues rose during the quarter by 4 per cent to
Dollars 5.32bn, the cost of meeting catastrophe claims from the earthquake
and the severe weather which blanketed much of the US during the winter left
the company nursing an operating loss (excluding after-tax capital gains) of
Dollars 349.4m.
A year earlier, Allstate reported an operating profit of Dollars 259.3m. As
a result of the catastrophe losses, the company's combined ratio - claims
plus expenses over premiums - jumped 26.9 points to 127.7 in the quarter.
Allstate's life insurance operations, however, remained profitable during
the quarter, with income rising slightly to Dollars 64.4m on revenues of
Dollars 724.6m.
Yesterday's results did not surprise analysts, and they had little impact on
the company's share price, which eased Dollars  1/4 to Dollars 22 3/4 on the
New York Stock Exchange.
Chubb Corporation, another US insurer, was also hit by earthquake and winter
storm losses. It posted net income of Dollars 73.2m for first quarter, down
from Dollars 125m a year earlier.
