FT  18 JAN 94 / Fresh Tory blood kept off the menu: The prime minister's
performance at the arms-for-Iraq inquiry
By normal standards Mr John Major's appearance before the Scott inquiry into
arms exports to Iraq was uneventful. By the standards of the last week,
however, it was a triumph.
So low is the government's stock in the wake of the 'back to basics' row
that a poor performance by Mr Major could have been fatal for his
leadership. In the event, he delivered a confident testimony that gave no
ground to critics' claims that he must have known about unpublished changes
to the government's guidelines for arms-related exports to Iraq.
It was not an electrifying spectacle. Baroness Thatcher struck the inquiry
like a lightning bolt. Lord Howe set off a storm that is still rumbling. Mr
Major merely looked in keeping with the grey Monday morning outside.
But spectacle is not everything. If Mr Major rarely looked prime
ministerial, he did occasionally manage to look magisterial.
By the end, even Mr Robin Cook, the shadow trade and industry secretary,
seemed to have accepted that fresh Tory blood was off the menu.
Ms Presiley Baxendale QC, the constitutionally nervous counsel to the
inquiry, did her best to unsettle the prime minister, returning again and
again to questions about what he knew and when he knew it.
But it became clear as the long day wore on that neither Ms Baxendale nor
Lord Justice Scott had any real evidence to counteract Mr Major's assertion
that he knew nothing about alleged changes to the guidelines until November
1992.
Ms Baxendale tried hard. The judge weighed in too, occasionally conducting a
long cross-examination of the prime minister.
But the day belonged to Mr Major. After a weekend studying the documents he
looked well-briefed and aware of the strong points of his case.
He made the most of them. After the Matrix-Churchill trial, he had ordered a
'massive trawl' of government files he had never seen so that he could
respond with accuracy to parliamentary questions; he did not see documents
that spelt out the debate over changes to the guidelines; intelligence
briefings were not passed to him; he was not informed about public interest
immunity certificates signed by other ministers to prevent the release of
government documents during the Matrix-Churchill trial.
It was a defence that defeated the best efforts of the inquiry team. But it
left opposition critics fuming that Mr Major was allowed to get away with
claiming he knew nothing about the arms affair, in spite of holding four
cabinet posts during the period.
Mr Cook said: 'The departments through which he passed appear to have been
stuffed with documents which he never saw, or which he saw but did not read
to the end, or which he read but did not take in.'
In the end, however, Mr Major probably summed up his own evidence most
concisely - while describing his efforts to discover the truth about the
alleged changes to the guidelines.
'Something I was not aware had happened suddenly turned out not to have
happened,' he said. It was a summing up of which even Lord Justice Scott
would have been proud.
