FT  16 NOV 94 / Survey of Denmark (9): Containers cover the globe - Maersk
Line / Hilary Barnes profiles two of the country's best-known companies
The AP Moller group's Maersk Line may or may not be the world's largest
cargo liner shipping service - it depends on the definition. But Mr Vagn
Lehd Moller, vice-president in charge of liner services, accepts the
description 'the most comprehensive' global liner service.
Maersk Line owns 47 vessels and operates a total fleet of 93 vessels. They
operate global east-west services and are active on all three major world
trading routes, the North Atlantic, Europe-Far East and the US-Far East.
The fleet operated by Maersk Line has a carrying capacity of 124,643
containers (at October 1, this year) - more than any other shipping company
except Taiwan's Evergreen. Fourteen of the ships can each carry more than
4,000 containers.
The east-west services are linked at a number of hub ports with north-south
services and 'feeder' services, which leave few geographical areas not
directly serviced by Maersk Line.
AP Moller, by far is Denmark's biggest industrial group, was founded in 1904
by the late Mr AP Moller, whose son, Mr Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller, remains
chairman of the group's twin holding companies, the listed D/S Svendborg and
D/S 1912.
Apart from passenger transport, the group has interests in all forms of
shipping - and also in offshore drilling. It produces oil and gas from the
Danish sector of the North Sea, and operates its own shipyard (the Odense
Steel Shipyard) and its own airline (Maersk Air), as well as manufacturing
and retailing businesses.
The group's structure means that consolidated figures for all its various
operations are not available, but turnover in the oil and shipping
operations under the twin parent companies came to DKr27.6bn in 1993, and
there was a net profit of DKr2.91bn - a good start for Mr Jess Soderberg,
who succeeded Mr Moller as chief executive officer, in charge of day to day
operations, in mid-1992, when Mr Moller turned 80.
In the highly competitive and secretive world of shipping, no one knows
exactly how much the other large operators make, or how. To the irritation
of Denmark's corporate analysts and business journalists, AP Moller keeps
its financial cards close to its chest. No financial information covering
Maersk Line slips out. But the AP Moller shipping operations as a group
consistently report profits.
Maersk Line, founded in 1928, has expanded rapidly since it went into
container transport in the early 1970s.
'The new-building programme for 1995, 1996 and 1997 is in place,' said Mr
Lehd Moller, which indicates that the liner business is still doing well
enough to invest in supplementing its fleet. The fleet is young, with an
average age of about seven years. 'We need high-speed, high-quality ships,'
he said.
Mr Lehd Moller does not see expansion taking place through cut-throat
competition for market-share in a stagnant market. 'As we see it, the global
market for containers will grow in coming years,' he said. 'We believe we
will see growth of at least 6 per cent a year for as far as we can see. More
and more cargo will go into containers. More and more markets will mature.'
He believed that containerisation would spread to relatively under-developed
markets, including east Europe and Russia.
Containers are also becoming more flexible and sophisticated. 'They can
cater for just about anything,' he said. An example was the growth of
refrigerated cargo ('reefer') containers. Maersk Container Industri A/S, the
group's container manufacturing company in Denmark, is planning to deliver
reefer containers, and Maersk Line recently took delivery of 500 20ft and
2,500 40ft reefer containers from Korea's Hyundai.
Maersk Line is the world leader in reefer containers, a fact which probably
means it is a larger carrier of refrigerated cargoes than any of the fleets
of bulk-carrying reefer ships operated by competitors. Reefer containers,
says Mr Lehd Moller, have at least the same reliability and are just as
sophisticated as reefer vessels.
Another business area which is being developed by Maersk Line is known as
'logistics' - in which the ocean shipping company undertakes to provide a
complete transport service from producer (for example, a shoe manufacturer
in China) to the final customer (a shoe retailers in Europe).
'This is building up very nicely,' said Mr Lehd Moller. But it is a very
complicated business. Contracts for Maersk's most complete Three Star
logistics solution, which may involve transporting 20,000 containers a year
for one customer, are numbered in single figures; but it has a much larger
number of somewhat less sophisticated Two Star contracts. This is
value-added business - 'very much so', said Mr Lehd Moller - and requires
considerable investment in the development of systems. 'You don't get paid
immediately,' he explained, and then outlined the complexity of the
operation.
To start with, the shoes must be of the right size, colour and quality. They
must be packed properly. Documentation is carried out, and then customs
clearance. Information systems are required, so that the customer knows
where the goods are and when they will be arriving; and the goods first have
to be transported to a port, then delivered to the stores by Maersk Line's
dedicated train and truck services (which are not owned by Maersk, but are
on contract or charter to it).
Maersk Line is widely acknowledged in the industry as an efficient operator
with high standards of service. An executive at Carlsberg, the Danish
brewery group, recalled attending a reception given by a third company in
Hong Kong. A Maersk Line vessel came into view approaching port. 'Ah,' said
an AP Moller executive, 'it will dock in 11 minutes time, and in exactly 29
minutes the captain will appear here.'
The predictions proved correct - a neat illustration of the group's motto, a
phrase coined by Mr AP Moller: 'Timely attention.'
