FT  11 NOV 94 / Property: Looser lease terms - Calls for an industry-wide
code of practice
At a secret meeting at the Department of the Environment last week,
representatives of property owners, tenants and the professions started
discussions aimed at changing the face of commercial leases.
Although the government said in July that it would not use legislation to
abolish established practices such as upward only rent reviews and
confidentiality clauses, Mr Tony Baldry, the environment minister, called on
the industry to encourage flexibility on lease terms.
While many property owners hoped that the minister's statement would be the
end of the matter, last week's meeting proves that the issue of lease reform
is very much alive in the corridors of power.
This should not come as a surprise. In July, Mr Baldry said that the
government would look again at the operation of commercial leases in three
years' time to see if the property industry had put its own house in order.
Given the state of the opinion polls and with a general election due by
1997, that might seem like an idle threat. But there is every chance that an
incoming Labour government would see political advantage in championing the
tenants' cause.
So what exactly does the government want? Mr Baldry's July statement gives
some clues. The minister called for an industry-wide code of practice which
would draw attention to the implications of upward only rent reviews and
encourage flexibility on other terms.
The code should also encourage greater openness - presumably by discouraging
confidentiality clauses, which prevent tenants sharing information on rents
 -unless there are compelling reasons to the contrary.
Above all, a code of practice should lead to a change of behaviour in the
marketplace.
The British Property Federation, which represents large landlords, has
already taken the initiative by proposing a code which would remind tenants
of their rights and draw attention to the possibility of negotiating
different terms.
Mr Roger Carey, BPF president, said: 'A 'health warning' of this kind would
be very valuable and would do much to promote the flexibility in lease terms
sought by tenants. Very importantly, it would not make the mistake of trying
to interfere in the position of the parties but would leave them free to
negotiate within prevailing market conditions.'
The BPF argues that anything more prescriptive than this would alienate
landlords.
'A Code of Practice which is not acceptable to owners will not be used and
the whole issue will go back into the melting pot,' Carey said.
But neither is it clear that a health warning would have much impact on
market behaviour, in which case the government could simply return with
legislation in three years' time.
The question is whether the BPF's proposals simply need to be strengthened
or whether the code of practice needs to be more prescriptive.
The tenants' side of the argument is put forcefully by the British Retail
Consortium. Mr James May, director general, argues that landlords are in a
much stronger position when negotiating with retail tenants than with office
or industrial occupiers.
'The retail market is different because location is so much more important.
Retailers need to be in certain prime locations of which there is limited
supply often in the hands of a single owner. In these situations the balance
of power is tilted too far in favour of the landlord,' he said.
The BRC's argument is that retail landlords can be in a monopoly position,
owning the prime sites in a particular high street or shopping centre. In
such circumstances market forces do not operate effectively.
Retailers would like more flexibility on the lease terms that landlords are
prepared to accept. That might include more rents linked to turnover, upward
and downward rent reviews, and shorter leases.
'If we have to pay higher rents for more flexible terms so be it,' said Mr
May.
The BRC would like a code of practice which encourages a greater range of
lease options for tenants and believes that something stronger than a health
warning is required.
The interests of small business - landlords and tenants - also have to be
taken into account. It is often the case that small landlords rely on a
long-term secure income almost like a pension. Forcing these owners to
accept more flexible lease terms could have an unpalatable side-effects.
The professional bodies such as the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors
and the Law Society are caught in the middle of this argument. The
institution, in particular, has to represent the interests of landlords,
tenants and their professional advisers.
Mr Richard Lay, chairman of DTZ Debenham Thorpe, the surveyors, and the
institution's commercial property spokesman, said: 'The government
instructed the industry to do something out of the blue. The first step is
to try to decide what is achievable on the landlords' side and what is
acceptable to the tenants.'
The question is whether the legitimate interest of all landlords in a secure
income can be squared with the desire of tenants for greater diversity of
lease terms without an element of compulsion.
Shorter, more flexible leases became widely available through recession as
landlords found their bargaining position weakened. The traditional 25-year
'institutional' lease has been reduced to 15 years or less.
Mr Baldry appeared to acknowledge as much in July, when he said: 'It is
evident that the market is now providing a greater variety of lease terms .
. . especially the availability of short leases'.
The danger is that leases will become longer and less flexible as the
economy improves and the balance of power tilts back in favour of landlords
to a degree that the government views as unacceptable.
Despite taking a hard line in public, many big landlords recognise that they
may have to give away slightly more than the BPF's 'health warning' proposal
to avoid legislation. It is now up to tenants to articulate more clearly
what kind of code of practice they would like.
