FT  01 DEC 94 / Survey of Management Buy-Outs (13): Workers share bonus -
ESOPs / David Cohen on benefits in involving employees
'What about the workers?' may not be the first question on the agenda when a
team of managers sits down to plot a buy-out but a growing number of MBOs
now give employees the chance to become shareholders. Managers who decide
not to keep all the equity may be motivated by feelings of guilt as they
contemplate the vast gains they hope to make on their own shares. But wider
ownership can also bring more tangible benefits.
First, where a management team faces competition from other bidders the
inclusion of employees may tip the scales in its favour. This is more likely
when the target business is being privatised and there may be a political
decision favouring a MEBO (E for Employee). Half the privatised London bus
companies - and a majority outside the capital - have been bought by MEBOs.
However, it will rarely be possible for the bulk of employees to be
shareholders in the MBO. The stringent requirements of the 1986 Financial
Services Act and the practical difficulties of co-ordinating a complex
transaction on a tight timescale favour the employee shareholdings being
held through an Employee Share Ownership Plan (ESOP).
An ESOP is a discretionary trust for the benefit of a company's employees.
If the decision is taken to allocate, say, 10 per cent of the MEBO company
to the employees as a whole, the shares can be taken up at the outset by an
ESOP with the ultimate distribution postponed. This should solve the
logistical headache with only the trustee of the ESOP - usually a corporate
entity controlled by the main MEBO company - needing to be directly involved
in the actual
As well as being convenient, an ESOP may make it easier to raise the finance
needed for the buy-out. The extent to which a target company's assets can be
used as security for loans to fund a buy-out is severely restricted by
section 151 of the 1985 Companies Act which makes it illegal for a company
to provide financial support for the purchase of its own shares. Whereas
MBOs have to try and take advantage of the very restricted section 151
loopholes, ESOPs have their own clear-cut exemption.
A bank which has refused to increase the amount it will offer to an MBO may
reconsider if the MBO becomes an MEBO and the bank can secure the target
company's property or its guarantee.
An ESOP should also make it cheaper for the MEBO to service and repay its
debt because regular, properly-structured contributions by the target
company to the ESOP should be deductible for corporation tax purposes.
But this tax break cannot be taken for granted. The Inland Revenue considers
each case on its own merits. The only way to guarantee tax relief will be to
ensure that the ESOP qualifies as an Employee Share Ownership Trust (ESOT)
under the 1989 Finance Act.
An ESOT has to satisfy rigorous conditions. Democratically elected employee
representatives must comprise a majority of the trustees or - as a result of
a reform introduced by this year's Finance Act - the trust can adopt a
'paritarian' structure with employee and management teams agreeing on the
selection of the independent professional who would hold the balance of
power.
Another perceived drawback of ESOTs is that shares must be distributed
either directly, by gift or sale, to all eligible employees, or via an
Inland Revenue-approved profit sharing scheme.
Managers who are prepared to tolerate these constraints may be able to take
advantage of the fact that a vendor who sells to an ESOT can 'roll over' any
capital gain on his shares by investing the proceeds in other assets and
will pay no capital gains tax until he disposes of those other assets. If
the conditions for this relief are met - in particular, the ESOT must own at
least 10 per cent of the target company within 12 months of the sale -
shareholders who want a rollover should be prepared to accept a lower price
for shares.
In spite of these attractions, ESOTs are still scarce. The majority of MEBOs
have turned their backs on the extra tax reliefs and opted instead for the
greater flexibility of the plain vanilla ESOP.
Nowhere is this flexibility more evident than in relation to the
distribution of shares to employees. Possibilities range from an offer for
sale - a test of employee commitment and a way of raising funds - to free
shares which, if held on the employees' behalf by the trustees of a profit
sharing scheme for five years, will also be tax-free. Or employees can be
granted IR-approved share options to be satisfied by the transfer of shares
from the ESOP.
Whatever the tax and financing pluses of slotting an ESOP into the MBO
jigsaw, the acid test will be whether the ESOP can achieve a 'hearts and
minds' objective. Wider employee ownership may defuse trade union objections
to a proposed buy-out and dampen worker resentment of 'get rich quick'
managers. This will be a particularly important safety valve if, as is often
the case, the managers' road to riches is paved with redundancies and other
cost-cutting measures.
On a more positive note, the managers and their investors will hope that
equity involvement engenders a sense of teamwork and a clear focus on common
goals throughout the workplace.
Simon Smith of Capital Strategies, specialist advisers on MEBOs, says 'the
benefits of employee ownership, bringing greater staff participation, can
enhance the value of everybody's shares. An index of large US companies with
significant employee ownership has outperformed the Standard and Poors 500
index by 22.7 per cent over the last 11 quarters'.
Similar trends in the UK should more than outweigh the cost of putting the
'E' into MEBO.
David Cohen is a partner in the City law firm of Paisner &amp; Co and the
Chairman of the Share Scheme Lawyers Group.
