FT  12 MAY 94 / London Stock Exchange: Standard strong
The recent decline in Standard Chartered shares was arrested yesterday as
the stock outpaced the rest of the bank sector and the FT-SE 100 Index
following presentations to Scottish institutions.
Standard shares, which reached a peak of 359p in February, fell to 232p on
Monday, but accelerated yesterday to post a 21 1/2 gain at 259 1/2 p, a rise
of 9 per cent on the session. Turnover of 5.6m shares was well above recent
levels of activity.
Dealers said the shares began to move ahead at the outset of trading, helped
by the 4 per cent jump by the Hong Kong stock market. And the presentations
by Mr Malcolm Williamson, Standard's chief executive, to the Scottish
institutions, hosted by Cazenove, Standard's broker, coupled with a general
feeling that the stock had been oversold, triggered the big surge.
There were mixed fortunes for J. Sainsbury, the UK's biggest supermarket
operator, the shares enduring a rollercoaster session. At the unveiling of
its full-year results, the stock moved smartly forward as analysts
interpreted the company's statement on steady margins positively.
But at the post-results meeting, analysts complained that the margin issue -
a crucial test of financial well-being in the food retail sector - was not
clarified by the company's management. There was also said to be confusion
over a number of other matters, the result being that Sainsbury shares slid
as analysts returned to their desks.
More positive consideration towards the close helped the shares steady but
still left them adrift 2 1/2 at 389p. Turnover came to a hefty 17m. But the
figures contained enough to lift other retailers, Tesco adding 7 at 235 1/2
p on 16m traded and Asda firming 2 1/2 to 59p with 23m turned over.
Takeover target Lasmo moved higher by 2 1/2 to 154p as the market picked up
hints that a cash alternative to the all-paper offer from Enterprise Oil or
a straightforward counter-bid from elsewhere could be imminent.
The rise in the Lasmo share price took place in the face of a fall in
Enterprise shares of 7 to 440p, amid hints that Philips &amp; Drew Fund
Management, which has been increasing its stake in Lasmo in recent weeks,
has been reducing its holding in Enterprise.
Rumours of an impending cash bid for Lasmo swept the London market in
midsession yesterday, with dealers reporting the 'same old names' as being
about to swoop. These names include Atlantic Richfield, the US group, and
France's Total.
BPB, the plasterboard manufacturer, and RMC, the cement/aggregrates group,
both fell heavily as dealers pondered the prospect of a move by Lafarge
Coppee, the French plasterboard and building materials group, into the East
German market. BPB shares plunged 19 to 304p and RMC 22 to 852p.
Bank shares, among the market's worst performers this year, came in for
strong support from two areas. Goldman Sachs, the US investment bank, said
the sector offered good value at current levels, while Collins Stewart, the
UK broker, was said to be recommending HSBC. The latter edged up 7 to 731p.
Royal Bank of Scotland receded 12 1/2 to 428p on exceptionally heavy
turnover of 11m, as short-term speculators took profits after the interim
figures.
Royal Insurance retreated 10 to 258p amid worries that the companies
first-quarter numbers, due this morning, could prove a big disappointment to
the market following some big bad weather losses.
Carlton Communications eased a penny to 912p, with Nomura International
reiterating a cautious stance.
Chemicals group Croda International and electronics concern Eurotherm
softened a penny apiece to 450p and 372p respectively, with some dealers
saying they were overvalued.
USM-quoted Phonelink shed a further 28 to 370p as scrappy selling drove down
the price of the tightly traded stock.
Reuters Holdings climbed 14 1/2 to 499 1/2 p, reflecting the easing of
pressure imposed by the recent Abu Dhabi Investment Authority stake sale.
RTZ rose 12 to 849p after the annual meeting. Shares in precision components
manufacturer Linread jumped 63 to 216p after the bid from McKechnie, 13 off
at 474p.
MARKET REPORTERS: Steve Thompson, Christopher Price, Peter John, Joel Kibazo
Other statistics, Page 30
