FT  26 JUL 94 / Happy hoteliers, do not disturb: Visitors to Hong Kong are
filling more rooms, but can the good times last
Later this year, Hong Kong's Peninsula Hotel will open its extension, a
30-floor tower with two helicopter pads for guests to make flying visits to
factories in southern China.
Rooms in the Peninsula's HKDollars 1.6bn tower will have bedside reading
lamps designed by Boeing, which focus light so precisely that insomniac
guests can read without disturbing their bed mates. Sanyo, the Japanese
electronic company, has designed facsimile machines for the bedrooms which
are completely silent. A small bedside light indicates that a fax has
arrived.
Rival Hong Kong hoteliers are amused by the grandiosity of some of the
Peninsula's new features. Like the Peninsula, however, they believe they
stand to benefit from the growth in visitors to Hong Kong - both leisure
tourists and business travellers using the territory as a base to do
business in China's rapidly growing markets.
Tourism has overtaken electronics to become Hong Kong's second biggest
export earner after textiles. Last year, 8.9m people visited the territory,
spending HKDollars 60m (Pounds 5bn).
Mr Stephen Wong, a spokesman for the Hong Kong Tourist Association, predicts
that tourism will eventually be the territory's biggest foreign exchange
earner, as textile manufacturers move their factories to China.
Some in the hotel and tourist industry admit that they do not know what will
happen after 1997, when Hong Kong reverts to Chinese control. Most, however,
say they are confident the territory's tourist upturn will continue. The
tourist association expects 15m people to visit Hong Kong annually by the
turn of the century.
While the territory has been, and will continue to be, a base for business
travellers visiting China, there has also been a large increase in Chinese
tourists to Hong Kong. Until 1992, the tourist association did not include
Chinese visitors in its statistics; most Chinese visitors had their trips
paid for by Hong Kong relatives and were not seen as contributing to the
local economy.
Now, however, Chinese visitors are increasingly funding their own trips.
Last year 1.7m Chinese residents visited the territory, an increase of 51
per cent on 1992. China now provides Hong Kong with more tourists than any
country apart from Taiwan.
The health of the tourist industry resulted in hotel occupancy in Hong Kong
last year averaging 87 per cent, compared with 74 per cent in London, the
most buoyant European tourist city.
Business has not always been as easy for Hong Kong's hoteliers. In the late
1980s and early 1990s, the territory witnessed a rapid increase in hotel
building. In 1988, the tourist association had 65 member hotels. By 1992,
there were 86.
The building upturn coincided, however, with a sharp slowdown in the growth
of Hong Kong tourism. Like hotels elsewhere in the world, Hong Kong
establishments were hit by the Gulf war and the onset of recession in the US
and western Europe.
But unlike their competitors in other regions, Hong Kong's hoteliers had to
contend with another setback: the Tiananmen Square massacre of 1989, which
severely shook confidence in the territory.
Since 1989, however, visitor numbers have risen by 67 per cent. Last year,
tourist arrivals increased by 11.6 per cent. In the first three months of
this year, they were up 8.2 per cent over the same period in 1993.
This poses a problem for the territory's tourist officials: where to
accommodate them all. Mr Wong believes tourism is set to grow more quickly
than the supply of hotel rooms. By 1997, the tourist association expects
Hong Kong to have 35,000 hotel rooms, only 1,500 more than it has today.
While hotels such as the Peninsula are adding new rooms, other hotels have
been pulled down to make way for office blocks. In a territory where land is
in such short supply, offices provide an even better rate of return than
hotels.
In January, Ladbroke, the UK leisure group which owns the Hilton
International chain, agreed to give up the management of its hotel in the
territory in return for a payment of Dollars 125m from Hutchison Whampoa,
the Hong Kong conglomerate which owns the building. Hoteliers expect the
Hilton to be pulled down to make way for an office complex, although this
could include a new hotel as well.
The slow growth in room numbers is good news for existing hotels, which
should be able to raise rates as visitor numbers grow. It is a less welcome
development for Hong Kong, which needs accommodation for its tourists.
The construction of a new airport, currently the subject of negotiations
between the UK and China, could provide a solution. Tourist officials see
the airport as the centre of new hotel developments, similar to those that
surround London's Heathrow and Gatwick airports.
Despite their high occupancy levels, hotels in central Hong Kong do have
problems, particularly with staffing. The difficulty is not the quality of
staff: hoteliers with experience around the world say Hong Kong staff are
more committed and harder-working than employees they have managed anywhere
else.
The difficulty is recruiting them and persuading them to stay. Until a
decade ago, Hong Kong employees stayed with the same hotel for years. Mr
Michael Hoffmann, the Peninsula's manager, says the hotel's oldest employee
started at the hotel as a 12-year-old page boy when it opened in 1928. He
now works in the banqueting department.
Today, however, young people in Hong Kong are increasingly mobile. Hong Kong
hotels report annual staff turnover of 30 or 40 per cent. Mr Seamus McManus,
general manager of the Mandarin Oriental, says there is stiff competition
for staff from other service industries, such as retailing and banking.
Hotel employees frequently leave to set up their own service businesses -
driving taxis or cleaning carpets.
Mr Jurgen Wolter, manager of the Hyatt Regency, who has worked in Hong Kong
for 25 years, says: 'In 1969, if a position as a waiter or a cook became
vacant, you would have 20 people waiting outside. Today, if you have 20
positions vacant, you would be lucky to have one person applying.'
One answer would be to employ staff from elsewhere, but restrictions on
immigrants from China and elsewhere in Asia are tight and are expected to
remain so after 1997.
High staff turnover means hotels have to spend more time training new
employees than they do in other countries. Mr McManus says the Mandarin
Oriental employs seven full-time trainers. In other parts of the world, he
says, hotels might employ one or two, or pay an outside company to train
staff.
Another problem confronting hoteliers is what they see as the declining
standard of English in the territory. As 1997 approaches, Hong Kong school
pupils are spending more time on Mandarin and less on English. While this
might be understandable from a political point of view, Hong Kong's
hoteliers say it makes it much more difficult for them to serve their
guests. Even after Hong Kong reverts to Chinese control, they say, the
language of international business will still be English.
Mr Wong, whose wife teaches English at a Hong Kong secondary school, says
that, while he agrees there has been a decline in standards of English, the
deterioration is small.
Mr McManus says, however, that the situation is so serious that hotels might
have to think about installing staff language laboratories to improve
employees' English.
Deteriorating language skills, however, are unlikely to deter visitors,
particularly when general service standards are so high. Continued political
stability in the territory will be of far greater importance to the
continued growth of Hong Kong's tourist industry. Local hoteliers are
praying it will continue.
