FT  22 MAR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Disappointed oil explorers may
cut Barents Sea losses
Oil companies operating in Norway may decide to suspend activity in the
Barents Sea after 13 years of disappointing results from 52 exploration
wells costing an estimated NKr10bn (Pounds 910m). Several wells have yielded
natural gas, but they are not considered commercially exploitable because of
the long distances to markets and high development costs.
With the current low level of oil prices and the high costs of exploring the
remote region, companies say activity in the area is an 'exotic indulgence'.
Recognising the decline in oil company interest in the area, the government
recently proposed more attractive terms and conditions for exploring there.
The authorities earlier linked the award of the most attractive Norwegian
shelf exploration acreage to company commitment to invest in high-risk
acreage such as the Barents Sea.
Many oil companies have welcomed the proposed changes but nevertheless say
they do little to enhance prospectivity, given low oil prices, distances to
markets and Norway's stringent tax regime.
Statoil, the Norwegian state oil company, says it must develop new
strategies before it proceeds and is not likely to drill a new well in the
region for at least two years. The group has spent some NKr2.5bn, about 25
per cent of total oil company exploration costs there.
'We're at a crossroads, and must soon decide whether - and how - we are
going to continue in the southern Barents Sea or switch our attention to
other parts of the Norwegian shelf,' Mr Tor Fjaeran, Statoil senior vice
president for domestic resource development, said recently.
He welcomed the new proposals but stressed that the potential for finding
hydrocarbons - particularly oil - was the principal factor determining
Statoil's commitment.
Mr Fjaeran said oil companies' expectations for the region had been reduced
because of the dominance of gas. 'The area is primarily a gas province and
no way has been found for selling the gas already discovered,' he said.
At the same time, according to Mr Fjaeran, present geological information
suggested that only small oil discoveries could be expected, while
environmental challenges added to costs.
Statoil recently completed testing a Barents Sea discovery that yielded a
high gas flow and low oil production and established that the find, though
technically producible, was not commercial.
The Norwegian Petroleum Directorate, the industry watchdog, estimates the
potential recoverable petroleum reserves of the region at 1.12bn tonnes of
oil equivalent, of which oil accounts for 190m and gas 930m. About 260m
tonnes of petroleum has been discovered, it says.
Mobil Exploration Norway, a pioneer explorer in the area, has spent about
NKr750m to drill seven wells. 'We have not completely lost interest, but we
have to look at the Barents Sea compared with other prospective areas,' says
a company executive.
'Although we appreciate the new proposals, the fiscal regime is still the
same.'
'Saga Petroleum, Norway's largest independent oil company, spent about
NKr150m exploring in the Barents Sea. 'We feel the Barents Sea is still
interesting given its size and, there are new explorations models but, given
the small amount of oil discovered so far, it is hard to justify investment
in the area right now,' says a Saga executive.
Norsk Hydro, Norway's biggest listed company, has spent about NKr1.7bn in
the region but says it will continue to evaluate future activity.
