FT  19 AUG 94 / Schering denies drug carries cancer risk: Patients advised
to consult doctor about using hormone which may affect DNA
Schering, the Berlin pharmaceuticals and agrochemicals group, yesterday
denied that one of its drugs contained a carcinogen, a substance that
encourages the growth of cancer.
At the same time, Germany's Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices
said it would advise patients 'not to panic' but ask their doctors whether
to continue using cyproterone acetate (CPA), a hormone Schering developed 20
years ago.
In a form marketed as Diane-35, the drug is used for reducing male hormones
in women, curing acne, and for contraception. With its elements combined
differently, and known as Androcur-10, it is administered to hypersexually
active men and is used as a treatment for prostate cancer.
Professor Gunter Stock, a Schering board member, said 15m people had
successfully used the drug since it went on the market in the early 1970s.
Turnover last year totalled DM400m (Pounds 165m), of which DM70m came from
domestic sales. The medicine, Schering's second-biggest seller, accounts for
about 10 per cent of its pharmaceutical division sales.
Schering's response was designed to reassure its shareholders after shares
fell from DM952 at the close of trade on Monday to DM908 yesterday following
the disclosure that the institute had written to Schering on August 5
seeking a response to the findings of two separate independent studies on
the effects of CPA.
The studies were carried out by the Institute for Toxicology in Munich and
the Institute for Pharmacology of the University of Genoa in Italy.
Professor Helmut Greim, head of the Munich institute, who conducted the
study over five years, said Schering had been aware, and it was accepted
internationally, that when the oestrogen contained in CPA was used in large
doses, it could promote tumours in liver cells.
Schering yesterday said it had repeatedly carried out studies in cultured
(isolated) liver cells from rats and had found some cases of tumour
promoters which led to the proliferation of cells; but it could not be
proved that this would develop into cancerous cells.
Both Schering and Prof Greim said that, because these cases were so rare and
the success rate of the CPA drug so high, its therapeutic effects outweighed
these incidents.
However, Prof Greim explained that in most of the trials carried out by
Schering on cultured liver cells of rats, and on the liver tolerance of its
patients, 'the Schering people had been concentrating on tumour promoters
which cause the proliferation cells in the liver, but not on the effect CPA
had on the deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA system'. DNA contains the genetic
instructions in all cells.
'In our studies, we stumbled upon what effect the CPA drug would have on the
DNA system and we discovered earlier this year that the drug interacted with
DNA, which means that there is a danger to the reproduction of the genetic
system of cells. This is much more dangerous than the proliferation of
cells,' said Prof Greim. He said the findings, later applied to cultured
human liver cells by the University of Genoa, appeared to confirm how the
CPA drug interacted with DNA.
Schering said it had until September 19 to respond to the Institute for
Drugs and Medical Devices. 'We have not asked them to withdraw the drug. We
will have to assess Schering's findings,' said Ms Julia Terzoglou of the
institute.
However, Prof Greim said Schering would have to look at the women who had
taken the drug over the years, particularly those who received high doses:
'This could take a couple of years.' Over a quarter of a million patients
had been treated with high doses of CPA.
