FT  07 JAN 94 / US pledges to back fight for democracy in eastern Europe
The Clinton administration yesterday pledged to support the fight for
democracy in former Soviet bloc states.
Vice-president Al Gore said the security of the US was linked with that of
eastern Europe, and that was why President Clinton was proposing a new
'Partnership for Peace', aimed at bringing former Soviet bloc states into
closer association with the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation.
Speaking as final preparations were being made for Mr Clinton's visit to
Brussels, to meet Nato leaders, and then Prague and Moscow, Mr Gore said the
partnership represented an 'evolutionary process of Nato enlargement'.
His speech was delivered in Milwaukee in the place of Mr Clinton, who flew
to Arkansas following the death early yesterday of his mother, Mrs Virginia
Kelley.
Earlier Russia warned Nato leaders not to offer east European states and
Lithuania membership of the alliance, as this could boost extreme
nationalist tendencies in Russia and undermine its reform programme.
At their summit in Brussels next week, Nato leaders intend to remain vague
about offers of membership and to refrain from giving specific security
guarantees. Instead, they are expected to propose bilateral agreements
between the alliance and any former Soviet bloc state which desires them,
which would allow close military co-operation, including joint exercises and
training for peacekeeping missions.
Yesterday, Mr Gore said Mr Clinton's objectives on his 10-day trip to Europe
would be to revive Nato, support democracy, reduce the dangers of nuclear
and chemical weapons and help the transition to market economics in the
former communist countries.
He also warned that the 'fiery nationalism' now burning in the former
Yugoslavia was smouldering in other European countries. But his speech did
not address directly the still unresolved problem of the ethnic conflict in
Bosnia.
The Clinton administration suffered further embarrassment over its policy on
Bosnia yesterday with the resignation from the foreign service of Mr Warren
Zimmermann, formerly the US ambassador to Yugoslavia.
