FT  09 MAR 94 / Wonder fuel to burning question: World stockpiles of
plutonium are growing. Clive Cookson and Bronwen Maddox examine the problems
of keeping it safe
The concrete bunkers along the windswept Cumbrian shore are some of the most
closely guarded places in the world. Inside the heavy doors, a corridor
stretches away for dozens of yards. Sealed trunks are stacked high on each
side, as in a bank vault. Each contains a cylindrical canister 18 inches
high, and within each canister there are smaller ones, like Russian dolls.
At the heart is a white crystalline powder: plutonium oxide.
That is how civil plutonium, produced in the core of the UK's nuclear
reactors, is stored at British Nuclear Fuels' Sellafield site. Its Pounds
2.8bn Thorp reprocessing plant - given final approval to start operating by
the High Court last week - will add 5 tonnes a year to the world's supplies
of usable plutonium by separating the material from used reactor fuel.
The military aspect of plutonium can be seen at the US Department of
Energy's Pantex nuclear weapons facility in Texas, which holds 6,000
grapefruit-sized spheres of pure shiny plutonium metal removed from
redundant hydrogen bombs.
Plutonium is one of the most dangerous substances created by man, taking
account of all its political, economic, military, environmental and
radiological implications. It did not exist on the earth until the 1940s,
when it was created in the laboratories of Los Alamos, deep in the US
desert, in the race to build an atomic bomb.
Now the world has about 1,100 tonnes of plutonium - in weapons, separated
civil plutonium and unprocessed used fuel rods from nuclear reactors -
according to William Walker and Frans Berkhout of the Science Policy
Research Unit at the University of Sussex, who compile the most
comprehensive world inventory of nuclear materials. They say the global
stockpile is increasing by 60 to 70 tonnes every year.
For two decades after it was first created, plutonium was expected to be the
wonder fuel of the future. Governments expected it to become the driving
force of an expanding nuclear industry, as uranium grew increasingly scarce
and costly.
As recently as 1971, Professor Glenn Seaborg, head of the US Atomic Energy
Commission, surmised that 'plutonium could even replace gold as the
international monetary standard - at least it has real intrinsic value'.
Yet today plutonium is widely regarded as a menace with a negative value.
Japan and France, the two countries whose enthusiasm for the civil use of
plutonium lasted longest, are now scaling back their plans for fast-breeder
reactors which generate plutonium by burning uranium.
Last month France announced that it was converting its Dollars 4bn
Superphenix fast breeder, which has been mothballed for the past four years,
into a research reactor to look at ways of burning up plutonium - the
opposite purpose for which it was designed.
Although the Japanese Monju fast breeder will start up this year, several
years behind schedule, its planned successor has been postponed
indefinitely. So has Japan's own reprocessing plant, intended to extract
plutonium and uranium from spent nuclear fuel like Thorp and the equivalent
French plant at Cap de la Hague, Normandy.
French and Japanese enthusiasm has cooled partly because uranium has
remained plentiful and cheap (see below). To a considerable extent, uranium
and plutonium are interchangeable nuclear fuels - and plutonium is so much
more dangerous and more difficult to handle that it will only come into its
own if and when uranium becomes scarce.
At the same time, large fast breeder reactors have proved technically more
difficult and expensive to develop than nuclear engineers had expected.
The plutonium itself has also brought new problems, not anticipated when
these projects began. For a start, it is difficult to store, decaying into
other radioactive substances which are more difficult to handle safely than
pure plutonium. But particular concern now focuses on the threat of weapons
proliferation, and on ways of safeguarding and transporting the growing
plutonium stockpile.
Most of the world's plutonium is mixed up with uranium and other radioactive
waste in used reactor fuel; this cannot easily be made into bombs. The
greater problem arises from the 90 tonnes of plutonium that have been
separated from civil reactor waste, and from the 50 tonnes of excess
military plutonium expected to result from dismantling thousands of Russian
and American nuclear warheads.
Critics of the UK's Thorp reprocessing plant say that it will increase these
dangers by separating out plutonium that would be less of a proliferation
hazard if it remained mixed in with the nuclear waste.
The US National Academy of Sciences reported recently that, contrary to
popular assumption, civil plutonium extracted from reactor fuel is adequate
for making bombs 'of at last 1 or 2 kilotons', equivalent in impact to
1,000-2,000 tonnes of high explosive. The amounts needed are not large - 6
or 7 kilograms, or about a bucketful.
Mr Walter Patterson, an energy analyst at the Royal Institute of
International Affairs, points out that plutonium acquired illegally by
terrorists would probably have undergone radioactive deterioration and would
be unpredictable. 'They couldn't make small, elegant bombs to put on
warheads, but if they were happy to use a pickup truck as a delivery
vehicle, they could still wipe out much of a city,' he says.
A study carried out last year by the Rand Corporation, a US consultancy, for
the Defence Department, concluded that within a decade the world would have
enough surplus plutonium to make 87,000 primitive nuclear weapons.
Faced with continued growth in the plutonium stockpile, governments have
been wrestling with the question of how to put it beyond the reach of
would-be bomb-makers. A favoured option is to combine plutonium with uranium
to burn in existing nuclear power plants as 'mixed oxide fuel', or Mox.
British Nuclear Fuels is pinning its hopes on Mox to soak up much of the
plutonium coming out of its new Thorp reprocessing plant. Although Mox fuel
assemblies have been used on a relatively small scale in pressurised water
reactors (PWRs) since 1963, Mr John Guiness, BNF chairman, predicts that the
technology is about to take off in a big way.
However, Mr Walker and Mr Berkhout at Sussex University believe that BNF is
overestimating the likely popularity of Mox in the next decade, because
straightforward uranium fuel is so much easier to handle. They predict the
amount of separated plutonium will grow by at least 50 tonnes in that
period.
More spectacular suggestions for disposing of surplus plutonium range from
exploding it deep underground to launching it into outer space. Although the
National Academy of Sciences dismisses these as impractical, it favours two
other options: converting plutonium into glass blocks mixed with radioactive
wastes, and burying it in bore holes several kilometres deep.
But such measures cannot provide the whole answer. Nuclear security
specialists say the international system for monitoring and controlling
plutonium also needs urgent improvement. The greatest risk comes not from
plutonium separated by reprocessing in France and the UK, but from material
extracted from former Soviet warheads or produced in reactors in third-world
countries.
North Korea's refusal last year to allow inspections of two sites by the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the UN nuclear watchdog, highlighted the
weaknesses of international agreements for monitoring plutonium and uranium.
It also raises questions about whether the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty,
under which signatories must permit these inspections, can survive when it
comes up for renegotiation next year.
The IAEA points out that it will need more resources simply to carry out its
present task of inspecting the world's radioactive sites, a task which is
becoming politically more controversial and technically trickier.
Although the IAEA does not initiate policy, it says its preferred option is
to see international sites developed for stocking the world's plutonium - if
so, Sellafield would be one obvious location. Mr David Kyd of the IAEA
points out that the agency's statutes would allow it to play the role of
plutonium caretaker.
But the problem is too complex to admit an easy answer. Quantities of
plutonium in the world are increasing, even though development of peaceful
uses for the material has been frozen. According to Mr Kyd: 'The point we've
been keen to drive home to people is that there's a problem out there. In
the mid-1990s, as nuclear weapons are dismantled, that problem will get more
acute.'
 -----------------------------------------------------------
THE WORLD PLUTONIUM MOUNTAIN
 -----------------------------------------------------------
Civil and military inventories of plutonium
End of 1992 (tonnes)
 -----------------------------------------------------------
Civil plutonium
 -----------------------------------------------------------
In spent fuel                                  664
Separated in store                              89
In fast reactor fuel cycle                      37
In thermal MOX fuel cycle                       16
 -----------------------------------------------------------
Civil inventory                                805
 -----------------------------------------------------------
Military plutonium
 -----------------------------------------------------------
In active warheads                              85
In inactive warheads                           107
Weapons grade outside warheads                  57
Fuel-and reactor-grade in store                 24
 -----------------------------------------------------------
Military inventory                             270
 -----------------------------------------------------------
Total                                         1075
 -----------------------------------------------------------
Source: Walker and Berkhout, SPRU
 -----------------------------------------------------------
