FT  12 MAR 94 / IRA believes attacks will lead to Ulster concessions
Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president, indicated yesterday that the IRA
believes it can win further political concessions from the British
government by keeping up its campaign of violence.
As a security review at Heathrow airport was completed following two mortar
attacks in less than 36 hours, Mr Adams said that the incidents 'should have
a major accelerating effect upon the British government'. On Thursday, he
had warned of more 'spectacular' reminders that the conflict was continuing.
His latest remarks came as the row intensified over security at Heathrow and
Scotland Yard confirmed it had undertaken a thorough review of security
arrangements at the airport.
Mr John Major, the prime minister, and Mr Albert Reynolds, his Irish
counterpart, yesterday issued a defiant joint statement saying the 'men of
violence' would not deflect the two governments in their search for peace.
With some Tory MPs demanding a security crackdown on the IRA and Labour
accusing ministers of 'delay, neglect and wrong priorities' over airport
security, the two leaders accused supporters of violence of making 'a grave
miscalculation' and committed the security forces to a continuing
anti-terrorist drive.
As well as an increase in the number of police, options being considered as
a result of the Heathrow security review are thought to include increased
video surveillance and temporary road blocks. The Ministry of Defence said
last night that the army was prepared to help patrol the airport.
Anti-terrorist experts are trying to establish why mortars fired on Heathrow
in the two attacks failed to detonate. One theory is that they were designed
not to explode on impact, generating publicity but minimising the political
risk of large-scale casualties.
Balpa, the pilots' union, said it had launched its own investigation into
apparent security lapses at the airport. Pilots are concerned that after the
first mortar attack on the airport's northern runway on Wednesday night,
more than 20 aircraft were allowed to take off before it was closed. BAA
said last night that Heathrow was fully operational.
The British Tourist Authority reported little reaction to the attacks. Mr
Stuart Crouch, chairman of the British Incoming Tour Operators' Association,
said he had received no reports of foreign visitors cancelling UK trips.
An impossible security task, Page 5
Legal limit of safety, Page 7
