FT  27 JUL 94 / Rabin warns of new wave of terror: Israel fears London bomb
part of campaign
Israel's prime minister Mr Yitzhak Rabin warned yesterday the world was
facing a new wave of radical Islamic terrorism after a powerful bomb blasted
the country's embassy in London, a day after Israel signed a historic
co-operation agreement with Jordan.
The car bomb attack injured 13 people, extensively damaged the embassy in
west London and rocked nearby buildings in the capital's 'embassy row',
including Kensington Palace, where four members of the British royal family
were unharmed.
Yesterday's blast followed a car bomb attack on a Jewish centre in Buenos
Aires on July 18 which killed at least 96 people, and prompted Mr Rabin to
suggest that European and American countries were at risk from 'a wave' of
attacks by extremists.
'They continue a struggle of terror to kill Israelis, to fight against
moderate Arab regimes and to do everything to undermine any possibility . .
. to bring about a comprehensive peace between Israel and its neighbouring
Arab countries and the Palestinians,' he said.
The blast at around 12.10pm occurred without warning, although one embassy
official said a vehicle driven by a woman had been diverted by security
staff from the main entrance minutes before the explosion outside the
embassy.
Commander David Tucker, head of Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist squad in
London, said last night police were seeking a woman of 55 to 60 years,
believed to have been driving the car, which was thought to contain 20-30lb
of commercial explosives.
Asked whether there was a connection with the bomb in Buenos Aires,
Commander Tucker said: 'This was a much smaller bomb and the connection is
obviously that the target is the Israelis.'
Ms Rachel Gordan, a member of the embassy press office, said: 'It was a
huge, huge explosion. Parts of the building just collapsed.' Builder Mr
Michael Hassit who was working nearby said he saw a 'big plume of smoke and
debris going up to 200 feet up in the air'.
According to Israeli officials, the London embassy together with other
Jewish buildings around the world have been on heightened security alert
since the Buenos Aires attack.
However, the attackers clearly managed to exploit vulnerable security points
around the embassy building in an operation which some security experts
believe would have taken several weeks to plan.
Mr Douglas Hogg, Foreign Office minister, described the latest attack as a
'shocking offence' and promised that security in the UK would be stepped up.
He added, however, that there could not be full security guarantees in an
'open city like London'.
Mr Rabin spoke shortly before he addressed a joint session of the US
Congress with King Hussein of Jordan. The King told congress he had come to
Washington to 'secure a peace for all the children of Abraham'. The King
also called for international aid to make the peace struck between leaders
'real to the men, women and children of the Middle East'.
However, Mr Rabin said that unless the world woke up to a new threat Israel,
moderate Arab regimes and even European, American and Latin American
countries would be at risk from Iranian-backed terrorism that he dubbed
'Khomeinism without Khomeini,' referring to the former Iranian leader.
Rabin's comment, Page 3
