FT  16 AUG 94 / Technology: Special agents - Intelligent gophers and experts
are here
First thing Monday morning. You switch on your office computer. Your
electronic secretary greets you with a suggested schedule for the day, a
run-down of your messages in order of importance, and a summary of articles
and reports retrieved overnight from an international information network.
It also reminds you to arrange meetings and travel plans for a business trip
two weeks away. You tell it to go ahead. It scans your diary to work out
when you can fit in some meetings and sends out an agent to negotiate the
timing of the meetings with your colleagues' agents.
It then sends out an agent to comb the airlines' computer systems for you.
It selects the cheapest flight offered by one of your preferred airlines
that fits your schedule. You approve its choice and it completes the deal by
arranging for your credit card agent to give your card details to the
airline's sales agent.
That scenario takes place around 2000, when electronic secretaries,
librarians and other agents have become commonplace. They 'know' their
users' likes and dislikes and can navigate their way through the most
intricate computer systems.
The technology is now emerging from research laboratories that might allow
this vision to become real. So-called intelligent agents - sophisticated
pieces of software capable of acting on behalf of users - are being
developed with the ability to scan data banks, to schedule meetings and to
handle routine clerical tasks.
Ovum, a UK-based consultancy, estimates that the markets for products and
services using intelligent agents could reach more than Dollars 2bn (Pounds
1.2bn) in the US and more than Dollars 1.5bn in Europe by 2000.
That confidence in the market's potential is shared by a growing number of
suppliers and developers, such as AT&amp;T, Sharp, Hewlett-Packard, IBM,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and General Magic, which are beginning
to deliver products designed for a range of industrial sectors, notably
telecommunications and computing.
Many examples of simple intelligent agents are already in use, performing
tasks such as retrieving information, automating repetitive tasks and
filtering extraneous information.
For example, the White House uses intelligent agents to retrieve
information. It has collaborated with MIT to devise a system that deals with
the hundreds of requests for information it receives via Internet every day.
Agents are used to match keywords in the requests with relevant mailing
lists.
A loan authorisation system devised by Andersen Consulting exemplifies the
way that intelligent agents can be used to address repetitive tasks.
Using this system, about 80 per cent of all loan decisions are made by
agents; only problematic cases are examined by humans.
The ability to filter information is demonstrated in another Andersen
Consulting product, the Commander Exception Monitor, which it produced in
collaboration with Comshare last September.
The product is used by Hertz, the rental company, to analyse pricing
structures in the car rental business. By excluding trivial changes, the
system reduces the equivalent of 28,000 spreadsheets of information about
prices, locations, sizes and type of car into something that can be easily
monitored by its pricing executives.
The agents that will bring the early commercial success are likely to be
those that concentrate on information filtering, in the view of Jeanne
Harris of Andersen Consulting. 'The kind of business problems that we solve
first are time-consuming, involve large amounts of data and are boring,' she
says.
Andersen Consulting believes that agents can be classified into four basic
types. At the simplest level, 'gopher' agents are capable of executing
simple tasks based on rules and assumptions, such as performing daily file
back-up routines.
'Assistant' agents are capable of making decisions, such as scheduling
meetings, as well as executing tasks. 'Expert' agents have specific
expertise that allows them to advise or train the user.
'Analyst' agents are capable of making inferences or suppositions. They can
identify patterns and trends, and can also infer the reasons behind them.
They might, for instance, be able to infer from an article search that
articles on a related subject would be of interest to the user.
Some agents may also be able to negotiate. BT, for example, envisages that
agents will eventually be able to negotiate with each other on behalf of
their respective owners - the caller and telecoms companies - to find the
optimum mix of bandwidth, price and time for making a call.
For researchers in the field of intelligent agents, the problems transcend
the merely technical. The widespread use of intelligent agents will raise
difficult issues about privacy and copyright as organisations allow greater
access to data and information.
Security is another thorny issue raised by agents, particularly 'mobile'
agents, which can move around computer systems. The possibility of agents
roaming the computer networks conjures visions of maverick ones gaining
access to confidential data, destroying files and disabling programs.
Robin Smith, strategic developments manager at BT Laboratories, is concerned
that computer viruses could be spread in the guise of an agent. 'If an agent
could go anywhere on a system, it could be a Trojan horse,' he says.
Another important constraint upon the introduction of intelligent agents is
likely to be the attitude of potential users. People may feel that their
jobs are threatened. Moreover, they are likely to feel nervous about handing
over any responsibility to a computer. 'People will be reluctant to trust
computers to take decisions,' says Harris.
The technical, security and human obstacles that need to be overcome mean
that intelligent agents may take longer than envisaged to fulfil the more
grandiose hopes of their developers. 'Intelligent agents will probably
experience a fall from grace around 1997, as early desktop products fail to
deliver the most lavish futuristic visions,' says Ovum.
But the potential of even the simplest intelligent agents ensures that
agents should be taken seriously by developers and by potential users, it
says. 'Intelligent agents will increase the performance gap between
organisations which use IT effectively, and those which don't'
