FT  10 JUN 94 / Survey of Uganda (6): Aids on the increase - Widespread
practice of polygamy exacerbates the problem
Despite an active education and prevention programme, the number of reported
acquired immune deficiency syndrome (Aids) cases continues to rise in
Uganda. The level of HIV infection varies from 5 per cent in rural areas to
38.5 per cent in some main-road trading centres and towns.
The government's Aids Control Programme recorded more than 42,000 cases of
full-blown Aids by the end of 1993, although the figures do not represent
the true extent of the epidemic.
The Federation of Ugandan Employers, which sponsors an Aids prevention
programmes in the workplace, says peer-group education has had a significant
impact in promoting the use of condoms.
On the other hand, recent medical studies suggest public health campaigns
are unsuccessful. One research programme in the Rakai district of western
Uganda revealed that 3 per cent of respondents who were free of infection in
1989 had become HIV positive a year later. The respondents knew about the
Aids menace, and yet many of them admitted to having multiple sexual
partners.
In addition to the universal problem of persuading people to alter their
sexual behaviour, Uganda faces particular difficulties in fighting Aids.
The widespread practice of polygamy, and the low status of women (who, in
many rural areas, still kneel before men when they meet) give women little
control over their own sexual health and that of their partners.
'Much of the preventive education of the west is not applicable in Uganda,'
says Ms Marble Magesi of Taso, a Ugandan counselling service for Aids
sufferers. 'What does monogamy mean to a man who already has three wives?'
The influence of the Roman Catholic Church, which opposes the use of condoms
to prevent the disease, has not helped educators in the populous west and
south of the country, where Aids infection is most widespread.
In addition, it is feared that the demobilisation of soldiers will also
spread the disease, as the rate of HIV infection in the army is believed to
be higher than 50 per cent.
The government's Aids control programme admits it can do little to help
adults who have already contracted the disease. But it is placing special
emphasis on educating children between the ages of five and 15 to keep them
free from disease. But already, statistics show that young girls in the
15-19 age group are six times more likely to be Aids carriers than boys of
the same age. Part of the explanation is that men increasingly prefer young
sexual partners on the assumption that they are free from infection.
