FT  07 MAY 94 / Mercy mission for money trouble / Assessing the first round
in defence of the dollar
The world peered into a currency abyss for a brief period this week.
Until 17 central banks came charging to the rescue on Wednesday, the dollar,
the world's most important trading and investment currency, appeared
threatened with free fall.
It was heading towards record low levels against the Japanese yen and
appeared well on course to go below the psychologically important Y100
barrier. Piercing such a 'big number' would have pushed the greenback into
uncharted territory. It would have been easy to imagine large investors
unloading their dollar holdings in panic-stricken trading conditions in an
attempt to stem ever-greater losses.
In the event, an estimated Dollars 3bn of concerted central bank
intervention at the behest of the US Treasury, and yesterday's announcement
of stronger than expected US employment growth in April, stopped the rot. By
yesterday evening the immediate threat of a dollar crisis had receded.
But the dollar could easily test the nerves of traders and policymakers in
the days and weeks to come. Measured against the currencies of America's
leading trading partners it is not far from its all-time low of August 1992.
Its sharp decline against the yen since President Bill Clinton took power in
January 1992 has unsettled currency watchers. For some, the dollar's recent
performance has brought back uncomfortable memories of the term of President
Jimmy Carter, the previous Democrat to occupy the White House, when the
dollar weakened so much as to require a large-scale international rescue.
The widespread and ostentatious nature of Wednesday's central bank purchases
of dollars for D-Marks and yen testified to the concern of a possible dollar
free fall in central banks and finance ministries around the globe.
A slumping dollar would be bad news for the US and Japan, the two main
protagonists in the currency's recent drama, and pose serious problems for
Britain. Although the Bundesbank and other continental European central
banks joined in the intervention, the dollar's weakness appears to be less
of a threat to Germany and the economies closely linked to Germany through
the European exchange rate mechanism.
A sharply lower dollar would hit an already weak US bond market. The
accompanying chart shows how US bond yields have soared since the beginning
of this year. Suggestions were circulating in the financial markets this
week that a dollar free fall would prompt Japanese holders of US Treasury
bonds to start liquidating their investments, forcing long-term interest
rates even higher.
A further sharp rise in the yen against the dollar would cause serious
problems for the Japanese economy by weakening its international
competitiveness. Japan's recovery from its most serious postwar downturn is
still far from assured. In contrast to previous periods of yen strength,
Japan faces increasingly tough competition from the countries of south-east
Asia.
Britain, like the US, would have cause to worry about the impact of dollar
weakness on its bond market. As the chart shows, the yields for government
gilt-edged stock have risen even more sharply than those for comparable US
Treasury bonds this year. Anxiety about the effects of a dollar collapse on
the gilt-edged market was an important reason for the Bank of England
decision to join in dollar support.
Even before the central banks had started to intervene, the Bundesbank had
declared that too strong an appreciation of the D-Mark against the dollar
was 'not in the interests' of the German economy. Although there is growing
optimism that Germany is starting to recover from recession, the economy is
still fragile and any increase in competitive pressures on export markets
would be unwelcome.
However, in some respects the Bundesbank and other continental central banks
have less cause to worry about the dollar than the Bank of England.
Continental interest rates are less entwined than UK rates with those of the
US. A series of small cuts in official rates this week showed that
continental interest rates are still heading downwards in recognition of the
more depressed state of the region's economies.
The dollar's decline so far this year has been as much a surprise as a worry
for policymakers and pundits. At new year, the general expectation was that
it would appreciate in value to reflect the stronger growth performance of
the US vis-a-vis its trading partners and the near certainty that US
interest rates would rise.
Consensus Economics, a London-based company that regularly polls forecasters
in more than 30 countries, reported the general expectation that the dollar
would be valued at Y112.1 and DM1.75 around Easter and Y114.2 and DM1.78 by
the end of the year. When the central banks bought dollars this week the US
currency was at DM1.6570 and Y101.2.
Since January the US has continued to register strong growth and the
authorities have pushed interest rates higher, lifting the federal funds
rate to 3.75 per cent from 3 per cent between the beginning of February and
April 18.
But as the chart shows, this period of Fed tightening has coincided with a
considerable dollar depreciation against the yen while it has also weakened
against the D-Mark.
According to Mr Paul Chertkow, head of global currency research at Union
Bank of Switzerland, this decline can be traced to the impact on speculative
investors of the Clinton administration's tough trade policy against Japan.
These investors, which included lightly regulated 'hedge funds', had built
up speculative positions in the dollar in anticipation of it rising against
the yen.
When President Clinton and the former Japanese prime minister Mr Morihiro
Hosokawa failed to settle US-Japanese trade disputes in Washington at a
meeting on February 11, the markets sold the dollar in the belief that the
US wanted to force Japanese concessions through a higher yen. Their
interpretation was supported by President Clinton's statement that the US
was seeking 'objective criteria' to judge progress on trade which might
encompass exchange rate variables.
More recently, the markets were confronted with the government of Mr Tsutomu
Hata, Mr Hosokawa's successor. This is so weak that it cannot be relied upon
to meet US demands to open its markets or boost its economy. The natural
instinct of traders and investors has been to sell the dollar and bid up the
yen.
The events of the past week and the declaration of Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the US
Treasury Secretary, that the US sees 'no advantage in an undervalued
currency' could mark a turn of the tide. If investors believe the US
administration has experienced a change of heart, the dollar may yet be
saved.
But that is a big 'if'. According to economists at S G Warburg, the UK
investment bank, there are signs that the one-time bullish consensus about
the dollar is cracking. Mr Jim O'Neill, head of global research at Swiss
Bank Corporation in London and a long-time dollar bear, points out that the
US current account balance of payments is moving deeper into the red as the
economy recovers. The overall US deficit between 1984 and 1993 was Dollars
1,025bn. 'There is no historical experience of a country continuously
running current account balance of payments deficits without ultimately
rather negative results for the currency,' he says.
At the end of a turbulent week, the world's central banks appear to have won
the first round in defence of the dollar. But they only have to think back
to the crises of 1992 and 1993 in the European exchange rate mechanism to
recall that there is a big difference between winning a battle and winning
the war.
