FT  08 APR 94 / Survey of East Kent (7): Pain amid the gain - The ferries
fight back
Sightseers used to swarm out on sunny summer weekends to see giant
mechanical diggers start hacking a giant hole into the chalk Downs behind
Folkestone. For some, however, it was a view into another kind of pit,
writes David Lawson.
Ferry traffic dominated the small port's economy, and what future was there
if passengers disappeared into a hole in the ground before they even reached
the coast?
'There was a general air of gloom in 1986 when the tunnel got the go-ahead,'
admits Ian Todd, information director for P&amp;O European Ferries. 'We knew
that in theory it could take all our custom.'
The choice was simple: sit back and hope the project would fizzle into
bankruptcy, or fight to keep a large chunk of the market.
Attack was chosen as the best form of defence. A quick, hard strike through
price cuts could cripple Eurotunnel in the early years when it was
constrained by heavy debts. But this could not be guaranteed - and carried
hidden dangers. The tunnel would be an even more formidable competitor once
relieved of its debts by bankruptcy, according to Roger Vickerman, professor
of regional and transport economics at the University of Kent.
So the industry opted for a campaign of cost-cutting and investment. It also
brought in a new ally when Sealink, the other big operator, was taken over
by Stenna of Sweden in 1991. Folkestone was an early casualty in the
crossfire. Just as the tunnel terminal emerged on the edge of the town, most
of the ferries deserted - 'it was just too small for the new generation of
super-ferries,' says Brian Rees of Stenna. Around 700 jobs and the spin-off
from more than 1m passengers a year, disappeared. But Dover, which had
seethed over the prospect of losing pre-eminence to its smaller neighbour
because of the tunnel terminal, won a large consolation prize. P&amp;O has
invested more than Pounds 400m in new ships and training while Stenna
Sealink spent Pounds 250m on four new ferries into the port.
Despite 200 redundancies, P&amp;O still employs around 1,000 people there and
another 3,000 on the ferries - 'last year we carried 8m passengers and more
than 250,000 lorries on the Calais route,' says Mr Todd. 'This was our
fourth consecutive record year.'
Stenna Sealink carried 6m passengers, a 10 per cent rise on 1992, and
312,000 lorries (6 per cent up) and plans 25 sailings a day in 1994 compared
with 20 last year. Both carriers also run freight-only services - P&amp;O to
Zeebrugge and Stenna to Dunkerque.
There has been some pain. P&amp;O closed its Boulogne service while a
partnership with Ostend Lines ended last year. But Dover's loss was
Ramsgate's gain as Sally, the third largest ferry operator, picked up this
loose end. It should double the 2m passengers carried from Ramsgate to
Dunkerque and Ostend in 1993. P&amp;O may also bring further relief to the area
by picking up the Olau service from Sheerness to Vissingen, under threat
because of a labour dispute.
But these outlets from north Kent are not involved in the same battle for
cross-channel transport. Ramsgate is a leisurely four hours from the
Continent rather than the tunnel's sprint. Dover, however, falls between
these extremes, with a 75-minute trip. The ferry operators have tried to
nibble away at the time difference - 'we can now offer a 20-minute check-in,
with cars having to stop only once to get the ticket,' says Mr Todd. After
that, computers read windscreen stickers automatically.
Price levels have also been simplified. Stenna Sealink substituted a single
fare for the confusing variety of rates set according to time of day. Mr
Rees adds that prices are between 60 and 90 less than the proposed tunnel
charges. But this is not a big battle zone. The two companies are
concentrating more on quality than bargain rates to defend their hold on the
market - the main reason for buying super-ferries. 'All our ships now have
silver-service restaurants, video lounges and baby rooms,' says Mr Todd.
Ferries made the first retaliation, timing improvements to begin last
summer, when the tunnel was scheduled to open. That has introduced
passengers to services they cannot get while speeding underground. While
day-trippers may opt for a shorter journey, others will prefer a comfortable
break.
Analysts accept that this distinction will help the ferries survive, even
with a fully-functioning tunnel. Cross-channel traffic is forecast to soar
from almost 65m passengers in 1990 to 113m in the next decade and 150m by
the year 2003. Freight traffic is growing even faster. The one question is
whether there is room for two operators. A merger seems possible, which
means some further pain amid the gain that east Kent will see from the
tunnel.
