FT  23 AUG 94 / Leading Article: Phone rules
Telecommunications used to be regarded as a natural monopoly. A decade after
the break-up of AT&amp;T in the US and the privatisation of BT in the UK,
competition in long-distance and international telecoms is now a way of life
across much of the developed world - although not, alas, on most of
continental Europe.
Within more dynamic markets - notably the US and the UK - the debate now
focuses on the extension of competition to local telecoms. The US Congress
is grappling with legislation to abolish the local monopolies of the seven
regional Bell operators. In the UK, cable companies - mostly US-owned - are
attracting 40,000 phone subscribers a month, but the rules for future
competition with BT remain unclear.
Two questions dominate the regulatory debate on both sides of the Atlantic,
albeit in different forms. Should regulation be skewed in favour of new
entrants? And as telecoms networks are upgraded into 'superhighways'
carrying inter-active entertainment and information services, what steps
should be taken to ensure nationwide provision?
The telecommunications bill currently before the Senate would, in effect,
allow US cable operators to provide telephone services across their networks
within a year. The Baby Bells, by contrast, stand to face a lengthy
regulatory battle, in the name of universal service, before they are allowed
to compete with the cable operators. In the UK, BT is prevented by an
outright ban from competing with cable operators in domestic broadcast
entertainment services.
Both sets of restrictions are likely to disadvantage consumers, contrary to
their avowed purpose. In place of detailed universal service rules, the US
would do well to impose a UK-style regime on Bell operators wishing to
compete in cable services. In return for a franchise covering a designated
area, they would be required to offer services across the area, within a set
timescale - but would otherwise be largely free to compete. In the UK, the
government should follow the recent advice of a House of Commons committee
and announce a firm date for lifting the BT entertainment ban, so that one
monopoly is not succeeded by another as optical-fibre local networks render
existing copper wires obsolete.
Policymakers are understandably anxious that these 'superhighways' do not
become the preserve of a privileged few. Population-coverage targets and
obligations to connect public sector institutions, such as schools, are
desirable safeguards. There is also a case for uniform tariffs for basic
services, although the definition of 'basic' is problematic in the new
inter-active age.
It is important, however, that regulation does not so hamper the operators
that they delay in building the networks at all. To seek to regulate in
advance for every eventuality is a recipe for manifold regulators but
precious few services.
