FT  29 JUN 94 / Business and the Environment: Freedom to own and to pollute
 -The effects of Albania's new economic activity
Albania's nascent environmental movement managed the impossible earlier this
month. It obtained police permission to block traffic and distribute
leaflets in the capital's main square - thus marking Tirana's first
environmental demonstration.
Further demonstrations have been vetoed by police, but Perla, the
environmental organisation behind the event, remains proud. It managed to
highlight its three main concerns for the capital: worsening traffic, loss
of parkland, and the need for environmental law enforcement.
All three are a function of the former communist country's liberalisation
and transition to a market economy, begun in 1991 when the first multi-party
elections took place.
People can now own cars, land, cattle and businesses, and watch foreign
television. It is the uncontrolled nature of the new economic activity that
threatens to exacerbate Albania's already serious environmental problems.
Since 1991, 150,000 private cars have entered Albania. They are usually old,
often unsafe. Private kiosks, selling everything from beer to bananas, pop
up overnight on precious parkland. More than 300 have appeared in green
spaces in Tirana - their daily rubbish dumped on the remaining parkland.
Even satellite dishes are an environmental hazard. An estimated 25,000 have
appeared in the past three years - their constant use helping to overload
the country's inadequate power system. People then cut trees illegally for
heating and cooking.
Albania is a mountainous country, devoted largely to agriculture.
Uncontrolled land use and grazing have caused soil erosion, worsening
deforestation and silting up rivers. Industries such as manufacturing and
mining have dumped - and continue to dump - toxic and hazardous waste on to
land, into rivers and along the Adriatic coastline. Near the port of Durres,
40km from Tirana, a 10cm layer of caustic soda covers 10 acres of land. At
Tepelena, in the south, there are large pools of petrol - some on fire -
leaked from oil and gas extraction.
But perhaps the most pressing issue, affecting all of the country's 3.3m
people, is water and sanitation. Few people have constant - let alone clean
 -water in their homes, because the distribution system is so dilapidated.
Tirana's water pipes have an estimated 35,000 holes in them, wasting about
40 per cent of the water supply - and in places blending drinking water and
sewage. There is no sewage treatment in Albania.
Mention the environment and the common response is that there are more
serious problems - poverty, housing, unemployment. Nevertheless, 12
environmental organisations have been established since 1991. International
organisations are also helping: the World Bank and the United Nations
Development Programme are contributing to a national water strategy; the
Worldwide Fund For Nature is considering projects for endangered species;
and VOCA, the American volunteers organisation, is researching ways of
reclaiming wetlands.
Last year, Albania's parliament passed legislation aimed at preventing and
reducing pollution, conserving species and habitats, and regulating natural
resource use.
Environmental impact assessments are required for designated projects and
activities, and a comprehensive National Environmental Action Plan drafted
last summer has called for investment worth about Dollars 8m (Pounds 5.2m)
over three years.
It is a tall order. Albania has no environment ministries, just a 10-man
Committee of Environmental Preservation and Protection, under the ministry
of health, with an annual budget of Dollars 160,000.
Who will control the much-needed foreign investment as Albania develops?
Arben Pustina, of CEPP's Forestry Directorate, says: 'We would like all
foreign investors in Albania to build as they would in their own countries.'
