FT  05 NOV 94 / Travel: Across a landscape carved by elephants - Michael J.
Woods follows in the footsteps of the big game in Zimbabwe
Leaves, golden brown and crisp as crackers, crunched underfoot. A squirrel
skipped through the long cream grasses with quick bounds and a deer passed
between the tall trees in front of us, one foreleg raised uncertainly. But
there was no sound of traffic, no horse riders passed us in the early
morning light and, much as it might have looked like it, this was no Surrey
woodland. For the squirrel was a mopane squirrel, the deer a bush buck and
the wood was part of Mana Pools National Park on the banks of the Zambezi in
Zimbabwe.
It was the beginning of day two of our three day safari, walking from one
mobile camp to the next through the Park. We followed the Zambezi
downstream, rarely straying from the river terraces where the rich soil
nurtured tall trees. Dark-leaved ebonies grew on termite mounds, their
yellow spring flowers rich with scent. The sumptuous, deep red velvet
upholstery blooms of the sausage trees had just finished and were scattered
blousily on the ground around the trunks. Among these were other trees,
tamarinds and feathery, apple-ring acacias laden with seed pods. Nearby were
the over-arching, elephant- sculpted pillars of cathedral mopane.
Browsers keep the leaves neatly clipped so that there are long views under
the tree canopy to a distant thin blue haze. Across this moved silhouettes
of dancing impala, disdainful kudu, scruffy buffalo and stately elephants in
a mist of grey dust. Our pace was gentle and our course erratic.
Occasionally we had to cross depressions which hold temporary water and grow
a dense crop of adrenalin grass. This is where old buffalo rest and lion lie
up during the day, hence the name and the need for caution.
But I had already seen lion on my only game drive during nine days in the
African bush, from the airstrip to the start of the walk. We spotted them
from the truck and, as my guide, Garth Thompson, explained, park rules
forbad us to drive any closer. 'But never mind,' he said, 'In Mana Pools we
are allowed to walk.' And so, less than 15 hours after leaving London, I
found myself walking towards a pair of lions. I was back in Africa.
As soon as we stepped clear of the vehicle, the male roused from lethargy to
needle-sharp alertness. 'Watch his tail,' said Garth and I studied it
intently. As we drew closer it began to twitch and wave with the increasing
tension of the cat. Finally we settled down against a tree and the lion
relaxed as his mate, lolling on her back, coyly rolled over and licked his
face.
Although this was to be my only sighting, we regularly heard lion in Mana
for they were part of the myriad of night sounds that lulled us to sleep in
our tents, pitched in a number of spectacular spots overlooking the river.
Their coughing roars were joined by the whoops of hyaenas and the occasional
bark and scream of an argumentative baboon. On the marshes in front of the
camp hippos moved squelchily, fat black silhouettes against a rising orange
moon and the distant silver strip of the river running beneath the mountains
of Zambia. Now and then they gave hollow laughs, a deep sound which
contrasted with the high pitched bell-like calls of the frogs and the
repetitive soft 'prrrp' of a scops owl.
Just as dramatic as Garth Thompson's camp sites was the location of
Chizarira Wilderness Lodge. It is situated in a concession on the edge of
little known Chizarira National Park and on the edge describes it precisely,
for it is on the very lip of the escarpment and each room has a wooden
balcony suspended over the abyss. Chizarira is a mountainous park whose
porous sandstone yields water through a number of perennial springs. These
ensure that the bird life is excellent but that the game is more scattered
as there is little need to congregate at scarce water points.
Led by Steve Alexander, I walked from spring to green spring, strolling
through dry valleys of golden grass and climbing slopes along terraced
elephant paths. One led to a gap in the sandstone rocks which looked
impossibly narrow. It would be difficult enough for a horse to pass through
let alone an elephant. Yet the age-old elephant path led over the great warm
bed-rock slabs towards the low cliff and through the mere slit of a cleft.
Rough elephant hides had deposited a skim of dust and mud on the coarse
stone walls on either side as the animals squeezed through the narrow gap
and then followed the winding trail down the hill to the spring.
Generations of elephant feet, padding in exactly the same places every time,
had carved plate-sized footprints in the sandstone leaving a series of worn
steps. In the late afternoon, with the sun dipping towards the horizon, the
primeval hills of Chizarira had the atmosphere of an old monastery where
daily processions of monks had, over centuries, worn prints in the steps
leading to their cloisters.
It is difficult to feel equally reverential about game viewing from a
speedboat. This creates a carefree atmosphere as it whisks you across the
waters of Lake Kariba from Musango Camp to a suitable walking spot in
Matusadona National Park. But tracking black rhino in jesse bush, a dense
curtain of scrubby vegetation which can hide an elephant in a few yards,
demands a certain sobriety and not a little caution. We found spoor and
droppings but none of the animals which, because of poaching, are extremely
scarce.
Nevertheless game viewing from a boat has its attractions. Many mammals seem
much less concerned by people in front of them when they are drinking and
allow remarkably close approaches. And occasionally you find a bird which is
astonishingly confident. A tiny malachite kingfisher provided us with a
perfect show one afternoon. We drifted towards its perch until we were
almost touching the branch and watched it dive repeatedly, its iridescent
blue and bright chestnut form plunging into the water after small fish and
then flying free again.
The sun was already low as we started back and within minutes its fiery
orange ball had slipped beneath the waters of the lake. At once the colour
was gone and we raced home over an absolutely still lake through warm
evening air full of scents and soft to the touch. Africa at its most gentle.
Michael Woods' walking safari in Zimbabwe was compiled and arranged by
Cazenove and Lloyd Safaris, Unit 1, 39 Tadema Road, London SW10 0PY; tel:
071-376 3746; fax: 071-376 5237. He stayed at Chizarira Wilderness Safari
Lodge in Chizarira National Park, Musango Safari Camp on Lake Kariba and
walked through Mana Pools National Park with Natureways Wilderness Trails.
