FT  07 OCT 94 / Tories decide against tackling Blair head-on
Senior Tories have decided against launching a head-on assault on Mr Tony
Blair's new-style Labour leadership at next week's party conference in
Bournemouth.
Instead they expect to concentrate on highlighting what they see as the
government's solid record of achievement since the last general election and
to unveil a handful of detailed policy proposals in areas such as social
security, law and order and possibly education.
Cabinet ministers yesterday agreed on this approach at a 20-minute meeting
in spite of signs of mounting backbench concern about the danger posed by Mr
Blair.
Party officials believe better results can be achieved by contrasting this
image of business-like Conservative government with what they see as
Labour's vapid idealism.
They feel the government has much to be proud of in its handling of areas
such as Northern Ireland, crime prevention and the economy. They acknowledge
however that the recovery has yet to produce a 'feelgood factor' among
voters, many of whom have become worse off since 1992 because of tax
increases.
It is safe to assume, however, that Mr Blair's embarrassing defeat yesterday
over Labour's commitment to widespread public ownership will not pass
entirely unmentioned.
This insight into Tory conference planning emerged as Mr Kenneth Clarke, the
chancellor, attempted to steady party nerves by saying it was 'in the grasp
of the Conservative party to win the election quite comfortably when it
comes'. Mr Clarke said the party would use next week's conference to 'carry
on with the momentum of successful change we have made in this country.'
With Europe less high on the political agenda than in recent years and Mr
John Major having to some extent reasserted his grip, Northern Ireland might
emerge as one of the week's principal talking-points.
In spite of a general perception that the prime minister has handled the
issue well, the party's vocal and influential integrationist camp is likely
to demand reassurance about the direction of government policy.
