FT  11 OCT 94 / Cracked from side to side
If the Conservatives establish 'clear blue water' between themselves and
Labour this week, they will drown in it. Few tears would roll down the
nation's cheeks. The anti-government majority would be well pleased.
Thinking Tories, who are more numerous than appearances suggest, might tell
themselves that a spell of opposition would be the most constructive way to
spend the last few years of the century.
'Clear blue water', a Tory cliche, has become a term of political discourse.
It implies a stance distinct from, and usually to the right of, the
opposition. Mr Michael Portillo, the chief of the liberal-nationalist
faction of his party, is one proponent of the transparent azure liquid
strategy. The assumption is that, if he were to be elected paramount chief
of the Conservatives, he would rule with a firm hand, and lead us towards
minimalist government, the reassertion of family values and the protection
of national sovereignty.
He would doubtless create a forcefield somewhere in the middle of the
English, or more accurately Franco-British, Channel. The latter would be
maintained at a strength sufficient to protect us from continental European
influences. Romantic xenophobes and market worshippers would delight in such
a party. The rest of us could enjoy the frisson of watching it flounder.
That might have been the consequence of last October's Conservative
conference in Blackpool, in which Mr John Major, then perceived to be in
danger of defenestration, leaned heavily to the right. The ministerial
speeches were nearly all in the same direction. As to this year, we must
wait. The prime minister is not about to be overthrown. Some of his
colleagues, such as Mr Kenneth Clarke, have kept their sights on what the
electorate expects. 'I am certainly not going to go back on our election
commitments to the great public services and start making cuts that go
beyond cutting out waste,' the chancellor said yesterday.
The Tory convention, which begins in Bournemouth this morning, is likely to
be preoccupied with the growing strength of the Labour opposition. What to
do? The choice must be agonising. Some urge a further rightwards turn,
towards what Mr Tony Blair has memorably designated 'planet Portillo';
others a return to the centre a la Clarke; yet others that ministers should
henceforth do very little and say nothing startling.
The latter is a sensible approach. It is compatible with Mr Clarke's
persistent theme, which is that only a prolonged period of 'good government'
will get the Conservatives out of the deep hole in which they find
themselves. If two more years of economic recovery and low inflation are
crowned with pre-election tax cuts, the voters may be gulled again.
That would be a pity. The Tories need to go into the wilderness and
contemplate their past and our future. Conservative Century*, a sympathetic
new history, tells us how the party has found itself in government twice as
often as its opponents. Mr Robert Waller, one of the score of contributors,
reminds us that since 1900 it has won 13 of 24 general elections outright,
and done very well in four others. Mr Anthony Seldon writes that 'either
standing alone or as the most powerful element in a coalition, the party
will have held power for 70 of the 100 years since 1895'. There is no
mystery about how this was achieved. 'The Conservative party's greatest
strength has flowed precisely from its determination to reflect public
opinion. Where it lost touch, ignored it, or was slow to adapt . . . it was
denied power.'
That is why its proper role is to lose next time. As a mirror of popular
expectations, the party is cracked from side to side. It would be unfair to
place all the blame for this on Mr Major and his colleagues. Most of us are
bewildered by the conundrums of post-communist capitalist society: how much
to be done by government, how much privately; how to reduce unemployment;
what measures are necessary for survival in the global economy. But Labour
showed in Blackpool that it is searching for popular answers. The Tories
have arrived in Bournemouth in factions.
Nowhere is this more the case than over Europe. Professor Keith Middlemas,
another contributor to Conservative Century, writes that the Single European
Act can be seen in part as a response by the Conservative government of the
day to pressures by leading corporations to open up previously closed
European markets. For financiers and industrialists, he argues,
'sovereignty, law and state power are no longer conceivable in strictly
national terms'. Not for the first time, he concludes, 'the party lags
behind'. Mr Major addressed Tory agents in Bournemouth last night. He
accused Labour of pandering to Scottish separists, and rolling over in
Europe. It was sharply phrased, and it promised no catch-up.
The proposition that a few years of opposition would provide productive
reconsideration time for the Tories is rejected by Mr Daniel Finkelstein,
director of the Social Market Foundation, a think-tank. Mr Finkelstein has
been in post-Reagan/Bush America. The Republicans, he writes in SMF Memo No
9**, are more divided, leaderless and lacking in coherent ideas than ever.
Some want to retrench the US welfare state; some are deregulators and
tax-cutters; others preach the US version of 'back to basics'; yet others
are protectionists and isolationists. A synthesis is 'more likely to emerge
in government as politicians struggle to implement a programme in diverse
departments and are bound by collective responsibility', writes Mr
Finkelstein.
In Britain, the opposite is true. The Conservatives are in government, and
yet in difficulties because they are divided, not strongly led, and wanting
in coherence. Worse, after 15 years of uninterrupted power, they appear to
be falling victim to Acton's dictum. British corruption is not traditionally
of the sort that puts money in pockets, but the alleged and proven
transgressions of this code are becoming too numerous to ignore. A prolonged
dip in the translucent briny might do more than untangle the Conservatives'
thinking. It might clean up their act.
*Edited by Anthony Seldon &amp; Stuart Ball, Oxford University Press, Pounds 20.
**20 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AA, Pounds 5
