FT  13 JAN 94 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Show your customers
you care - Phone numbers on products not only deal with complaints, they can
build brand loyalty
What happens when a damaging rumour about your product gains circulation?
Van den Berghs discovered the answer when an entirely false story appeared
on television, and then in a Jewish newspaper in the UK, that Flora, the
spread, contained pig fat.
Concerned consumers had an immediate way of checking the story: a customer
service telephone number, which had for some time been a standard feature on
Flora packs and which meant the company was easily contactable. As calls
flooded in, operators were able to reassure consumers that Flora is, indeed,
pig-fat free. The telephone number was seen as an important factor in
defusing the situation.
The Flora experience is recounted by Robert Leiderman, whose consultancy,
the L&amp;R group, guided Van den Berghs' implementation of its telephone
service in 1990. It was an early example in the UK of what has become known
as a 'careline' - the slightly twee term used to describe telephone lines
that offer consumers the chance to seek information, make suggestions or
complain about products.
Telephone numbers on product packs, or at the point where services are
delivered, are still relatively rare in the UK. By contrast, a recent L&amp;R
survey found that 83 per cent of branded goods carry a telephone number in
the US, where carelines have been operating for some years. In France the
figure is 30 per cent, in Germany 15 per cent, but in the UK just 8 per
cent.
The benefits of a careline do not just become obvious in a crisis, or when
dissatisfied customers need to let off steam, argues Leiderman. He sees
direct telephone contact with consumers as a valuable marketing tool,
building brand loyalty and boosting consumer confidence. The L&amp;R survey
found that manufacturers used the lines to build a customer profile and
assemble a database of regular users, as well as gauging reaction to new
products and collecting ideas.
Nor is application of the concept restricted to packaged goods. Burger King,
the Grand Metropolitan hamburger chain, displays its careline number on
posters in its restaurants, on receipts and on take-away bags. Comments from
consumers have led to the introduction of a breakfast menu, non-fizzy drinks
with children's meals, the continuation of a non-meat burger, and trials in
the sale of merchandising such as sweatshirts and baseball caps.
Before Burger King's careline was introduced customer complaints were
handled by letter in 'a very laborious, ineffective and costly manner',
Pauline Gallagher, the company's UK customer care manager, told a marketing
conference organised by IBC Financial Focus in London recently. Complaints
were not logged and ideas were lost. 'Our customers were talking - giving us
valuable information - but we were not listening,' she said.
Now, all information from calls is keyed into a computer and analysed.
Problems with suppliers can be pinpointed - indeed suppliers pay a nominal
amount towards the cost of dealing with calls where a quality problem has
led to complaints. The careline would also provide an early warning system
if the company was, for example, a victim of product tampering or poor
hygiene in one of its restaurants.
John Gardner, managing director of VG, the UK chain of over 600 independent
grocers, provides a rare example of a careline for own-label products.
For VG it is a way of inspiring trust and confidence in the company's
own-label range, as well as providing a channel for customer feedback.
Information from customers has helped in updating products by, for example,
eliminating some food additives.
As Gardner points out, 'carelines are not for the timid or faint-hearted', a
point reinforced by the experiences of Coca-Cola &amp; Schweppes Beverages, the
joint venture between Cadbury-Schweppes and Coca-Cola formed in 1987.
Steve Harris, head of Coca-Cola &amp; Schweppes Beverages' quality assurance in
the UK, has seen the number of complaints from consumers double since 1992,
when a careline number started appearing on products as part of a Total
Quality programme. He is nevertheless philosophical: 'We are making it
easier for consumers to tell us if they are dissatisfied.'
Operators at Coca-Cola &amp; Schweppes, who received three months' training
before the scheme started, take a total of about 5,000 calls a week on 10
telephone lines. About half of the calls are hoaxes or nuisance calls, many
from children.
Harris also warns that careline providers 'must be prepared for some very
nasty calls. There are some weird people out there and if you are on the
receiving end it can be very stressful'. Counsellors are brought in from
time to time to talk to the operators, says Harris.
Out of the genuine calls, 10 per cent are complaints and the rest are
enquiries about, for example, ingredients and calories contained in
products, or company facts and figures requested by school children or
students doing projects.
Summarising the benefits, Harris says the service helps build brand loyalty,
provides early warning of any product quality problem and could, in future,
be used to track promotions and chart levels of customer satisfaction.
However, not all of those introducing carelines have thought out their
strategies as thoroughly, and many are unable to evaluate the service they
provide, warns Robert Leiderman.
L&amp;R's survey found that declared objectives are not always carried through
in the operation of the lines. For example, while half of the careline
providers cited helping to build a database of regular users as a potential
benefit of the service, less than 15 per cent of US carelines ask for the
caller's name and address. In France the figure was 14 per cent, and none
bother in Germany. In the UK it was substantially higher at 45 per cent.
Carelines only work if objectives are clear and evaluation procedures are
laid down at the outset of the project. 'Some manufacturers are taking to
carelines as a 'follow the leader' reaction to what is happening in the
marketplace. The danger is that companies will venture into carelines
without the level of commitment required to make them work,' says Leiderman.
