FT  28 MAY 94 / Hunters harpooned: The whales might finally be saved
The decision by the International Whaling Commission to set up a sanctuary
around Antarctica is being hailed as a victory for the green movement's
whale diplomacy.
'This is the end of deep-sea whale hunting,' said Gordon Shepherd of the
World Wide Fund for Nature. 'The Japanese whale industry is dead.' The
sanctuary, to be monitored bu Australia, would link up with an existing safe
area in the Indian Ocean, to protect about 80 per cent of the world's
surviving whales, and indefinitely put off-limits some 750,000 minke whales
that Japan says are legitimate commercial targets.
At the annual commission meeting in Puerta Vallarta, Mexico, attended by
representatives from the industrialised world and international
environmental groups, Japan was the only country to vote against the
sanctuary, with Norway, which does not hunt in the Antarctic, refusing to
vote. Japan is now threatening to withdraw from the commission, which in
principle would allow it to resume hunting.
The triumph of the environmentalists is partly symbolic, since commercial
whaling is prohibited under a moratorium in effect for eight years. While
the commission is considering lifting the ban, most observers believe a
decision will not be made for years.
Nevertheless, the sanctuary is viewed by the greens as an essential safety
net, amid signs that the moratorium is 'leaking'. Norway has recently
resumed limited commercial minke whale hunting off its coastline in the
north-east Atlantic, while Japan kills about 300 minke whales a year in the
Antarctic for 'research' purposes - allowed under the moratorium. Activists
believe that Japan will give up research killings in the Antarctic sanctuary
now there is no hope of commercial hunting.
The sanctuary may have wider implications. Some campaigners see the 23-1
vote as a vindication of their tough tactics, which included threatening the
Caribbean supporters of Japan's position with a tourism boycott. 'We can
definitely learn from this and apply it to other animals,' says Kate
O'Connell, an environmentalist based in Colombia.
The governments of non-whaling countries such as the US, the UK, France and
Germany are happy to go along with the environmentalists because of the
domestic political credit they earn. 'They see this as a cheap way to buy a
green image,' says Milton Freeman, an anthropologist at the University of
Alberta, Canada. 'Who could possibly be against a whale sanctuary?'
Such attitudes infuriate Japan and Norway, which stress that the charter of
the commission requires it to base decisions on scientific grounds, and
regulate whaling so as to provide for 'the optimum utilisation of the whale
resources'. They say there is no scientific basis for a comprehensive
sanctuary, since endangered whales such as the blue whale, are already
protected, and will continue to be protected whatever happens to the minkes.
Having lost the battle over the sanctuary, Japan and Norway are pushing to
replace the moratorium with catch quotas for minkes, the only whale species
not endangered. Quotas would allow the Japanese to hunt on a limited scale
for minke whales off its own coast, and take political pressure off Norway
for resuming whaling unilaterally in the north-east Atlantic.
They are seeking support from the commission, whose scientific committee has
developed a mathematical model, known as the Revised Management Programme,
to calculate how many whales of a species can be caught in a year without
threatening survival.
But the commission is in no hurry to implement the model, and the
non-whaling countries would like to avoid a politically sensitive vote on
the moratorium. The stalling game was given a boost by reports this year
that the former Soviet Union under-reported killings of blue and other
endangered whales. One ship caught 7,207 humpback whales and 1,433 blue
whales during a period of the 1960s, and not 152 and 156 as reported,
according to Alexei Yablokov, President Boris Yeltsin's adviser on ecology.
Environmentalists said proof of Soviet misreporting would reduce any catch
quotas agreed - although the commission has said its impact would be
minimal. More important, environmentalists argue that observation and
monitoring of catches has to be tight to prevent further cheating. With one
minke whale worth up to Dollars 50,000, the temptation to misreport is
considerable.
As well as doubting official reports of Soviet kills, scientists have also
begun to question estimates of stocks. The Norwegians reckon there are
87,000 minke whales in the north-east Atlantic, giving a catch quota of 290,
according to the model. Dr Justin Cooke, a scientific consultant who helped
develop the commission's mathematical model, reckons they are 53,000 minkes,
which would give a quota of just one minke a year.
Anti-whaling nations say that debates such as these could hold up the
implementation of a quota scheme for off-shore hunting forever. Even if
there is acceptance of the numbers, there is the problem of how whales are
killed. The UK objects to whale hunting because of the slow and painful
death of a harpooned whale.
As a European commissioner put it: 'The point about whales is you get an
enormous response - we received 60,000 postcards backing the sanctuary.' The
fact that whale meat is regarded as a delicacy in Japan does not seem to
matter.
