FT  29 APR 94 / Enterprise Oil in hostile Pounds 1.45bn bid for Lasmo: Deal
would create group valued at over Pounds 3bn
Enterprise Oil launched a Pounds 1.45bn hostile takeover bid for rival
explorer Lasmo yesterday. If successful, the offer would bring together the
UK's two largest independent oil and gas explorers into a single group
valued at more than Pounds 3bn.
The offer is the largest hostile bid in the UK since BTR's Pounds 1.47bn
offer for Hawker Siddeley in 1991. If Lasmo shareholders accept the
unusually structured all-paper offer, the enlarged company would rank fourth
among North Sea explorers, after British Petroleum, Shell and Exxon.
Enterprise virtually ruled out any prospect of a cash sweetener. 'I do not
see any need for it,' said Mr Graham Hearne, Enterprise chairman and chief
executive. The group's policy was to pay for big acquisitions with paper, he
added.
Mr Hearne said Enterprise's strong cash generation over the next few years -
after completion of the Nelson and Scott fields - would meet Lasmo's need
for funds to bring its exploration opportunities on stream. He rejected
suggestions that Lasmo's recent Pounds 219m rights issue was enough to fund
the loss-making company's future needs.
Lasmo, however, attacked the bid as a 'contrived paper offer . . . which
would dilute significant growth potential for shareholders'. Mr Joe Darby,
chief executive, said the combination of the two companies 'would add no
value for shareholders'.
Initial reaction in financial markets appeared to support his view.
Enterprise's shares closed 21p down at 425p, while Lasmo fell 5 1/2 p at
157p. 'This bid is good for neither Lasmo shareholders nor Enterprise
shareholders,' said Mr David Basham, a Kleinwort Benson oil analyst. 'By
1996, they will have to find 164m barrels every year just to keep their
reserve base stable.'
Another analyst criticised the strategic logic, saying: 'You could drive a
horse and cart through the gaps.' The structure caused some comment. 'It is
hard to see what Lasmo shareholders will be getting in this offer,' said
another analyst. Credit agency Moody's said it was reviewing ratings of
Enterprise for potential downgrade and Lasmo for possible upgrade.
The offer comprises, for every 80 Lasmo shares:
27 Enterprise A shares which will convert to ordinary shares in 1997 and
will carry a 3p annual dividend between 1994 and 1997. That is equivalent to
the dividend Lasmo indicated it would pay in those years when it launched
its recent rights issue, plus
12 Enterprise warrants exercisable from 1997 to 2001 at 407p.
Enterprise says that values Lasmo shares at 150p, based on the A share price
of 407p and a warrant price of 86p.
Lex, Page 20
Industrial logic, Page 22
London stocks, Page 42
