FT  06 SEP 94 / Tories face accusation on rail strike
Mr John Prescott, Labour's deputy leader, last night accused the
Conservatives of wanting to keep the rail strike going until their party
conference next month.
Addressing a fringe meeting at the Trades Union Congress in Blackpool, Mr
Prescott supported the demands of the RMT and said the government wanted to
use unions 'as whipping boys for what is wrong with the economy'.
Significant numbers of British Rail staff have been recruited to help
Railtrack managers and supervisors keep over half the network open during
Thursday's 24-hour stoppage by signal workers. Two members of BR's staff
helped in signal boxes last week - the first time BR had intervened in the
13-week conflict.
Railtrack said that more than half of services would be running on Thursday,
the highest proportion so far, and that it would provide a full service
between London and Bristol for the first time during the conflict.
Mr Jimmy Knapp, leader of the RMT transport union, displayed his anger at
BR's co-operation with Railtrack by boycotting a planned dinner last night
with BR.
However, he said BR was exaggerating the effect of what he called its
'secondary action'. He said he did not believe there were enough BR staff
with experience to make a real impact on signalling operations.
Mr Knapp said that commentators should not be surprised that the travelling
public were supporting the signal workers. 'Many members of the public,
especially the south-east commuters, know what it is like to be badly
treated by the railways,' he added. 'But more generally many of them know
what it is like to be treated badly at work.'
In a resolution to be debated on Thursday, the RMT - backed by Aslef, the
train drivers' union - calls on the TUC to organise a national demonstration
in London in support of the signal workers.
The motion says there 'must be a negotiated settlement to the dispute and
calls on Railtrack to return to the negotiating table immediately'.
Mr Prescott's speech increased pressure on Labour leader Tony Blair to
support unequivocally the signal workers' cause, after a number of his
parliamentary colleagues supported the RMT.
Shadow employment secretary Ms Ann Clywd called on Railtrack chairman Mr
Robert Horton to resign to settle the dispute.
'He is the Eddie the Eagle of big business - incompetent, graceless and
doomed to be remembered as a sick joke,' she told a TUC rally.
