FT  03 SEP 94 / The struggle to hold on to peace: The IRA's ceasefire
represents only the first stage on a perilous road to lasting stability in
Ulster
Perhaps, after two and a half decades of stomach-churning attrition, this
week's IRA ceasefire means the people of Northern Ireland can start burying
their differences instead of their dead. Perhaps not.
Whichever direction Ulster takes from what the high command of the
provisional IRA calls an 'historic crossroads', it will be too late for Mr
Sean McDermott, the 37-year-old Catholic shot dead by loyalist gunmen just
12 hours before the midnight ceasefire began.
But, for the baby boy born to Lisa Stewart in Belfast's city hospital six
hours and six minutes into the peace, there is the chance of a life free of
the troubles which began the year his mother was born.
Whether the province is finally awakening from a 25-year nightmare, which by
last night had claimed 3,170 lives, or is preparing for something worse,
will now begin to unfold, fitfully and unpredictably, over the next weeks
and months.
The rows over the calculated decision of the IRA not to commit itself to the
'permanent' ceasefire demanded by London and Dublin and on the untimely
return to Ulster jails of four republican prisoners, which hinted at
secretly agreed concessions by London, will not be the last. They will
appear trifling compared with what lies ahead, and the leadership qualities
and goodwill of everyone involved will be severely tested.
The timing of a breakthrough delivered by the republican movement came as a
surprise after nearly nine months of private prevarication and public
point-scoring on the contents of last December's Downing Street declaration
 -London and Dublin's best shot at establishing an universally acceptable
blueprint for a lasting political settlement for Ulster.
Though the announcement came suddenly, the underlying shift in attitudes has
been more gradual.
Upbeat predictions had been made before in the land of false dawns, but this
time they reflected a perceptible change in attitudes within the community.
Under the leadership of Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein - the IRA's political arm
 -has been pursuing for seven years its own Irish peace initiative. Its
efforts - against a background of dwindling public support and a growing
recognition that consent, not coercion, was the only strategy supported in
both north and south - have been met from outside with contempt.
But Mr Adams has managed to cultivate within republican ranks a culture of
debate and the notion of political negotiation as an alternative to the
Armalite. The leadership of Sinn Fein and the IRA appear to understand that
the ability to kill has not brought much progress towards British withdrawal
and a united Ireland.
While there is no deviation from its ultimate objective of a 32-county Irish
republic, it is prepared to try an alternative route. According to Mr Adams:
'Irish nationalism has sufficient political confidence, weight and support
to bring about the changes essential for a just and lasting peace.'
While the IRA and Sinn Fein have made the running - manipulating and
sometimes winning the propaganda battle with London - the unionists have
seemed to be outflanked and at risk of being swept along by events.
Twenty years ago, hardliners in the Protestant community were able to
combine forces to bring down the newly established power-sharing executive,
demonstrating a unity and resolve which is no longer evident. Now, the broad
body of unionists face a stark choice.
They can try to wreck any new political initiatives to preserve a status quo
no longer acceptable in London, or they can help forge a compromise package
of political and constitutional change. Confronting them as they choose will
be a formidable coalition stretching from Washington to west Belfast.
Whatever happens Protestants intend to keep a tight grip on the rock which
guarantees Ulster a place in the United Kingdom for as long as the majority
wishes.
For Mr John Major, maintaining the unionists' trust will be of paramount
concern - hence reports of a prime minister 'livid' over the return to
Ulster of IRA prisoners. Hence, too the fact that it was Mr James Molyneaux,
the patient, profoundly sceptical leader of the Ulster Unionist Party, who
was first into Downing Street after the ceasefire announcement.
So far, Mr Molyneaux remains on board and behind a Downing Street
declaration he once dismissed as 'a dead Christmas tree'. And he will be
called on to try contain the loyalist paramilitary threat to further
progress. Yesterday, hopes were rising that, while further revenge attacks
by loyalist extremists cannot be ruled out, they might suspend violence if
reassured about Ulster's right to self-determination.
Mr Major, whose bold, joint initiative with Dublin has brought republicans
to the negotiating ante-room, will be less concerned about the continuing
self-exclusion from any future talks of the Rev Ian Paisley's Democratic
Unionist Party. The hope is that, eventually, his still-potent voice will be
undermined by political momentum.
Provided the IRA ceasefire holds, Downing Street is unlikely to delay much
longer recognition that the IRA action is intended to be permanent. This
would mean that initial, exploratory contact between British government
officials and Sinn Fein could take place before Christmas.
Sinn Fein dialogue with the Dublin government will begin earlier, with Mr
Albert Reynolds, the Irish premier, anxious to embrace northern republicans
in his proposed north-south Irish Forum for Peace and Reconciliation. The
forum could be operational by October.
Mr Adams, on a path perhaps even more dangerous than Mr Major's, will need
rapid evidence that the ceasefire is paying dividends to keep his supporters
behind him. The UK government is likely to oblige with an early end to the
broadcasting ban on Sinn Fein.
Equally important for British ministers will be success in their joint
efforts with the Irish government to piece together the pivotal framework
document on which political and constitutional progress can be based. The
document could be finalised next month, and will include a power-sharing
Ulster assembly and a number of cross-border institutions.
It will also incorporate changes to the Irish constitution, possibly
involving a referendum, renouncing Ireland's territorial claim on the north.
In return, Britain will amend the 1920 Government of Ireland Act which gives
Westminster 'supreme authority' over Northern Ireland. The gesture is seen
by Britain as largely symbolic, given subsequent legislation enshrining the
principle of majority consent for changes in Ulster's constitutional
position.
The format for planned bilateral exploratory talks between Sinn Fein and
British government officials is undecided. But secret discussions between
the two sides in 1993 envisaged exchanges involving three representatives
from each side.
These talks will enter totally uncharted waters and could easily expose the
obstacles that cause the peace process to come unstuck. Under the heading
'practical consequences of ending violence', will come the intensely emotive
and complex question of all-round demilitarisation, without which further
progress will be impossible.
Any hope of bringing all parties to round-table talks will stand or fall on
the removal of terrorist weaponry and the threat that it could be used
again. Sinn Fein and the IRA will be equally adamant in demanding a
comparable de-escalation of British military and security forces, including
a withdrawal of British troops initially to barracks and ultimately back to
the mainland.
The issue of IRA prisoners will prove as intractable. 'Our prisoners come
first and last. If they are not released, you can forget the whole thing,' a
senior republican source says. Downing Street has rejected a general
amnesty, and unionists intend to keep Mr Major to his word.
Only when the matters of weaponry and prisoners have been resolved can the
crucial constitutional issues be addressed in wider talks aimed at securing
a comprehensive, negotiated political settlement.
At their heart is the issue of self-determination and what Sinn Fein calls
the loyalist 'veto' over moves towards a united Ireland. The going here will
be no easier.
Republicans have now embraced the principle of unionist consent, but only in
the context of the right to self-determination of the Irish people as a
whole. In other words, Ulster can have its referendum but only the decision
of all the people of Ireland will count.
Mr Adams also insists that Britain has a responsibility to persuade
unionists that their best interests lie in 'the creation of an agreed and
stable Ireland'. Mr Major, however, will not join the persuaders or withdraw
safeguards for unionists. A shift on either could see him destroyed at the
hands of Westminster's Ulster unionists and unhappy Tory MPs.
The agenda for agreement looks impossibly daunting but then, until recently,
the prospect of any progress between two historically and diametrically
opposed forces appeared fanciful.
If the politicians have their doubts, an Ulster opinion poll yesterday
showed only 9 per cent of Protestants and 58 per cent of Catholics believe
the ceasefire will last.
Suspicions are held equally deeply on both sides; those of Ulster's
Protestant community who can contemplate negotiation with those they
consider mass murdererers do so only because the prize of peace is
desperately sought.
There are understandable suspicions that the IRA's gesture is a sham, and
that the organisation is only intent upon further destabilising the province
before returning to violence when it can justify a resumption.
Republicans believe they have cause to doubt the good intentions of a
British government they say has betrayed them too many times in the past and
which wants to trap them into a peace before replacing Ulster on the
political back-burner. The IRA and Sinn Fein know that the passage of time
would make any return to violence harder to justify and would lose them any
credit recently won from a relieved domestic and international community.
But, as the week ended, there was an unfamiliar, enjoyable peace along the
Shankill and up the Falls, across the Highfield estate to Andersonstown.
Republicans have a gaelic battle cry of Tiochfaidh ar la] - our time will
come - while hardline unionists shout 'No surrender]' The two sides remain
divided by a gulf of historic proportions but the overriding hope is that
the gap may just have started to close.
