FT  28 JUN 94 / Keating spurns interest rate rise: Bid to outface market
pressures
Mr Paul Keating, Australia's prime minister, yesterday insisted the federal
government would not be pushed into lifting official interest rates, despite
the continuing drop in bond prices.
Mr Keating's comments helped to send the nation's currency, already unnerved
by the tumbling US dollar, to a six-week low, but failed to prevent bond
yields reaching their highest levels for over two years. The general mayhem
spilled over into the share market, where the All-Ordinaries Index fell by
about 3 per cent, to 1,957.4.
'The government won't be responding to pressures in the bond markets which
are induced from other markets,' the prime minister told parliament, shortly
before leaving for a three-day visit to Indonesia. 'The key point is
official rates have not risen and they have not risen because the government
believes that inflation has been checked.'
In recent days, Mr Keating and Mr Ralph Willis, the treasurer, have become
increasingly strident in their efforts to delay a rise in official interest
rates. The government argues inflationary pressures are negligible in
Australia, where unemployment remains high, and that business confidence and
investment needs to be encouraged. This viewpoint was given some weight
yesterday with publication of the latest quarterly survey from the
Australian Institute of Company Directors and KPMG Peat Marwick.
The survey, conducted shortly after the government's ADollars 6.5bn (Pounds
3.1bn) jobs package and budget plans were announced last month, suggested
that optimism about the Australian economy has ebbed in recent months. About
63 per cent of company directors, drawn from a wide range of businesses in
both private and public sectors, expected the economy to improve over the
next six months, for example, compared with 71 per cent in the March
quarter.
However, the government's repeated assertions it will not be rushed into
raising interest rates have not stopped financial markets betting a rise is
inevitable. A number of banks have already edged up home loan rates and, by
yesterday evening, 10-year bond yields had risen to 9.97 per cent, from 9.60
per cent at Friday's close.
