FT  25 MAR 94 / John Mowlem launches Pounds 63m rights issue
John Mowlem, the UK contractor and construction equipment group which owns
London City Airport, yesterday launched a Pounds 63.1m rights issue after it
revealed that it would breach loan covenants.
Mowlem, which last year made a pre-tax loss of Pounds 124.2m after
provisions and property writedowns of Pounds 61m, also intends selling its
UK housebuilding business.
The company had pre-viously raised Pounds 100m from disposals.
It has already announced that it intends selling London City Airport, which
last year incurred a pre-tax loss of Pounds 4.8m. Group losses included
Pounds 48.8m of goodwill previously written off to reserves and now charged
against profits following last year's sale of the HSS plant hire business.
Sir Philip Beck, who is standing down as Mowlem's chief executive but
remaining part-time chairman, said that following the latest writedowns the
company would breach bank loan covenants requiring minimum levels of net
assets, as well breaching financial covenants made on a Pounds 50m bond
issue in 1988.
To prevent this, Mowlem shareholders are being offered three new shares at
100p each for every five already held. Mowlem's share price fell 40p to 112p
following the announcement.
Mr John Marshall, who takes over as chief executive in August, said the
proceeds would be used to reduce debt and fund working capital as the
construction businesses recovered.
Mr Brian Watkins finance director, is to retire and will be replaced by Mr
Charles Barton, previously finance director of Laird Group.
The company said that net debt of Pounds 76m at end of February could
possibly have reached Pounds 100m at the highest point this year compared
with shareholders funds of just Pounds 91m.
Net debt, based on levels prevailing at the end of December, would fall
following the rights issue to Pounds 12m representing gearing of just 8 per
cent.
The issue has been underwritten by Kleinwort Benson, with US institutions
represented by Morgan Stanley agreeing to take up their rights on their
combined 19.4 per cent of the shares.
Other UK institutional shareholders of Mowlem have agreed to sub-underwrite
the issue. Brokers are Hoare Govett.
The company, provided shareholders agree to reduce the share premium account
by Pounds 60m, will not pay an interim dividend for 1994 but intends to
recommend a final dividend of 2p.
It is not paying a final dividend for 1993
The latest provisions include Pounds 17.4m to cover redundancies and
restructuring costs, Pounds 36.3m of asset writedowns and bad debt
provisions and Pounds 7.3m against discontinued businesses.
Background, Page 25
