FT  04 JUN 94 / International Company News: US media groups agree Dollars
2.3bn cable TV deal
Times Mirror, the US media group, has agreed in principle to sell its cable
television operations to Cox Enterprises for about Dollars 2.3bn.
In a statement issued yesterday , Times Mirror said it was in 'serious
discussions' with Cox. 'We do have an agreement in principle,' the company
said, 'but a definitive agreement has not yet been executed or delivered.'
Previously, Times Mirror had indicated it was reconsidering its role in the
cable TV business. The group derives about 15 per cent of its revenues from
its television and cable operations and is the 11th largest US cable TV
system operator with 1.2m subscribers. Times Mirror is also a leading
publisher of newspapers including the Los Angeles Times and New York
Newsday.
Atlanta-based Cox is currently the sixth largest US cable TV company, with
more than 1.7m subscribers in 17 states. The privately-held group also owns
several newspapers including the Atlanta Journal-Constitution as well as
television and radio stations. The group's revenues last year were Dollars
2.3bn and it employs about 31,000.
Combined, the cable TV operations of both companies would form the third
largest US cable TV company, after TeleCommunications and Time Warner.
The tentative deal between Cox and Times Mirror follows the collapse, in
April, of a planned investment in Cox by Southwestern Bell, the large
Texas-based local telephone company. Southwestern had planned to buy a 40
per cent stake in Cox's cable TV operations for Dollars 1.6bn.
The companies blamed 'increasingly stringent government regulation of the
cable TV industry' for the termination of their agreement. In February, the
Federal Communications Commission ordered US cable TV companies to comply
with new regulations on their rates for basic cable TV services.
If the sale of its cable TV operations is completed, it will be the second
large asset sale by Times Mirror. Last year the Los Angeles-based group
completed the sale of its four TV stations for Dollars 335m.
Times Mirror's shares opened late yesterday at Dollars 35 1/4 against
Thursday's close of Dollars 32.
