FT  25 FEB 94 / Arts: An acquired taste for the pyramids - Patricia Morison
reviews 'Egyptomania' at the Louvre
Robert Venturi put jokey little coloured lotus-columns outside the National
Gallery extension and IM Pei's glass pyramid now squats in the forecourt of
the Louvre. But although post-modern architects now and then use ancient
Egypt as a source for references, repro-Pharaonic seems to have had its day.
It barely survives, except in the tourist gift-shops of Egypt which are
still crammed with pyramid paperweights and busts of Tutenkhamun.
Egyptomania, the Louvre's clever, complicated, but indigestible new
exhibition, opens a chapter in the history of taste. It shows the many forms
for which over two centuries, from 1730 to 1930, western art and
architecture gleefully and unselfconsciously adapted artistic motifs from
the land of the Pharaohs.
Although repro-Ramessian is nowadays rejected as kitsch, Egyptian style was
once extremely influential. It was more exotic than Greco-Roman, more
accessible than Etruscan, and highly prestigious. Egyptian style was
enormously versatile, associated with eternity, manliness, sexiness,
exoticism, non-Christian piety, and patriotism.
As an architectural style, it was also relatively simple and cheap in
comparison with classicism. So it was used extensively, for garden design,
prisons, cemeteries, in bourgeois villas, Russian palaces, and the
staterooms of Mediterranean cruisers.
The exhibition will travel to Canada and Vienna, although not all 300
exhibits appear at each of the venues. Yet there is something undeniably
special about seeing it in Paris. At the Louvre one is just a step away from
the magnificent obelisk looted from the temple of Karnak at Thebes. Close by
are squares where grotesque ceremonies were staged in which huge statues of
Isis, the Goddess Nature, expressed jets of wine from her breasts into the
cups of thirsty revolutionaries. France even has the best claim to be called
the cradle of Egyptology, born on September 27, 1822 when Champollion
announced that he had discovered how to read hieroglyphics.
How will the exhibition look elsewhere? At the Louvre, the organisers have
gone for style over comfort. Tiny video-screens displayed at the cases show
pyramids and obelisks in gardens and play extracts from Mozart's Magic
Flute. The overall design is a pitch-black labyrinth as if it was intended
to evoke some ancient ritual. I found it claustrophobic and tiring.
On the other hand, it made possible a great bit of theatre. Dotted through
the darkness are white rooms containing the 'real thing', famous pieces from
the Louvre's Egyptian galleries. Some pieces are Egyptian and some are
Egyptianising Roman sculptures, chosen not just because of their intrinsic
merits but because they inspired later artists.
The most remarkable of these antique pieces is the exceptionally beautiful
pink marble statue from Munich. It is one of the famous series which Emperor
Hadrian ordered to be made to immortalise his lover, Antinous, drowned in
the Nile. Because eclectic Rome was so enamoured of her Egyptian colony, it
seemed quite natural that Hadrian should order the gorgeous youth to be
represented as the god Osiris. From the mid-16th century, this sculpture
could be seen by visitors to the Villa Albani at Rome, setting a standard
for Egyptian art (as Antinous was thought to be).
The variety and quality of exhibits is overwhelming, with paintings,
furniture, architectural drawings, ceramics, sculpture, jewellery, and
fashion accessories. Theatre design gets a corridor to itself. There are
important set and costume designs for the Magic Flute, for Rossini's Moses,
and for Verdi's Aida, although, as we are reminded, it was the Egyptologist
Mariette Bey who deserves so much of the credit.
Apart from occasional treasures like Schinkel's Magic Flute designs and
Boullee's project for a warrior's grave, there is almost nothing in the show
to which I would give house-room. Not for me the model obelisks and sphinxes
for the mantelpiece, the tremendously elaborate clocks made to look like
Egyptian temples or Nubian slave-girls.
Anyone less insensitive to pseudo-Egyptian furniture will discover rare and
fabulous pieces. Among the most remarkable are two 18th-century bookcases,
one for a French civic library and one commissioned by an Austrian abbot.
Painstaking copies of Egyptian temple style, they were made expressly to
hold the 25 volumes of the celebrated Description de l'Egypte. Remarkable
too, is a late 19th-century grand piano made with two statues of pharaonic
noblemen to each leg.
The selection of paintings is quite as remarkable, including many comically
ghastly 19th-century specimens many of which look still worse for being
badly lit and in such solidly Egyptian company. They make the point well,
however, that successful painters needed to read up Egyptology if they were
to tackle popular subjects like Moses in the Bullrushes, or the Death of
Cleopatra.
John Martin's 'Seventh Plague of Egypt' and David Roberts's 'Departure of
the Israelites' vie to express the sense of grandeur of Egypt. Many of the
most successful painters and paintings of the age were Egyptian-minded;
Gustave Moreau, Hans Makart, and Elihu Vedder's 'Man Questioning the Sphinx'
of 1863. Sir Edward Poynter's epic vision of forced labour, 'Israel in
Egypt', is pure Hollywood and too exhausting to look at for more than a
minute at a time. Images of Cleopatra have a separate section in which the
supreme horror is Cabanel's Salon painting of Cleopatra trying out poisons
on her slaves. Fascinating, too, to see the notorious sado-erotic shocker of
1865, Federico Faruffini's 'Sacrifice of an Egyptian Virgin to the Nile'.
Luc-Olivier Merson's 'Rest on the Flight into Egypt' is another impressively
awful example of a painter taking Egypt seriously. In fact it is a copy made
in 1880, the year after the original had enraptured visitors to the Paris
Salon. On a moonlit night, Joseph lies flat out on the sands and the Virgin
Mary sleeps between the paws of the Sphinx. The unearthly radiance emanating
from the Christ Child in her arms inspired the novelist JK Huysmans to dub
the picture, 'Virgin and Sphinx, Jesus and mayonnaise.'
Egyptomania continues at the Louvre until April 18, sponsored by Fondation
Electricite de France. It then travels to Ottawa and Vienna.
