FT  10 MAY 94 / Narrow presidential win in Panama for ex-banker
A millionaire businessman from a discredited party which was the political
instrument of two military dictators has won a narrow victory in the
Panamanian presidential election, considered the country's cleanest for a
quarter of a century.
Mr Ernesto Perez Balladares, 47, of the Democratic Revolutionary party, won
33 per cent of the vote on Sunday, four points clear of Mrs Mireya Moscoso
de Gruber, of the governing Arnulfista party.
In third place was Mr Ruben Blades, a salsa singer and Hollywood actor with
a Harvard law degree, who had been expected to come second.
Mr Perez Balladares's victory confirms the remarkable resurrection of the
PRD, which was thrown out of power by the US invasion at the end of 1989 to
oust the strongman General Manuel Noriega.
Party officials who went into hiding or were arrested by the invaders will
return to government. Gen Noriega himself is serving a 40-year sentence in
the US for drugs offences.
'Now we will begin to build together the future of the nation, without party
political differences,' Mr Perez Balladares declared in a victory speech on
Sunday night. In Congress, the PRD is expected to fall well short of a
majority after the congressional election on Sunday.
In his campaign, he played on memories of the party's founder, the late Gen
Omar Torrijos, who is fondly recalled by many poor Panamanians for his
populist social policies and for negotiating a 1977 treaty with the US for
Panama to take back the Panama Canal.
The victor promised to create jobs and increase social spending to alleviate
conditions for the poor. But the bulky former banker with Citibank has said
he would honour Panama's foreign debt obligations, maintain tight fiscal
policies, and attempt to attract foreign investment so as to improve
infrastructure.
His government, which is to take office on September 1, will oversee the
handover from the US, by 2000, of 34,000 hectares of prime real estate in
the Canal Zone. It is unclear what it plans to do with the area, estimated
to be worth several times Panama's GDP of Dollars 2.4bn (Pounds 1.6bn).
Many analysts speak well of Mr Perez Balladares but the prospect of the
return to government of certain characters, known as the 'herd', has raised
concern. 'All those nasty creatures are going to come out of the woodwork
and ask for a place in the sun,' said Mr Victor Bulmer-Thomas, director of
London University's Institute of Latin American Studies, who was observing
the election.
