FT  27 SEP 94 / Survey of Mauritius (9): Mainstay of growth - The island's
attractions make tourism a potential economic powerhouse
'Tiger in paradise,' proclaims a slogan promoting the international image of
Mauritius.
It is intended to bring to mind the group of newly industrialised countries
led by the Asian 'tigers' which Mauritius wishes to emulate, while evoking
the island's balmy climate and glorious beaches.
But the would-be Indian ocean tiger may be taking a breather, preparing for
what the government hopes will be its next leap forward; in the meantime,
paradise is expected to bring in even more visitors.
The record suggests that this can be done, and the potential is there. The
island's spectacular beaches and marine life, and its friendly people, are a
highly marketable combination. Mauritius also offers a sense of security and
peace of mind rarely found in any large holiday destination - violent crime
is rare and visitors go unmolested.
Nevertheless, some long running issues and concerns will have to be
addressed. If the current rate of increase in visitors - nearly 10 per cent
a year - is to be sustained, Mauritius may have to reconsider its ban on
direct charter flights, while protecting its reputation as an up-market
destination.
The island will also have to fend off competition from a post-apartheid
South Africa, raise the standards of a number of hotels whose services and
facilities do not justify their high prices, and encourage visitors to spend
more during their stay. Most important is to ensure that growth is not at
the expense of the environment, where the record has so far been mixed.
It is a tall order. But most analysts agree that if the remarkable economic
growth Mauritius has enjoyed for more than a decade is to continue, much of
the impetus may have to come from tourism.
The textile industry, backbone of the export processing zone (EPZ) that
accounted for the economy's dramatic take-off in the early 1980s, faces its
most testing time since its inception. Local labour costs have escalated and
international competition in the new GATT era is getting tougher.
Although diversification within the EPZ is under way, it is proving a slow
process, as is the development of financial services and offshore banking.
With the sugar sector expected to do little more than hold its own, tourism
will have to carry much of the burden for keeping up the 5-6 per cent annual
GDP growth to which Mauritians have become accustomed.
Tourism has already played a crucial part in the island's success, expanding
at a rate few thought possible. From 124,000 tourists in 1983, the numbers
have climbed to 335,000 in 1992, rising to 375,000 last year. With the tally
for the first quarter of this year at 101,000, the year end target of
400,000 is within reach.
Foreign exchange earnings in 1993 reached MRs5,300m - exceeded only by
textile exports and sugar receipts - while providing direct employment to
more than 11,000 people, and thousands more indirectly.
The high growth of recent years (nearly 11 per cent in 1993, 10 per cent in
1992) can be maintained, say hoteliers, without adding to the island's 85
hotels - at least in the short term. Occupancy rate in the larger hotels was
68.5 per cent last year, and 60 per cent in the smaller establishments.
There is also room for growth in the traditional markets. Last year France
and the island of Reunion each accounted for 23 per cent, Germany 10 per
cent, the United Kingdom 8 per cent and South Africa 11 per cent - while
officials single out India as a barely tapped target.
The island's national carrier, Air Mauritius, is also better equipped to
cope. Sir Harry Tirvengadum, its chairman and managing director, has been
raising the quality of the airline, which in May this year became the first
southern hemisphere airline to operate the new Airbus A340-400, with
individual video entertainment systems available throughout the whole cabin,
and telephones on board.
But if tourism is to play a greater part than its already significant role,
the overall standard of hotels will have to be raised.
The top of the range resorts - such as Le Touessrok recently remodelled at a
cost of MRs480m La Pirogue and Le Saint Gerain - can compete with the best
in the world.
The trio are owned by Sun Resorts Ltd, a public company, listed on the
Mauritian stock exchange, in which two of the major shareholders are Sol
Kersner's Sun International and the Mauritian conglomerate, Ireland Blyth
Ltd (now renamed as IBL), each with about 24 per cent.
With the international management and marketing expertise to draw on, and
locations second to none, these Mauritian hotels can claim to be among the
best resorts in the world. But many of the hotels on the island fall short
of the standards their image and room rates require, whether the food, the
furnishings or the amenities - other than the main attraction, the sea.
This issue becomes more pressing given the challenge to Mauritius posed by
South Africa. It offers game parks as well as beaches, hotels as good but
cheaper, and above all, lower air fares thanks to competition on a popular
route.
Although a charter route to Mauritius continues to operate through the back
door - via Reunion, the French dependency a hop away - the government seems
set to continue the policy which bans direct services which would cut fares
and bring the island within reach of more tourists.
Meanwhile efforts to encourage tourists to spend more on the island are
paying off, boutiques offering EPZ clothing and knitwear, as well as duty
free shopping facilities.
