FT  13 APR 94 / Business and the Environment: Plan of gentle persuasion -
Worldwide wast / France prefers the voluntary route to pollution control
France has set itself ambitious goals for dealing with industrial and
household waste, but in many cases hopes to meet them by voluntary means.
The rising cost of waste treatment, however, raises the possibility that the
government may have to use more compulsion.
For instance, perhaps because it attracts more tourists than any other
country in the world, France aims to stop, by 2002, using landfills to bury
anything except 'ultimate' waste that has already been reduced to a minimum
by some previous treatment. In theory, this will mean the closure of more
than 6,000 landfills.
The reality may be different, however. The country's 95 'departments' are
first supposed to draw up plans to eliminate household waste, while France's
22 regional authorities are due to do the same for industrial waste. But
they are not exactly rushing to assume these tasks, for which they will have
to bear most of the financial burden.
The environment ministry puts the cost of investing in alternatives to
traditional landfills at FFr40bn (Pounds 4.7bn) with about a tenth of this
being met from a FFr20 levy on each tonne of buried waste. But others
believe the eventual investment will be more than FFr100bn, requiring at
least a big increase in the levy on waste-producing companies.
Apart from some 400m tonnes of easily-disposable or re-useable waste from
the country's big farm and food sector, France produces:
Household waste amounting to 20m tonnes a year. Only 8 per cent is now
treated by composting (difficult because the organic waste needs to sifted
out from the rest), while an increasing proportion (41 per cent) is burnt.
At present, the rest ends up in landfills.
Some 6m tonnes of household waste comes from packaging. The government has
said that by 2003, some 75 per cent of packaging material should be
recovered and recycled, but in sharp contrast to Germany it has left this
largely to business initiative. Led by BSN, the food group, several thousand
companies have formed a group called Eco-Emballages. Member companies are
allowed to place a green dot on their products to inform consumers that the
products will be recycled, and they pay a small levy on each product sold to
help make this recycling possible.
But so far Eco-Emballages' operation is small-scale, spending some FFr180m
over three years to finance 37 pilot projects in collecting and sorting
packaging waste. 'We did not want to follow the Germans in immediately
ordering the recovery of all packaging waste, and then not knowing what to
do with it all and having to ship it to other countries,' says Christian
Desachy, the environment ministry's director on waste.
In another voluntary move, France's environment and aid ministers launched a
campaign to encourage the French, who tend to get far too many pills from
over-prescribing doctors, to return to their local chemists unused
medicines. Their containers will be recycled by the drug industry, while
their contents will go to the third world.
Industrial waste of some 147m tonnes a year. Some 7m tonnes is considered
hazardous, requiring special treatment. On average, about half is dealt with
by manufacturers themselves. But some companies do more. Elf-Atochem, the
chemical wing of the Elf-Aquitaine oil group, treats 90 per cent of its
industrial waste, while Rhone-Poulenc treats 78 per cent of its own waste
and believes it can reach the 90 per cent level, too.
According to Alexandre Colin of the French chemical industry federation,
companies in this sector have been spending 15-20 per cent of their total
investment, and 3-4 per cent of operating costs, on reducing environmental
damage and industrial waste. Such calculations may be harder to make in the
future, says an executive for Rhone-Poulenc. By spending FFr1bn a year on
the environment, 'we at Rhone-Poulenc have done most of what we needed to do
to correct the problems of the past'. Most progress will come through
upstream investment in cleaner technology, 'and therefore environmental
investment will be harder to distinguish from ordinary investment'.
Out of waste has come jobs. FNADE, the main French federation of waste
specialist companies, has some 200 members employing 22,000 people. Some are
offshoots of the big construction and water treatment companies. Together,
they treat some 630,000 tonnes a year of industrial waste imported from
clients mainly in Germany, but also Belgium, the Netherlands and
Switzerland. However, France still sends some 3,000 tonnes a year of
untreatable potassium cyanide and arsenides residues for burial in German
salt mines.
'We have a good savoir-faire on waste, and it would be better to export this
than to import the waste itself,' says Desachy. However, as Claude Perrin,
deputy head of FNADE, points out, this is easier said than done, with France
still relying on superior incinerator technology from Germany and
Switzerland.
Next week: Hungary.
