FT  25 JAN 94 / Leading Article: Cross-Channel shopping
Since the European Union raised duty-free allowances on cross-border
shopping a year ago, British consumers have been quick to discover the
pleasures of a single market. Lured by lower prices, they have poured across
the Channel to stock up on drink and tobacco. By some estimates, such
purchases accounted for a fifth of all beer bought for home consumption in
Britain last Christmas.
But this bonus for consumers means a loss of business for UK producers and
retailers. There is also a problem for the Treasury. It has long relied more
than most European exchequers on revenue from high excise taxes, which
account for most of the cross-Channel price differences. But the tradition
of annual duty rises, beloved by successive Chancellors, is now threatened
by the law of diminishing returns. As much was acknowledged in the last
Budget, which left rates on beer and spirits unchanged.
But that has merely prevented a large discrepancy in retail prices from
widening further. As long as it persists, a strong incentive remains for
British shoppers to go abroad, and for 'parallel traders' to import alcohol
and tobacco cheaply for re-sale - a practice which is illegal but hard to
police effectively. At some point, something has to give.
British brewers, which are particularly threatened because of their heavy
dependence on their home market, have seized the opportunity to call for a
two-thirds cut in beer duties. So far, the Treasury is unimpressed, since
the proposal would involve foregoing much more tax revenue than is being
lost because of cross-Channel shopping. The brewers' solution is also out of
proportion to the problem because pubs, which account for four-fifths of all
beer sales, face no direct challenge from cheap imports.
Inflated premiums
The growth of cross-Channel shopping may in time serve to accelerate the
decline in pub drinking already under way. But that is a trend which the
brewers have actively encouraged. Since 1980, they have raised the pub price
of a pint, before tax, 60 per cent faster than inflation, to far above the
level in supermarkets. Equally, UK brewers which charge inflated premiums
for mainstream continental lager brands have only themselves to blame if
their sales and profits are now under attack.
The pursuit of such policies, in spite of falling consumption and excess
production capacity, suggests an industry which has grown used to operating
in a captive market. That is a luxury it is less likely to enjoy in future.
While there is a strong case for removing tax anomalies, the aim should be
to minimise trade distortions, not to shelter brewers' profits from the
disciplines of international competition.
Insular attitudes
However, insular attitudes are not confined to producers. The government has
also been slow to recognise that falling trade barriers have narrowed its
freedom for manoeuvre in indirect tax policy. Indeed, it appeared to assume
until quite recently that it could muddle along with its old ways regardless
of the exigencies of Europe's single market. Witness the Thatcher
administration's insistence in the late 1980s on building a customs hall at
Waterloo station to receive arriving Channel tunnel rail passengers.
Equally nonsensical was the spectacle of Mr Norman Lamont, when Chancellor,
admonishing other countries for discriminating against Scotch whisky exports
by taxing them excessively, while subjecting the same drink at home to some
of the heaviest taxes in Europe.
In recent months increased cross-border shopping has forced other EU
members, such as Denmark, with much higher indirect taxes than neighbouring
states, to cut them substantially. The pressures on the UK to do likewise
are likely to continue. This is not a comforting prospect for a government
struggling to reduce an already large budget deficit. But at least it cannot
claim to be unprepared. The Thatcher administration, after all, made much of
the competitive benefits of low income taxes. Britain also opposed Brussels'
earlier efforts to harmonise indirect taxes on the grounds that the level
should be influenced by the market.
