FT  02 JUL 94 / Ruthless killers or paper tigers: Tony Jackson says the sums
don't add up in the UK's newspaper price war
These are lively times for the UK newspaper industry. Mr Conrad Black's
Daily Telegraph slashes its cover price to 30p to match Mr Rupert Murdoch's
cut-price Times. The Times responds with a yet more suicidal cut to 20p. The
Telegraph's stockbroker, the immensely respectable Cazenove, resigns in
apparent protest at Mr Black's share dealings. For the public at large, this
is pure entertainment. Investors, by contrast, are bound to ask themselves
what the blazes is going on.
Two chief theories have emerged on what the press moguls are up to. The
first might be termed the end-game thesis. This argues that the UK newspaper
market is in terminal decline, and that Mr Murdoch and Mr Black are out to
drive weaker competitors to the wall and carve up what is left of the market
between them.
The second we might call the football thesis. This says that newspapers,
like football clubs, attract the kind of owners who are driven by
self-aggrandisement rather than profit. Newspapers have been
uncharacteristically profitable for the past seven or eight years, as a
result of the breaking of the print unions. Now the owners have come up with
a splendid wheeze for throwing that profit away, and the result is business
as usual.
The choice, in other words, is between conspiracy and cock-up. Let us take
conspiracy first. The newspaper, we are told, has had its day. The habit of
reading is dying out, especially among the young. The break-up of the family
means each copy of a newspaper is read by fewer people. The imminent arrival
of electronic media means newsprint is about to be rendered as obsolete as
the wax tablet.
So far as the quality press is concerned, none of this squares with the
facts. There is evidence that the UK tabloid press may be in decline: but
the combined circulation of broadsheet national dailies has been rock steady
for the past 20 years, varying only with the economic cycle. There was a
brief upward blip with the arrival of the Independent in 1986. The market
has now settled back to 2.2m copies a day, bang in line with the 20-year
average.
As for readership, the surprising fact is that the average for the quality
dailies has actually risen over the past decade from 3.1 readers per copy to
3.3. Once more, the trend in the tabloid press has been the other way. The
reasons are a matter for debate: the net effect, though, is that quality
press readership has actually risen by some 12 per cent over the period.
This leaves us with the promised advent of electronic media, a phenomenon of
undeniable significance and uncertain date. Its practical impact on the
market has so far been almost zero. The economic characteristics of
electronic newspapers are unclear, as is their relationship with
conventional media. If Messrs Black and Murdoch are basing their price cuts
on such a hazy prospect, they are gamblers indeed.
In fact, Mr Murdoch's motive in first slashing the price of The Times from
45p to 30p last September may have been rather more prosaic. During the
1980s, the quality press in Britain fared better than the tabloids in
circulation. The qualities also pushed their cover prices up much more
aggressively, so that between 1982 and 1991 their share of national daily
press circulation revenue shot up from 19 per cent to 27 per cent.
With the arrival of the cost-conscious 1990s, this became a dangerously
exposed position. It was also one being experienced by other owners of
branded consumer goods around the world. The most celebrated instance was
Marlboro, America's favourite cigarette, which had become much more
expensive than its cut-price competitors. In April last year, Marlboro's
owner Philip Morris shocked the market by slashing the US price by 20 per
cent. The Philip Morris board which made that decision included Mr Murdoch.
The Times price cut in September was even more aggressive than Marlboro's,
amounting to some 30 per cent over a six-day week. Nevertheless, it was not
without commercial logic. Within six months The Times's circulation had shot
up from about 360,000 to 515,000. Simple arithmetic suggests that
circulation revenue on an annualised basis thus stayed almost unchanged.
At the same time, higher sales should have allowed The Times to charge more
for its advertising space. This is important, since the average broadsheet
gets about twice as much revenue from advertisements as from circulation.
What this has actually been worth for The Times is a matter of guesswork. It
has not raised its official advertisement rates, and the rate cards of most
newspapers are in any case a polite fiction. In the last quarter of 1993,
according to one industry estimate, the qualities as a class were
discounting their advertising space by about 40 per cent.
The net effect of all this on the Times's profits is hard to gauge,
especially since the rise in circulation will have meant a corresponding
rise in newsprint and other production costs. Nevertheless, it can be argued
that until last week Mr Murdoch's strategy was defensible in commercial
terms.
Then came Mr Black's intervention, and the game changed overnight. This is
where the cock-up theory comes in. The Telegraph's cut in its weekly
newspaper bill very nearly matched that of The Times, at 29 per cent. At
that point, however, the sums part company.
The Telegraph's circulation is roughly twice that of The Times. It does not
follow that the Telegraph can therefore lure away twice as many floating
readers. Suppose, for the sake of argument, that the Telegraph's initiative
is as successful as was The Times's. This means a rise of 155,000 copies, or
15 per cent of the Telegraph's circulation. Put that together with a 29 per
cent drop in price, and a back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that
circulation revenue falls 18 per cent.
Mr Murdoch's immediate reaction, to cut the price of The Times by a further
third, means his sums go out of the window as well. But as he will doubtless
have calculated, his hand is stronger than Mr Black's in two respects.
First, Mr Murdoch's global empire is a good deal bigger than Mr Black's, and
his pockets are deeper. Second, the profits or losses of The Times are
buried in Mr Murdoch's group accounts. The paper is believed to have lost
money for years, but there is no knowing for sure.
The accounts of The Telegraph plc, by contrast, are transparent. Every time
Mr Black cuts his price, any investor with a pocket calculator can make a
fair stab at what it means for group profits and dividends. Since last
week's cut, the value of the company has fallen by about a third, or Pounds
250m. At this rate, Mr Black's shareholders will become restive long before
Mr Murdoch's do.
Meanwhile, both papers will be looking for cost savings as a means of
containing the damage. It is not clear where they will find them. The big
savings in production were made in the late 1980s. Cutting editorial staff
during a circulation war would risk defeating the object. Attempts will
doubtless be made to squeeze the margins of the newsagents, but the
newsagents can take care of themselves. Meanwhile, the cost of newsprint is
moving up in its usual cyclical fashion: and since the last upswing in the
cycle, both papers have added to their newsprint bills by increasing their
pagination.
The alternative is to push up circulation still further. Executives at The
Times are talking of raising their circulation to 700,000. If they succeed -
and it is a big if - they may once again have recouped lost revenue. Even
so, the paper will scarcely be breaking even. If it is ever to make a decent
commercial return, its price must eventually be pushed back up again.
The crucial question for the industry is whether this will prove possible.
The argument about the stability of broadsheet circulation, after all, cuts
both ways. In the long run, extra copies won by The Times and the Telegraph
can come only from their rivals. The more numerous these copies, the more it
appears that the UK public is becoming promiscuous in its reading habits;
and that newspapers, like other branded goods in the 1990s, are moving
towards the status of commodities, sold chiefly on price.
In commercial terms, therefore, Mr Murdoch and Mr Black are playing a
dangerous game. How fortunate, one might conclude, that like football
bosses, they are not just in it for the money.
