FT  19 APR 94 / Prosecutor raps Deutsche Bank over Schneider
The Frankfurt prosecutors' office yesterday criticised Deutsche Bank,
biggest creditor to the collapsed Schneider property group, for holding back
information.
Mr Job Tilmann, a senior prosecutor, said his office was 'surprised and
displeased' by the way Deutsche bank had withheld important facts when the
bank launched its fraud claim against the missing Mr Jurgen Schneider, who
built up the group.
Mr Tilmann said that when Deutsche lodged its claim last week, alleging that
Mr Schneider had made a fraudulent loan application to finance a shopping
centre in Frankfurt, the bank had not mentioned that it had known about Mr
Schneider's disappearance on April 7 - four days before the group's problems
were made public.
The bank had also kept silent about access it had to documents at the
property group's Konigstein headquarters, Mr Tilmann told the Financial
Times.
He described the bank's silence as 'idiosyncratic'. The implication,
strenuously denied by Deutsche, is that the delay may have impeded the city
prosecutors' case against Mr Schneider.
Deutsche said that when it filed its suit against Schneider it offered to
participate in talks with the prosecutors' office.
Separately Mr Otto Lambsdorff, economics spokesman for the Free Democratic
Party, junior partner in the ruling coalition, said in a radio interview
yesterday that the affair was a 'huge disgrace for German banks', with
dangerous repercussions for the recovery in eastern Germany. It presented
the market economy in the wrong light.
'Anyone who makes it that easy to pull off a fraud cannot talk his way out
of the situation by saying that he was made a victim of fraud,' Mr
Lambsdorff said.
Deutsche Bank yesterday rounded on its critics, explaining how it had
reacted after a board member received a letter from Mr Schneider on April 7
asking for further credits and saying that on medical advice he had gone to
an unknown destination.
'Until this point there were no considerable payment delays (in respect of
Schneider) within the Deutsche Bank group,' the bank said. 'It was only then
that it became clear that the group was in acute financial difficulties.'
The bank said that in the following days it talked to officials at Jurgen
Schneider AG, discovering evidence which gave rise to the suspicion of
fraud. The loan application was refused and it was only on the evening of
Sunday April 10 that suspicion hardened that Mr Schneider had taken flight.
The next day the group's problems were made public.
Deutsche said that it was owed DM1.2bn in respect of eight of the group's 85
property developments in Germany. It insisted it had been gradually reducing
its lending to Schneider and that its loans were well secured by mortgages
against individual properties. Schneider collapsed with debts of more than
DM5bn.
The city prosecutor said it was in talks with the Federal Criminal Office
over the extent to which police should be brought in to track down Mr
Schneider.
Treuhand summons, Page 26
