FT  08 JUN 94 / UK Company News: Anglian Group at Pounds 25min improving
market
Anglian Group, the double glazing company, yesterday announced an 8.7 per
cent increase in annual pre-tax profits to Pounds 25.1m, despite the loss of
business from the privatisation of the Property Services Agency.
Mr Bill Hancock, chief executive, said: 'We do not expect the current year
to be easy, but consumer confidence in the domestic sector, though still
patchy, has improved.'
The share price rose 13p to 251p yesterday, but that compared with a price
of more than 320p before the March profits warnings over PSA sales.
Anglian revealed that sales to the PSA market for the year to April 2 had
fallen from Pounds 19.2m to Pounds 7.8m. It added, however, that it had
achieved a reasonable level of lower margin sales to the PSA's successors
and had also increased sales to local authorities and housing authorities.
Reflecting this confidence, the dividend for the year is being increased by
8.4 per cent to 10.3p via a recommended final of 6.2p. Earnings per share
rose from 18.7p to 19.3p.
Total turnover increased by 17 per cent to Pounds 176.7m, although Pounds
17.2m of the figure was attributable to recently-acquired New England
Windows. Increased retail sales made up for the PSA shortfall. Overall,
profit margins were roughly maintained at 14.8 per cent.
Anglian said the new automated production line would begin operating later
this month and said it was confident this would enable it to ease pressure
on its profit margins. These would also be boosted by a 5 per cent increase
in prices, put through in January.
The company recently acquired a 77.5 per cent stake in Living Design, one of
Scotland's largest window and kitchen groups. It was now looking at the
possibility of acquiring a PVC-u business to lower costs for the new
production base.
Anglian has also expanded into the security alarm business through the
purchase of 75 per cent of Status Innovations, with a view to marketing
security products to its existing client base.
COMMENT
Anglian has succeeded in weathering the recession with remarkable ease, but
having already taken a main share of the market it is going to struggle to
achieve more. Its new production line should help maintain profit margins,
but the market place remains competitive, and it will have to rely on volume
increases to boost its profits. Analysts believe it can push pre-tax profits
up to Pounds 28m for the current year, which leaves the shares on a p/e
ratio of 11.6. This suggests some upside potential for the share price, but
the outlook is unexciting.
