FT  25 OCT 94 / US offers Cuba small hope for dialogue
As Cuba and the US renewed talks on immigration issues in Havana yesterday
there was little sign the meeting would satisfy initial Cuban hopes for a
wider dialogue on the longstanding US-Cuban conflict.
The talks were scheduled to review progress of an immigration accord signed
on September 9 that will sharply increase the number of Cubans allowed to
migrate legally to the US each year. The September agreement halted an
exodus by sea of thousands of Cubans trying to reach the US without entry
visas.
Both sides have have expressed a willingness to make the immigration deal
work, but Washington has resisted Cuban pressure for full-scale negotiations
on bigger issues such as the US trade and financial embargo against the
island.
Cuba's foreign minister Roberto Robaina admitted to a parliamentary foreign
affairs committee on Saturday there were 'no new elements' to suggest the
mere continuation of the immigration talks would lead to immediate
significant improvements in relations.
The US even appeared to have downgraded the importance of its delegation to
the Havana talks. Instead of Mr Michael Skol, deputy assistant secretary of
state, who took part in the September negotiations, the US team in Havana
was led by a lower-ranking official, the head of the State Department's Cuba
desk. Cuba is keeping its same chief negotiator, Mr Ricardo Alarcon,
president of Cuba's National Assembly and a member of the Communist party
politburo.
While the latest talks have no fixed agenda, Cuba was was thought likely to
press for a quick start to the expanded US visa programme. The increased
visa processing has been delayed because additional consular staff had to be
sent to the US Interests Section in Havana to help cope with the extra work.
US officials say between 26,000 and 27,000 Cubans are expected to be granted
visas to migrate legally over the next year, through accelerated processing
procedures, expanded criteria for refugee status and an immigration lottery
to start on November 1.
