FT  25 OCT 94 / Pentos considers disposals to focus on Dillons
The new management of Pentos, the loss-making specialist retailer, is
considering selling off most of its businesses and concentrating growth on
Dillons, the booksellers.
Mr Bill McGrath, who took over as chief executive in January, said in an
interview that Dillons had the potential to be 'tremendously profitable'.
Mr McGrath outlined his future strategy in response to complaints from a
group of former senior managers of Pentos to the Financial Times about the
running of the company. The complaints followed worse than expected pre-tax
losses of Pounds 36m in the first half to July 2.
Mr McGrath implied that the three other businesses - Ryman, the stationer;
Athena Galleries, the cards and poster chain, and Pentos Office Furniture
would be for sale at the right price.
He said the aim was to maximise shareholder value, return the company to
profit and dividend payment without going back to shareholders for further
funds.
'None of the companies is being marketed but if an offer was to be presented
to us that would expedite that process (a return to profit) we would give it
obviously serious consideration,' Mr McGrath said.
The Pentos chief executive said he was not talking about 'fire-sales'
although he conceded that with Athena, the 'most problematic' of the
companies he might take a more radical view.
He expects a cash outflow from Athena for the next two years.
The Pentos chief executive implied that he might he prepared to sell Athena
for a relatively low price.
'I think the best thing we can have for shareholders, staff and customers is
a vibrant, healthy, profitable bookselling business,' said Mr McGrath.
Analysts believe that Dillons could make profits of Pounds 5m in the second
half on 1994 compared with a trading loss of Pounds 13m in the first half.
Mr McGrath rejected all the complaints from former managers about his
strategies.
'I think I could have moved on some of the people changes quicker, but it is
always a balance. You are always wiser with 20:20 hindsight,' the Pentos
chief executive said.
Background, Page 22
