FT  18 AUG 94 / UN warns of world's creaking cradle: Annual population
report points to huge strains on resources
The world's population is set to reach a staggering 10bn by the middle of
the next century, up from 5.7bn now, the United Nations warned yesterday.
The annual report from the UN's Population Fund (UNFPA), released yesterday,
says the projections assume that the average number of children born to each
woman will continue to fall, as it has done steadily for several decades
(see accompanying story).
If birth rates fall by more it expects the world's population may be as low
as 7.8bn people in 2050. If they stop falling, the total could reach 12.5bn.
The difference between the upper and lower projections - nearly 5bn people,
as much as the world's current population - has huge implications for
prosperity, migration and demand for natural resources. But in advance of a
UN conference in Cairo next month, controversy is mounting over how
countries can try to restrain population growth, or whether they should do
so at all.
Global figures conceal the diverging fortunes of different regions. Africa's
population growth of 2.9 per cent a year is the highest in the world, easily
outstripping Asian and Latin American growth of less than 2 per cent, the
report says. Although many developing countries have seen steady falls in
total fertility rates - the average number of children born to each woman -
they have also seen life expectancy soar in the past 40 years from 41 years
to 61 years, according to the UNFPA.
Industrialised countries can expect their share of the world's population to
shrink given their slow rates of population growth: about 1 per cent a year
in North America, 0.5 per cent a year in the former Soviet Union and 0.3 per
cent a year in western Europe. Meanwhile, their populations are ageing: the
UNFPA expects the proportion of people aged 65 and over in industrialised
countries to rise from the present 12.7 per cent to 18.4 per cent by 2025.
The report flags a long list of economic, social and environmental concerns
that follow from its projections. It warns that population growth will put
huge strains on the supply of natural resources such as forests, fish and
clean air.
It dismisses fears of an 'overall global shortage of food' of the kind much
voiced by 'Club of Rome' school of forecasters some 20 years ago, pointing
out that 'during the past 10 years, the world's food production has
increased by 24 per cent, outpacing the rate of population growth'.
But the report points out that the improvement in food production has been
unevenly distributed; in Africa during the past decade, food production fell
by 5 per cent while population rose by a third. The report concludes that
while production 'should be sufficient to meet all needs for the foreseeable
future . . . poverty translates global adequacy into national and local
shortages'.
Water, as much as food, may prove 'an increasing cause of friction' between
countries and regions, the UN suggests. Rapidly industrialising countries
such as China are facing intense demand for water supplies from industry as
well as from rural populations which are continuing to grow.
Developing countries should brace themselves for huge internal migration as
surplus rural labour travels to the towns to look for work, the UN warns.
The report estimates that 1.3bn will be added to the workforces of Asia,
Africa and Latin America between 1995 and 2020. It adds that cities are
likely to contain half the world's population by the end of the century.
For their part, developed countries need to consider how to respond to
rising pressure for immigration, particularly along Europe's and North
America's southern borders. The UN describes present levels of international
migration as 'hardly significant numerically - about a million people a year
 -compared with movement within countries toward urban areas'. But it warns
that such migration has 'a social and economic impact out of proportion to
its numbers'.
State of World Population 1994, United Nations Population Fund, 220 East
42nd St, New York, NY 10017 USA
See editorial comment
