FT  10 DEC 94 / How to Spend It: 'That's just what I've always wanted' -
Gift ideas for the person with a special interest, here are a number of
suggestions that you might not have thought of . . . / The Wine Buff
What to buy for enthusiasts and experts - it is an annual dilemma. Their
hobbies ought to provide a host of ideas.
But what if they have already got your chosen gift, or - even worse - what
if it is not the right make or design? The Weekend FT's experts offer some
suggestions . . .
If it is books they like, there were two major publications this autumn:
Jancis Robinson's Oxford Companion to Wine (OUP, Pounds 30) and Hugh
Johnson's World Atlas of Wine (Mitchell Beazley, Pounds 30). Robinson's book
is the most useful and up to date. Johnson's is the nicest to look at.
Johnson's shop, at 68 St James's (tel: 071-491 4912) is a good place for
wine related presents. If you go there on the evening of December 15,
Johnson will be there, signing copies of his atlas. A good-sized decanter,
copied from a c1810 original, may be had for Pounds 157, or Pounds 227 for
magnums. For the original you will have to pay Pounds 300.
A useful idea is a wine cooler which covers the whole bottle. This is made
from copper, plated with silver and costs Pounds 395.
Silver bottle holders are available for Pounds 200 and the popular decanting
cradle is Pounds 175 or Pounds 350 for magnums. A beautiful claret jug with
a silver mount comes in the form of a modernised ampora for Pounds 400.
For the female wine buff there is a necklace of lapis lazuli with bunches of
grapes at Pounds 295.
An amusing idea, which has the virtue of being slightly cheaper than many of
the items in the shop is a decanter label in silver with the legend 'plonk'
(Pounds 36). It might make a subtle hint.
The best wine glasses come from the Austrian company of Riedel. The
hand-made sommeliers range starts at Pounds 23 a stem. If that is too much
to pay, the vinum range is about half that and few people will know the
difference. Selfridges and Harrods have them. For other stockists call
Michael Johnson Ceramics (tel: 071-624 2493).
