FT  28 FEB 94 / The Personal Pensions Time Bomb: Hard sell increases the
costly potential of 'a duff product' - Norma Cohen traces the development of
ideas aimed at reducing the burden of financing retirement which have
drained Pounds 10.5bn from the National Insurance fund in seven years
It was during a weekend gathering of ministers and civil servants at
Chevening, the chancellor of the exchequer's country residence, in July 1992
that the government was first warned of the financial difficulties it had
created by promoting personal pensions.
On the opening day of a strategy session called by Mr Peter Lilley, the
social security secretary, a group of ministers and civil servants was
alerted to the potential cost of persuading people to opt out of
occupational and state pension schemes into personal pension plans.
The warning came from Mr David Clark, then deputy secretary for pensions, in
a paper to the assembled group of senior civil servants and ministers. A
minister recalled: 'The paper said that, in some sense, personal pensions
have been a tremendous success but there are a few time bombs ticking away
there.' The time bombs had been set ticking just eight years earlier when,
as a former official put it, the government became 'mesmerised' by the
allure of personal pensions as a way to extend choice, increase individual
investment and reduce the cost of the state pension scheme.
Yet even at the outset the government was warned of the potential pitfalls.
Throughout the preparation of the legislation pensions specialists and
senior civil servants highlighted the risks to the government's finances and
to ill-informed consumers who might be encouraged to opt out of occupational
schemes that would serve them better.
The full consequences of the government's enthusiasm are only now becoming
clear. That weekend there were revelations for Mr Lilley. He was told that
about 60 per cent of the nearly 5m people who had taken out personal
pensions since 1987 were saving no more towards their retirement than the
tax rebate the government offered them. And for vast numbers of these people
the sum amounted to only several hundred pounds a year.
The Pounds 6.9bn in tax rebates paid out between 1987 and 1992 had induced
very little of the activity that the government was so keen to encourage -
long-term savings by individuals for their own retirement.
The minister was also warned that hopes of cutting the costs of the state
earnings-related pension scheme (Serps) were unlikely to bear fruit because
people had the option of contracting back into the scheme when the rebate
was no longer to their advantage.
Large numbers of personal pensions were being sold to people who were either
too old or earned too little to benefit from them. A number of these would
be worse off in retirement than if they had not taken a personal pension.
Top officials at the DSS had nagging worries about personal pensions for
nearly a year before the July meeting when the first demographic data about
personal pension-holders was available to the department.
The officials said they were becoming particularly concerned about the
possibility that there was a direct connection between reports of widespread
mis-selling by life insurance sales agents and the fact that personal
pensions were being sold to those who could not benefit from them.
Yet when personal pensions were launched there was no public hint that they
would create financial difficulties on the scale now feared.
Indeed, the government launched the policy with an advertising campaign that
showed people shackled by their occupational pensions who would be set free
by personal pensions.
The government's interest in personal pensions came initially from two
sources: consumers and ideologues.
Mr Marshall Field, partner at consulting actuaries Bacon and Woodrow and
former general manager of Phoenix Assurance who was closely involved in the
development of the plans, recalled the roots of personal pensions in the
early 1980s: 'There was a great deal of fuss from consumerists and the press
about the poor treatment of early leavers from occupational schemes.'
The other push came from the Centre for Policy Studies, the rightwing
think-tank. It published a paper in 1982 written by Lord Vinson and the late
Mr Phillip Chappell that called for individual ownership of pension assets.
That message, former DSS officials said, gripped Sir Norman Fowler, then
social security secretary and now Conservative party chairman. Individual
ownership of pensions and the promotion of choice and flexibility in pension
provision seemed a logical extension of individual ownership of homes and
shares, which were already articles of faith for the Tories.
Yet even at this stage there were warnings from seasoned servers in the
pensions industry, including those who helped to write the legislation.
A former civil servant said: 'The reality is that this was a duff product
from day one.'
Former officials say ministers who pushed the legislation through were told
from the outset that personal pensions were likely to be bad for taxpayers
and a bad bargain for all but a limited group of potential customers.
Sir Norman pressed ahead by setting up a committee, including government
ministers and Mr Field, to consider changes to social security legislation.
He also set up a personal pensions sub-group, which included the highly
influential Sir Mark Weinberg, now chairman of J. Rothschild Assurance and
creator of two of Britain's largest life companies, Allied Dunbar and Abbey
Life.
One of Sir Norman's former aides said: 'In the main, Weinberg was the only
person in the industry who Fowler had direct contact with.' That group
produced a report in July 1984 which reflected both the concern that people
who left occupational schemes early were penalised with lower benefits and
the desire to promote individual choice. It also in part addressed concerns
about the potential for customers to be exploited by the way personal
pensions could be sold.
In particular, the National Association of Pension Funds had warned the
group that strict regulation of sales practices and control of fees and
charges would be needed to protect the consumers.
But by late 1984 government ministers had another reason to press ahead.
They were growing alarmed about projections that showed the cost of Serps
could soar by the year 2030. Mr Field said: 'It was at that point that they
got the idea you could blend these two themes together.'
Personal pensions seemed to offer a way to cut the costs of Serps by using
tax incentives to encourage people to opt out of the state scheme. The idea
was taken up in a government green paper on social security issued in June
1985.
Meanwhile, the Government Actuaries Department was asked to work up
projections about how many people would be likely to contract out of Serps
through a personal pension.
Although it outlined the effect on Serps if up to 5m contracted out,
privately GAD officials said it was never imagined that more than 500,000
would choose a personal pension. That was either because most people were in
a good occupational scheme or because the millions in poorly paid or
part-time jobs who were ineligible for an occupational pension would not be
able to take out a personal pension. Most significantly, the GAD made a
vital assumption about the impact of personal pensions on the government's
finances.
It had assumed that rebates of National Insurance contributions, which were
to be used to help fund personal pensions, would be what was actuarially
needed to provide a pension of equivalent value to a Serps pension on
retirement.
But, according to former officials, Sir Norman was determined to see large
numbers of people contract out of Serps.
That drive to cut the costs of Serps was reflected in a white paper
published in December 1985. What a portion of the industry liked in the
white paper was its proposal for offering rebates of National Insurance
contribution that, for young people, were far larger than what was needed to
provide them with the equivalent of a Serps pension by the time they reached
state retirement age.
The DSS was prepared to add a 2-percentage-point rebate of NI contributions
to those contracting out of Serps for the first time, so that for young
people earning enough to pay NI contributions a personal pension could be
very lucrative.
The other side of the coin, however, was that they were a bad deal for men
over the age of about 45 and women over the age of about 40, because the NI
rebate was buying less pension benefit than they would receive in Serps.
By April 1992 there were about 296,000 men over the age of 45 who were
contracted via personal pensions and 206,000 women over the age of 40.
Uniformly, former ministers and many in the life insurance industry refer to
the additional 2 per cent of NI rebate as a bribe to persuade people to opt
out of Serps.
Once the policy found its way into the Social Security Act of 1986 people
were allowed to contract back into Serps when they were too old to enjoy the
advantages of contracting out.
The results of this policy were set out in a study by the National Audit
Office in December 1990. It found that the rebates earned on personal
pensions between 1988 and 1993 would cost Pounds 5.9bn more than they would
save in terms of lower entitlements to state pensions.
A former official said: 'We all told the secretary of state that personal
pensions were really only good for the very young or for very high earners.
The head of the contributions agency in Newcastle (which remits NI rebates
to personal pension accounts) told me that on the last day of eligibility
for retrospective tax benefits three lorries full of applications turned up
at her door.'
Personal pensions, enshrined in the Social Security Act of 1986, became
available in July 1988. Self-regulating bodies began to notice mis-selling
was going on in 1990.
In March of that year Lautro, the self-regulating body for the life
insurance industry, issued an enforcement bulletin saying it was concerned
about misleading advertising urging people to contract out of Serps.
It reminded companies that only certain people could benefit - a significant
fact missing from the advertising - and warned them to modify their
advertising accordingly.
By the end of June 1991 Lautro was well aware that sales agents were urging
occupational scheme members to transfer into personal pensions. At this
stage, there were about 4.3m personal pension holders. In a report of its
monitoring committee, released in January 1992, Lautro noted that in the 12
months to the preceding June it had received many complaints about transfers
and had found evidence of mis-selling.
It was about this time that DSS officials started to worry that personal
pensions were being taken out by people who would have been better off
staying in an occupational scheme.
In June 1992, the month before Mr Lilley gathered his team at Chevening,
Lautro and Fimbra, the self-regulating body for independent financial
advisers, warned members that under almost no circumstances should they urge
an employed member of an occupational scheme to take a personal pension.
Although the personal pensions legislation gave the DSS the power to set
fees and charges, it has never written regulations to do so. Its one rule
has been that insurers may take no more than 5 per ent a year of the NI
rebate in sales agents' commissions, less than that paid on individual
monthly contributions to personal pensions.
The effect of the contracting out from Serps soon began to tell on the
National Insurance fund. By the end of the 1988-89 tax year - the first year
in which they were available - about 1.057m pensions had been sold, twice
the GAD projection. By the end of the following tax year they totalled
3.85m, rising to 4.305m at the end of the 1991 tax year.
Ministers watched as the massive rebates quickly eroded a Pounds 1.58bn
surplus in the NI fund. In the seven tax years ending April 1994, more than
Pounds 10.5bn has been paid out of the fund on behalf of individuals who
have contracted out of Serps through an approved personal pension.
Because of this drain on the fund, which is the pool into which workers'
National Insurance contributions are paid, several items historically funded
by the fund were slipped into the general revenue budget, where they remain.
Ministers did not advertise the outpouring of funds but a National Audit
Office report in December 1990 did.
The NAO found that because people could opt back into Serps when it was no
longer to their advantage to stay out, the Pounds 9bn in outgoings from 1988
to 1993 were only going to cut Serps' costs by Pounds 3.1bn.
The tragedy of the personal pensions saga is that at the outset there was a
clear need for government action.
Occupational pensions disadvantaged those who changed jobs and many who
wanted one had no access to it. Moreover, Serps would become unaffordable as
Britain's population aged.
But the net effect of personal pensions policies as a way to meet those
goals has been that taxpayers have spent billions to provide pensions to
some who may well be worse off in retirement than they would have been.
