FT  19 DEC 94 / Survey of the Czech Republic (12): A blot on the conscience
 -Czech attitudes on citizenship for gypsies come under fire
'The gypsies are vermin. We should put them on trains and move them out.
People here prefer the skinheads, ask anyone.'
This was how a news vendor reacted in the picturesque town of Pisck in South
Bohemia earlier this month when 14 skinheads were acquitted over charges
arising from the death of a 17-year-old Romany (gypsy) boy. He was
expressing a widely-held view which reflects badly on the Czech reputation
for tolerance.
The Czech Republic enjoys a good press as a model of how a post-communist
state should be run. Mr Vaclav Klaus, the prime minister, has shown himself
to be a hard-headed and sophisticated leader, fully alert to the country's
economic needs. President Vaclav Havel enjoys a worldwide reputation as a
champion of liberal values. The country's image shines in a region beset by
communist comebacks and re-awakened ethnic conflicts.
However, treatment of the Romanies, the republic's only sizeable ethnic
minority, not just by skinheads, but by the government itself, is a source
of growing disquiet. An American diplomat told an international conference
in Warsaw in September that Czech policies over citizenship were creating 'a
humanitarian crisis in the heart of Europe'.
Since July this year, some 100,000 Romanies have been stripped of their
Czech citizenship. A new law, enacted after the split with Slovakia in 1993,
classifies almost all the country's Romany population, estimated at over
250,000, as Slovaks, although two-thirds were born on Czech territory, and
the rest were moved from Slovakia by the communists, usually forcibly, after
the war. They were mainly employed as manual labour in an area depopulated
by the post-war expulsion of Sudeten Germans.
To qualify for Czech citizenship, those now classified as Slovaks had to
meet several difficult conditions, including proof of registered residency
and a clean criminal record. Many failed as they had to overcome a
bewildering mass of bureaucratic hurdles and thousands are illiterate.
Although the vast majority of Czechoslovak Romanies gave up their nomadic
lifestyle about 350 years ago, they have continued to live on the margins of
society. Unable to form an effective political lobby and with few powerful
friends, they have made easy targets.
Ms Ina Zoon, of the Tolerance Foundation, a Czech human rights group, argues
that the citizenship law 'was designed in a discriminatory way and directed
against the Romany people'.
Many Czechs view Romanies as troublemakers and criminals, heavily involved
in prostitution and other unsavoury professions. But others say it is unfair
and ironic for Romanies to be singled out for their supposed criminal
behaviour, when Czech society as a whole is plagued by corruption scandals,
and cheating and petty theft are widespread.
However, Romany pickpocketing gangs and pimps tend to be visible. Crime
committed by non-Romanies may be more sophisticated and the police are often
less vigorous in their pursuit of it.
Since July, Romanies without Czech citizenship have been deprived of some
key rights, including the right to vote in last month's local elections.
They have also started to see their social benefits withdrawn.
Not only Czechs, but the international community at large has traditionally
shown a lack of concern about the estimated 6m Romanies who now comprise the
largest stateless minority in Europe. They are a distinct people who have
preserved their own language and culture since migrating to Europe from
India in the 10th century. But they are often seen in terms of crude
stereotypes - as thieving vagrants, fortune-tellers or picturesque figures
out of Bizet's Carmen.
Recently, however, a number of international organisations have begun to
take note of their plight and Czech citizenship policies are under fire. In
October members of the US Congress wrote to Mr Klaus urging him to secure a
change in the citizenship law, which they described as 'the most extensive
revocation of citizenship since the end of the second world war'. Mr Max van
der Stoel, the CSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities, also 'strongly
urged that such legislation be changed'.
A great cultural divide exists between Czechs and Romanies. The latter are
stuck at the bottom of the social ladder, but so far the government has
brushed aside criticism. Mr Klaus described the congressional letter as
'insignificant. Tens, if not hundreds, of letters come to my desk everyday,'
he declared. Even President Havel has publicly defended the law. Jiri Payne,
head of the Czech Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee, says: 'Critics of
the law don't understand exactly how it is in our country.'
For Mr Klaus, the primary motivation behind the law may be a wish to remove
what he perceives as an economic drain and an obstacle on the headlong path
to prosperity. But there are also political advantages to be gained by
pandering to the widespread and often crudely-stated racism of much of the
electorate.
Opinion polls indicate around 75 per cent of Czechs dislike Romanies and 30
per cent believe they should be deported or isolated in ghettos. It is not
uncommon for bars and restaurants to display the sign: 'No Romanies served'.
Recently, even public swimming pools have started to ban them.
Where the government and its critics differ is about what should be done.
Romany groups now fear the Czech government may try to deport them. Although
the government denies this, economic hardships and racism may force many
Romanies to try to move to Slovakia, where the Czechs claim they will not
have trouble getting passports and citizenship rights.
It seems unlikely, however, that the new Slovak government, which includes
anti-Hungarian and anti-minority nationalists, will show much enthusiasm
about absorbing them. The danger here is that any border tug-of-war that
results could well inflame latent Czech-Slovak tensions as well as harming
the image of both countries.
