FT  09 MAY 94 / The B-teams head for South Africa's party
South Africa is throwing a party tomorrow. All welcome.
A national holiday has been declared so everyone can celebrate. As many as
150,000 will crowd into the gardens of the Union Buildings in Pretoria,
bastion of white rule for more than eight decades, to be present at the
inauguration of Mr Nelson Mandela as president.
Inside, the guest list of 5,000 dignitaries ranges from Afghanistan, still
involved in its own civil war, to Zimbabwe, in the form of President Robert
Mugabe, who shook off minority rule north of the Limpopo.
After hurried preparations by the hosts and probably security fears on the
part of those invited however, few western leaders have decided that their
journey is necessary. Europe will be represented by an assortment of royal
spouses and heirs, as well as by the European Union at Commissioner level
and the current Greek presidency, and by the occasional foreign minister,
such as Britain's Mr Douglas Hurd, who is due to accompany the Duke of
Edinburgh.
Foreign governments jets began lining up at Johannesburg's Jan Smuts
airport, target of a bomb attack immediately before polling late last month
in the country's first all-race elections. Far-right whites opposed to the
elections were suspected, but since voting began nearly two weeks ago,
political violence whether prepetrated by the white right or by rival black
groups, has all but evaporated.
Pretoria has been declared a no-fly zone for the duration of the ceremony
(yes, rump Yugoslavia will be there too) and much of the city centre will be
cordoned off to road traffic. But even with a much reduced threat of a
terror assault, logistical problems look daunting. Officials insist there
will be space for the 150,000 who have tickets, in the face of reports that
the capacity of the enclosure is barely half that.
Confidence in the ability of the bureaucracy to handle an exercise of this
kind has been shaken, however, by the ineptitude shown in organising the
elections themselves, results of which were delayed by a week.
Salmon trout salad and rack of veal will feed more than 1,000 of the top
dignitaries, and the long-exiled Miriam Makeba will sing for the masses
beyond. But in the weekend festival atmosphere, few are churlish enough to
raise the question of cost, put by one estimate at R22m (Pounds 4m). 'We
just don't know - the accounts will come in afterwards,' says one civil
servant involved in the preparations.
On financial matters, the incoming government encountered its first public
relations setback when it was disclosed that Mr Mandela, who has been
calling for cuts in political salaries, will receive R575,000 a year before
allowances. This is well above the rate for most western heads of state and
considerably more than the salary of R266,000 enjoyed by outgoing President
FW de Klerk. Mr Mandela's income was fixed by a committee set up by the old
white-dominated government.
Tomorrow, though, is a day for counting heads rather than rands and cents.
From the EU, according to a list of acceptances obtained by the Financial
Times last night, only Denmark is planning to send its prime minister, along
with the presidents of the Irish Republic and Portugal.
In place of US President Bill Clinton will come Mrs Hillary Rodham Clinton
and Vice President Al Gore. Canada plans to send a deputy premier and from
Australia will come Mr Malcolm Fraser, the prime minister before last. Japan
is sending its defence minister, a choice it shares with Albania.
It was unclear whether Cuban President Fidel Castro, whose troops suffered
heavy losses fighting South African-backed forces in Angola, would show up
in person.
