FT  21 MAY 94 / A public queen and a private person: Jurek Martin unravels
the legacy of a First Lady
On both sides of the Atlantic this week, the tabloid pack was massing, but
only in London did it sink its teeth into a royal target. On Thursday night,
in a spacious Fifth Avenue apartment in Manhattan, Jacqueline Kennedy
Onassis died from cancer, not only free at last from the camera's prying
lenses but with her own privacy intact.
That this should be so is remarkable. For the public scrutiny which is the
lot of British royalty was first elevated to its current pitch more than 30
years ago by American fascination, soon to spread around the world, with the
glamorous young woman married to the handsome young 35th president of the
United States, who together briefly formed America's royal family.
Mrs Onassis (or Jackie or Jackie O, after her marriage to the Greek shipping
magnate) was never out of the news. But this graceful icon of a new form of
American womanhood, alternately the subject of much adulation and some
vilification, came to the end of her life almost prosaically, as a private
citizen, as a grandmother, and as a career woman.
The span of her public life, from Jacqueline Bouvier, the debutante, to a
senior editor's job at Doubleday, the publishers, is in its always
privileged and off-centred way very much the American story of the times.
She glittered in the 1950s with her marriage to the ambitious young
politician from Massachussetts in a decade when her country was
rediscovering the taste of prosperity after the war.
She dazzled in the White House of the 1960s, as a new generation took over
Washington and made power and style inseparable. Part of her enduring appeal
was because, as Gloria Steinem, the feminist writer, recently put it, 'she
is the remaining familiar face from a time of hope in this country'.
As that hope crumbled, she suffered, and her country saw the agony etched on
her face, as John Kennedy was shot to death next to her in Dallas, and
again, five years later, when her brother-in-law, Robert F Kennedy, was cut
down in Los Angeles. The first assassination was a seminal moment in the
development of television as a mass medium and she was its first tragic
heroine.
She escaped in 1968 into a second marriage and great wealth with Aristotle
Onassis, an international jetsetter who blazed the way for a later
generation of what has come to be known as Eurotrash. In so doing, she
married a succesful businessman much older than her - and would be described
in today's terms as the ultimate 'trophy wife'.
Then, though she never needed financially to earn another cent, she went to
work, just as American women began to spread themselves into employment.
Finally, she spent the last 15 years or so of her life as the constant
companion of a man who was never divorced from his wife.
Of course, much of her early fame was based on her marriages, especially to
a Kennedy, the closest the US has come to a royal dynasty and as flawed as
most of the European varieties. It was not publicly known then that the
president chased women in droves and the partnership seemed to conform
precisely to the image of the king and queen of Camelot.
But, for reasons that now seem understandable, she seemed to have kept her
personal distance from that most extraordinary of American families. After
JFK's death, she and her two surviving children rarely joined the summer
clan gatherings on Cape Cod. And she married Onassis just months after RFK
was laid to rest with what was seen as scant regard for the sensibilities of
a country which thought she should remain a Kennedy queen forever.
That relationship was the only one which temporarily tarnished her
reputation. The supermarket magazines portrayed her as snobbish, avaricious
and self-centred, forever on shopping trips with bottomless pockets. The
Onassis connection returned to haunt her later, in 1988, when she was
criticised for refusing to attend the funeral of her stepdaughter, Christina
Onassis.
But her greatest achievement must surely be that it is still possible even
for those on whom the public spotlight is always turned to preserve privacy
and dignity. That ability may have been innate, for she was always a
disciplined character (a lifelong heavy smoker, she hardly ever allowed
herself to be caught in public with a cigarette in her mouth). She was also
taught in a tough school by a Kennedy family which, whatever its qualities,
was never tolerant of privacy.
Just last month Hillary Rodham Clinton, no softie herself, was musing on the
conflict between public demands and private considerations and seemed half
to admit that her emphasis on the latter, motivated in good measure by the
imperative of protecting her daughter, was misplaced.
Mrs Onassis, also a good mother, would probably have disagreed with her  -
and may have done so when the two women met privately during and after the
1992 election campaign. Mrs Clinton acknowledged as much in a tribute
yesterday, recalling that Mrs Onassis had once told her: 'if you bungle
raising your children, I don't think whatever else you do matters very
much.'
To that end, in the last 20 years of her life, just about the only
interviews she gave were about her work in publishing - and she cut off
those friends who had the temerity to talk about her to the media. One who
did speak observed, anonymously but kindly, that it 'is queer that her
public persona and real self should be so unlike'.
First Ladies often learn the hard way to be tough. For some, like Pat Nixon
and Betty Ford, who was thrust into the job on short notice, the lessons
were unbearably painful. But a modern lineage which runs from Eleanor
Roosevelt through Rosalynn Carter and Nancy Reagan to the present incumbent
reveals a group of women expected not only to support their husbands but
also to develop with determination their own agenda, with Mrs Clinton and
Mrs Roosevelt pushing furthest into the policy arena.
Mrs Onassis was true to this pedigree. Her distinctive contribution was to
be a beacon of modern American style - practically the inventor of it. As
such she set standards for subsequent First Ladies long after her pill box
hats, outsize sun glasses and designer dresses had passed out of fashion.
These standards and this style, which reduced even Charles de Gaulle to
blithering incoherence in admiration, have never quite been emulated since
though not, as Mrs Reagan showed, for want of trying.
That might not seem substantive for a country founded on good republican
principles, but fascination with royalty has not been extinguished by 218
years of independence. And in Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, public queen and
private person, America was served by a role model which nations with
monarchies going back centuries might well envy.
