FT  12 JUL 94 / UK Company News: An efficacious formula - Daniel Green on
Smith &amp; Nephew's new found prominence
There are few happy investors in the healthcare industries these days, but
shareholders in Smith &amp; Nephew might at least have a half-smile on their
faces.
S&amp;N's shares have outperformed the falling FT-SE 100 index and the
pharmaceuticals sector by more than 10 per cent this year.
The unhappy pharmaceuticals sector has been hurt by falling margins because
those who pay for drugs - insurance companies in the US and governments
elsewhere - are bearing down on healthcare costs.
The profitability of the drugs industry, where operating margins of more
than 30 per cent are typical, makes it an obvious target for efforts to cut
prices.
But S&amp;N seems to have been relatively unaffected. Annual sales in 1993 were
Pounds 949m, up 11 per cent on 1992. Pre-tax profits before exceptional
items were Pounds 163m, up 16 per cent.
Perhaps most important, trading profit margins have risen from 16.5 per cent
in 1992 to 17.1 per cent last year and 'are trending up again this year',
says Mr John Robinson, chief executive. He says that they are likely to stay
in the 17 to 18 per cent range.
S&amp;N is happy with its new-found prominence. It has struggled for years to
shrug off its image of a slow-moving pedlar of bandages and creams. Without
medical magic bullets and blockbuster drug sales, the company's shares have
been outpaced by the likes of Glaxo and Wellcome.
The turnround this year is the result of the very dullness of S&amp;N's product
range. Drug companies rely on a handful of big sellers for their success.
Trouble with one can mean trouble for the whole company. S&amp;N has 2,000
brands and none is vital to the future of the company. In a time of
declining growth in healthcare, that gives S&amp;N a rare defensive appeal.
Almost two thirds of sales are in four sectors:
Casting and support. These include joint bracing devices and modern versions
of the plaster cast. S&amp;N says it is the world's biggest supplier, ahead of
3M and Johnson &amp; Johnson of the US. Sales in 1993 were Pounds 162m, up from
Pounds 121m a year earlier;
Trauma and arthroscopy. These are fracture repair devices and keyhole
surgery equipment. S&amp;N says it is second and first respectively in world
sales competing against the likes of Stryker of the US and Zimmer, part of
Bristol-Myers Squibb, the US drug company. Sales last year were Pounds 199m
(Pounds 155m);
Orthopaedic implants, mostly artificial knees and hips. This is a fragmented
business led by Zimmer and Howmedica, part of Pfizer, the US drugs company.
S&amp;N sales last year were Pounds 118m (Pounds 95m) and Mr Robinson
acknowledges that the company is too weak, especially in hip implants. 'We
are vulnerable there,' he says;
Wound management, mostly specialist dressings for skin ulcers and pressure
sores which often afflict the bedridden. Sales last year were Pounds 136m
(Pounds 127m) and S&amp;N says it is in fifth place in world sales behind the
likes of 3M and Johnson &amp; Johnson.
Other products include consumer goods such as Lil-lets tampons and
Elastoplast plasters, eye and ear implants and surgical gloves.
Some of these products have defensive characteristics in themselves. Nurses
must be trained to use specialist dressings, so a hospital manager offered
cheaper dressings would have to bear in mind the costs of retraining.
Nevertheless, Mr Robinson concedes that there is price competition in some
areas, especially in the US. He has tried to minimise the effect in three
ways: by concentrating on high-margin, high-technology products in which S&amp;N
is a world leader; by broadening the group's geographical base; and by
increasing research and development efforts.
So in 1992 S&amp;N sold the Nivea cosmetics brand to Beiersdorf of Germany. It
is no longer in simple bandage cloths and gauze, which are produced in
developing countries at low prices.
It is trying to expand in Europe, especially Germany. Its European market
share is low - almost half S&amp;N's sales are in North America and only one
fifth in continental Europe. The region is also promising because cost
controls have tended to focus on cutting drug bills rather than total
hospital costs as in the US.
And in May it set up a joint venture with Advanced Tissue Sciences, a
Californian biotechnology company, to develop a means of growing living
cartilage in the laboratory. A product, which would be surgically inserted
into a patient's knee, is scheduled to be launched by the end of the decade
and sales could reach Dollars 1bn (Pounds 600m) a year.
Mr Robinson is convinced that this strategy will maintain the company's
outperformance, but some analysts are not convinced.
Mr Stuart Adkins at Lehman Brothers, the stockbroker, argues that the whole
of the healthcare business is a buyers' market. 'There is price pressure yet
to come for Smith &amp; Nephew,' he says.
Even relatively high-technology medical goods such as hip implants are
subject to heavy competition and 'near commodity status'. Investing in
biotechnology companies is necessary but not sufficient for success, he
says.
Mr James Culverwell at Hoare Govett, the stockbroker, is more optimistic,
arguing that S&amp;N is more accustomed than drug companies to the tendering
process increasingly used by cost-conscious healthcare buyers.
Lower margins make it less of a target for bargain-hunting clients, and in
any case the S&amp;N sales effort already includes cost benefit analyses, an
area still new to most healthcare suppliers.
Either way, it is clear that S&amp;N is in a race against time. It must sell
more in Europe and harvest the fruits of new research before price pressures
begin in earnest and spill out from the US into Europe.
