FT  02 JUN 94 / Book Review: Small, trendy but imperfectly formed
LEAN AND MEAN: The Changing Landscape of Corporate Power in the Age of
Flexibility
By Bennett Harrison
Basic Books, New York, Dollars 25
For the past 15 years, conventional wisdom has been that small is both
bountiful and beautiful in business. With large companies - from IBM to
Kodak, General Motors to Westinghouse - finding it ever harder to adjust to
an era of radical change, their days are numbered, the argument runs.
Instead, small companies have become the prime driver of job creation,
technological innovation and economic growth. For every Microsoft, Benetton
or Body Shop, surging from small to large with remarkable speed, there are
thousands of agile minnows which will never grow so big, but which are the
economy's powerhouse.
Nonsense, says Bennett Harrison, a Pittsburgh professor of political economy
who, as the author of recent books on American 'deindustrialisation' and
'working poverty', is no stranger to controversy.
Instead, he argues that the prime motor of economic growth is becoming
flexible, worldwide 'networks of production'. These are dominated by large
companies but contain dependent minnows with a 'dark side': unskilled,
low-paid and unprotected workforces.
Even in vibrant local regions and districts such as those in northern Italy
and Silicon Valley, the idealised picture of clusters of interdependent,
innovative small companies sparking each other's growth is incorrect, says
Harrison. Such districts are coming increasingly under the influence of
large companies, from Benetton to Japan's Fujitsu. He complains that their
global networks are wreaking havoc with traditional government policies for
regulating big business.
To back his case against what he calls 'the myth of small firms', Harrison
has certainly done his homework: a fifth of his 300-page book consists of
references to research by others in economics, social science, technology
and business strategy. He has, it seems, examined almost every side of every
argument about the subject. Almost, but not quite.
His evidence on the overstated role of small companies is important, but
less forceful than it looks at first sight. This is partly because his
definition of 'small' is inconsistent: sometimes he confines it to
organisations of less than 20 employees, sometimes of under 100 and
occasionally higher still. Most of the research studies he collates and
compares have also already been published, notably the work of a team which
includes Professor James Medoff, an influential Harvard economist.
In simple terms - though the statistics are far from simple, hence the
continuing controversy - Harrison argues that there has been no upward trend
whatever over the past quarter century in small companies' share of
employment in Japan and western Germany, the world's two most successful
large economies. In the US, a modestly growing relative share of smaller
units of production is discernible - not all of them owned by smaller
companies, however - but only for manufacturing; in services, the average
size of unit has grown.
Only in the UK, Harrison argues, is there uniform and unambiguous evidence
that small is becoming increasingly bountiful, both for individual plants
and for whole companies. But, as he says, that may be more a function of the
failure of large manufacturers than a gauge of the real vibrancy of small
enterprises.
Against the belief that small companies are more innovative than large ones,
Harrison cites studies which suggest that this is definitely not true of
process innovation (in production, information technology and so on) and is
questionable in product innovation.
Harrison's corrective to the 'small is beautiful' doctrine is especially
timely in American political terms. Debate about the justification for a new
industrial policy, and the shape it should take, has been under way ever
since President Bill Clinton took office.
But that debate has encouraged Harrison to take a polarised position on
several counts. First, most of the book is about manufacturing; there is too
little discussion of the implications of the rapid recent American (and
British) shift to services. Nor does he examine properly whether the
accelerated pace of information technology and large company subcontracting
favours only big service providers, or also specialised enterprises on a
smaller scale.
Second, in his haste to refocus attention from small companies on to large
ones, he falls into the common trap of almost ignoring those in the middle.
The real story of Italian and especially German industrial success has not
been very small companies, but specialised medium-sized ones. In a world of
global networks, small may not be as powerful as was once thought, but
medium size may remain so in certain products and services.
Third, in spite of his evident and interesting expert knowledge of the real
workings of Italy's (government-supported) 'industrial districts', some of
his other perceptions about Europe are superficial. To cite the recent spate
of cross-border takeovers and alliances as a sign of future strength in
European big business is to ignore not just the weakness of some of those
large companies, but also the evidence that most such takeovers fail.
On the other hand, Harrison provides plenty of meat for business people and
politicians to chew on in the juxtaposition of his two main themes: the
changing shape of concentrated corporate power, from centralised to
dispersed; and the political, economic and social dilemmas which this
creates for both national and state governments.
Oddly, in spite of all his concern about the socially 'dark side' of global
network production, he offers few specific policy recommendations, other
than better enforcement of existing labour laws, and the provision of
greater technical assistance to small and medium-sized companies.
