FT  09 MAR 94 / Business and the Environment: East counts cost of a dirty
legacy - Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania face a big bill after 50 years of
Soviet army sloppiness
The Soviet army may be withdrawing from eastern Europe but it has left
behind an ecological mess. The bill for the clean-up operation will be
staggering.
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania are currently sizing up the fallout from 50
years of sloppiness at more than 1,000 former Soviet military facilities.
This legacy of Soviet rule, ranging from nuclear waste to water pollution,
should keep policy planners and eco-businesses busy for years.
Soviet pilots, for instance, would regularly dump jet fuel on the ground to
minimise flying hours. At the Tapa military air base in Estonia, 16 sq km
are polluted by jet fuel, 7m deep in some places.
At most Soviet airfields in the Baltic region - as in east Germany and the
Czech Republic - waste fuel, while not toxic, has seeped into the region's
shallow natural groundwater reserves and raised purification costs.
The World Bank has examined the damage at Latvia's Tukums air force base,
and is considering funding clean-up programmes. Environment Canada, a
government agency, has offered to train Latvians in site remediation and
assessment. But institutional lenders have yet to commit substantial funds
to clean-up efforts.
Meanwhile Baltec, a private Latvian company, has begun a bioremediation
project at Tukums. Over five years, it plans to pump out the jet fuel, some
of which can be salvaged and resold, and put bacteria into the soil to break
down the remaining fuel.
Inspectors previously barred from secret sites are finding other and more
worrying surprises. Near Zvarde, an eastern Latvian town, more than 24,000
ha of farmland were confiscated for air target practice. The land was
returned to Latvia after independence, leaving a trail of pollution,
deforestation and unexploded bombs after 30 years of daily bombing sorties.
Peteris Elfers, a member of parliament, estimates that demining might take
another 30 years. 'It has to be done,' he says, 'but we don't have the
technology to do it well.' An inspection last summer found 364 bombs, mines
and rockets after examining just the main bombing polygon of 159 ha - and
only cursorily to a depth of 20 cm.
Deadly waste understandably raises more eyebrows. In Sillamae, a closed
military city on Estonia's north-eastern coast, a classified chemical
combine has left a 20m-high dam that contains, according to Murray Feshbach,
an expert on the Soviet environment at Georgetown University in the US, 4m
tonnes of uranium ore, 1,200 tonnes of pure uranium, 1,000 tonnes of radium,
800 tonnes of thorium, plus 2m tonnes of calcium sulphide oil shale ash and
some ground radioactivity.
In a big storm, this could go into the nearby Gulf of Finland and directly
affect the Baltic rim countries. Feshbach says one safety measure, so far
not carried out, would be to encase the dam in cement.
Nuclear waste pockets have also been discovered across the Baltic
hinterlands. Last summer in Lithuania, radioactive equipment dumped at a
landfill in Zokniai, an airfield near Siulinae, produced alarming geiger
readings.
Paldiski, a big submarine base in Estonia, has two nuclear reactors, a
depository for liquid waste, another for solid waste and underground
pipelines for radioactive sewage. In troop withdrawal talks, Russia has
agreed to give up the base, remove the nuclear fuel rods and take care of
waste and the necessary clean-up. What should be done with the 600 tonnes of
liquid waste and the two reactors is unclear.
Estonia, which has a fiercely nationalistic government, worries about the
proposed length of a Russian clean-up presence until 2000. It may look west
for help instead, says Alar Olljum, a foreign ministry spokesman.
But Feshbach worries more about dimethylhydrazine, also called heptyl, a
liquid rocket fuel that is supertoxic, volatile, carcinogenic and nerve
paralysing. Around 270 tonnes - of the estimated 150,000 tonnes in the
former Soviet Union - have been found around Ventspils, a large Latvian port
city. 'There is no known technology to get rid of it,' says Feshbach. 'The
cheapest way is to fire it from rockets.'
However, Harry Whitacker, chief of emergency engineering at Environment
Canada, hopes heptyl can be turned into ammonia or methanol by using
ultraviolet light and peroxide in an advanced oxidation process; and nitric
acid, once pumped to the surface, could be converted to fertiliser if mixed
with ammonium and hydroxide.
On the Baltic Sea shore, military harbours have been left in a pitiable
state. At Liepaja, a top Soviet Baltic Fleet base, the harbour floor,
polluted by heavy metals and crude oil a metre deep, needs to be dredged.
Just off the coast sit sunken battleship hulls, stripped of non-ferrous
iron. Nearby are submarines which used batteries leaving semi-toxic residue
 -potentially dangerous if built up over time. Clean-up would be expensive,
but a World Bank official says the spectacular site of pilfered Soviet
warships might be a profitable tourist site.
The bank has made the conversion of Liepaja from a military into a
commercial centre a priority project in the belief that the city's large
port could be a key trans-shipment point to and from the Russian market. The
bank has obtained the Latvian government's commitment to support a project
of water treatment, coastal management and tourism. Environment Canada would
handle the military pollution.
Like any economically depressed nation, however, Latvia must make hard
choices on pollution clean-up. A clear economic incentive is needed to
secure funding.
Symbolic cost estimates have been presented to Russia, the inheritor of the
Soviet army. Latvia has sent Moscow a Dollars 147m (Pounds 99m) bill for
land use and anticipated clean-up. Realistically, however, the Balts do not
expect Russia to pay.
