FT  10 JUN 94 / Bonn warned by US over VW spy case
The Volkswagen/General Motors industrial espionage case couldharm relations
between the US and Germany if the Justice Department does not receive help
soon from German investigators, Mr Ron Brown, commerce secretary, suggested
yesterday.
There was no evidence of any danger to political or other business relations
at present, but 'I think it has the potential', he said in Bonn.
The risk depended on the responsiveness of the German authorities to
inquiries from the Justice Department and 'how quickly the information
flows', he added.
His remarks were the first public indication of irritation in the US
administration over the Hesse Justice Ministry's reluctance to provide
concrete help to the US authorities.
It is believed US investigators have asked for, but have been so far refused
access to, evidence accumulated by German prosecutors probing allegations
that former GM director, Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, stole
industrial secrets from the US group and took them with him when he joined
VW last year.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation started an independent probe of the
circumstances, shortly after the White House made plain that President Bill
Clinton considered industrial espionage a particular threat to US economic
interests.
Until yesterday, Justice Department and other US government officials have
consistently refused to comment on their investigation, which is believed to
be based on suspicions that GM corporate property was moved illegally across
state boundaries, in contravention of federal mail and telecommunications
laws.
Mr Brown, who met Mr Gunter Rexrodt, the Bonn economics minister, in Paris
on Wednesday was speaking after meeting US and German business and political
officials. Mr David Herman, Opel chairman, GM's German subsidiary, was among
the guests.
Mr Rexrodt was briefly embroiled in the case last year, when he was
unwillingly drawn into the fray as a potential mediator between the two
vehicle groups.
German investigators came under heavy political fire recently when Mr
Gerhard Schroder, prime minister of VW's home state Lower Saxony, called for
the case to be closed.
He suggested the investigation was biased and based partly on evidence
acquired by private detectives, hired by Opel lawyers, who used deceptive
methods.
His charges were promptly rejected by the most senior prosecuting official
in Opel's base, Hesse, who also imposed a news black-out on the probe.
