FT  29 JAN 94 / BankAmerica buys Continental Bank
BankAmerica, the US's second biggest bank, is to buy Chicago-based
Continental Bank in a Dollars 1.9bn (Pounds 1.26bn) deal which marks its
first big expansion away from its west coast base.
The deal sent a flurry of anticipation through the stock market, sending the
shares of banks which are considered potential takeover candidates sharply
higher.
Although BankAmerica had been widely seen as a potential buyer, it was not
expected to attempt a big takeover until it had fully digested its 1992
takeover of the troubled Security Pacific. Its emergence could prompt others
to accelerate their own acquisition plans, speeding up the pace of takeovers
in the US banking industry.
BankAmerica will issue 21.25 new shares to Continental shareholders, valued
at midday yesterday at Dollars 975m, and pay Dollars 939m in cash. The cash
and paper offer values each Continental share at around Dollars 35 1/2.
The purchase will cement the San Francisco-based BankAmerica's position as
one of the US's largest corporate banks, and will bring it nearly
shoulder-to-shoulder with Citicorp in terms of overall assets. Based on 1993
figures, the new bank would have assets of Dollars 209bn, compared with
Citicorp's Dollars 216bn.
Continental - formerly Continental Illinois - was the subject of a Dollars
4.5bn bail-out in 1984, at that time the US's largest financial rescue, when
depositors fled the bank over fears about losses on its energy loans.
Since then, it has shed its retail side and concentrated on corporate
banking, becoming the largest corporate bank in the industrial heartland of
the midwest. It had assets of Dollars 22.6bn at the end of last year, and a
return on capital of 15.6 per cent, broadly in line with other big US
commercial banks.
The deal will strengthen the Chicago corporate banking market, already the
second largest in the US after New York.
BankAmerica plans to make the city the headquarters for all its US corporate
banking operations, which had assets of around Dollars 60bn and after-tax
earnings of more than Dollars 500m last year. The shares of BankAmerica fell
Dollars 1 in early trade before partly recovering to close down Dollars 3/8
at Dollars 45 3/8.
US stocks, Page 19
