FT  14 MAR 94 / Motorola accord ends US sanctions threat
Japan has narrowly averted US trade sanctions over its treatment of
Motorola, a leading US cellular phone company.
A deal reached after intense negotiations removes the immediate threat of
sanctions over US access to Japan's cellular phone market. But it could
create an unfortunate precedent by encouraging the Japanese government to
become closely involved in the affairs of private companies.
Washington, which used the case to signal its dissatisfaction with Tokyo's
progress in opening its markets, was due this week to publish a list of
likely targets for sanctions. The US has sought to put pressure on Japan to
accept quantifiable indicators of the openness of its markets.
Mr Mickey Kantor, US trade representative, brandished a Motorola cellphone
last month as he announced that Japan had breached a bilateral agreement.
The deal calls on the Japanese government to monitor investment by Japanese
cellular phone operator, IDO, in a cellular phone system promoted by
Motorola. The government should also allocate more radio frequency to the US
system. IDO agreed to quicken the pace of its investment in Motorola's
system.
The Japanese government also agreed to monitor IDO's progress in
implementing its plans at three-monthly intervals; to back low-interest
loans from the Japan Development Bank; to allow IDO to carry out its
investment and to review the situation if there was a request from either
party.
President Bill Clinton welcomed the breakthrough. But Japanese officials,
who have emphasised the importance of deregulating domestic industry, said
that such a deal was only possible in a sector where bureaucratic
involvement was still strong because of the need to allocate frequencies.
Japan's Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications had sought to leave the
dispute in the hands of the two companies. But US pressure and the threat of
sanctions forced Tokyo to concede.
The deal calls for IDO to bring forward its investment in a further 159 base
stations for the Tacs cellular phones system, backed by Motorola, and
complete that investment by early autumn next year.
Apple assault on Intel, Page 17
