FT  15 SEP 94 / France welcomes FIS 'release'
France yesterday welcomed the transfer of two opposition Islamic Salvation
Front (FIS) leaders, Mr Abassi Madani and Ali Benhadj, from jail to house
arrest and the freeing of three others, as an important step towards ending
the violence which has claimed 10,000 victims in the past 21 months.
Mr Alain Juppe, foreign minister, told a cabinet meeting yesterday that the
decision by General Liamine Zeroual, the Algerian head of state, was 'an
important step, showing that dialogue between the Algerian authorities and
the FIS is a reality.'
The minister cautioned, however, against undue optimism, noting: 'It is no
secret that the Islamic movement and no doubt the authorities remain
divided.'
Mr Juppe insisted that France had never 'given unconditional support to the
Algerian government. While understanding the concern of every government to
ensure order and security in its country, we have said that a policy focused
entirely on security would not produce a lasting solution.'
Gen Zeroual's decision was also welcomed by Mr Rabah Kebir, spokesman for
the exiled FIS, who said that his party 'was happy about the liberation of
our leaders. We consider it a positive step but not a sufficient one. All
FIS leaders must be set free, notably Mr Andelkader Hachani, the head of the
party executive at the time of the elections of December 1991.'
Meanwhile, 17 international commercial banks held a meeting with the Banque
d'Algerie, the central bank of Algeria, in Paris on Tuesday to discuss the
restructuring of Dollars 3.1bn (Pounds 2.06bn)-worth of the country's
Dollars 4.7bn commercial debt.
The banks decided to set up a steering committee which will include two
Japanese banks, two Arab banks, one French and one US bank and a Japanese
leasing company.
The next meeting between Algeria and its commercial banks creditors will
take place in the week after the annual meeting of the International
Monetary Fund, due in Madrid in the first week of October.
