FT  12 MAR 94 / Legal limit of safety: The Heathrow attack has highlighted
UK security again
The scenario is familiar. A spectacular IRA mortar attack - this time at
London's Heathrow airport and audaciously restaged within 36 hours -
followed by political squabbles over allegedly lax security and a further,
inevitable, tightening of anti-terrorist measures.
The republican paramilitaries have proved yet again they retain not only the
capacity to strike on the British mainland, but the capability to penetrate
the extensive and expensively constructed armour of national security.
On past form - not always a reliable guide to what it will do next - the IRA
may now be content for a while to pursue its mainland offensive via the
telephone. Which head of security will, in the days ahead, run the risk of
dismissing an anonymous message about an unspecified attack?
Whatever lies ahead, each new assault brings a fresh appraisal of existing
security and, invariably, further unwelcome restrictions on the free
movement of people going about their everyday business.
In Northern Ireland, such measures have for years formed part of the
paraphernalia employed against terrorism. But now there are road blocks in
the City of London and video cameras strung along UK high streets to monitor
the innocent and the untoward. Police go to the brink of legality
selectively to stop and search.
To minimise the ever-present terrorist threat invokes accusations, already
being bandied about by politicians yesterday, of dangerous negligence; to
implement a draconian clamp-down hands the terrorists another form of
victory.
But, beyond the rhetoric, how much more can be usefully done in a world
where home-made weaponry mounted in a Nissan Micra can thwart the best
endeavours of 1,400 airport security staff, and threaten carnage in a
supposedly high-security zone?
The battle inevitably focuses primarily on trying to identify, locate and
arrest the IRA 'volunteers' who still plan murderous attacks while their
political masters talk of peace.
The IRA has changed its internal organisation in recent years in a way that
makes it more difficult to keep track of its operations and identify its
main players. The organisation has become more decentralised with
individual, active unit 'cells' operating autonomously, so that it is less
vulnerable to penetration by the security services.
There are, of course, exceptions. In Ulster itself, the recent rate of
success against paramilitaries has been good, while another mainland bombing
campaign was halted with last month's arrests and weapons seizure in
Accrington, Lancashire.
The security services have tried to match the increasing logistical
sophistication of the IRA with their own reorganisation. Two years ago, the
government agreed that MI5, the domestic intelligence service, should
replace the Metropolitan Police in leading intelligence-gathering on the
IRA. In addition MI5 has a specific role as policy adviser to the government
on anti-terrorism.
According to security sources, the move has gone some way towards
streamlining intelligence-gathering, which was previously subject to intense
inter-service rivalries. Tensions still persist, however, in relationships
between M15 and the Metropolitan Police Special Branch - still in charge of
operations - and between the various regional police forces which are
expected to contribute their resources to localised IRA threats.
Yesterday's call by Mr David Mellor, former Home Office minister, for a
national anti-terrorist force drawing police and security forces under one
roof is not a new idea and will continue to be resisted by those jealously
guarding their own patches.
More localised initiatives have had some success. The City, shattered twice
by IRA lorry bombs in 1992 and 1993, reacted positively, if controversially,
to its own bloody experiences. Though no one will tempt fate by declaring
victory, the decision effectively to shut down core areas of the square mile
and to step up high-profile policing has, so far, had the desired effect.
After the Baltic Exchange bombing in November 1992, the City police put more
officers, including some from the CID and fraud squad, on to the streets,
while the Home Office provided more personnel. City police introduced
24-hour patrols of armed officers, who employ powers under the Police and
Criminal Evidence Act to halt and question anyone they want.
In the wake of the Bishopsgate bomb in April 1993, the police worked with
the City corporation to implement the controversial road closure programme
intended to end the threat of vehicle-borne bombs. Cameras at eight entry
points record not only vehicles but passengers' faces.
But high security in one area carries the risk of terrorist activity being
transferred to another. The IRA takes a perverse pride not just in employing
new weaponry but in wrong-footing the authorities in its deadly game of cat
and mouse.
According to a City police source: 'We all recognise the danger that, in
putting up barriers, you simply shift attention to new targets. But that
doesn't mean that you can do nothing.'
Major John Wyatt, an anti-terrorist expert who has been advising City firms
on security in the aftermath of Bishopsgate, says permanent checkpoints are
not a solution: 'The IRA is always quick to exploit set patterns of
control.' The key to deterrence, he believes, lies in flexible controls and
improved intelligence.
The police, for good measure, would like wider powers of arrest and
detention. But everyone involved in the daily battle against terrorism will
privately admit one inalienable truth. Ultimately the answer will have to be
found by politicians and not by the forces of law and order.
