FT  15 OCT 94 / The Conservatives in Bournemouth: Tories wave the union flag
at Blair
Mr Ian Lang yesterday pledged that the future of the union would be at the
heart of the next general election campaign by the Conservative party - as
he used the issue to launch a sustained attack on Mr Tony Blair.
Signalling that the party's high command thinks it has found a weapon with
which to pierce the new Labour leader's armour, the Scottish secretary
devoted fully one-third of his speech to picking apart Labour's commitment
to devolution for Scotland and Wales.
In a speech that earned him a two-minute standing ovation, Mr Lang conjured
up a picture of a Labour government hamstrung in its first year by its
promise of a bill to set up a Scottish parliament and a Welsh assembly.
The bill would be opposed tooth and nail and would take up 'the entire
parliamentary session' he said. It represented for the moment 'the sum total
of the Blair agenda'.
He added: 'It is an agenda that is undeliverable. And it represents a
failure of judgment of massive proportions.'
As speaker after speaker came to the podium to defend the union Mr Adrian
Lee, national chairman of the Young Conservatives, said he hoped there would
be no return to devolved government in Ulster.
He said: 'Unequivocal unionism is not only principled but it wins votes. If
devolution is wrong in Scotland, England and Wales, why is it right in
Northern Ireland?'
Addressing this question later, Mr Lang argued that the circumstances of
North-ern Ireland were different.
'I am not averse to having different arrangements within an integrated
United Kingdom parliament,' he said. 'Northern Ireland has a democratic
deficit, Scotland does not.'
Mr Lang warned that Scotland would have to pay 'a heavy price' for the
creation of a Scottish parliament, with questions such as the level of
Scottish representation at Westminster and Scottish MPs' right to vote on
all UK matters coming under scrutiny.
He said the government could not go on earmarking funds to ensure 'a level
standard of public services' if Scotland were given the power to raise and
lower its own taxes.
But he acknowledged that Scotland could pull out of the union if it ever
became 'the preponderant and settled view' of the Scots that that was what
they wanted to do.
Mr OJ Williams, a Conservative from Carmarthen, west Wales, said the party
was not opposed to 'true' devolution, meaning the removal of tiers of
administration to give individuals choice over their own lives.
The other parties believed in devolving power to institutions not
individuals. The real reason they wanted to do that was to keep power for
themselves.
Ms Nanette Milne, an Aberdeen councillor, said it was wrong to assume the
whole of Scotland was 'crying out' for constitutional change.
She said many people were afraid that devolution would create divisions
between Scotland's different regions. There was 'a real fear' of rule by
'red Clydesiders' and 'power-hungry Scottish socialists' if a separate
Scottish parliament was set up.
