FT  12 OCT 94 / Leading Article: Prize fighters
It's Nobel-tide again. The prize for medicine was awarded on Monday, that
for economics yesterday, and the peace prize is expected on Friday. As usual
the latter is causing the greatest controversy. According to apparently
authoritative leaks, it will go jointly to Yassir Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin.
One member of the awarding committee is said to be planning to resign in
protest, on the grounds that Mr Arafat is a former terrorist.
The row is as depressingly predictable as the choice. A terrorist past
should not in itself be a disqualification. Apart from the difficulty of
defining the term, it is true that those who make war are often best placed
to make peace.
No, the objection to Mr Arafat, as indeed to Mr Rabin, is that they are
established national leaders whose role in 'the peace process' has already
been recognised ad nauseam. If the committee has indeed chosen them, it has
acted true to the form which dictated such choices as de Klerk-Mandela
(1993), Begin-Sadat (1978) or Kissinger-Le Duc Tho (1973).
Several questions suggest themselves. What are Nobel prizes for? Why are
there three science prizes, one for literature, and one for peace, but none
for art, music, philosophy, psychology, or any of the social sciences except
(since 1968) economics? What are the credentials of those who award them?
And why does the world pay so much attention?
Some of the answers lie buried with Alfred Nobel, who endowed the prizes and
specified the bodies to award them in his will. On the whole those entrusted
with his legacy have interpreted it imaginatively, including astronomers
under physics, animal behaviourists under physiology, and historians
(notably Winston Churchill) under literature.
Inevitably, in making comparisons across such enormous fields, they have to
be subjective and sometimes appear capricious. Who can possibly be qualified
to set the merits of a Chinese poet against those of a Colombian novelist?
Yet the Swedish Academy was right to resist an early suggestion that only
Europeans be considered for the literature prize. Recent awards such as that
to the Egyptian novelist Naguib Mahfouz in 1988 have helped to make the
western public aware that great literature is being produced in non-European
languages and cultures.
When the prizegivers err it is more by striving for objectivity or what is
now called political correctness than by eccentricity. They are at their
best when giving the peace prize to a figure who is still controversial or
embattled, as Martin Luther King was in 1964 and Andrei Sakharov in 1975; or
in recognising a scientist such as Georges Charpak (physics, 1992) whose
work on particle detection was hitherto little noticed, yet essential to
many flashier discoveries in related disciplines.
Scandinavian subjectivity is no worse than any other sort. Any attempt to
make the committees globally representative would certainly be the kiss of
death.
