FT  12 JUL 94 / International Company News: Executive bail-out holds TWA
off-course - How does an airline lose five top men in a few months?
To lose one top executive is unfortunate: to lose two, it might be said,
looks like carelessness. How, then, does one describe the loss of five in a
matter of months?
Since coming out of Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection at the end of last
year, Trans World Airlines, the seventh-biggest US airline, has seen an
exodus of senior managers.
In January, it lost a chairman and a vice-chairman; in May, it lost its
senior vice-president for marketing; last month, its chief financial officer
quit; and last week another vice-chairman resigned.
A favourable interpretation of such a rapid turnover might be that the
newly-resurgent company is clearing the decks to make way for fresh talent.
Given the company's precarious financial condition, however, it is equally
tempting to ask whether it is a case of executives leaving a sinking ship.
Once one of the world's biggest and best-known airlines, TWA first ran into
trouble in the 1980s, when losses in the deregulated US market started to
outweigh profits from its international operations.
Bad turned to worse when Mr Carl Icahn, the one-time corporate raider, took
over the airline in a leveraged buy-out in 1988, adding hundreds of millions
of dollars worth of borrowings to the balance sheet. With the airline
industry as a whole struggling, TWA was dragged into bankruptcy in 1992 by
the cost of servicing its debt.
When the airline emerged from Chapter 11 last November, it was under
different ownership. As part of the rescue plan, employees agreed to swap
some Dollars 660m worth of labour concessions for 45 per cent of the
company's shares. The remaining 55 per cent went to the creditors.
TWA also emerged with a management team aimed at accommodating the differing
perspectives of its new owners.
Mr Glenn Zander, one of the two TWA executives who had been running the
company while it was in Chapter 11, was seen by the labour unions as too
hard. Mr Robin Wilson, the other, was seen by the creditors as too soft. So,
both were made vice-chairmen, and an outsider was appointed above them: Mr
William Howard, a 71-year-old airline industry veteran, who became chairman
and chief executive.
Unfortunately, this seemingly happy compromise was a spectacular failure.
The airline missed its financial targets, squabbles about strategy burst
into the open and, just six months after the team's installation, Mr Howard
and Mr Zander resigned.
In January, Mr Howard was replaced as chairman by a non-executive member of
the board: Mr Donald Craib, a former chairman and chief executive of
Allstate Insurance with no previous airline experience.
One of Mr Craib's first decisions was to bring in an experienced airline
boss as chief executive: Mr Jeffrey Erickson, the tough-talking chief
executive of the upstart US airline Reno Air.
Since joining TWA in April, Mr Erickson's determination to stamp his
authority on the airline has seen off the other vice-chairman and two more
senior executives. 'I am building my own management team, and you can't do
that without people leaving,' he said.
Hence, the clearing-of-the-decks analogy stands up better than that of the
sinking ship. Yet there is no doubt TWA has financial problems. Last week
Standard &amp; Poor's, the US credit rating agency, downgraded the airline's
senior secured debt to triple C, and revised its ratings outlook on the
airline to negative. Mr Philip Baggaley, S&amp;P's airline industry analyst,
says the company could run out of cash this winter.
Although TWA has gone a long way towards overcoming the poor reputation for
service it earned in the Icahn years, fierce competition from other airlines
is preventing it from meeting its revenue targets. And, with one of the
highest cost structures in the US airline industry, it is ill-equipped to
fight a fares war.
In the quarter to March, TWA incurred net losses of Dollars 124.4m. More
important, at the end of the quarter it had only Dollars 135m in cash. All
its credit facilities are drawn and, with virtually all its assets pledged,
it cannot raise more funds. Next January, it is due to repay some Dollars
190m worth of debt extended by Mr Icahn. Clearly, it will be unable to do
so, though equally clearly it will hope to extend or refinance the loans.
If TWA survives the lean winter period, other problems lie ahead. In the
middle of next year, its labour concessions expire.
Its airliner fleet, one of the oldest in the US, is long overdue for
renewal. Its only hub - St Louis, Missouri - serves a relatively small
segment of the US market, and suffers competition from the low-cost
Southwest Airlines. Its few remaining transatlantic routes are weak.
TWA is fighting back with an efficiency drive aimed at lopping Dollars 135m
a year off operating costs.
However, some Wall Street analysts say employee ownership could prevent the
company from making the staffing cuts it needs to survive. Nearly all of
them rate it as the US airline least likely to be around in five years.
Mr Erickson retorts: 'I am here to prove them wrong.' However, he does not
rule out the possibility that TWA could change a lot in the meantime.
Nothing is sacred, he says. Some routes - including the transatlantic ones -
could be cut. Others will be added.
'You have to respond to what the marketplace wants,' Mr Erickson says. 'I
think the final chapter in the 15-year saga of US air deregulation is being
written now, and the airlines that respond to the marketplace in this final
chapter are likely to be around. My job is to make sure we're one of them.'
