FT  03 MAY 94 / South African Elections: Next chapter unclear after
fairy-tale start
South Africa has emerged triumphant from the most perilous stage of a
revolution without precedent, and its citizens seem bemused by their
achievement.
After more than three hundred years of supremacy, the white minority last
week finally, irrevocably and peacefully surrendered power at the ballot box
to the country's black majority.
The full details of this astonishing - some say miraculous - event are not
yet known, for the election commission is still grappling with mountains of
ballot papers.
And one major obstacle which could jeopardise the prospects of a stable
South Africa may yet emerge: the outcome of voting in KwaZulu/Natal,
stronghold of the Zulu leader, Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi.
Nor, at this stage, is it clear what may be the next step of the white
right, whose extremists could yet destabilise South Africa with an
assassin's bullet.
But, as an exuberant president in the waiting, Mr Nelson Mandela celebrated
the ANC's achievement at last night's victory party, taking satisfaction in
a fairy-tale start to the new South Africa.
And, as he pressed ahead with the critical process of reconciliation, South
Africa's remarkable political metamorphosis continued.
In the television studios and televised press conferences, on radio and on
newspaper front-pages, one leader began assuming the mantle of power, and
the other, incumbent President FW de Klerk, began shedding it. Before its
eyes, South Africa watched a process unfold which has neither precedent nor
parallel in Africa, and perhaps the world.
Mr Mandela, never less than a monumental personality, seemed to gain further
stature as the results trickled in; almost perceptibly, the aura that comes
with office seemed to desert Mr de Klerk. Nothing so became the two men, and
the country in their charge, than this transfer of power, which is due to to
be made formal at next week's inauguration in Pretoria.
'For the first time I envy South Africans, for the first time I wish I could
call myself South African,' said one hard-bitten observer of many years
standing last week. He had been moved almost to tears as he watched black
and white embrace at a moving ceremony that took place at midnight on
Tuesday.
Seldom, if ever, can the advent of democracy have been the instrument of
catharthis so profound, so liberating, for rulers and ruled alike, as South
Africa's unforgettable and moving experience last week.
Millions suffered under apartheid. But apartheid's victims extended beyond
its borders. Hundreds of thousands died in Angola, Zimbabwe and Mozambique,
the front-line states in the proxy battles to defend white rule.
But last week, for a precious few days, the pain of the past seems to have
been eased, even thrust briefly out of mind.
A truce, undeclared and unspoken, in the political fighting that has cost
more than 14,000 lives over the past 10 years was broken but not spoilt by
the bombs of the extreme right. In the 24 hours that ended yesterday
morning, police reported that there had not been a single death from
political violence.
Joyous as the election was for blacks, it also became liberating for whites.
As they cast their votes, many spoke of having the sense of casting off the
burden of apartheid, whether or not they had supported the policy. Many were
taken aback by the simple - though unprecedented  - experience of going to
the polling booths, black, coloured and white, as equals, to chose a
government that for the first time will reflect the will of the majority.
The orange, white and blue flag of the old South Africa was lowered at
centres across the land, and the new one raised while choirs sang the
region's hymn of liberation, now adopted as one of the official anthems of
post-apartheid South Africa: Nkosi sikelel i'Afrika (God bless Africa).
For black South Africans in particular it was a proud moment, but for many
Afrikaners it must have been a poignant, painful one.
As that flag entered the history books, the other official anthem carried
across the night air, sung in Afrikaans, and no doubt giving comfort to
those fearful of what the future holds: Die Stem von Suid-Afrika (At thy
call we shall not falter, firm and steadfast we shall stand. At thy will to
live or perish, O South Africa, dear land).
Over the past week at least, most white South Africans overcame their
apprehensions. And whatever may happen in the future, for a few days, South
Africa has basked in the glow of pride asserted, and pride recovered.
