FT  24 DEC 94 / QE2 halted in New York on safety fears: Cruise liner trapped
at quayside as Cunard faces threat of lawsuit
The Queen Elizabeth 2 was trapped at a New York quayside last night, hours
after it was due to sail for the Caribbean, when the US Coastguard refused
to give the cruise ship a safety certificate.
The move is highly embarrassing for Cunard, the cruise line that owns the
QE2, and follows questions about safety raised by passengers on board the
liner, which sailed from Southampton to New York this week with a Dollars
45m (Pounds 28.8m) refit incomplete.
Last night, Trafalgar House, which owns Cunard, admitted that, with
hindsight, the liner should not have sailed from Southampton before the
refit was complete.
Mr Tom Smith, head of corporate communications, said: 'We have to
acknowledge that we should have done things differently but we were
receiving advice that it would be ready right up until the day it sailed,
which meant we had a shipload of passengers waiting on the dock at
Southampton.
'Many were keen to go on board, even when they were told it would not be
complete.'
He added that Trafalgar House would be considering legal action over the
refit.
Cunard in New York would not comment on the Trafalgar House statement.
The US Coastguard said last night it refused to give the QE2 a safety
certificate because of hazards including openings in bulkheads and fire
walls and obstacles in passageways.
It said there were openings in draught stops in the ventilation system,
which close during fires to prevent the passage of flames and fumes.
During the transatlantic voyage, which began last Saturday, angry passengers
complained that the failure to complete the refit before the vessel sailed
had resulted in 'building site' conditions, cabins without water and closed
amenities.
One passenger, Mr Andrew Coad, a vice-president for global equities systems
at Wall Street securities house Merrill Lynch, said on arrival in New York
that he and others planned to file a class action lawsuit against Cunard
citing the safety issue.
Mr John Olsen, Cunard's chief executive, strongly denied that safety had
been jeopardised. 'We take great care with this sort of thing,' he said. 'We
are not compromising our safety standards, and we have had a Marine Safety
Agency inspector on board who signed a safety certificate (in Southampton).'
The MSA is the British government agency responsible for safety at sea.
Speaking from on board the QE2, one passenger, who asked not to be named,
said passengers were 'bitterly disappointed' by the latest delay. He said
Cunard had offered to repatriate any passengers who did disembark, and give
them a free cruise next year.
The QE2 had been due to leave New York at midnight on Thursday for the
Caribbean, but was still lying at the terminal on Manhattan's west side last
night. Cunard said it was aiming for the ship to sail at midnight.
Nightmare on QE2, Page 4
Battle of Trafalgar, Money 4
