FT  23 MAR 94 / Poll rejects Scottish water plan
More than 97 per cent of voters in a Strathclyde region referendum have
overwhelmingly rejected plans to remove the Scottish water industry from
local authority control.
The government proposals were rejected by 97.2 per cent of the 1.2m who
voted in a postal ballot. Papers were returned by 71.5 per cent of those who
received them - a high turnout for recent UK referendums. Strathclyde region
includes almost half the population of Scotland.
Mr Robert Gould, convener of Strathclyde regional council, which organised
the referendum, called the result 'sensational'. He said the government
'would be very unwise to proceed with their water legislation with less than
3 per cent supporting it'.
Mr Ian Lang, Scottish secretary, called the referendum 'pseudo-democratic'
and 'meaningless'. The ballot paper had not explained that the status quo in
the water industry could not continue when local government was reorganised.
He attacked the region for spending more than Pounds 500,000 on the
referendum.
In a System Three poll in yesterday's Herald newspaper only 10 per cent
supported the government's plans and 81 per cent were opposed.
The government proposes removing water from the nine regional and three
island councils and putting it in the hands of three state-owned authorities
with boards appointed by the Scottish secretary.
A Commons committee considering the bill to reform Scottish local government
will discuss the water industry clauses tomorrow.
Last year the government dropped the idea of privatising the Scottish water
industry after opinion polls and responses to a consultation paper showed
very strong opposition.
Many in Scotland object to the plan for water authorities because they would
not be directly under democratic control, and they believe that the
government would eventually privatise water.
Scottish Office ministers say the industry must be restructured because the
regions and the 53 district councils will be replaced by 30 unitary
councils.
Labour said this week that if it came to power it would fill the boards of
the authorities with elected councillors, while the Liberal Democrats would
create joint boards of the new councils to run water services.
Mr Lang said in an interview with the Financial Times last month: 'I don't
believe people worry so much about the democratic control of water as about
the fact that it is delivered cleanly and cheaply.'
