FT  23 JUN 94 / Survey of Korea (7): Europe's chance - The defence market
opens up
The Korean War museum, opened earlier this month, commemorates the tragic
conflict which convulsed the peninsula more than 40 years ago and left the
country divided, one of the last legacies of the cold war. But next to the
maps and diorama of the struggles of yesteryear is also a proud display of
the nation's contemporary arms industry, the fruits of Seoul's Yulgok
Project, a programme estimated to be worth more than Dollars 37bn that is
aimed at establishing a technology-based domestic arms industry.
Seoul's ambition to build up its weapons manufacturing capabilities is
unsettling the South Korean military equipment market, irritating the US,
which has been the overwhelmingly dominant supplier, and providing
opportunities and risks for groups from Europe and elsewhere.
At stake is a great deal of money. South Korea's defence budget is between
Dollars 12.5bn and Dollars 13bn a year, of which about half is spent on
equipment. Of that procurement budget, on average between a quarter and a
third is spent overseas - more than Dollars 3bn a year.
Until the late 1980s, the US market share of the overseas procurement budget
was as high as 95 per cent according to western diplomats. That proportion
has fallen to about 80 per cent, although the figure changes from year to
year, varying when large contracts are awarded, and has been as low as 60
per cent.
Seoul's desire to build up its military manufacturing capability is partly
motivated by the reluctance of Washington to supply its most sophisticated
hardware. 'The Americans have a tendency to supply the Koreans with what
suits the US, rather than with what the Koreans want,' explains one European
diplomat. 'Washington doesn't want its technology exported to third parties,
and doesn't want the Koreans to be competitors in the arms bazaar in 10
years' time.'
The reluctance of the US to supply South Korea with sophisticated technology
is accompanied by Seoul's desire to reduce its dependence on Washington. In
the short term, the alliance between the US and South Korea remains firm.
But in spite of American officials' denial of any desire to withdraw US
forces from the peninsula, European diplomats say the presence of US troops
in a united Korea would probably be an anomaly.
Washington's willingness to supply arms after such a withdrawal would be
more equivocal than at present, they claim. 'If the US has to choose between
supporting Korea or Japan, there's no doubt who would lose out,' says one
European diplomat.
As a result, Seoul is hunting for military technology wherever it can find
it, a policy which offers significant opportunities for non-US arms groups.
European countries, less reluctant than the US to transfer technology, have
already been able to snap up an increasing number of contracts. The market
leaders are probably Germany and the UK, followed by France, Spain and
Italy.
The areas where European manufacturers can compete most effectively are
mostly where the US has no equipment available to meet Korean requirements.
The most obvious example was the contract for nine diesel submarines
concluded by Howaldtswerke Deutsche Werft of Kiel, Germany. The US does not
manufacture such vessels. Similarly, American suppliers were unable to meet
Seoul's requirements for transport aircraft with short runway capabilities.
The contract was eventually was given to Casa of Spain which will supply 12
CN-235s at a cost of about Dollars 200m.
On occasions the Europeans can win against US competition, however. Matra of
France won a contract for about 150 Mistral man-portable surface to air
missiles in a deal initially valued at Dollars 180m, which could eventually
be worth up to Dollars 720m. Although the cheaper Stinger missile offered by
US company General Dynamics was preferred by the South Korean army, the
Pentagon was reluctant to release the technology. Matra's willingness to
supply Lucky Goldstar with technology and allow it to participate in about a
quarter of the project won the day with the South Korean government.
The Europeans' efforts would perhaps be more successful if they worked
together. At present, European suppliers, sometimes from the same country,
virtually slit each other's throats in their efforts to win contracts.
'It's ridiculous that we have two European helicopter companies competing
with each other,' says one European diplomat. 'It's difficult enough just
competing with the US.' He gives the example of a consortium between British
Aerospace and Sema of France which recently won a contract to supply the
electronic combat system for Korean navy's destroyer programme against Atlas
Elektronik, a German competitor, and Ferranti of the UK. Other diplomats
agree that Europe's lack of co-ordination hinders its efforts, but there
remain few signs of greater co-operation.
Meanwhile, US military authorities in South Korea argue that buying European
systems could lead to problems of compatibility with US hardware stationed
on the peninsula. European suppliers say this fear has been exaggerated,
pointing out that most European weapons are configured to Nato standards
anyway.
A further danger highlighted by US officials is that non-American suppliers
may prove unwilling to supply materials and spare parts during a conflict.
The status of the Dollars 66m PC-9 trainer programme which was due to be
supplied from Switzerland by Pilatus remains in doubt because of Swiss
concerns that the 20 aircraft could be converted to carry weapons. Seoul's
inexperience in dealing with non-US contracts has led to expensive bills for
spare parts, according to one diplomat.
Most European diplomats concede it will be impossible for the Europeans to
compete with the US for contracts for major platforms, such as jet fighters
or tanks. Washington's political clout, and the dominance of US military
thinking on the peninsula, put such huge deals out of bounds.
However, Europeans could supply components or the entire programme for
projects such as:
* Electronics equipment for about eight reconnaissance aircraft, smaller
than the American Awacs, but capable of offering airborne early warning
capabilities. The South Koreans are almost completely dependent on the US
for information about movements in North Korea.
* Trainer aircraft. After the failure of Daewoo Heavy Industries' indigenous
KTX-I trainer, Lockheed of the US is offering help for early development for
the KTX-II programme in a deal worth about Dollars 700m. The next stage of
development could be worth up to Dollars 2bn. The UK wanted to supply a
cheaper redesigned version of the BAe's Hawk.
* Frigates: South Korea's admirals have aspirations to a blue water navy,
capable of operating beyond coastal waters. European diplomats say the US is
offering reconditioned ships, but the South Korean navy wants new vessels of
possibly up to 8,000 tonnes.
* Deep water submarines. The UK is understood to have offered four
second-hand Upholder class vessels, but the South Korean navy is not
particularly interested.
* Naval helicopters.
* Mine-hunters.
* Ground-based electronics, particularly in the field of command, control
and communications. This might include military satellite communications.
* Land-based helicopters.
* An upgrade of the K1 tank. Most of the equipment would probably be
provided domestically or by the US, but European suppliers could ship some
components.
The extent to which the Europeans can capture market share remains unclear.
This is partly because in recent months few deals have been concluded. A
purge of the armed forces and an anti-corruption campaign instigated by
President Kim Young-sam has led to a virtual paralysis in military
procurement. During 1993, only 20 per cent of the overseas procurement
budget was actually spent.
'Nobody wanted to make a decision,' explains one diplomat. The disincentives
to take action received a further boost last year after a Dollars 6.67m
fraud involving a French-Korean, counterfeit bills of lading and a
non-existent cargo of artillery shells. The affair cost Mr Lee Kyong Jae his
job as defence minister. However, diplomats say the decision-making process
is now loosening up.
Although South Korea represents an opportunity for European companies,
diplomats admit there are risks. In the first place, the contracts may not
be particularly profitable. Some non-US suppliers have succeeded by offering
low prices or even throwing in free samples. In addition, nearly all deals
over Dollars 5m include a mandatory offset of 30 per cent.
Another problem is that by winning a contract through technology transfer,
the Europeans could create a future competitor. 'The main advantage the
European makers have is their willingness to offer technology, but they
mustn't offer too much,' says one European diplomat.
However, most European observers discount such dangers. 'What the Koreans
have done in the automotive industry is extraordinary,' says a European
diplomat. 'But there's a big difference between assembling a submarine or a
trainer aircraft, and developing one for yourself.'
Another explains: 'The clever stuff is really beyond them. On a submarine,
the sonars, weapons and controls to propel and direct the boat are all too
sophisticated. It's worse in aerospace.'
Indeed, the track record of the Korean Agency for Defence Development (ADD),
responsible for acquiring technology and then developing indigenous weapons
systems, is particularly patchy in that sector.
The most disastrous example is Korea's KTX-I trainer aircraft, developed by
the ADD. The aircraft was underpowered and overweight, making the trainer
difficult to manoeuvre, and there were problems with the landing gear.
The ADD is continuing to persevere, however. After the failure of the KTX-I,
it is co-ordinating development of the KTX-II. Samsung, Lockheed of the US,
and Casa of Spain are collaborating to develop a twin jet-engined trainer.
'The Koreans will keep pushing for technology,' says one diplomat. 'The
Europeans will give it to them. But it's more likely to be the older
generation kit - say the mark VI rather than the mark VII. The question is
whether the Koreans, using all those PhDs to vacuum up technology from
whatever source, will eventually be able to catch up on their own. In the
short term, the answer is no. In the longer term, the question is rather
more difficult to answer.'
