FT  01 SEP 94 / PNG discerns some light amid the gloom: Search for peace
will be right at the top of new premier's priorities
Sir Julius Chan, Papua New Guinea's new prime minister took over the
leadership reins with relative ease.
From here on, however, life for the Chan regime may not be so easy. Sir
Julius, Papua New Guinea prime minister for a brief two years in the early
1980s, and its first finance minister after independence in 1975, faces
three main issues.
The first is the situation on the island of Bougainville, where the
government has been fighting a guerrilla war with local secessionists for
more than five years. The tactics of both sides have been condemned by
organisations such as Amnesty International, and international censure has
rained down.
There are, however, some hopeful signs. Private contacts between the
government and the Bougainville Revolutionary Army have been getting under
way in recent months, and Sir Julius, in his former role of foreign
minister, had been due to fly to Honiara, in the Solomon Islands, later this
week to meet secessionist leaders.
He quickly confirmed that this visit will go ahead. 'Peace is vital: it's
very much top of the priority list,' Sir Julius said, although he was less
precise about concessions which might be offered to the secessionists.
The second, even more intractable, problem is the economy, which suffered a
serious blow in 1989, when the Bougainville dispute forced the island's
large Panguna copper mine, operated by Australia's CRA, to close. The mine
had been providing about 30 per cent of the country's export earnings, and
accounted for some 10 per cent of its gross domestic product.
At first, PNG seemed to weather the Panguna loss fairly well. Gross domestic
product fell from Dollars 3.5bn (Pounds 2.3bn) in 1989, to Dollars 3.2bn the
following year, but growth then picked up as the Porgera goldmine and Kutubu
oil field projects came on stream. It ran at double-digit rates in 1992 and
1993.
However, despite efforts to reduce public spending in line with diminished
means, the budget deficit mounted to dangerous levels in the early 1990s,
with actual government expenditure outstripping budgeted sums by significant
margins. The government deficit, which had stood at only 1.2 per cent of GDP
in 1989, rose to 5.6 per cent of GDP in 1992, and 7 per cent last year,
according to the latest Asia-Pacific Economics Group report.
With growth likely to evaporate in 1994 as the Porgera and Kutubu
contributions ease off, Mr Masket Iangalio, finance minister in the
government of Mr Paias Wingti, had warned that his country could be heading
for bankruptcy.
The third issue of pressing interest to western markets, and closely related
to the country's economic situation, is the country's resources policy. This
has been the focus of much confusion recently, with Mr Iangalio at open odds
with Mr John Kaputin, the former mining minister.
The fiercest tussle has come over the proposed ADollars 1bn (Pounds
487m)-plus gold mine on the island of Lihir, which is a joint venture
between Britain's RTZ and Niugini Mining, controlled by Canada's Battle
Mountain. The original plan was split funding between a ADollars 400m share
issue and debt financing, with the two partners and the Papua New Guinea
government all holding stakes in the project.
Since then, there has been furious debate over whether the PNG government
should stick to a provisional agreement to involve Malaysia's state-owned
Malaysia Mining Corporation at an early stage in return for assistance with
funding, and what equity entitlements should be offered to landowners.
The required 'special mining lease', due to be granted in early 1994, has
still not materialised.
In Australia, mining executives seemed to be holding their breath and hoping
that the change of government will mean a more pragmatic approach to Papua
New Guinea's economic difficulties, and thus a smoother ride for would-be
project developers.
One, involved with the Lihir project, suggested Sir Julius would probably
want to put his own stamp on the mine decision, but would appreciate the
economic boost it could eventually bring. 'I don't think they can afford not
to go ahead,' he said.
