FT  17 JAN 94 / Equity Markets: Other markets
FRANKFURT
Speculation on the outlook for interest rates is on the agenda this week
ahead of Thursday's Bundesbank Council meeting. NatWest Securities says
recent data on orders and industrial output point to further economic
weakness, providing some justification for monetary easing. But the
weakening D-Mark, down 4.2 per cent on a trade weighted basis since
mid-October, mitigates against swift cuts.
ZURICH
Winterthur, Switzerland's third largest insurer, has called a news
conference this morning at which it is expected to announce that it is
taking a substantial minority stake in DBV Holding, Commerzbank's insurance
subsidiary. Commerzbank, also holding a press conference today, has been
looking for a partner for DBV after talks with Zurich Insurance broke down
last year.
STOCKHOLM
Volvo holds its EGM on Wednesday to ratify the appointment of a new board of
directors, which will open the way for asset disposals. These are rumoured
to include the sale of its 46.9 per cent stake in Cardo. Volvo shares hit
all-time highs on Friday, following positive reports from analysts and
recent press comment. The market has also become enthusiastic following
suggestions that France may soon end the relationship between the Swedish
group and Renault.
MADRID
Banco Santander is due to continue Spain's bank reporting season this week
and analysts are looking for a 6 per cent rise in 1993 net profit, after
Popular's 7 per cent rise, announced last week. UBS says the possibility of
a general banking crisis in Spain has diminished after last week's comments
from Banesto's former chairman, Mr Mario Conde, when he maintained Banesto's
financial troubles were overstated.
TOKYO
Further buying from overseas investors may emerge, especially if other Asian
markets resume their decline. Although uncertainty over the political reform
bill, which the government hopes to pass through parliament on Thursday, may
cause some volatility, the market could receive a boost once the bill is
approved. However, share prices could see heavy selling pressure if Prime
Minister Morihiro Hosokawa fails to push the bill through.
