FT  17 NOV 94 / Kenya does a tidy-up before investors meet: Leslie Crawford
weighs economic reform commitment on day of London conference
The end of the year usually heralds a flurry of economic reforms in Kenya.
The proximity of the annual meeting of donor governments and reviews by the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank help concentrate the minds of
policy makers as they struggle to meet targets to qualify for more aid.
This year has been no exception. Earlier this month, Mr Musalia Mudavadi,
Kenya's finance minister, deregulated the oil industry - the last remaining
sector of the economy subject to price controls.
Mr Mudavadi also announced that civil servants in his own ministry and the
central bank were under investigation for the irregular payment of billions
of shillings in export compensation last year to a trading firm, Goldenberg
International. Its owner, Mr Kamlesh Pattni, who was charged with corruption
earlier this year and later released on bail, is back in prison.
The actions appear to have been prompted by the need to convince donors that
Kenya is committed to open government as well as an open economy. The slow
judicial investigation into the Goldenberg affair - the biggest embezzlement
of public funds in Kenya's history - had led many Kenyans to believe it
involved powerful godfathers within President Daniel arap Moi's government.
The last-minute house-cleaning may also have been inspired by President
Moi's visit to London this week, where he is expected to inaugurate an
investors' conference today. The meeting, organised by the Confederation of
British Industry, hopes to sell Kenya as a reformed economy with good
investment opportunities.
Rapid deregulation over the past 18 months has produced some encouraging
results. Inflation has fallen from a peak of more than 100 per cent in early
1993 to an annualised rate of about 13 per cent.
Record prices for coffee will boost export earnings this year. After the
removal of exchange controls, the Kenya shilling has, against expectations,
appreciated against the dollar, while the central bank has accumulated
Dollars 800m in foreign exchange reserves, equivalent to six months'
imports.
With good rains promising a bumper maize harvest, and a strong shilling, Mr
Mudavadi believes the goals of price and currency stability are within
reach. 'The economy is moving towards single-digit inflation, which it last
encountered in 1987,' he told a recent meeting of Kenyan employers.
But for the past three years, economic growth has been less than half the
annual 3 per cent increase in population. Manufacturing is hurting from high
domestic interest rates and a flood of cheap imports, while the strong
shilling has eroded the profitability of the tourist industry. Despite a 10
per cent increase in tourist arrivals this year, most hotels on the Mombasa
coast say they are operating at a loss.
'The government is acutely aware that in order to maintain social peace, the
economy must create 450,000 jobs a year,' says the director of a
multinational company in Nairobi. 'And in order to do so private investment
must be revived.'
The London conference marks Kenya's first attempt in many years to attract
foreign direct investment into the country. Hopes are running high, but the
outcome may fall short of expectations.
'Kenya is only likely to see incremental amounts of new investment from
companies already based in East Africa,' says one businessman who will be
attending the conference. Kenya is a latecomer to the liberalisation game,
having embarked on economic reform a decade later than Latin America and 20
years after south-east Asia. Its 26m citizens are too impoverished to
provide an attractive domestic market for foreign manufacturers, while the
pursuit of export-led growth stumbles over innumerable obstacles: the
distance from export markets, a dilapidated infrastructure, a
poorly-educated workforce and competition from other third world countries
following similar strategies.
There are also lingering doubts about President Moi's commitment to staying
the course, particularly if benefits are slow to materialise. He has reneged
on the reform process before - reimposing exchange controls in March 1993
and banning grain imports in August this year.
Although both relapses were corrected, they reveal deep schisms within
government over the policies adopted over the past 18 months. Mr Mudavadi
and central bank governor Mr Micah Cheserem have often looked lonely and
exposed as the principal champions of reform.
Much remains to be done, mainly in areas in which IMF technocrats fear to
tread. The modernisation of the economy would proceed more rapidly, and far
more smoothly, if its die-hard opponents were removed from senior positions
in the civil service, the ruling Kanu party and President Moi's inner circle
of advisers.
Political infighting has delayed the government's privatisation programme,
while a weak judiciary, beholden to its political masters, has made little
progress in investigating a host of financial scandals that robbed the
exchequer of some Ks30bn (Pounds 461m) - 10 per cent of GDP - last year.
Economic liberalisation, however, is creating a groundswell for fundamental
political change far greater than the social protests which brought about
democratic elections in 1992. Forced to compete, businessmen have become far
more critical of the system of political patronage which has made a few
individuals immensely wealthy and rendered them above the law.
'Kenya has changed,' says Mr Raphael Waita, deputy managing director of
Caltex Oil Kenya. 'Liberalisation has reduced corruption. We don't have to
kneel before government officials any more. What we now need is a clear
legal framework that creates a fair competitive environment for everyone.'
