FT  02 JUL 94 / As They Say in Europe: Chaos is restored - What Britain
should have been saying at Corfu
Britain's foreign secretary, Douglas Hurd, is fond of saying that things in
the European Union are moving Britain's way. And last weekend's events on
the island of Corfu proved it. Britain was able to eliminate the man -
Belgian prime minister Jean-Luc Dehaene - that most of the others wanted on
the reasonable ground that they preferred him. Especially the Germans and
the French.
Many Europeans failed to see this as the blow for freedom it was represented
as being in Britain but, rather, the result of an interplay of forces within
the Conservative party and the British media. What happened had, in effect,
been a coronary at the heart of Europe. The Dutch paper, Trouw, expressed
the general view succinctly: 'Major cannot accept Dehaene. In the United
Kingdom, it is the tabloids that rule.'
The fact is that Dehaene was no more unacceptable to Britain than any other
majority candidate might have been. But since he was depicted in the UK as a
fanatical centraliser, that was that.
Actually, he was a good deal more acceptable than the other leading
contender, Dutch prime minister Ruud Lubbers, whose colourful and
scandal-ridden career in politics would have caused huge international
interest had it happened anywhere but the Netherlands. Lubbers was also the
architect of the Maastricht treaty, which could be regarded as a
disqualification for most jobs.
In Germany, and even in France, there was some sympathy for the British
position. The Frankfurter Allgemeine shared a widely-held view that the way
in which Dehaene had been presented to the nations of Europe left a lot to
be desired. By implication, John Major was right to see this as some kind of
Franco-German diktat.
Yet, said the paper: 'Franco-German co-operation is indispensable for the
evolution of Europe.' And it noted, menacingly: 'Only those who believed
that the order of battle 'Britain against the rest of Europe' had been put
to rest with Margaret Thatcher's overthrow can refuse to admit the existence
of a fundamental British conflict with the Europeans.'
In France, comment often followed similar lines. There was some recognition
that the two allies would have to watch their step, however high-minded
their motivation, alongside a belief that Britain could not really be
'dissolved in Europe', as La Tribune put it.
Inevitably, Figaro produced a characteristic rant and quoted Joan of Arc's
words about booting the English out of France - which, in the eyes of most
sections of French society, is synonymous with Europe. (It ceases to be
Europe when it disagrees with France.) But there was an implicit question
that found an echo elsewhere: 'Can Europe progress with Britain as a
member?'
The next stage of the battle is to find another candidate, a freely accepted
man-of-the-majority and yet one who is more acceptable to Britain than
Dehaene. Liberation thought the affair could end up by leaving the British
worse off (although conceding Major had done Europe a service by returning
the EU to its normal state of chaos). And it pointed out that even though
there might not be a revival of 'cohesion', this row could well result in
more clarity about the respective roles of the commission and the member
states.
For the UK, though, an opportunity has been missed by rejecting Dehaene
unconditionally. The British should have demanded that he and his sponsors
agree to four priorities in the work of the commission as a condition for
his succession. These are:
A crackdown on the corrupt use of EU funds. At present, this is largely the
responsibility of governments - and they have little interest in firm action
because corruption offers gains to their people at the expense of others.
That work should begin now on ensuring farm spending is reduced in
preparation for the programme of subsidy reduction agreed in the Gatt world
trade round.
That each member should guarantee implementation of the single market
directives to at least the level achieved in Britain.
That the commission should complete its work on producing a binding
definition of subsidiarity.
These (apparently naive) proposals are thoroughly objectionable in the eyes
of most governments although they could hardly admit it. Rejection would
mean that any British veto had a sound moral base. Acceptance would give the
British a huge stick to wave at every council meeting from now on.
The great error of the British is the failure to recognise that the best way
to screw up the EU is to ensure that every single rule, regulation,
directive and agreement is implemented to the very letter.
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.
