FT  07 JUN 94 / Hand-up, not hand-out
It's jobs, stupid. The Clinton campaign's famous phrase should be thus
re-stated in time for the next British general election. The deciding issue
could be employment policy. That would not necessarily be to the
disadvantage of the Conservatives. Since 1979 they have won most of the
arguments. As soon as Labour has a new leader it had better find out why,
and what to do about it. A bogus commitment to full employment will not
suffice, except perhaps as a cynical slogan. What Labour needs is a credible
social and economic programme. At present it has none.
This is not to belittle Mr Tony Blair, the likely winner of a leadership
contest. He talks of national renewal. He also espouses the development of
the individual through a return to the values of the family and the
community. Such a sermon could win converts, but it would not guarantee
victory. For that Labour needs a believable set of economic proposals, a
strategy that comforts the electorate, a story that convinces voters that
they would be better off if they threw the Tories out.
To his credit, Mr Gordon Brown has cleared the way for some of the necessary
rethinking. The shadow chancellor has worked hard to reposition the Labour
party. He and his colleagues now run a mile from anything that could imply
an increase in personal taxation. The party is no longer associated with
devaluation. His central message is that Labour would fit people for the
21st century job market by better education and lifetime opportunities for
retraining. The Conservatives have expressed their admiration by copying
bits of it. Mr Brown further distinguished himself last week by stepping
aside to allow Mr Blair a clear run at the leadership. He was right. A man
who speaks in capital letters would be unlikely to soothe the anxieties of
wavering voters. He could do his cause a further service. He could challenge
his party's long-standing beliefs about deregulation, the minimum wage, and
unemployment benefit.
I have chosen those three out of a potentially longer list because the new
leader, be it Mr Blair or his likely rival Mr John Prescott, will be asked
about them. The debate could begin next Monday. The GMB general union has
invited contenders for the Labour leadership to appear before its delegates
in Blackpool on Monday afternoon. Mr Prescott believes that it is his duty
to campaign for a commitment to full employment, if only to force Mr Blair
to reveal his hand. Touching as it may seem, Mr Prescott regards a challenge
by himself as an endeavour to ensure that the new emperor has clothes.
Violins, please. Self-sacrifice has become chic in the Labour party. The
only danger is that he might win. Happily, it is slight.
What will Mr Blair say? He appears to have handed the economic portion of
his brain to Mr Brown for education and training. One or both of them will
doubtless study a special report due to be published by the OECD tonight.
This should put persistent structural unemployment high on the political
agenda. It is too closely argued to be disposed of in a few headlines, but
the thrust of it favours the Conservative approach to labour market
regulation, tax policy, social security contributions, and the minimum wage.
Education 'n training is also on the OECD's lengthy menu of proposed
job-creation policies, but the people's party will find little support for
its current thinking in most of the other items.
Alternatively, the putative leader of the opposition may turn to Mr Robert
Reich, Mr Clinton's secretary of Labour. Mr Reich has been all over London
town. He spoke at a Guardian seminar on Sunday and delivered a lecture
organised by the Labour think-tank, the Institute for Public Policy
Research, yesterday. He has a tale of woe to tell, about the US being the
most unequal society in the world, with Britain racing to catch up with that
dismal record. Jobs, and wage increases, are going to the 'problem-solvers',
people with university degrees. The unskilled and uneducated are today's
losers. Like everyone else, Mr Reich favours more training and better
education. That said, his further arguments give little support to an
inadequately modernised Labour party.
He is lukewarm about increases in the US's generally low minimum wage. How
low would Mr Blair put the floor in Britain? Mr Reich acknowledges the high
cost in jobs foregone of continental Europe's regulated and highly taxed
labour market. President Clinton's re-employment legislation is designed to
get people off social benefit. In the 1980s it might have been called
workfare. On the morning of Black Wednesday in 1992 I heard the president
campaign on this theme in Watts county. In last autumn's British Budget the
Conservatives announced a new 'job-seekers' allowance'. It cuts the time on
benefit from 12 to six months and obliges claimants to look for work or
accept training schemes. Labour is awaiting the report of its social justice
commission on this subject. Its leadership candidates should beware. Any
promise of full employment, or a move towards it, would be hollow without
some reform of the welfare system. The American slogan 'a hand-up rather
than a hand-out' would do.
Mr Reich has other pots simmering. One contains a school-to-work
apprenticeship programme; another a tax credit system for low-paid workers.
Britain's Tory administration introduced family credit for low-paid
employees and national vocational qualifications that could become goals for
apprentices. As with all job-creation programmes, none of these is itself a
solution, but together the complete Reich package may add up to somewhere
between harmless and mildly beneficial.
Labour is trapped between the tempting haven of continental Europe, whose
comfortable conditions for employees cannot be sustained, and the awful
example of America, whose 1980s deregulation has destroyed whole layers of
society. There is no magic third way, certainly not one that ends with
everyone who wants a job getting one. Subsidies rarely work. You have to
settle for less regulation and less welfare if you want more people in jobs.
The question is how much less. If Mr Blair becomes leader he will have to
teach his party these facts of life. Then, with Mr Brown, he should assemble
a package that outflanks the Conservatives. The alternative is hot air, and
another Tory victory.
