FT  04 AUG 94 / Technology: Cleaner ways with nuclear waste - An innovation
with vast potential cost savings
A US company has developed a technology for handling high-level nuclear
waste more cleanly and cheaply than existing methods. It also makes the
extraction of strategic and precious metals more economic.
Molecular recognition technology (MRT) is the brainchild of Reed Izatt and
Jeremy Bradshaw, professors of chemistry at Brigham Young University in
Utah. The company, IBC Advanced Technology, was formed as a spin-off from
the university.
MRT is a type of separation process tailored to recognise certain metals and
reject others. Caesium-137 and strontium-90 are the two most important
radioactive constituents of nuclear wastes, even though they occur in low
concentrations. They provide 98 per cent of the heat and 97 per cent of the
penetrating radiation liberated during the first 30 years after the wastes
have been formed.
MRT can remove caesium-137 and strontium-90 from the waste stream, so
minimising the volume of waste that has to be turned into glass and disposed
of geologically. Potential cost savings are estimated to be several billion
dollars.
MRT makes use of cavity-like molecules called ligands. These contain atoms
that function like teeth, biting into and holding certain metals inside the
ligand but not others. What determines this selectivity is the number and
type of atomic teeth contained in the ligand, and the size and shape of the
overall molecule.
Every metal found on earth has its own way of responding to these criteria -
which means that it is possible in theory to design a ligand to recognise
almost any metal and reject the rest.
When the MRT ligands are bonded chemically to solid supports, such as silica
or titania, they can be used in conjunction with porous membranes or
fabricated into columns and gels. This makes MRT potentially valuable in any
industry where metal separation is a problem or a financial burden.
As miners exhaust high-grade copper ores, for example, the metal will
increasingly have to be extracted from low-grade deposits containing large
amounts of impurities. Extracting the metal by conventional methods
(smelting and electrolysis), while abiding by increasingly tough
environmental regulations, means a sizeable hike in the price of copper. MRT
is a cheaper way of extracting these strategic metals.
MRT can also take out toxic metals such as lead, mercury, bismuth, antimony
and arsenic from waste streams, returning clean water to the environment.
New regulations are requiring a lower lead content in tin, used in the
packaging, beverage and electronics industries; MRT will reduce lead levels
in tin to below 30 ppm, without incurring environmental costs.
What makes MRT attractive, compared with traditional separation by
precipitation, ion exchange and solvent extraction, is the speed at which it
operates, and a selectivity that does not diminish however low the
concentration of the desired metal becomes.
One of the company's earlier successes with the nuclear industry in 1991 was
the separation of rhodium from spent nuclear fuel. Rhodium is important as
one of the constituents used in catalytic converters, and European demand
for rhodium is expected to increase as a result of legislation requiring new
cars to be fitted with catalytic converters.
The company has formed an alliance with 3M, the US-based multinational, and
Pacific Northwest Laboratories to tailor MRT for taking caesium-137 and
strontium-90 out of nuclear waste. This involves using 3M's membrane
technology to incorporate IBC's MRT ligands.
Testing at the US Department of Energy's Hanford site (a large underground
nuclear waste storage facility in Washington state) begins later this year,
but tests using non-radioactive caesium and strontium show that the IBC-3M
membranes can isolate these metals at concentrations as low as a few parts
per billion.
