FT  06 JUL 94 / Arts: The changing shape of history - Television
For anybody still wondering if we really live in 'the age of television',
the past week must surely have settled things. It is not so much the
material which television creates itself which matters - although the repeat
of Monty Python's Flying Circus on BBC2 on Sundays does emphasise the extent
to which television has been defining the zeitgeist for several decades.
More significant are the events which measure out our lives and which we now
tend to experience via television; matters in which television does not
create the programme material but seems at first sight to be acting simply
as a medium of communication. The American space programme, the activities
of the royal family, and sporting events such as Wimbledon and Grand Prix
motor racing are examples. Such things may be affected very much by being
conveyed via television; in some instances they may be changed, sometimes
profoundly. In extreme cases they may cease to have any real significance
except as television.
When rain stopped play at Old Trafford on Monday, BBC2 showed a tape of a
1973 Test between England and New Zealand, and you suddenly remembered what
cricket used to be like. Not only were the players not wearing the kiddy-kit
which is now required for so many televised matches, they did not have a
single line of writing on their white shirts, wore English caps, and there
was no advertising painted on the pitch. Television has changed cricket.
Watching the Wimbledon finals, the French Grand Prix, and the Tour de France
it was hard to avoid the feeling that all major sports are steadily becoming
adjuncts to television. Wimbledon and the Tour feel increasingly like
branches of the marketing business, and it seems unlikely that Sampras would
have walked away with Pounds 345,000 but for television's involvement. Not
long ago it was a novelty to have television pictures delivered from inside
a racing car; in the French Grand Prix most of the cars seemed to be fitted
with cameras. For BBC1's new series The Contenders starting on Friday they
have fitted miniature cameras to the forehead of hurdler Colin Jackson and
the back of high-board diver Bobby Morgan. How long before Olympic athletes
are fitted with cameras? How long before the Olympics are seen solely as a
television event?
Throughout most of history monarchs have been known to their subjects via
their portraits on coins. What little our parents knew about the royal
family came from cinema newsreels and newspapers. Today thanks to television
the British royal family is as familiar as soap opera stars. True, it seems
that last week's studiously hyped ITV documentary about Prince Charles
achieved a rating rather lower than that for Coronation Street which
preceded it. However, the reason, presumably, is that it lasted two and a
half hours and included some dreadfully boring passages.
Vigorous editing could have transformed a wearisome 150 minute programme
into a taut 50 minutes containing all the important bits. Perhaps it was
only by including the tedious details about foreign visits and duties that
the programme makers managed to get the access they wanted, but the result
will have been that even if the transmission began with 25 million or so
viewers, many will have given up. The royal family may live to regret the
way they have embraced television, but there is no mistaking the fact that
they have. It could even be argued that, like the Olympics, the royal family
is ceasing to have much significance except as a television phenomenon.
The best example, however, of the way that we may now experience some of the
most important parts of our lives via television has come from BBC2's series
on the American space programme, One Small Step. At the time of the Apollo
missions, like many others I was enthralled and inspired. When the first
astronauts were on the dark side of the moon and no one knew for sure that
we would ever see them again, I stayed up all night in front of my first
television set and went bleary eyed to the office next day to discuss every
arcane detail with other newspapermen who had done the same.
Our knowledge came solely from television. Of course the trappings helped:
the music from 'Also sprach Zarathustra', the portentous build-up from
Mission Control ('Zero minus three minutes and counting . . . all engines
running . . . we have a lift off' and then that volcanic roar from the
biggest engines ever built). But beyond the trappings was a feeling that
something immense was happening; that what we were watching was on a par
with the setting sail of the 15th century navigators.
One Small Step did a good job in recalling not only what happened, but how
it felt at the time (particularly impressive given that the BBC has, by all
accounts, destroyed the material showing James Burke, Patrick Moore and the
others at the British end, enthusing over the space missions). Most telling
of all, though, is the way in which history and hindsight show that the
American space effort was organised as part of the cold war. Vox pops
preserved from the streets at the time prove that Americans had swallowed
the propaganda of the McCarthy era and were appalled and terrified at the
thought of the Russians ('They can't even make refrigerators]') leading with
Sputnik, the first animal in space, the first man in space, the first woman
in space, the first team in space, the first space walk, and so on.
I still suspect that our descendants will see man's escape from terrestrial
gravity as one of the great milestones in human history. Yet there is no
denying that, seen from a distance of a mere 25 years, the American space
effort now looks like a finite television event. It is hard to believe that
the moon programme would ever have been undertaken as a part of the cold war
(itself a meaningless concept outside the age of mass communications) except
in the television era. The presence of this new mass medium does help shape
our very history. Yes, we are living in the age of television.
