FT  24 AUG 94 / Silence in HK auction room as developers snub land sales
For the first time in a decade, the Hong Kong government auctioneer heard
only silence yesterday when a plot of public land was put on the block. And
for two other prime lots, after almost 10 minutes without a bid, China came
to the rescue with a face-saving offer.
The result of the auction was as much about troubled relations between the
Hong Kong government and developers, as it was about longer-term confidence
in the territory's property market.
The auction hall was packed, as it generally is for the regular government
sell-offs, but the biggest property developers opted to send middle managers
rather than the senior officers who typically attend.
But the lack of bids stirred fears about the fate of Hong Kong property
prices, which have fallen by at least 12 per cent since their peak of March.
The mood has shifted after an estimated 200 per cent leap in prices over the
past three years, when developers competed for commercial and residential
lots offered by the government.
Analysts who argue that the market is not ready for a real fall say the
present turbulence results from the tension between the government and the
developers since plans were announced to cool the market in March by
increasing the flow of land. This tension has been heightened by a
corruption investigation against leading property developers.
Yesterday's auction was, in effect, left in the hands of one bidder,
Chinese-backed Citic Pacific, which clinched two plots at the opening bids
of HKDollars 950m (Pounds 79.4m) and HKDollars 220m - sharply less than
market expectations, which were as high as HKDollars 1.2bn for the first
plot, a residential site which Citic plans to develop into about 300 flats.
Citic's role was a positive sign for some observers who interpreted it as a
vote of confidence from China in Hong Kong's long-term prosperity.
Mr John Corrigall, the auctioneer, stressed that one Tuesday auction was not
wholly indicative of the outlook for the property market, but confessed to
being 'a little disappointed'.
He attributed the poor response to a rise in interest rates. Hong Kong banks
put up their main lending rate by 50 basis points to 7.75 per cent last
Friday.
But there was at least one happy man, Citic's managing director Henry Fan,
who emerged smiling from a scrum of TV crews. 'It was a pleasant surprise,'
he said. 'We never expected the non-existence of competition. We seldom have
the chance even to put our hands up.'
The tension between government and Hong Kong developers is unlikely to end
quickly.
The colony's Independent Commission Against Corruption is now seeking to
establish whether developers colluded at a May land auction to divide up
lots among themselves and minimise their outlays.
But analysts fear that the investigation and attempts to control developers
could harm the property and financial markets. About 65 per cent of the Hang
Seng Index is linked to the property market, and with some private forecasts
of falls of 50 per cent or more in property prices, bidding silences could
become all the more eerie.
World stocks, Page 27
