FT  03 JUN 94 / International Company News: Metallgesellschaft ready to quit
mining - German group could raise CDollars 500m from sale of Canadian stake
Metallgesellschaft has said little about the future of its extensive
international mining interests in the six months since the ailing German
group began its fight to survive heavy oil-trading losses.
The mining assets, held through MG's 50.1 per cent stake in Toronto-based
Metall Mining, have merely been identified as a possible candidate for
disposal as part of the group's scramble to raise cash.
Behind the scenes, however, MG is slowly but surely nearing the point of
unveiling a public offer of its shares in Metall Mining which, at current
market prices, are worth about CDollars 500m (USDollars 360m).
The offer is sufficiently close for MG, Metall and their advisers to be
keenly watching investor response to the forthcoming initial public offering
by Falconbridge, the Canadian nickel, copper and zinc producer. Due to be
priced around June 15, the Falconbridge issue could raise CDollars 750m.
Metall Mining officials will brief analysts in London today on the progress
made in removing the obstacles to MG's withdrawal. They are likely to report
that of three hurdles which needed to be overcome, only one of any substance
remains.
The obstacles date back to 1987, when Metall was taken public as MG's
vehicle for the expansion of its international mining interests.
Metall's varied portfolio includes a minority stake in the big Ok Tedi
copper mine in Papua New Guinea, a controlling interest in Copper Range, an
integrated US producer, and a string of valuable exploration properties
stretching from Turkey to Australia.
Its top priority is to find or buy a big, low-cost copper deposit. In its
non-copper businesses, weak zinc prices have led Metall to shift its focus
to gold. Projects in Turkey and the Canadian province of Quebec are expected
to double annual gold output to 320,000 ounces over the next couple of
years.
Metall also holds significant direct and indirect equity stakes in Teck
Corporation and Cominco, two of Canada's most prominent mining companies.
Last September, before MG's troubles surfaced, the German company parked its
copper smelting and refining interests in Europe and Indonesia with Metall.
Most of these investments are joint ventures. Metall's partners include
Degussa, the German metals group, and Australia's MIM, as well as the Keevil
family of Vancouver, who are large shareholders in Teck and Cominco.
Ironic as it may seem, these partners demanded assurances when the projects
were bundled into Metall that the fledgling Canadian company's stake would
revert to its seemingly robust parent, if MG were to sever its ties with
Metall. Under these agreements, MG would be obliged to pay Metall a fair
market price for the assets.
Since MG's troubles surfaced, Mr Norman Keevil, chairman of Teck, has agreed
to relinquish his right to require it to take over Metall's multiple-voting
Class A shares in Teck if the German company spins off its stake in Metall.
In the event of a third party taking control of Metall, however, Mr Keevil
will acquire voting rights over Metall's interest in Teck as well as the
right to buy the shares himself.
Metall has also completed all but the formalities of an agreement under
which it will peg its interest in Ok Tedi at 18 per cent, in partnership
with BHP of Australia and the Papua New Guinea government.
The government, which will end up with 30 per cent, has pledged not to
exercise its right of first refusal on Metall's shares when MG sheds control
of the Canadian company.
The one outstanding problem relates to Metall's interests in Norddeutsche
Affinerie in Germany and Austria's Brixlegg, two of the copper smelters
which were transferred to it last year. It has yet to reach an agreement
with MIM and Degussa, which have a first right of refusal on Metall's stake
in the event of MG losing control.
Dr Klaus Zeitler, Metall's chief executive, told the annual meeting on May
12 that 'we will either continue to own our shares in these smelters or we
will be paid the fair market value of these assets'.
Metall's attractions to prospective buyers include its string of blue-chip
properties plus its sturdy balance sheet, which includes over CDollars 1bn
in equity and CDollars 300m in cash and short-term investments.
The recent surge in copper markets has improved its prospects. A 10 per cent
rise in prices would have boosted Metall's lacklustre 1993 earnings of
CDollars 1.3m by another CDollars 21m.
Mr Ray Goldie, analyst at Richardson Greenshields in Toronto, recently
raised his forecast of 1994 earnings from three cents to 16 cents a share,
jumping to 62 cents in 1995.
However,Metall also has some weak spots, notably its 84 per cent stake in
Copper Range. Besides being a relatively high-cost producer, the
Michigan-based company is under environmental pressures either to close its
smelter or modernise it at a cost of USDollars 200m to Dollars 250m.
Metall hopes to double Copper Range's ore reserves and cut costs by
extracting metal from pillars of previously mined-out areas.
Dr Zeitler expressed confidence at the annual meeting that Copper Range can
be transformed 'from a relatively high-cost producer to a modern,
state-of-the-art, medium to low-cost producer within the next three to four
years.' But he acknowledged that progress will depend heavily on the absence
of environmental 'hiccups'.
