FT  22 AUG 94 / Troubled skies cause blips in Athens: Radar worries and a
traffic controllers' row are raising tempers
So incensed were some Greek travellers at the delays caused by an air
traffic controllers' go-slow that they pushed aside the security guards and
staged an impromptu sit-in earlier this month on the runway at Athens
airport.
Since the start of the peak tourist season in July, both charter and
scheduled flights leaving the country's airports have been delayed by up to
three hours. Conditions are worst in the afternoons and at weekends, when
demand is highest for landing slots at Athens and at important tourist
resorts such as Rhodes and Heraklion on Crete.
Already under great work pressure, Greece's 380 air traffic controllers have
added to the summer temperatures by demanding a substantial real pay rise,
claiming they should be exempted from public sector wage restraints, which
restrict increases to 10 per cent this year to match the anticipated
inflation rate.
'We get seniority rises at the same rate as other Greek civil servants with
university degrees, but nothing to compensate for specialised skills, or for
doing a stressful job with inadequate equipment,' says Mr Panayotis
Tsoubelis, chairman of the controllers' union. 'The result is a higher staff
attrition rate than anywhere else in the public sector.'
Greece's transport minister, Mr Theodore Pangalos, agrees in principle that
the air traffic controllers are entitled to a higher salary scale, and more
training for what is becoming a steadily more demanding job. But he wants
the union to agree in writing to postpone its pay demand until next year.
The controllers decided to reject Mr Pangalos's terms just as the August
rush of charter flights started. The result is that, with tourist arrivals
forecast to rise by about 10 per cent this year to almost 11m, pressure on
the country's outdated air traffic control system has never been greater.
'There is a crush of traffic across Greek airspace in summer, with the
number of flights more than doubling to 1,500 a day,' says Mr George
Stamboulidis, a senior civil aviation official. 'But we still don't have the
facilities to ensure smooth flow management.'
Athens airport is among Europe's busiest, handling more than 10m passengers
a year. Yet it has only one runway and its air traffic control centre relies
on a short-range radar system dating from the 1960s. Outside its 40-mile
range, the air traffic controllers rely on talking to pilots over a VHF
radio link.
Says a pilot for a charter operator: 'After you've been cruising quietly
across Europe, Greek airspace seems chaotic. Sometimes the frequencies are
so busy you don't get a chance to give your position before making the
approach to Athens.'
A new approach radar for the Athens area was due to start operating in
mid-1992. It was intended as the first stage of a Dollars 46m (Pounds 29.7m)
turnkey project, awarded in 1991 to Thomson-CSF, the French electronics
manufacturer, to update Greece's air traffic control system to international
standards.
The new system would immediately increase Greece's air space capacity by at
least 15 per cent by providing full radar coverage. Traffic from important
Greek airports would move faster, as aircraft flying at the same altitude
and speed would no longer have to be kept 60 miles apart to ensure a
10-minute safety margin between flights.
Much of the Thomson equipment is now in place, but the new Athens approach
radar is not yet working. One senior Greek civil aviation official says:
'You expect delays on this kind of project, mainly because of local
topography. But the problems have gone on so long, we're beginning to think
Thomson's original specifications for the project were incorrect.'
Thomson says the radar is situated in a 'difficult environment' at Athens
airport, between a mountain and the sea, with several islands nearby. It
maintains that the system operates to international standards and is being
specially modified to satisfy the demands of Greek air traffic controllers.
The controllers complain that the radar, which gives a computer-controlled
image of an aircraft and its flight path, cannot be used in its present
form. Says one: 'The screen gives you wrong information - two aircraft when
there's only one, or no aircraft at all in one area when you already know
it's there. It's not reliable, so we switched it off.'
If the radar's problems cannot be sorted out by the end of the year, the
government may revoke the contract with Thomson and choose another system,
civil aviation officials say. In the meantime, tourists flying home from
Athens can resign themselves to a long wait on the tarmac.
