FT  01 DEC 94 / The Budget: Reforms of Customs work announced
Reforms to the way Customs and Excise carries out its work were announced
yesterday after a root-and-branch review which will result in 4,000 job
losses over the next five years.
Job cuts in the department, which is under pressure to cut costs and meet
the public spending targets set out in this week's Budget, will include 550
anti-smuggling officers and 2,000 value added tax officials.
The staffing reductions were criticised bitterly by trade union leaders
yesterday who said they were designed to pay for future tax cuts, would
damage the fight against drugs and allow significant VAT evasion.
But Mrs Valerie Strachan, chairman of Customs and Excise, denied that the
changes had been prompted by the need to cut costs: 'We have been moving in
this direction for some years. We have been analysing the risks and focusing
on areas where risk is greater.'
She added: 'By the year 2000, we expect our numbers to be just under 21,000
compared with the current figure of just over 25,000.'
Changes announced in the Budget on the collection of VAT - the registration
threshold is to be raised to Pounds 46,000 - will limit visits to companies
and reduce the burden on officials, said Mrs Strachan.
She envisaged more 'desk audits' at local VAT offices of traders' books
rather than visits to the workplace.
The development of the single European market had also altered the way the
department worked - shifting the workload away from ports and airports.
However, Mrs Strachan promised: 'There are not going to be any Customs-free
ports or airports.' In future there would be more concentration on catching
high-value complex smuggling and trafficking.
A further measure which will help cut costs is closer liaison with the
Inland Revenue. They are to share the same adjudicator, helplines, advice
centres, and possibly training programmes.
Mr John Sheldon, general secretary of the NUCPS civil service union, said:
'Cuts in the front-line fighters against drug smuggling will be paid for by
all of us in the human and cash costs of drug addiction and drug-related
crime on the streets. It is a dangerous and irresponsible decision.'
Mr Mike King, the NUCPS national officer for Customs, said: 'These cuts have
nothing to do with efficiency or effectiveness and everything to do with
finding the cash for future tax cuts to save the government at the next
election.'
