FT  09 JUL 94 / World Cup '94: Political fortunes decided on the pitch -
Latin American leaders follow their country's results keenly
In Latin America, where soccer is a matter of life and death, the political
fall-out from the hasty exit of four out of five Latin American World Cup
contenders could be considerable. It has probably already influenced the
result of one presidential election. The 3-1 defeat by Romania of Colombia
on June 18 kept most Colombian males sober that Saturday night. Instead of
spending the following day recovering from their hangovers, they turned out
in unexpectedly high numbers to vote.
That probably benefited Liberal candidate Ernesto Samper - seen as more
popular among male voters than his Conservative rival, Andres Pastrana,
whose support was strongest among women.
In Mexico, the team's defeat by Bulgaria prompted a rare sporting
pronouncement from President Carlos Salinas: 'Perhaps if we had strengthened
the attack after Luis Garcia was sent off, we would have had more
opportunities'.
This poke in the eye to coach Mejia Baron - who, to the mystification of
Mexican fans, left attackers Hugo Sanchez and Carlos Hermosillo on the bench
 -was probably well deserved. Mexican performance in the World Cup was
expected to produce a feel-good factor which might have helped propel
Salinas's anointed successor, Ernesto Zedillo, to victory in next month's
presidential elections.
The biggest impact, though, could be in Brazil. In the first round of
presidential elections in October, the two leading candidates are a
left-winger (political rather than footballing) known as 'Lula' and an
establishment contender, Fernando Henrique Cardoso. In a recent poll, 25 per
cent of voters said they would not make up their mind about their vote until
after they knew the victors in the World Cup.
Stephen Rose, a London stockbroker specialising in the Brazilian and
Argentine markets, says: 'The feeling is that if Brazil win, people would
think things in the country are not so bad after all and that would benefit
Fernando Henrique.'
In Argentina, President Carlos Menem has more time to recover from defeat
before elections next year, in which he hopes to run again. But the
63-year-old head of state, who plays soccer himself, takes defeat badly.
Mysteriously, his team win more often than the Argentine national side these
days.
