FT  28 JAN 94 / Brazil makes slow progress on economic reform package
Brazil's Congress is inching towards approval of the first stage in the
government's economic stabilisation package, but observers remain cautious
about whether the plan will provide a lasting cure for inflation, now
running at about 40 per cent a month.
Congress yesterday looked set to pass a set of measures, including a slight
increase in corporate tax, which are needed to help balance this year's
budget. This marked a partial victory for Mr Fernando Henrique Cardoso, the
finance minister, who proposed the package last month. However, more
controversial proposals to reduce the budget deficit have met substantial
opposition and the government is being forced to contemplate alternative
cuts.
Measures approved so far include a 5 per cent increase in existing tax
bands, taking the top rate from 25 per cent to 26.25 per cent, and a new
upper rate of 35 per cent. But Mr Cardoso's plans to raise Dollars 5.6bn by
setting aside 15 per cent of the transfers central government makes to
states and municipalities has been strongly criticised by Brazil's powerful
state governors. The set-aside can only be approved via a constitutional
amendment and now looks likely to be watered down.
As a result, the government is likely next month to start negotiating
alternative measures and may propose a reduction in export incentives and
further cuts in development programmes. It is also possible the estimate of
social security contributions will be increased, despite a previous upwards
readjustment, and that public servants' income tax will go to the federal
rather than state governments.
These measures would allow the government to claim a balanced budget, but
some observers fear the balance will be cosmetic. 'They're making deals and
Congress is proposing substitutes and that suggests something is very
shaky,' according to Mr Robert Macedo, former economic policy secretary.
The plan has also generated some optimism that Brazil can complete a debt
deal with international banks by a deadline of April 15.
Mr William Rhodes, vice-chairman of Citibank, which heads the bank advisory
committee, said he was 'increasingly optimistic' that a deal - which covers
Dollars 35bn of debt principal, Dollars 7bn in interest arrears and about
Dollars 11bn owed to Brazilian banks - could be completed by the deadline.
This will require an accord with Brazil and with the International Monetary
Fund, to be voted at the IMF's March board meeting.
Citibank said the holders of 96.51 per cent of the Dollars 35bn debt
principal have now signed the accord. This suggests the Brazilian holding of
the Dart family of the US - which still object to the terms of the deal - is
just over Dollars 1.22bn, less than once thought.
