FT  18 MAR 94 / Survey of Scotland (8): EU funding may be a ray of hope in
the gloom - The Highlands
The far north of Scotland has always had too many of its eggs in too few
baskets, according to Mr Sandy Brady, director of strategic planning for
Highlands and Islands Enterprise (HIE).
This harsh truth has been cruelly underlined by the rapid rundown of the two
large oil rig construction yards which brought considerable prosperity for
most of the last 20 years to communities around the Moray and Cromarty
Firths.
The speed of the downturn is alarming. The McDermott yard at Ardersier, near
Inverness, now employs just 50 people on a care and maintenance basis - down
from a peak of 3,500 at the beginning of 1992. The Highland Fabricators yard
at Nigg in Easter Ross still has enough work for 700 people - but that is
down from a level of 2,000 in 1992.
Mr Brady is optimistic that orders will return to the yards, although
changes in technology mean employment levels are likely be more modest. But
policy makers must also face the possibility that - like the closed
aluminium smelter at Invergordon - the era of the big oil rig yards is
coming to an end in the Highlands.
The more diversified Inverness economy has coped relatively well with the
downturn, although unemployment has crept up to 12 per cent (high, but still
below the Highland average). The impact has been much worse in the Nairn and
Forres area, where unemployment is 19 per cent, and Easter Ross, where it is
16 per cent.
Job shops and retraining have helped an estimated 500 workers find
short-term contracts offshore or overseas, which has helped keep money
coming into the local economy and prevented a crash in property prices. Many
others are thought to have left the area.
However, the loss of lucrative blue-collar work will continue to be keenly
felt - particularly in Easter Ross communities such as Alness, which
attracted immigrants from the central belt of Scotland and beyond to work in
the now-defunct smelter.
Looking back on the coming of the rig yards, Mr Brady says: 'We would have
preferred to have had 40 small-scale enterprises, but that was not an option
we were offered. The ideal pattern for the Highlands is much more diverse
than we have had.'
A ray of hope in this gloom is the recent designation of the Highlands and
Islands as one of the European Union's poorest regions for the purpose of
economic assistance. It means the area could attract Pounds 260m over the
next six years.
Mr Brady says this decision, long lobbied for by the HIE, offered the chance
for a one-off improvement in the infrastructure.
Putting themselves in the same category as the - mainly southern - EU
countries qualifying for maximum EU funds was uncomfortable for officials at
HIE, who have long stressed the area's high-technology potential.
However, they could stress the region's remoteness. One key indicator was
sparsity of population, which is the lowest density in the EU. Only 2 per
cent of the land is arable.
Since remoteness was such an important reason for winning the EU cash, there
is understandable concern in the more outlying areas that the cash should
get to them - and not just be funnelled into Inverness and its catchment
area.
To avoid unseemly squabbling, it seems likely that the funds will be
allocated on an area basis, with local committees choosing which of the
range of possible projects should attract support.
Increased attention will certainly be paid to tourism, which already
accounts for 20 per cent of the region's gross domestic product and employs
about 20 per cent of its total workforce. Tourism, Mr Brady says, has
enjoyed slow but steady long-term growth, although this had been masked in
recent years by global recession and a run of poor summers. Winter sports
had also suffered two bad seasons; this season seemed to be much better.
HIE aims to extend the season, lengthen accommodation occupation levels and
encourage visitors to travel more widely. Mr Brady says: 'Autumn tourism is
good, with significant activity in October. We must concentrate on the
spring, which is only busy around Easter.'
By giving employment for about eight months a year, HIE hopes the local
population will see local tourism offering practically full-time jobs.
The salmon farming industry, which employs more than 6,000 people and has
brought much-needed work to even the remotest areas, is a particular area of
concern.
A recent study of Norwegian salmon farming by Ernst &amp; Young, the accountancy
firm, concluded that over the past five years the industry has enjoyed a 20
per cent subsidy on its cost of production from the Norwegian government.
Because of a surge in Norway's production, salmon prices in the EU have
collapsed well below the break-even point of many Scottish producers. Some
85 per cent of Norwegian salmon is exported to the EU. Brussels recently
lifted the minimum import price to Pounds 2.74 a kilo, but Scottish farmers
say this is still insufficient to restore their profitability.
Mr Brady says: 'We have tried very hard to put pressure on in Edinburgh,
London and Brussels - but it is not an issue over which the UK government
wants to have a stand-up fight with the Norwegians.'
