FT  18 AUG 94 / Takeovers rather than profits lift directors' pay, says
study
Top directors do more for their pay by promoting takeovers and increasing
company indebtedness than by concentrating on developing their core
businesses, according to a new report.
The study, which raises questions about the role of executives in takeovers,
says there is only a small connection between the performance of a company's
share price and dividend - the so-called shareholder return - and increases
in top executive pay. There is no relation between directors' pay and
company profit performance.
However the study does suggest company takeovers as one of the main causes
for the 77 per cent real increase in the pay of top executives between 1985
and 1990. The research, published yesterday by the National Institute for
Economic and Social Research and involving around 170 companies, contrasts
that 77 per cent increase with the 17 per cent real average earnings growth
in the same period.
The report says the 'results indicated that lower cash holdings relative to
current liabilities raises pay, as does expansion through takeovers',
through its effect on sales growth. 'Growth by takeover which results in the
firm being cash poor is a strategy for managers which raises pay
considerably.'
Increases in executive pay were 'systematically higher' at companies that
had expanded by takeover rather than through internal or organic growth.
This was 'despite other evidence which suggests that such behaviour does not
enhance firm performance'. The report says the findings raise questions
'about the degree of effective control of top managers' pay and over
decision-making concerning who controls and benefits from takeover
decisions'.
However when takeover activity and other effects were stripped out, annual
pay rises of 13 to 15 per cent a year were still achieved by directors
between 1985 and 1990.
The report says this implies either managerial skills were becoming more
valued by shareholders or that top executives were more able to influence
their own pay levels. Reducing the presence of unions at a company also
'results in higher pay'.
NIESR report on training, Page 6
Editorial Comment, Page 13
