FT  22 AUG 94 / Sweden anxious for market verdict on budget plan
Sweden's financial markets, which over the past two months have been in
frenzied mood over the alarming state of the public finances, will today
give their verdict on the latest proposals from the Social Democratic party
for tackling the yawning budget deficit.
The package of tax rises and expenditure savings published by the Social
Democrats on Friday evening were a direct response to market fears -
expressed through the tumbling value of the Swedish krona and rising
long-term interest rates - that the country's biggest political party,
champion of the mighty welfare state and likely winner of next month's
election, was being dangerously vague about how it will deal with a public
debt that amounts to approaching 100 per cent of gross national product and
is still rising fast.
While the argument will rage on until the election over whether the Social
Democrats' SKr61bn (Pounds 5.06bn) savings package goes far enough, one
important principle at least now seems to have been established that unites
both the opposition and the four right-centre parties of Prime Minister Carl
Bildt's incumbent coalition.
It is that public debt must be stabilised by the end of the new government's
four-year term in 1998 and that renewed inflation, historically the
preferred Social Democratic way of getting out of financial trouble, must be
avoided.
This helped win the Social Democratic package a positive - if guarded -
initial response from Mr Bjon Wolrath, chief executive of the insurance
group Skandia, who triggered much of the market turbulence in June when he
announced Skandia would boycott government bonds until the political parties
produced a credible plan for dealing with public finances.
Mr Wolrath said he would be reconsidering the boycott in the light of the
Social Democratic proposals. 'On the presumption that there is a broad
majority in parliament to carry through strong measures, we will buy Swedish
bonds again,' he said.
But fierce debate over the extent and mix of measures needed to achieve the
double goal of reducing the SKr200bn budget deficit and fostering a
faltering economic recovery may yet continue to unsettle markets.
The first difference between the Social Democratic programme and that agreed
by the government parties lies in scale.
The government parties have proposed strengthening the budget by SKr101bn by
1999, SKr40bn more than the opposition, although SKr20bn of this total has
not been detailed. The Social Democrats are betting higher growth and a fall
in unemployment will help close the budget gap. If not, they will take
tougher fiscal steps.
But a problem for both sides may lie in a vicious circle of high deficit
costs crimping economic growth. The government's fiscal plan envisaged 3 per
cent annual growth in the second half of the decade; already next year's
growth forecast of 3 per cent growth has been cut to between 1 and 2 per
cent because of the effects of high interest rates.
The second big difference is over the mix of fiscal policy. The SKr61bn
Social Democratic programme consists of SKr27.4bn in tax increases - mostly
through raising marginal income tax from 50 to 55 per cent, restoring taxes
on dividends and raising capital and wealth taxes - and SKr33.6bn in
savings.
By contrast, the SKr81bn programme detailed by the coalition contains just
SKr15bn in new tax revenues, while cuts in transfer payments total SKr26bn
and (unspecified) cuts in public consumption a further SKr35bn. (The balance
of SKr5bn is accounted for by pension reforms).
Industry and business have been quick to criticise the Social Democrats for
over-emphasising tax cuts and not facing up fully to the need to cut public
spending, which accounts for 70 per cent of GNP.
Last week, Mr Lars Ramqvist, chief executive of Ericsson, the
telecommunications company, said tax increases would be a 'knife in
industry's back' just as most companies are returning to health after the
recession.
They would threaten Ericsson's ability to keep the highly skilled staff it
needs in Sweden, he said.
