FT  30 APR 94 / How to Spend it: A-Z that is handy in the house
If you have a perfectly up-to-date Filofax and never lose any of those
useful addresses that people thrust into your hand at parties, then no doubt
you can survive without The World of Interiors Decorating Directories.
For the rest of us I foresee that these directories will be a useful prop
through those times that register highly on the stress meter - moving house,
having the builders in, deciding what colour to paint the kitchen. Insider
information always appeals and these directories list the names, addresses
and telephone numbers of The World of Interiors' favourite companies: the
suppliers of recherche cornices, old-fashioned herbs, antiqued garden pots,
painted tole ware, wrought-iron curtain rails and everything else the
efficient householder might one day conceivably need to know.
The directories are free - the first part (A to F for fabrics) came out with
the April issue. To get a back copy you should get in touch with The World
of Interiors itself (tel: 071-351-5177). For the second part (F, for
Finishing Touches to Z) all you need to do is buy the May issue (Pounds
2.80, out last Thursday) for your free copy will come with it.
Fired Earth, largely known for its ceramic and terracotta flooring, is
offering a collection of alternative floor coverings. Homing in strongly on
the fashion for earthy natural looks, for a touch of ethnic and eco-chic, it
calls its range Grass Roots and declares it to be Easy on the Eye (which it
most certainly is) and Easy on the Planet (on which matter it is harder to
pronounce).
All its flooring coverings are woven from 100 per cent renewable plant fibre
which may sound awfully new and politically correct but which really means
it is offering our old friends sisal, hemp, jute and coir. They have, to my
mind, always been attractive and always will be, but it is reassuring to
learn that coir replaces itself in a mere 90 days.
All these natural fibres are hard-wearing, all are attractive to look at,
the irregularity of the colouring and the roughness of the weave only adding
to their charm.
Some of these floorings come from British sources - such as the handwoven
rush matting from Rousham - others, such as the jute, from far-flung
estates. They come in different weaves, colours and textures but all can be
fitted, or there are rugs which can be loose laid or come edged and braided.
An underlay is recommended both for comfort and to add to its life.
An installation service is offered and there is a splendid brochure (tel:
0295-812088 for a copy) with close-up pictures of the weaves and the
colours. For those who wonder what the finished product will look like in
situ, Fired Earth offers to send three samples, free of charge, so that
colour and textured can be compared.
You can either collect the floor covering from Fired Earth's Oxfordshire
warehouse or, for a small charge, it will be delivered to your door. Prices
range from Pounds 8.18 to Pounds 25.26 per square yard.
Still in ethnic mood, the Natural Floorcoverings brochure always offers a
selection of hand-woven tribal rugs and kelims, all of which (not, as the
brochure points out, entirely coincidentally) team up extremely well with
the other natural floor-coverings range and with the original terracotta and
unglazed floor tiles.
