FT  07 OCT 94 / The Labour Party in Blackpool: Policy to hold referendum on
PR confirmed
Labour yesterday reaffirmed its commitment to hold a national referendum on
proportional representation - in spite of fears that this could divide the
party.
In a wide-ranging debate on the future of the British constitution, leftwing
activists argued that Labour should rescind a decision taken last year to
hold a referendum, claiming that this could allow the Liberal Democrats to
gain more Commons seats.
Several speakers argued that a referendum on PR would distract an incoming
Labour government from implementing its economic programme. Fears were also
expressed that PR would allow extremist groups into parliament.
However, the conference narrowly voted to stick by the resolution taken last
year which accepted the Plant Commission's recommendations on electoral
reform.
This commits Labour to supporting the current first-past-the-post system,
but concedes that the public should be allowed to express its preference for
electoral reform.
The conference also made clear its determination to abolish the large number
of quangos set up by the Conservatives, ending Tory 'patronage, sleaze and
secrecy'.
Mr Michael Meacher, shadow public service minister, said Labour would
abolish many quangos, introduce tighter controls on party funding and bring
in legislation to open up the workings of Whitehall: 'We must and will raise
standards of conduct in public life. Tory Britain today has become
Corruption Incorporated.'
On the issue of devolution, the conference defused a potential row with its
Welsh MPs by committing Labour to the creation of a Welsh assembly in its
first year of government.
In recent days, MPs from the principality had expressed concern that the
Labour leadership was leaning towards the creation of a Scottish assembly
within 12 months of taking office without making the same commitment to
Wales.
The conference yesterday voted to give equal prominence to devolution for
both regions and calling for elected regional government in England.
However, there is less certainty over the party's attitude to reform of the
House of Lords. Mr Tony Blair has said that the party would end the right of
hereditary peers to vote on laws. But the conference went much further than
this yesterday by reasserting its call for abolition of the House of Lords
and the creation of a replacement second chamber.
