FT  22 APR 94 / Survey of Egypt (1): Mr Mubarak still refuses to be rushed -
Economic reforms continue and political reforms are promised once the
Islamic fundamentalists are defeated. But progress is slow
President Hosni Mubarak is now well into his 13th year as Egypt's leader and
six months into a third presidential term which should see him at the helm
of the most populous Arab nation until the end of the millennium.
So it should not seem odd that he prefers to take a longer-term perspective
on his plans for the country. If Egypt is suffering hardships and
irritations (such as the recent rise in terrorism), this should not be
surprising, he explained recently. 'The government can be excused, as it is
engrossed in reforming a burdensome heritage accumulated over 50 years'.
Mr Mubarak's message is clear - and largely unchanged over the past decade
of his rule.
Liberalising economic reforms are necessary to dismantle the remaining
statist legacy of Gamal Abdul Nasser, but they will be pursued only
steadily. Wider political reforms must await the resulting economic
transformation. Militancy, which may seek to threaten this project under the
guise of Islam or any other, will be crushed. Above all, Egypt cannot - and
his government will not - be rushed.
To this domestic agenda can be added his ambitions for Egypt as a regional
power. Having reclaimed its centrality as an Arab power following its
isolation after the Camp David peace accord with Israel, Egypt will now
prove essential in helping to achieve the comprehensive peace now delicately
being negotiated. And it will remain a stalwart ally of the west, available
as broker and mediator in other regional problems - perhaps increasingly in
Africa, should its present role as interlocutor in the Arab-Israeli peace
talks diminish in importance.
The past couple of years, however, have begun to issue challenges to Mr
Mubarak's comfortable view, potentially threatening every aspect of it. A
growing number of critics inside the country, and among its important
allies, wonder whether, in the face of rising domestic pressures and
uncertain international shifts, six more years of similarly slow progress in
the same direction constitute a recipe for continued political stability -
the totem of Mr Mubarak's rule. They wonder, too, whether Mr Mubarak's
determination to keep the same coterie of old faces in his ageing regime is
an adequate response to such shifts and pressures, or whether his own regime
is only acquiring its own 'burdensome heritage'.
On the domestic front, the rising pressures are self-evident and nowhere
more so than in the sharp rise in violent Islamic militancy. Since militant
groups such as the Gamaa al-Islamiyya and Jihad began to launch attacks
against security personnel, senior government figures, banks and tourist
targets in late 1992, more than 350 people have died in violent clashes - at
least as many victims as the total number killed over the preceding three
years.
Last month Mr Hassan al-Alfi, the interior minister, told the Financial
Times that the security problem was 'very much under control'. The police
had successfully infiltrated several militant groups and constrained their
operations in Cairo, he said, and violence was now largely confined to towns
such as Assiut and Dairut in Upper Egypt, a traditional stronghold of
Islamic militancy where violence has long been aggravated by low levels of
education, higher than average unemployment and a culture of vendetta.
But any improvement in the security situation is relative only to the
sharply higher plateau of violence.
Already this year, more than 70 people have died in clashes. Moreover, the
murder of a senior police general in Cairo a few weeks ago shows that,
despite the most sweeping and sustained security operation in at least 10
years, the security forces cannot eradicate extremist groups.
For some time it appeared that an attempt to get rid of them through
security measures which included mass detentions and - so it is alleged by
human rights groups - torture and occasional resort to 'shoot-to-kill' raids
on suspected extremists, constituted the sole government response. But this
may be changing, and according to analysts like Mr Mohammed Sid Ahmed, a
leading political commentator, behind public expressions of unconcern, the
government is certainly taking the militants more seriously. 'People in
senior positions who, a year or two ago, would once have dismissed the
threat, are no longer doing so,' he says.
There are some signs of a more sophisticated public relations offensive. The
government has recently begun to orchestrate a media campaign, for instance.
This has included the televised 'confessions' of a 'repentant' militant; and
prime-time soap operas portraying Islamic extremists as misguided and
corrupt.
But this falls a long way short of the more fully-fledged political response
to the political violence long called for by some of Egypt's opposition
parties and innumerable intellectuals. On his re-affirmation as president in
October, Mr Mubarak said he would call for a 'national dialogue' among
Egypt's established political groups, although no date has yet been set for
the talks.
If and when they do convene, however, Mr Mubarak seems firmly to have ruled
out discussing any of the sort of structural changes called for by some
opposition groups which might dilute his present near-absolute executive
powers - for example, he has governed under a 'state of emergency' more or
less unbroken since assuming power.
The talks will also exclude, as a group, the Moslem Brotherhood. This will
be indirectly represented by the Labour Party, under whose banner Egypt's
most cohate, popular and professedly moderate Islamic group has been
permitted only a degree of official representation.
The more optimistic advocates of the national dialogue suggest that, once
begun, it might develop a momentum of its own in which such issues as
corruption (allegations of which have swirled with increasing persistence
around people associated with the regime) might be openly debated. 'The
dialogue might confront the regime with the need to find ways to renew and
refresh itself,' suggests Mr Sid Ahmed.
But diplomats and other observers suggest that it is precisely such a
possibility which the government will endeavour to prevent. They cite the
government's recent decision to put on trial journalists with the
publication al-Shaab, the Labour Party's (and thus indirectly the
Brotherhood's) mouthpiece) for coverage which has been much braver than most
in pointing at government corruption. 'For the government, the dialogue will
be an attempt to rally everyone behind its policies against the extremists,
no more,' says one western diplomat.
Aside from bullets, prison and soap operas, the government's chief weapon
against militancy appears to be its hope of achieving an economic
turn-round, to attack the disillusion and unemployment it blames for the
unrest. But here, too, there are grave doubts about the government's ability
to deliver.
Nearly three years into International Monetary Fund and World Bank-inspired
reforms, Egypt's sprawling and still public-sector dominated economy remains
well short of the 4 or 5 per cent growth rates the programme aimed to
stimulate.
GDP growth, not helped by the negative effect of militant attacks on the
tourism industry, is a modest 2 per cent at best. Worse: the effects of
subsidy cuts and rises for utilities such as power have almost certainly
made the poor poorer - some estimates indicate that household consumption
has slipped by 2 or 3 per cent over the past two years.
By some tallies, Egypt's economy will have to produce between 5m and 6m new
jobs by the end of Mr Mubarak's present presidential term in order to
accommodate the influx of new workers - and make some inroads in present
unemployment, which is already about 20 per cent. This is Egypt's political
timebomb. 'If the country cannot produce the 5m jobs, the amount of
discontent will be enough to produce a political change, one way or
another,' one western economist gloomily concludes.
But after its undeniable and hard-won success in managing its stabilising
macro-economic reforms, Mr Mubarak's government now faces the more
politically sensitive task of pushing through structural reforms, such as
privatisation and deeper tariff cuts, which threaten short-term unemployment
and cut into deeply entrenched vested interests. There are already signs
that the private sector, whose confidence is vital to inspiring the growth
Egypt needs, is beginning to suspect a weakening of government will.
Mr Mubarak's bet appears to be that he can continue the reforms at his own
pace, trusting to his political instinct as to how far and fast he can push
Egypt.
He is relying on what one foreign businessman describes as 'Egypt's uncanny
ability somehow to keep its head above water'. He is also relying, no doubt,
on Egypt's strategic importance to the west - a strategic importance which
is the mainspring of an annual Dollars 3bn in aid and political backing for
Egypt within the IMF, World Bank and Egypt's foreign creditors in the Paris
Club.
For the moment, Mr Mubarak's bet seems to be the only one which counts. He
has no self-evident political rival. His international support seems
assured.
And he retains in his hands all the levers of security and political power.
For yet another year, therefore, Mr Mubarak will try to show that Egypt can
remain a sort of political Leaning Power of Pisa and defy - or at least
defer - the apparently inevitable.
