FT  08 JUN 94 / OFT urges extensive reforms of consumer credit laws
Extensive reforms of the laws affecting consumer credit were proposed
yesterday by Sir Bryan Carsberg, director-general of fair trading, in an
effort to relieve the regulatory burdens on business.
The Office of Fair Trading recommended that lending to businesses should be
removed from the scope of the Consumer Credit Act, on the grounds that it is
designed specifically to protect consumers.
Other proposals designed to cut down the red tape on consumer credit include
the simplification of rules for the advertising of credit terms and the
removal of regulations relating to credit and hire quotations.
Sir Bryan said that his proposals were 'in the nature of a spring-clean, not
a wholesale clearing-out of the cupboard'. His starting point was the basis
that the framework of the 1974 Consumer Credit Act was sound, but some rules
were unnecessarily onerous.
However, Sir Bryan said that some existing rules, while reflecting sound
motives, were misleading or unfair. For example, he recommended a
modification of the rules concerning the calculations of Annual Percentage
Rates to enable easier comparisons of credit terms.
Sir Bryan also recommended the immediate implementation of the relevant
section of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990, which would require
lenders to give borrowers more information about packages in which mortgages
are sold in association with tied products, such as insurance. Research by
the OFT, published yesterday, found that 'a sub-stantial proportion' of
con-sumers with tied packages had been dissatisfied with tied products.
Sir Bryan recommended against implementing a proposal made by the government
in 1988, which would have removed the requirement for credit traders to
obtain licences when they started to trade.
The OFT's proposals were cautiously welcomed by lenders. The Council of
Mortgage Lenders said that the overall approach of the OFT appeared to be
'sensible, balanced and achievable'.
But the Consumers' Association said the OFT's proposals to change some of
the information on loan repayment rates provided by lenders 'would weaken
consumer protection and confuse consumers'.
Mr Nigel Griffiths, Labour spokesman on consumer affairs, said he doubted
that the OFT's proposals would help address consumers' confusion.
The proposed reforms, which followed a review of the Consumer Credit Act,
were developed in the context of the government's Deregulation Initiative.
OFT gives individual top priority, Page 13
