FT  07 SEP 94 / UK Company News: IMI shows 4% rise to Pounds 37m - Sales
volumes up 8% and order books at strongest level for 4 years
Strong demand for replacement copper plumbing systems in eastern Germany and
a surge in orders for betting chips from new casinos set up on indian
reservations following the discovery of a quirk in US gaming laws both
helped IMI, the Birmingham-based international engineering group, lift first
half profits.
Pre-tax profits grew by 4 per cent to Pounds 37m in the six months to June
30, up from Pounds 35.5m a year earlier, but were held back by an Pounds
8.3m trading loss on the Redwood International computer software company,
which was finally sold in July. Turnover grew by 5 per cent to Pounds 574m
(Pounds 546m) including Pounds 6m (Pounds 17m) from discontinued operations.
Operating profits from continuing operations increased by 20 per cent from
Pounds 40.6m to Pounds 48.7m reflecting an improved performance by the
group's four core businesses as the benefits of internal cost reduction and
the broadly based improvement in trading conditions came through.
The interim dividend, which has been held steady for the past four years, is
being increased from 4.2p to 4.4p reflecting the board's growing confidence
in the outlook. Earnings per share rose to 7.3p (6.9p).
Mr Gary Allen, chief executive, said order books were at their strongest
level for four years, and sales volumes had risen by an average 8 per cent
across the group. However, he added that prices had not shown any real
improvement.
Mr Allen said demand for copper plumbing materials in eastern Germany
following re-unification was the main factor behind an 8 per cent growth in
sales to Pounds 165m and 26 per cent increase in operating profits to Pounds
14.1m in the building products division.
Copper was considered a strategic material by the former communist regime in
East Germany, and the plumbing systems installed in most buildings were made
of inferior steel. He said IMI had sent six copper plumbing system display
trucks into eastern Germany 'as soon as the Berlin Wall came down', and
orders had come flooding in.
Although several businesses in the special engineering division continued to
make small losses in the first half, the division as a whole lifted sales by
4 per cent to Pounds 125m and profits by 6 per cent to Pounds 8.6m.
Among the operations contributing to the improvement were IMI's two casino
tokens businesses in the US, where demand for chips has soared recently
following the discovery of a loophole in Federal law which has enabled
Indian reservations across the nation to set up gaming establishments.
COMMENT
With almost 70 per cent of its sales overseas and leading market positions
in many of its businesses, IMI should benefit as the world-wide recovery
gathers pace. However, IMI's well-deserved quality rating is already
reflected in its share price. Headline pre-tax profits this year will be
depressed by a Pounds 35m exceptional charge related to the sale of the
computer software operations. Excluding this, profits of about Pounds 85m
look possible, producing earnings of about 16.7p. Hold.
