FT  15 OCT 94 / Private View: Author of many characters
Who is Doris Lessing? By reputation, of course, she is the famous writer. To
meet, she is a woman of seductive frankness. According to the calendar, she
is 75 years old next Saturday.
Lessing herself says she is several people.
As Doris Tayler, a fraught and sensuous child in Southern Rhodesia, she took
cover behind a mask called 'Tigger', the bouncy character from
Winnie-the-Pooh. Was Tigger still around, I asked her?
'Oh, she emerges from time to time, usually when I'm in false positions and
I need protection. Out she pops.'
Is the person she's protecting in this room now?
'My real self is an observing person and somewhat solitary person, I would
say, even when there are a lot of people around.'
And when you come to observe yourself . . .?
'Ah,' she interrupted, 'but we are not just one person at all. We're
composites of people. I'm much more interested in the different kinds of
people inside one's skin.'
The first volume of her autobiography, which comes out on Thursday, is
entitled Under My Skin.
So who are these various Doris Lessings? The first, she said, is The
Observer, 'a defended observation post', who seems to do all her remembering
for her. A second is The Hostess, a continuation of Tigger, a well-behaved
person who 'adores cooking and having little evenings'.
'And then there's the one I totally disapprove of, which is the unhappy
child that is sorry for itself. She is an immensely self-pitying creature.'
The autobiography started as a defence against the 'fantasies' and
'unbelievable inaccuracies' (she gave examples) of biographers and
interviewers. Then it became interesting. But to relive her childhood had
been painful, she said, and gave her nightmares.
Was it your third person who had the nightmares?
'You tell me who dreams before I answer that. Who does the dreaming? No,
this is a serious question. How do we know it's not different people doing
the dreaming? I mean, the older I get - forgive me for that boring remark -
the more I don't know, the more questions there are.'
Lessing asked a lot of such questions during nearly two hours in which she
talked about herself with a critical detachment far too passionate to be
called clinical. Sitting calmly - almost motionlessly - in a deep sofa she
seemed both forceful and vulnerable. She was tireless, inquisitive, intense.
I left exhausted.
I had arrived with my own hypothesis (or fantasy): that Doris Lessing, twice
married, twice divorced, who left two children in Africa and brought her
third to London, could be explained as the emotional victim of her mother.
She agreed that her mother, Emily, tried to bind her 'with bands of steel'
and she had to fight her to get out from under.
'She was a very talented woman. She could have been a musician. She was very
efficient, immensely social, very clever at school. But she found herself
nursing a very sick man' (Alfred Tayler had lost a leg in the first world
war) 'stuck in the middle of the bush. She wanted me and my brother to live
her life for her.'
Lessing's daughter in Africa has two girls. Her older son, whom she
described as brave and romantic, never married and died of a heart attack
two years ago. Her son of the second marriage, who lives near her in London,
is also unmarried. She resisted further questions about him. The children of
the famous had enough to put up with, she said.
When I asked her if she had been a possessive mother in her turn, she said
absolutely not. 'Because I'm too much of an egotist. I'm always thinking
about my next book.'
Are parent-child relations a kind of curse?
'Yes, they are. Much better if we didn't have any parents at all. I remember
saying so, often and loudly.' She laughed.
My hypothesis was looking increasingly ragged as Lessing went on to explain
how her life had also been shaped by the suffocation she felt in a colonial
community. 'It was provincial and narrow and immensely self-satisfied. And
of course white superiority . . . it was horrible. I hated it.'
More important still, she said, was the overriding influence of the first
world war, an event that had brutalised generations.
'You have miseries thrust at you day and night. You have the dead soldiers
and the 'Angels of Mons' and you have star-shells and No-Man's-Land and
corpses and the whole lot, day and night.
'It meant I was brought up with the rage of a soldier who felt that he had
been betrayed - and he wasn't unique, that's the point. He had total
contempt for the British government and a kind of inbred belief that any
kind of authority was crooked.
'This was probably in the long run more important than my mother, who, after
all, I got away from.'
When I asked her about her marriages and suggested her life had been
'rackety', she scarcely blenched.
'I was too young to be married,' she said simply. 'I was really
psychologically infantile. I was like a bright competent, efficient girl,
that's what I was, in both marriages. It was much better with my poor old
Gottfried (Lessing, a Russian-born German refugee and committed communist)
than with Frank (Wisdom, a civil servant) because we were so ill suited that
we had to be terribly kind to each other, which was something.' She laughed.
You never wanted to marry again?
'Well, in theory, yes. In practice you have to marry somebody, don't you?
And that's . . .' she laughed again . . .'a bit difficult. There are a
couple of men that I would have been very happy with but unfortunately they
were the wrong age.' She meant they were 15 years too young.
After she had explained about her clutch of secret personae, I asked: Has
living in your head been an enjoyable thing?
'I wouldn't say enjoyable. But what would I do instead?' (She would have
liked to be an old-fashioned farmer) 'Anyway, I don't do nothing. I planted
60 tulips just before you arrived. That's not entirely living in my head.'
Later, however, she agreed that the business of recording life meant there
was less time for living it.
In her sixties, Lessing was struck down by inexplicable grief. 'This wasn't
depression - I know the difference - and I don't know what it was about. A
most appalling and terrible grief and there was no reason for it.'
The Observer added: 'Why is it that an emotional condition makes your heart
physically painful? Why is it that your heart feels as if you'd just like to
pick it up and throw it over a cliff when you're unhappy? This is an odd
thing, surely, when you find yourself taking aspirin for heartache . . .
This is crazy.' She thinks there is a link between homesickness, exile,
being in love, and death.
Why is she a writer? Because she always was one. She had to do it. I asked
what that meant.
'I think it's some form of psychological balancing mechanism, actually. If
you are a writer, by definition it seems to me you're pretty neurotic. And
the whole writing business is some way of coming to terms with it.'
Writing's not a job, I said.
'Oh yes it is. What is a job then?'
Writing is an occupation, a sort of therapy.
'That's one way of looking at it. You make it sound almost totally
self-indulgent. I mean, other people quite like what you write, sometimes.'
Do you do it for that?
'No. Because you have to. It's what you are. I would have said it's a
necessity. It's a need to . . . to understand. Or maybe it's a need for
order, as I've been wondering recently, imposing order on chaos. You see,
you're making it too intellectual.'
Novels were invaluable as information, she said, a fact not properly
recognised. 'A great deal of our knowledge of the world and our fellow human
beings comes from literature.' She described a businessman friend who
whenever he was going to a new country would go to the library and take out
all the novels written about it.
Do you a feel you have had an influence on the world?
'Yes, I have had a small influence. Not enormous.'
What has it been?
'I was one of the people who changed attitudes about what was going on in
southern Africa. And I think I've changed attitudes about how men look at
women.
'Only last week I had a letter from a man in Mexico who had just read The
Golden Notebook and said he'd no idea women ever talked about anything but
husbands and babies. Well, this kind of thing's quite cheering, really.'
Is old age a nice place to arrive at?
'I see things differently, It's a continuum. But I do regret the lack of
energy. You'll suddenly find energy leaking out of your fingertips and toes
for no reason whatsoever. This is not nice.
'But I don't mind being old. It's a question of what you expect. I have a
very distant view of myself and life, you know. You get more and more
detached about yourself, particularly if you write an autobiography and know
it would have been quite a different book at 50.'
The most important thing in Lessing's inner life has been her 30-year-long
study of Sufism. Predating Islam, with which it is usually associated, it is
an intuitional search for knowledge akin to Christian mysticism but not
itself an 'ism'. Nor is it, Lessing said emphatically, a cult or a religion.
'God forbid] I loathe religion.'
As the author has herself written, part of the search involves seeing
through what the Sufis call 'the commanding self', a false personality
created by parents, society, the era. Inside is the small and precious real
self waiting to be reached.
She is trying to become a Sufi herself. She must know, therefore, that
wrapped inside the many Doris Lessings there is, under the skin, just one.
