FT  26 JAN 94 / Survey of Mobile Computing (14): The pace may accelerate -
Battery Technology
As mobile electronics races ahead, batteries are revealed ever more clearly
as the Achilles heel of the portable computer. While processors, memories
and even screens double in performance every two or three years, battery
technology improves by perhaps 10 to 20 per cent over the same period.
Now that the electronics industry has come to realise quite what an obstacle
batteries are to future progress, manufacturers are beginning to team up
with battery companies to force the pace of development.
For example, Compaq recently announced a partnership with Duracell to
develop standard-sized nickel-metal hydride rechargeable batteries for
portable computers. But the integrated Japanese electronics companies, which
manufacture batteries as well as computers and other mobile devices, are
emerging as a particularly strong source of innovation in this field.
There is a good prospect that the higher priority now being given to
batteries will lead over the next five years to devices that pack much more
energy into a smaller space than anything available today. Then
manufacturers will be able to design 'sub-notebook' sized computers with
power-hungry features such as colour screens and built-in disk drives.
Most of the current generation of portable computers were designed to run on
throw-away alkaline batteries or rechargeable nickel-cadmium (NiCad) packs.
They can generally manage three to five hours of operation before needing to
be recharged - not enough to do much work on an intercontinental flight.
NiCad was developed originally in the 1960s and is now getting close to the
limits of its potential performance. It is also environmentally suspect,
since cadmium is a toxic metal which can contaminate groundwater if NiCad
cells are dumped in unsuitable landfill sites.
The leading green contenders to replace NiCad are nickel-metal hydride
(NiMH) and lithium ion (Lion). Both originated in Japan and both are
beginning to appear in upmarket portable computers. Last month, for example,
IBM added NiMH to its ThinkPad sub-notebook computers, while Toshiba's
T3400CT will be Lion-powered.
Lion can pack more usable energy into a given weight of battery than NiMH,
but it is a more sensitive material and less good at delivering the
relatively high power required for a disk drive. Most observers expect both
technologies to enjoy a good run at the expense of NiCad over the next few
years, though the long- term future probably lies with lithium-based
systems. (For electrochemical reasons, lithium is theoretically the best
metal of all to use in batteries.)
At the research stage, a particularly exciting prospect is the lithium
polymer (LiPol) battery. This contains a solid plastic film as the
electrolyte - the material that carries charge between the electrodes -
instead of the liquid electrolyte used in today's batteries.
LiPol's energy output per gramme is likely to be twice as good as Lion and
six times better than NiCad. Another great advantage is that LiPol need not
have the chunky shape of today's batteries. It can be produced equally well
as flexible sheets less than a millimetre thick, which can be cut or folded
into whatever size and configuration best suits the appliance in question.
Many laboratories around the world are working on LiPol. They include the
Japanese giants such as Sony, Californian start-ups such as Valence
Technology, and universities such as St Andrews in Scotland.
While computer manufacturers wait for a breakthrough in battery technology,
they are constantly taking steps to make the most of the batteries that are
available, by reducing the power consumption of their products. An obvious
example is the memory card used instead of a disk drive in sub-notebook
computers.
Software-based power management systems also help to extend battery life, by
sending the computer to sleep when the user is doing something else for a
few minutes and then allowing him or her to resume at exactly the same
point.
The chip makers are playing their part too, by developing special low-power
low-voltage processors such as the Intel 486SL for portable applications.
