FT  10 JUN 94 / Personal View: The wrong way to compete
This week's report by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development on unemployment in Europe seems to come out strongly in favour
of the UK government's economic policy, in particular with regard to its
Maastricht opt-out of the social chapter. The basic message from both runs
like this: Europe's labour and social costs have become too expensive and
its labour laws are too inflexible. In particular, they give employees too
many rights and too much job protection.
The UK government would add: lucky and successful Britain has no such
problems and where they arise they are attacked vigorously. Hence the UK is
first out of recession and has reduced unemployment.
Consider also the following, however: Germany and Switzerland have some 80
per cent higher labour costs per hour than Britain and Spain, about 40 per
cent higher than Italy and France, and four times the labour costs of
Portugal. This should make Germany very uncompetitive. But no, Germany still
has a very healthy trade surplus with the world and the UK shows a huge
deficit. Germany even has a trading surplus with Britain, which has been
rising again lately at an alarming rate.
Competitiveness depends on capital investment, R&amp;D, processes, management
qualities, work force attitude and skills, rather than on wage rates - in
other words, on overall productivity. UK companies believe they can
compensate for their lack of investment by focusing on labour costs. They
are forced into this position often by a harsh financial climate. While
Japanese and German companies pay shareholders on average less than 35 per
cent of profits and US firms pay 53 per cent, British companies have to fork
out a huge 70 per cent.
And when all else fails - as it always has and will do again - there is good
old devaluation to restore competitiveness for a while. But here lies a real
reason why the UK could not be in the exchange rate mechanism or become part
of a single currency Europe.
When my company, Jungheinrich, set up shop in Britain in 1967, the pound
stood at DM11.20, importers had between them less than 10 per cent of the UK
lift truck market and a healthy 60 per cent of British production went into
export. In 1994 the pound stands at barely DM2.50, imports are more than 60
per cent of the home market and the last remaining British-owned fork truck
maker, Lancer Boss, has been bought out of receivership by its German rival,
Jungheinrich.
A link between low wage cost, international competitiveness and long-term
success seems to me at best unproven and at worst to be more likely the
reverse.
Certainly the industrial world is changing and it is clear that the labour
market has to change with it. Flexible manufacturing, just-in-time and lean
production offer a system that is desirable from a micro-economic business
viewpoint. Raw materials and components arrive at the factory gates just in
time and products are no longer made for stock. It must be every
accountant's and production manager's dream to employ labour in the same
fashion. It is a quite effective system in the upward phase of a business
cycle. Companies hire more quickly, unrestricted by concerns over possible
later redundancy costs and time-consuming sacking procedures.
But the nightmare comes with the downward part of the business cycle:
redundancies will happen just as fast and on an increasing scale, leading to
macro-economic instability and an even crazier roller-coaster ride.
Britain's last recession produced 1.5m unemployed in little more than 2 1/2
years. There is good reason to believe the speed with which this happened
was influenced by the above trends. If such trends continue, Europe could
return to macro-economic instability. This would be forced by international
competition, the advance of information technology in production processes,
and governments' flight into deregulation (under pressure from business) in
its search for ways to combat unemployment.
The question is how to find a workable balance between micro-economic need
for flexibility and stability in the business cycle at the macro-economic
level. Germany has begun to address its excesses on the social front and
will also modify certain aspects of its over-regulated labour market.
Britain, coming from the completely opposite side, needs in many areas more,
not less, protection and regulation. It should try to learn from its
European neighbours. Being so often in a minority of one in Europe does not
happen by coincidence. It is invariably a sign of being wrong.
The author is chairman of Boss Group, now part of Jungheinrich, the German
fork lift truck maker
