FT  13 OCT 94 / International Company News: Ebner denies seeking control of
UBS
BK Vision, the largest shareholder in Union Bank of Switzerland, has denied
UBS charges that it is trying to take control of the bank and close its
large retail business.
UBS has called an extraordinary shareholders' meeting for November 22 to
approve its plan to convert the bank's registered shares into bearer shares,
thereby eliminating their extra voting power.
BK Vision, an investment company controlled by Mr Martin Ebner's BZ banking
group, holds over 18 per cent of the registered shares.
If the board motion succeeded, the premium on the registered shares, now
more than 20 per cent on the bearer shares, would disappear. This would
result in large losses for registered shareholders.
Mr Ebner said BK Vision could not gain control of the bank because of
restrictions limiting individual registered shareholders to voting a maximum
of 5 per cent of the voting capital. He denied UBS charges that he was
putting together a concert party of shareholders.
However, he believed that a majority of UBS shareholders could soon be
attracted to BK's ideas for managing the bank.
Last spring, BK won 40 per cent of the votes at the UBS annual meeting for
its motion to reduce the number of directors from 22 to a maximum of nine.
Mr Ebner said most of the votes against him were proxies held by the board,
providing grounds for his optimism on future motions.
He described charges that BK wanted UBS to abandon its retail banking
business as 'grossly overblown'. The bank needed a strong refinancing base
in Switzerland for its investment banking business, he said.
BK's aim since its formation in late 1991 was to to make UBS more sensitive
to shareholder interests, notably a higher return on equity.
It was disappointed with the results to date and with the board's negative
reaction to its suggestions, and so it had become more aggressive.
BK opposed the elimination of the registered shares and would demand that
registered shareholders have the right to vote separately on the motion. UBS
claims that a two-third majority of all votes and a simple majority of the
capital would suffice.
BK has proposed that Mr Walter Frey, a Zurich motor dealer, be elected to
the UBS board to represent registered shareholders.
Mr Frey is a political colleague of Mr Christoph Blocher in the conservative
Swiss People's Party. Mr Blocher is a close business associate of Mr Ebner.
Mr Ebner said there were several avenues of legal action open to BK if the
UBS board's plan to eliminate the registered shares carried at the EGM.
