FT  29 JAN 94 / Markets: Fee-based advice may be the answer - Serious Money
A reader telephoned recently to say that he had Pounds 80,000 in the
building society. He knew this was a lot to keep on deposit but did not know
where to go for advice because he could not 'trust' anyone. He said he did
not want to consult an independent financial adviser because the advice
would be influenced by the commission received on the sale of investment
products.
This is a position in which many people can find themselves. It is one
reason why today we are beginning a series of profiles of fee-based
independent financial advisers around the UK (see Page V) .
The complex structure of salesmen, tied agents and independent financial
advisers which characterises the financial services industry, is not an easy
one in which to find impartial advice. It is difficult to know, for example,
which of the alphabet soup of regulators is meant to be on the business card
of an eager adviser.
This confusion was highlighted in a recent survey in Money Week, a trade
publication. It found that, although 44 per cent of those surveyed said they
were certain they knew what was meant by the term independent financial
adviser, on further questioning it was clear most did not.
Independent financial advisers are distinguished from the rabble of sales
agents by the word 'independent'. However, independent in this context
simply means being independent of having to recommend the products of a sole
company - most IFAs still rely for their living on the commission they are
paid by the companies providing the products they recommend to the public.
People think they are getting 'free' advice' but they are paying for that
commission through increased premiums or charges on the products. The system
is open to abuse because investments may be recommended which are not in the
best interests of the client but earn the IFA commission.
Now, there are many diligent IFAs who want to build up a long-term
relationship with clients, and work hard to make sure that they are happy.
They will therefore include investments such as National Savings, which pay
no commission, in the hope of keeping their clients' business and picking up
more through personal recommendation.
However, there are many IFAs who are not so scrupulous and the potential for
abuse is not confined to small, sleazy outfits. Last December, Noble Lowndes
and Partners, one of the UK's largest chain of IFAs, was fined Pounds
740,000 by the regulators for switching people out of their occupational
pension schemes and into personal pensions without proper documentation,
sometimes against the obvious interests of the client.
But change is afoot. From next year, investors must be told how much
commission salesmen and advisers earn. This should mean that a client will
know that their IFA will get 5 per cent in commission for selling them a
single premium investment bond, but 3 per cent on a unit trust.
Commission disclosure has been fiercely resisted by the life industry but
although some of the arguments have merit, others are worryingly
self-interested.
One IFA was quoted in the trade press recently complaining about an incident
in which one of his clients had found another IFA willing to split the
commission on a deal he had recommended. The IFA sounded dire warnings that
commission disclosure would result in investors 'shopping around' for the
best deal - as if this were an outrageous thing to do.
Unfortunately commission disclosure is very much a partial solution. The
wool will still be pulled over most investors' eyes since it is likely to
result in the industry restructuring the way in which commission is paid.
Instead of taking the commission upfront, IFAs are likely to be paid less
initially, taking most of the commission spread over the first years of the
life of a policy or investment. The increased costs of administering
commission steadily over the years will inevitably be passed on to the
consumer.
The FT has consistently taken the line that fee-based advice is more likely
to result in impartial advice. This is not to say that it is always bound to
be better. After all, there are plenty who have paid expensive accountants
or lawyers fees and been dissatisfied. However, if the client pays for
advice, that advice is more likely to be unbiased.
When it is in a positive mood, the industry's reply to this is that it too
would welcome fee-based advice but clients are not prepared to pay for it.
But this is because consumers think they are getting 'free advice' when they
go to a commission-based IFA.
At the moment, consumers who buy investments through an IFA are paying for
the many who take up the IFA's time, but do not end up doing business. If a
system of disclosure is put into place which allows investors to know
clearly how much they are paying through the commission system, it should
not be long before they are happy to pay fees for financial advice instead.
Only then, can people like our reader feel able to trust their IFA.
