FT  18 OCT 94 / London Stock Exchange: Footsie bounces from 3,100 in subdued
trading - Market Report
Firmness in government bond prices yesterday helped the UK equity market
recover after at first dipping below the Footsie 3,100 mark recaptured so
recently. The London market was also helped by renewed focus on the defence
sector after suggestions that GEC, already closely watching developments in
the VSEL situation, might be interested in bidding for British Aerospace
itself.
London traders maintained that the outcome of the German elections had been
widely foreseen, but the big dollar earning stocks were subdued by
uncertainty over the medium term outlook for the US currency. Oil shares
lacked strength as the Iraq-Kuwait situation appeared to become more stable.
Trading volume was generally poor, but with activity in the defence stocks
boosting the Seaq total. A trading programme ranging across the FT-SE 100
and Mid 250 stocks was printed in the second half of the session.
Led by stock index futures, the market bounced from its early low and, at
the day's best, the Footsie was 26 points ahead. Support faded later and in
spite of a rise of 18 points on the Dow Jones Indus-trial Average in UK
trading hours, the final reading of 3,120.2 on the FT-SE 100-share Index
showed a gain on the day of only 13.5 points. Private investor interest
appeared to have faded away again, leaving the broader range of the market
without much strength to face profit-takers.
The FT-SE Mid 250 Index gained 4.6 at 3,548 and overall volume of 459.5m
shares through the Seaq network showed a fall of nearly one fifth from
Friday's total. Volume in equities was boosted at the close on Friday by the
sudden weakness in the US dollar which prompted some US selling of the blue
chip internationals in London.
Press suggestions that GEC might bid for British Aerospace were not new,
having been widely canvassed as a part of the general reshaping of the
western defence industry envisaged following glasnost.
There was significant market support for a GEC move yesterday, although few
analysts expect such a development without offical sanction. At least one
sector analyst rejected any suggestion of a GEC strike. Trading figures from
VSEL had little impact since the share price remains linked, via the share
bid offer, to the Aerospace share price.
Shares in Eurotunnel responded firmly at first to the board's interim
report, which rejected outright any talk of another rights issue or threat
to banking covenants. But by the close the shares were slipping away as
analysts focused on the disappointing downgrading of 1994 revenue forecasts.
Traders took a mixed view of prospects for the UK equity market in the near
term. The institutions were clearly keeping out of the way yesterday,
waiting for the latest UK Public Sector Borrowing estimates, wich are due
this morning. Most forecasts are for a sharp increase in the September
figure and there is some doubt as to how this would be taken in the British
government bond market.
The recovery in UK gilts remains the key to a genuine rally in UK equities
and analysts noted yesterday that the FT-SE 100 Index is still unable to
break away from the 3,100 level which appears to have become a significant
barrier.
However, some traders commented that much of the potentially unsettling news
in the market - ranging from the German elections to the latest raft of US
economic statistics - is now out of the way and that UK equities could
resume their upward path. Doubts over the delay in recovery in retail
spending failed to hold back shares in the big store groups, and banking
stocks continued to hope that domestic base rates can remain at present
levels, at least until the new year.
