FT  21 MAY 94 / Brussels at sea on shipwrecked steel rescue plan
The survival of the European Commission's rescue plan for the steel industry
looked increasingly doubtful last night, after senior officials confessed
they did not know how to achieve essential capacity cuts.
In spite of the Commission's efforts to distance itself from comments by Mr
Karel Van Miert, competition commissioner, that the plan was dead, it was
unclear what Brussels would do next to salvage it.
A proposal by Mr Van Miert to reduce production at mills in Brescia,
northern Italy, was rejected by his fellow commissioners on Wednesday,
because of the questionable legality of state aid to the steel companies in
return for capacity cuts.
Yesterday, officials close to Mr Van Miert insisted there were no
alternative solutions for achieving the minimum 19m tonnes of finished
product capacity cuts required under the plan.
'If you take away the Bresciani contribution, I can't see where the capacity
cuts will come from,' said a senior steel official. 'All the other ideas are
even more unacceptable.'
However, a spokesman for Mr Martin Bangemann, industry commissioner,
suggested there was still hope for the plan, adding that all sides agreed
that a solution to the crisis in the steel industry had to be found.
The commission said it would review the future of the rescue plan before
reporting to European Union industry ministers when they meet on June 21.
Under the plan, the commission hoped to persuade the EU's steel sector to
cut capacity of hot rolled steel products by between 19m and 25m tonnes. So
far, only 11m tonnes of capacity cuts have been achieved. Mr Van Miert's
proposals would have produced at most a further 5m tonnes of capacity cuts.
But this would have involved bending rules on state aid, leaving the
commission open to legal action from unsubsidised steel producers as well as
the US authorities, with whom the EU is attempting to forge a multilateral
steel agreement.
Last night, as Europe's big steel companies were attempting to assess the
implications of Mr Van Miert's remarks, the consensus was that the plan was
not dead, but was clearly in deep trouble.
The rescue plan began at the end of 1992 as an attempt to cut 25-30m tons of
crude steel capacity out of a total of 170m tonnes, reducing the
recession-torn industry's overcapacity.
Talks between the Commission and the Italian government over the future of
Ilva, the state-owned producer, became seriously bogged down last summer.
Another major problem area was Eko Stahl, the struggling eastern German
producer. The German steel industry and other European steelmakers wanted it
to shut while the German government pushed hard for it to be saved.
Eventually, European industry ministers reached agreement in December to
approve nearly Ecu7bn (Pounds 5.4bn) of state aid for public sector steel
producers in return for 5.5m tonnes of cuts in finished product capacity in
Italy, Spain, Germany and Portugal.
The deal was meant to pave the way for cuts from the non-aided steelmakers,
producing the total reduction of 19m-25m tonnes. But the industry almost
immediately resisted.
British Steel and other producers claimed that a rescue plan for
Klockner-Werke's Bremen mill - now being investigated by the Commission -
amounted to state aid, and thus contravened ministers' declaration in
December that there would be no more subsidies.
With tempers becoming frayed as an April deadline approached for the
non-aided sector to provide a viable restructuring plan, the Commission
agreed in March to give the industry until November to finalise the capacity
cuts.
In spite of this week's events, producers still believe that talks on the
rescue can continue. Usinor-Sacilor, the French state-owned steel group,
said Mr Van Miert had overreacted. 'There is no reason to say that the plan
is finished,' said Mr Jean-Yves Gilet, director of international affairs at
the French group. He admitted, however, that the Commission's objective of
reducing rolled steel capacity by 19m tonnes would be difficult to achieve.
Meanwhile, hopes that an integrated steel plant can still be built at Eko
Stahl will come under further pressure in coming weeks because of
uncertainty over the European rescue plan.
While the European Commission had already approved plans by Riva, the
Italian group which pulled out last week, to increase capacity at Eko Stahl,
a rescue package for the plant is likely to be more difficult to assemble
amid fears that there would now be no overall limits on European steel
production.
Mr Gunter Rexrodt, economics minister, is under considerable pressure to
find a solution for Eko Stahl, the main employer in Eisenhuttenstadt where
unemployment is already high.
However, Thyssen, Germany's biggest steelmaker which is advising the
government, sees prospects only for a cold rolling mill which would mean
further job cuts for the 3,000-strong workforce, already down from 12,000 in
1989.
