FT  01 NOV 94 / High noon for the media
One day our elected representatives will decide that Britain's newspapers
and broadcasters are getting too big for their boots. The worms will turn.
We may then see a protracted struggle, as with the trade unions in the
1980s, designed to put the media in their place. A future government - it
could be the Conservatives, but it is more likely to be Labour - might
manipulate cross-ownership rules, codify the activities of self-regulatory
bodies, impose a right of reply, or introduce laws safeguarding individual
privacy and imposing severe penalties for journalists who obtain information
by deception. Blueprints for such legal weapons, and others, lie in
Whitehall files. Their deployment is the stuff of politicians' everyday
fantasies. Only the courage is lacking.
Not everyone sees a need to crunch us. The most skilful practitioners
understand that we are easily seduced. Mr Tony Blair, the Labour leader, is
a sophisticate who knows how to influence reporters and commentators alike.
So do some Conservative bigwigs such as the foreign secretary and the
chancellor, neither of whom could argue convincingly that the prime minister
is a consummate master of the art. Against that, your average
run-of-the-mill Labour politician deeply mistrusts the media. Most
Conservative members of parliament are angered by what they regard as its
muck-raking.
Certain ministers are afraid of what we might say, some of them with reason.
Since Mr John Major became prime minister his colleagues have clunked over
like ninepins, usually following the publication of details about this or
that lapse and always after a period during which No 10 Downing Street had
intimated that so-and-so had the personal backing of the PM. One or two were
fired simply because they were bad at their jobs. I would not seek to
differentiate between these categories. Most of those concerned were small
fry, their ill fortune best forgotten. Yet some - Mellor, Lamont, Patten, to
take but three - live on in our memories.
What links them all, sharks and piranhas alike, is that they can be said to
have been 'brought down by the media.' I place the phrase in quotation
marks, because it was of course their own behaviour, or inept management of
their departments, that destroyed their careers. It is true that Mr Major's
main excuse for dismissing Mr Norman Lamont as chancellor was the latter's
lack of presentational skills, but that is an exception. The junior
ministers lost to the public service over the past fortnight were
undoubtedly dismissed by the media. The first resigned voluntarily,
acknowledging fault. The second was obliged to go, in response to
accusations said by the government to be unsubstantiated and unfounded.
The prime minister's defence of his ministry might have been more robust if
he had commanded a three-figure majority, or if his party enjoyed more
public support. Alas, the Conservatives' overall lead in the Commons is
heading for the lower teens and sinking. In consequence, disgruntled
back-benchers exercise disproportionate power. Mr Major must balance the
demands of the right and the Eurosceptics against his comprehension of what
the electorate expects. Conservative newspapers that helped him to victory
in April 1992 have turned against him. Some, such as the Sun, occasionally
appear to be flirting with Labour; others, such as the Sunday Telegraph,
hold him in contempt.
The primary source of the most recent spate of discomfiting stories about
the Tory administration has been The Guardian. In pursuing one inquiry, Mr
Peter Preston, its editor, used a doctored parliamentary letterhead as a
subterfuge, to protect his sources. No deception was involved, he says. Mr
Preston acknowledged yesterday that 'it would have been better in retrospect
to have used another heading on the notepaper'. The Speaker of the House has
asked for a report. Labour says that The Guardian was wrong. The Tories have
gleefully pointed their fingers at its editor. Even the mortally wounded may
strike back when they see a weak spot in their opponent's defences.
Yet it would be surprising if this single incident became the trigger for a
government attempt to roll back the power of the media. Earlier this year
the Sunday Times used its own tricks of the trade to entrap a pair of
minnows, both backbench Conservative MPs, in an inquiry into the receipt of
cash for asking parliamentary questions. Its methods were upheld by the
newspaper industry's self-regulating Press Complaints Commission. Against
that, a recent poll by the Association of British Editors indicates some 80
per cent of backbenchers of all parties think the PCC is a failure, while
more than half would replace it with a statutory body.
My own view has changed. I have previously argued in favour of a privacy
law, incorporating Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights -
'Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home
and his correspondence.' Canada, France, Germany, Denmark and the
Netherlands have such laws. Wronged individuals would be able to sue, as
they do now for libel. There would be a public interest defence. Acceptance
by the media of such a bill could be traded for a Freedom of Information
act.
This argument has been eroded by the co-operation of many individuals, from
royalty downwards, in the destruction of their own privacy. Never mind the
public interest defence. Politicians would use any privacy law as a shelter
behind which they could hide derelictions in their performance of their
public duties. The freedom of information act is wishful thinking. The
Conservatives refuse it, and while Labour promises one we must await the
fine print before pronouncing it worthwhile.
It would, however, be a mistake to conclude that because the government has
not so far put forward a press control bill it will never do so. Sir David
Calcutt, who offered a list of proposals in an official report four years
ago, recently questioned whether there was any political will to implement
his recommendations. He remembers the statements of past ministers, the
warning that the media was in 'last chance saloon'. It may not be there at
the moment, not while our gunslingers have the saloon surrounded, with
snipers on every roof. But one day . . .
