FT  15 SEP 94 / Survey of Northern Ireland (7): The textile base remains
strong - Ulster companies are leading suppliers to British retail chains
Pyjamas and tights may not have the glamour of haute couture, but the
manufacture of these staple items of clothing for British retailers, such as
Marks &amp; Spencer, keep more than 16,000 people in work in Northern Ireland.
Garment manufacturing is now the most important sector of Northern Ireland's
textile industry, itself the most significant manufacturing sector in
employment terms, with annual sales exceeding Pounds lbn.
Out of around 100,000 manufacturing jobs in Northern Ireland, around 26,000
are in the textiles industry, of which garment manufacture accounts for
around 16,000. An additional 10,000 people are employed indirectly by the
textile industry.
The strength of Northern Ireland's garment industry is due to a combination
of factors: the historically strong textile industry base; the growth of the
British chain stores; and the high level of government support available
since the start of the troubles 25 years ago. The skilled workforce and
infrastructure developed by the linen industry allowed Northern
Ireland-based garment manufactures to start supplying British retail chains,
and to grow with them as they came to dominate the clothing market in
Britain.
'Chain stores account for 60 per cent of clothing sales in Britain and
provide the volume demand required by manufacturers to achieve economies of
scale,' explains Mr Bruce Robinson, the deputy chief executive of Northern
Ireland's development agency, the Industrial Development Board(IDB).
The generous level of capital grants available in Northern Ireland over the
last two decades - up to 40 per cent more than in the UK - has meant that
local companies have been able to equip themselves with the expensive
machinery needed to supply products of the quality required by chain stores.
Northern Ireland's garment manufacturers would prefer to explain their
success in terms of increased competitiveness.
'Our competitive edge is better design, a very close relationship with the
customer, and a quick response time,' explains Mr Sean O'Dwyer, the managing
director of Desmonds, a supplier to Marks and Spencer, which employs 2,700
people, making nightwear and other clothing. Northern Ireland-based
suppliers, such as Desmonds, offer British retailers the facility to drop
unsuccessful lines in mid-season and increase production of successful ones,
so that they avoid being left with surplus stock at the end of the season.
Although Far Eastern manufacturers might be more competitive on a cost
basis, they are at a severe disadvantage when it comes to response time. The
only way in which they can match Northern Ireland based suppliers is to
air-freight their products, which is prohibitively expensive. It is an
advantage which Desmonds has successfully exploited.
Expansion plans
The family-owned firm started supplying Marks and Spencer 40 years ago, and
now sells the chain store about Pounds 100m worth of clothing a year -
'we're pretty confident that we can increase output. By 1998 we plan to have
increased volume by 40 per cent,' comments Mr O'Dywer. Desmonds plans to
invest about Pounds 5m under the expansion plan creating a further 600 jobs.
The outlook for the garment sector is better now than it was ten years ago,
believes Mr Terry McCartney, the chief executive of Charnos, which has
extensive textiles interest in Northern Ireland through its Adria
subsidiary.
'We have seen the industry being weakened by cheap imports, but I think that
is changing and we are winning back market share through the quality of our
service and design,' he explains. Adria, which produces branded and
own-brand hosiery and lingerie for UK retailers has increased employment by
250 this year, opening a Pounds 5.4m lingerie factory in Derry. The company
plans to open a new hosiery knitting factory in Strabane this year and hopes
to employ over 1,500 people in Northern Ireland by the end of 1996.
The garment industry's strength is not reflected in other parts of the
industry, however - particularly carpet-making. Last month, textile group
Richards announced it was closing its carpet-making subsidiary in Bangor,
Spence Bryson, with the loss of 175 jobs. The closure was blamed on fierce
competition in the UK carpet market.
'The performance of the carpet industry is linked to activity at retail
level and the number of new housing starts,' according to Mr Desmond Morgan
of the Northern Ireland Textile Association - 'these have been very slow to
pick up and matters have not been helped by the entry into the UK market of
the US carpet giant, Shaw International.'
Textile yarns and fabric are a very important sector of the industry in
Northern Ireland and are set to become more so with the decision of
Taiwanese group, Hualon, to set up near Belfast. Although questions have
been raised about the appropriateness of the decision to give Pounds 61m in
grants to Hualon, the 1,800 jobs which the project will create in Belfast
are very welcome.
The fully integrated textile plant will dye, finish, weave and spin nylon,
cotton and polyester-cotton fabrics.
Other textile companies such as cotton spinners and weavers, Fruit of the
Loom and Courtaulds Textiles, form the second largest sector in the textile
industry in employment terms, accounting for the bulk of non-garment
employment.
The linen industry remains a significant employer, although it underwent
rationalisation in the mid-1960s and 1970s. Northern Irish linen
manufacturers, who produce about 20 per cent of Europe's linen, have been
forced to move away from their traditional market, which was household
fabrics. However, the return to fashion of natural fabrics, has given linen
spinners a new lease of life in export markets.
