FT  14 FEB 94 / UK Company News: Commercial property in favour - Survey of
UK fund managers shows sharpened appetite for Japanese equities
UK institutions are showing renewed enthusiasm for commercial property,
according to a survey of fund managers carried out by Gallup for Smith New
Court, the securities house.
The February survey found that a balance of 33 per cent of fund managers
wished to buy property, repeating last October's figure which was the
highest level recor-ded since the survey began.
Fund managers also reported a sharpened appetite for Japanese shares.
The balance of managers planning to increase their holdings of Japanese
equities has risen from 8 per cent in December and 39 per cent in January to
50 per cent in February, its highest level since October 1991.
For the first time since the survey began in mid-1990, fund managers planned
to increase their holdings of cash.
Mr Peter Lyon, global stra-tegist of Smith New Court Securities, said that
the increased cash alloca-tions reflected the historic-ally high prices of
many stock markets and diminishing prospects for further interest rates
cuts.
The survey revealed a shift in interest away from continental Europe and the
Pacific Fringe markets.
Mr Lyon attributed the negative sentiment towards continental European
equities to continuing poor economic conditions and the slow pace of
reduction of interest rates.
The decline in interest in the Pacific Fringe markets was attributed to the
impact of US interest rate policy and to expectations that the strong
performance last year might be followed by a correction.
A balance of 12 per cent of respondents intended to increase their holdings
of US equities, while a balance of 4 per cent of managers planned to raise
their holdings of UK equities.
Investors continued to be confident about the outlook for the UK economy. UK
earnings per share growth is expected to decelerate slightly from 15 per
cent in 1994 to 13 per cent 1995, while dividend per share growth is
expected to be about 6.5 per cent in both years.
The survey involved 91 institutions, handling funds totalling Pounds 781bn.
