FT  18 JUL 94 / Survey of South Africa (16): National party redoubt /
Profile of Western Cape province
Cape Town, the European settlers' first landfall nearly 350 years ago, now
finds itself the last redoubt of white political control following the
victory of Mr FW de Klerk's National party in the Western Cape, the only one
of South Africa's nine new regions which it secured in the April elections,
writes Gordon Cramb.
Representatives of President Nelson Mandela's African National Congress
dominate the national parliament, which sits in Cape Town. But when the
regional cabinet meets at the other end of a leafy avenue, its four ANC
members are outnumbered by the six from the white-run National party, which
won the Western Cape because it convinced 'coloured' (mixed-race) voters
that it could better protect their interests.
The parties are linked at each level in a government of national unity. But
many Capetonians fear that their city, 1,000 miles from the ANC's
Johannesburg power-base, will become marginalised in the new South Africa -
missing out on reconstruction spending and losing its key institutions.
There is pressure within the ANC for parliament to be relocated to a site
near Johannesburg. Mr David Bridgman, director of Wesgro, an economic
development organisation funded by the private sector and local
municipalities, argues that this is not 'the sort of signal to the local or
international populace to be sending out' and says the R1.5bn estimated cost
of the move would provide housing for a quarter of a million people.
Greater Cape Town has a population of some 3m, with hundreds each day
arriving from rural areas to seek work. But the city and its surrounding
region have few industries which can absorb unskilled labour. The Western
Cape - bereft of metals and minerals - has as its main productive sectors
agriculture (and the majority of South African wines), a textiles and
garment industry, and tourism.
'For every 10 tourists you have a job,' says Mr Kobus Meiring, the region's
finance minister who was administrator of the old, larger Cape Province in
the dying years of apartheid. He describes the ANC's reconstruction and
development programme as 'a summary of what I have been trying to do in the
last five years' and he diverges in no respect from his ANC counterparts
when he enumerates housing, employment and health as the biggest challenges.
Mr Meiring admits being worried about a possible northward drift of
decision-making but argues that constitutional provisions, as well as the
government of national unity operative at central and regional level, should
protect the Western Cape from discrimination in allocating funds.
The region can trade not only on its breathtaking scenery but on an
underemployed port and airport and a relatively well-educated workforce. Oil
multinationals and insurance companies are among companies headquartered in
Cape Town in spite of the distance of the city from refineries or stock
exchange.
According to Mr Bridgman, potential foreign investors are exploring 'one or
two R1bn-plus projects'. If the National Party-led administration differed
to any extent from its ANC-headed equivalents elsewhere, it would 'focus a
little more on production as opposed to redistribution,' he suggests,
adding: 'We need the other side, too.'
 -----------------------------------------------------
Western Cape
 -----------------------------------------------------
Area: 129,386 sq km
Population: 3.6m
Population growth: 1.7%
Literacy: 71.9%
Labour force employed: 68%
Contribution to national gross domestic product: 13.2%
Life expectancy: 65 years
 -----------------------------------------------------
Source: Development Bank of Southern Africa
 -----------------------------------------------------
