FT  15 MAR 94 / International Company News: Kemper rebuffs GE Capital bid
GE Capital, the fast-growing financial services arm of General Electric, has
had an uninvited bid of more than Dollars 2bn rebuffed by Kemper, the
Chicago-based fund management, life insurance and broking group.
News of the approach to Kemper emerged yesterday as GE Capital published
correspondence between the two companies over the past fortnight.
The all-cash offer, which GE Capital said was still open, would be for at
least Dollars 55 per Kemper share, representing a premium of 35 per cent on
the company's closing market price yesterday of Dollars 40 7/8 .
If successful, the bid would create one of the largest asset management
groups in the US, with nearly Dollars 150bn under management.
In a letter on March 2 to Mr David Mathis, Kemper chairman and chief
executive, Mr Jack Welch, chairman of General Electric, said that Kemper
would become 'the flagship of our major thrust in the asset management
business'.
The various asset management businesses in GE and GE Capital, with Dollars
75bn under management between them, would 'probably' be consolidated with
Kemper, Mr Welch said. The Chicago-based company had Dollars 70bn under
management at the end of last year.
The approach was rejected by Mr Mathis, who wrote back that 'a sale of the
company at this time is not in the best interests of our stockholders.'
GE Capital made the exchange of correspondence public yesterday in an
apparent attempt to put pressure on the Kemper board, rather than risk an
aggressive bid which would risk alienating senior Kemper staff. In his
letter, Mr Welch said that GE intended to keep Kemper's top management in
place.
Kemper is in the final throes of shaking off underperforming real estate
assets, which have held it back for much of the 1990s. GE said that it might
pay more than Dollars 55 a share for Kemper, pending a review of its real
estate assets.
According to Mr Samuel Liss, an analyst at Salomon Brothers, the benefits of
an overhaul at Kemper undertaken in the past two years, including an exit
from property/casualty insurance, are only now beginning to show through.
Last year, the company made operating profits of Dollars 108m, up from
Dollars 45m the year before, before accounting changes. However, troubled
real estate caused it to report an after-tax loss of Dollars 101m on
continuing operations.
Through a series of acquisitions, GE Capital has grown its revenues from
Dollars 16bn in 1991 to Dollars 22bn in 1993. It has won widespread respect
in the financial services industry for a successful, low-cost attack on a
number of niche markets, from car leasing to credit cards.
