FT  31 JAN 94 / Survey of the World's Young People (1): Global pressures are
getting worse / An examination of the prospects for young people in a world
where inequality of opportunity is all too common
It is one of the greatest achievements of medical science that of the
millions of babies born this year, more than ever before will live to the
age of five. Beyond that, the advances of modern society become harder to
detect.
Whether coping with childhood in a Bombay slum or a Chicago ghetto, the
world's youth faces growing pressures. Unstable communities, inadequate
education opportunities, a lack of adult role models and slim prospects for
employment are hallmarks not just of the developing world, but of the
industrialised world too. The worries are likely to get worse.
According to United Nations reports, more than 6bn people will inhabit the
earth by the year 2000. About half of them will be under the age of 20.
The implications are staggering. The aspirations of young people, from rich
and poor countries alike, will put untold strain on global resources. Yet
the world's policy makers and business leaders have not addressed the
problem of how they will cope with, let alone fulfil, these hopes.
Already the pressures show. In low-income countries, too many children still
lack basic education and health care. The United Nations Children's Fund
(Unicef) has calculated that while more than 90 per cent of the developing
world's children start school, half, in many countries, drop out in the
first few years. As a result there are now an estimated 100m children aged
6-11 not in school. Two-thirds are girls.
Mexico's economic reforms are applauded, but 1m new jobs will have to be
created every year to match the rate at which young people are entering the
work force, according to the University of California Centre for US Mexican
Studies.
Child labour, and the serious exploitation of working children, remain
widespread as families struggle for survival under the pressures of grinding
poverty and growing consumerism. Rural to urban migration adds to the social
problems, placing families under enormous stress as they put up with
overcrowding, unemployment and poor living conditions.
And growing poverty in urban areas has contributed to a dramatic increase in
the number of street children - as many as 100m, according to some
estimates.
The difficulties facing youth are not confined to the poorest countries.
Even societies with the highest levels of income are failing to provide for
the needs of all their young people.
Low academic achievement, school drop-outs, alcohol and drug abuse, teenage
pregnancy, vandalism and violence are on the increase in the industrialised
world. According to Unicef, the US - with 20 per cent of its children living
below the national poverty line - has more than double the child poverty
rate of any other industrialised country.
In the UK, according to a study from Fordham University's Institute for
Innovation in Social Policy, children are worse off today than they were in
1970.
Rising divorce rates and the increase in single parent families, together
with the failure of governments to alleviate poverty through social
services, have also resulted in children increasingly being deprived of
parental time and attention.
The consequences of growing stresses in family life are beginning to show up
in some disturbing statistics. Many nations face a steady rise in teenage
violence and suicide, drug abuse and - harder to quantify - disaffection,
demoralisation and disillusionment.
'We have tended to avoid this issue of values, feeling that it is a
sensitive area, best left to parents and schools,' says Mr James Himes,
director of the International Child Development Centre, for Unicef. 'But
schools do not do a good job of teaching values, and families, particularly
low income families, have such trouble holding together just to survive that
they do not have time to worry about the ethical dimensions of child
raising.'
The economic and business implications of neglecting these problems speak
for themselves.
Few governments have addressed the problem of how their economies can create
enough new jobs to absorb the rapid growth in the number of young job
seekers. Furthermore, there is an enormous price - social and economic -
associated with the increasing number of people born in poverty - and likely
to remain in poverty with little education and few job related skills.
For business, this promises to be a long term problem. Employers rely on
youth to provide a good, dependable workforce. They also represent
companies' future consumers.
'It is enlightened self-interest for us to invest in young people,' says Mr
Joe Stewart, the senior vice president of Kellogg. 'We are investing in them
as future human beings, but also as future strong consumers. How better to
operate than with a strong market around you?'
The long-term benefits of investment in youth for governments and the
private sector are clear. For example, the East Asian countries that have
enjoyed such breathtaking growth over the last decade invested heavily in
human as well as physical capital.
A report from the World Bank shows that in eight east Asian 'superstar'
countries, a bigger share of education spending was allocated to basic
primary and secondary education - vital for a skilled workforce - than to
universities.
For example, in the mid-1980s, Indonesia, South Korea and Thailand spent
more than 80 per cent of their respective education budgets on basic
education.
Compare this against the primary and secondary education spending figures in
Argentina and Venezuela, with respective allocations of less than 50 per
cent.
Education - especially for women - is associated with lower fertility. In
turn, children from smaller families tend to have more years of schooling
and perform better at school than those from larger families.
The impact that educating women can make shows in Kerala, the southern
Indian state. Its female literacy rate of 66 per cent is almost double that
of its nearest rival, while its fertility rate has fallen to the
astonishingly low level of 2.3 children per woman - lower than in China,
Thailand, the former Soviet Union, and Ireland. One significant factor in
explaining Kerala's success, says the United Nations Population Fund report,
is the priority given by the state government to spending on education and
health.
But in a world of diminishing financial resources, where the prevailing
economic philosophy in many countries is for governments to scale down state
involvement in society, how are the aspirations of youth to be met?
There is no substitute for caring parents, but supportive adults, good
schooling, proper health care and effective charitable programmes can start
to make a difference. Throughout the world there exist thousands of
programmes which are improving the environments in which young people live -
and raising our consciousness of their needs.
Yet philanthropy alone cannot solve all the problems. Even if young people
are provided with a good education, there is no guarantee that there will be
jobs waiting for them. Likewise, forging ties between young people and their
communities will not ensure that, as adults, they will not be forced to
migrate from their homes in search of a better life.
The growth in the world's population calls for decisive action by
partnerships formed between government, business, non-governmental and
non-profit making organisations, aimed at channelling resources towards
people growing up in the 1990s. Only then will all those who make it through
their first crucial years as babies hope to flourish in youth, leaving in
their place a better legacy for those who come after them.
