FT  16 SEP 94 / Haiti's opposition hides as US threatens invasion
Almost all open supporters of Haiti's exiled president have gone into
hiding, fearing they will become military targets as the threat of a US-led
invasion intensifies.
Mr William Perry, the US defence secretary, yesterday announced the call-up
of 1,700 reservists in preparation for military action to restore
Jean-Bertrand Aristide as president.
President Bill Clinton met senior foreign policy and military advisers ahead
of a televised address to the nation on the crisis last night.
Officials declined to comment on a New York Times report that the president
might call off a fully fledged invasion if the leaders of the military junta
accept an offer of third-country exile and immunity from prosecution.
Mr Emile Jonaissant, de facto president in Haiti's army-backed government,
said neither his administration nor the military would give way. He accused
Mr Clinton of threatening Haiti for domestic political reasons.
The decision by Mr Aristide's supporters to go underground, reported by
diplomats in the capital Port-au-Prince, follows the murder of several of
their number over the past two years. Statements from army officers last
week said 'traitorous' Haitians would 'pay' in the event of an invasion.
There is also growing fear that the country's military may turn its guns on
the slums of Port-au-Prince, in which the ousted president has significant
popular support.
Haiti's ill-equipped and poorly trained army of 7,000 has been expanded by a
rapid recruiting programme, but is not expected to offer much resistance to
an invading force three times larger. However, maverick elements in the
military may hide and begin guerrilla resistance.
The invading forces may have the support, or at least acquiescence, of many
junior officers in the Haitian military who have been meeting in recent
weeks with foreign intelligence services. They have been promised early
amnesty and other unspecified 'rewards' for not resisting the invasion.
The three military leaders - General Raoul Cedras, the commander of the
armed forces, General Philippe Biamby, the chief of staff, and Colonel
Michel Francois, the police chief - would be taken into custody by the
invading forces, partly for their own protection, according to diplomats.
Mr Robert Malval, the prime minister appointed by Mr Aristide last year
under an abortive agreement to resolve the crisis, who was sidelined by the
military, would be reinstated.
