FT  29 SEP 94 / International Company News: Czechs to reopen talks on oil
The Czech government is to reopen talks with four international oil groups
on the future of the country's petroleum industry, breaking months of
deadlock over the role of foreign investment in the sector.
Mr Vladimir Dlouhy, the Czech trade and industry minister, said the
government is to 'create conditions for exclusive negotiations' between
Shell, Conoco, Agip and Total and the Czech Republic's two oil refineries,
Chemopetrol Litvinov and Kaucuk Kralupy.
If the negotiations are successful it will be an important breakthrough for
foreign companies seeking to invest in the country.
Opposition to foreign participation in the petroleum sector has come
especially from Chemapol, a monopoly importer of Russian oil, which tabled a
rival proposal for the industry and whose future could be under threat if
the foreign oil groups agree terms with the refineries.
Mr Dlouhy said the 'basic conditions and criteria' for the negotiations
would be announced by October 15 and would require approval by the council
of ministers.
They are expected to lead to agreement on a Dollars 700m investment package
for the industry.
Representatives of the four companies, which have been in negotiations with
the government for more than two years, described the announcement as 'a
substantial breakthrough' in their attempts to invest in the industry, which
is estimated to need up to Dollars 1bn to bring it up to international
standards.
The four companies have offered Dollars 180m for a 49 per cent stake in the
two refineries, which process most of the Czech Republic's oil requirements
using supplies of Russian oil.
They have also pledged to spend a further Dollars 520m on a five-year
investment programme of modernisation and environmental enhancement.
The announcement appears to be a victory for Mr Dlouhy and the privatisation
minister, Mr Jiri Skalicky, who have argued strongly for foreign
participation in the sector in opposition to ministers, including the prime
minister, Mr Vaclav Klaus, who favour keeping the oil refining and
petrochemical divisions of the industry together.
