FT  30 MAR 94 / Survey of Investment in India (17): The road to Santacruz -
Jewellery exports sparkle in Bombay free trade zone
Bombay's Santacruz export processing zone (Sepz) is the spearhead of India's
growing exports of processed diamonds and jewellery, writes RC Murthy.
At present, there are 33 manufacturing units there which last year earned a
total Rs. 5bn. there are 33 units which process diamonds and make jewellery
for exports.
According to Hitesh Mehta, manager of Intergold, the biggest of these units,
a lot more companies would like to diversify into manufacturing for export
to take advantage of one of India's chief assets, its cheap labour.
Intergold, which began manufacturing in the zone a couple of months ago, is
a subsidiary of B. Arunkumar, one of the top 50 jewellery exporters in
India, with 1,200 employees.
Mehta manager, says says that access to cheap labour enables the export
manufacturers to raise their added value to 35 per cent.
Two dozen new units have been recently been authorised. It is estimated,
however, that about 900 of India's 5,500 jewellery exporters would like to
join them there.
Businesses in the zone are permitted to import gold and precious stones
duty-free and and to export their finished goods without obstruction.
The zone has become a magnet for exporters. Though the administration is
deregulating the economy, the integration with the global economy has been
painfully slow and the process is may take another five years.
The trade reforms have given a fillip to diamond exports. The rupee was
devalued by nearly 30 per cent three years ago. Last March it was made
convertible on the trade account and this month was also allowed to float on
the current account.
India escaped relatively lightly from the world diamond industry's deep
recession of the last three years.
Exports of finished diamonds from India shot up last year to Dollars 3.28bn
from nearly Dollars 3bn a year before.
The Central Selling Organisation, the marketing arm of De Beers, reported a
turnround in rough diamond sales last year, after a steady three year fall.
The CSO's sales jumped by 29 per cent to Dollars 4.36bn in 1993. India's
exports of finished diamonds and jewellery jumped 26.7 per cent on a
year-by-year basis to Dollars 3.56bn in the ll months to February last, says
Mr Harshad Mehta, chairman of Intergold.
Gold jewellery is the best performer, with exports rising by nearly 30 per
cent against a 6 per cent drop a year ago.
India's share in the Dollars 30bn world gold jewellery market is still only
0.26 per cent, however. Exporters and the administration are eager to make
it easier to import primary gold and to build the infrastructure for
jewellery manufacture.
'We will be a force to reckon with in the next five years', says Mr Mehta.
His confidence stems from India's breakthrough in the Far Eastern market
last year. Korea, Taiwan and Thailand overtook France and Germany, India's
most important markets after the US, Japan and Italy. The Asian 'tigers',
including Hong Kong, Taiwan, South Korea and Singapore, and other Pacfic Rim
countries have vibrant economies, which augurs well for Indian exports, says
Mr Mehta.
A jewellery show in Bombay this month was part of a plan to increase
overseas customers' awareness of India's potential. A similar show a year
ago was ruined by a series of terrorist bombs in the city. Nows the industry
has decided to hold the Bombay fair every year. This year it took place
immediately after similar exhibitions in Hong Kong and Bangkok.
The Indian diamond houses also talk of building a permanent exhibition
complex in the diamond bourse.
