FT  04 OCT 94 / Survey of World Car Industry (8): Ever-more-complex
transatlantic tussle - The industrial espionage battle between Volkswagen
and General Motors
The scene of the industrial espionage battle between Volkswagen and General
Motors has moved from the high ground and the newspaper headlines into the
legal quicksands.
Investigations of the circumstances surrounding the defection to VW of Jose
Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, the US group's global purchasing supremo, in
March last year have become bogged down in mountains of paper in Germany and
enmeshed in an ever-more complex transatlantic tussle involving lawyers and
politicians.
But GM remains convinced that the probe into what a German judge described
as 'potentially the biggest-ever case of industrial espionage' will
eventually show that at the time VW recruited Mr Lopez along with seven of
his closest associates from Detroit and the group's German subsidiary, Adam
Opel, it also gained access to vast volumes of General Motors' confidential
data.
Staff poaching and charges of dirty dealing are common enough in the world
of international business, but the intensity of GM's attack on Europe's
biggest volume carmaker and the scale of the allegations it has made have
yet to be matched in the motor trade.
The basic charges are that at the same time as Mr Lopez was negotiating his
terms at VW (and consistently denying that he was about to leave GM), he and
his associates were systematically looting Adam Opel's industrial secrets.
These included details of Opel's entire European component supplier network
and key contract data, especially prices; plans for a new-style low-cost,
high speed car factory, and information on new models.
Mr Lopez has consistently denied any wrong-doing, and has got on with his
new job. Formerly renowned within GM for squeezing price concessions out of
component suppliers, he was charged by his new boss, VW chairman, Ferdinand
Piech, with a leading role in helping the German group claw back a 30 per
cent production cost disadvantage in relation to French and Japanese
competitors.
Now, while VW races to reach the promised break-even point this year after
last time's DM2.3bn loss, a German criminal investigation, launched in May,
1993 after GM aired its initial suspicions at the public prosecutor's office
in Darmstadt, is gnawing snail-fashion at a mountain of paper and electronic
data.
Dorothea Holland, until four months ago the only prosecuting lawyer on the
German case, assembled this mountain - officially estimated as equivalent to
about 2m computer print-out sheets - during one of the more spectacular
phases of the probe, in a raid on VW's headquarters in August last year.
Now, reinforced by at least one other prosecutor, she and her team have
disappeared into the pile of paper.
Following a steady flow of leaks and statements on apparently incriminating
discoveries, her office has been gagged by senior legal authorities.
No further announcements will be made until a decision has been reached on
whether there is evidence enough to indict Mr Lopez and/or his associates.
Until the gag was imposed, Ms Holland had appeared to be making substantial
progress.
According to her office, boxes which were discovered early in the
investigation in the former home of two of Mr Lopez's colleagues were found
to contain some of the allegedly confidential documents which GM claimed had
disappeared at the time of Mr Lopez's leaving.
These included plans for the 0-Car, a mini-style vehicle designed for the
hard-fought European market, and detailed price information.
According to eye-witness reports which to date have not been challenged by
VW, the apartment's former occupants, now employed by the German group, had
earlier been observed shredding large quantities of documents with two
machines.
By VW's own admission, shredders were also used in its corporate guest house
in Wolfsburg to destroy papers and other materials which arrived there
almost immediately after Mr Lopez's appointment to the VW board.
According to VW's statements, the 'possibly sensitive' material was shredded
to prevent its circulating within the VW group.
In late April this year, just before the flow of progress reports dried up,
Ms Holland's office reported that the haul from her VW raid had been found
to include plans for a revolutionary car factory, known as 'Plant B' within
VW, which showed striking similarities to Opel's 'Plant X'. It also emerged
that further GM data was discovered on a computer diskette that had been
compiled by one of Mr Lopez's daughters.
Meanwhile, a US probe, started at the instigation of the Commerce Department
in Washington, is stuck at the German border in a hither-and-thither
exchange involving local and federal governments, the Darmstadt diggers and
VW's and GM's legal advisers.
This investigation, which was launched after US President Bill Clinton
apparently decided that industrial espionage in general was a threat to his
nation's well-being, is in principle a far more simple or at least more
single-minded pursuit than that of Ms Holland.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation is probing possible mail and wire fraud.
In effect, if GM data is found to have been posted or transmitted across
state or federal boundaries without the knowledge or permission of its
owner, then those responsible, the recipient or its agents may be liable to
criminal prosecution and huge fines.
After months of toing and froing, the Bonn justice ministry recently agreed
in principle that the FBI could have access to the evidence gathered in the
German investigation.
However, since under German law VW has a right to know details of any
proposed information exchange, and the right to challenge any planned moves
in court, the scene appears to be set for an extended interlude that will
spell yet more frustration for GM and relief for the VW management.
