FT  23 APR 94 / Fashion: Build a new look with antique clothes - What was
chic in 1910 can look wonderful in 1994. Jane Mulvagh rummages along the
rails at London's best old clothes shops
It can be extremely distressing to pay Pounds 500 or more for a special
outfit only to find that it becomes a hit for the retailers and many other
people are wearing it too.
One of the fundamental roles of dress, particularly dressing-up, is that it
distinguishes you. So finding yourself just one of a crowd spoils the fun.
A way out of this trap is one-off dressing. By trawling through some of the
myriad antique clothes shops and auction room sales you can bypass
uniformity.
It is best to ferret around on a regular basis and not leave it until you
are in dire need of an outfit - that is when mistakes are made.
Your approach can be either that of the collector, who ignores high fashion,
or simply an amateur seeking to mirror current fashions with antique
originals.
This is a particularly appropriate time to try this as many period
silhouettes, textures and textiles are a la mode. Nubbly, open-work crochet
is favoured by Moschino, Christian Lacroix and John Rocha this season, so
why not buy the Edwardian original?
A cream openwork tabard, dated 1910, was sold this week at Christie's South
Kensington, London, for Pounds 187.
The slightly louche femininity afforded by bias-cut chiffon has reached cult
status - thanks to John Galliano and Valentino. For half the price you can
find 1920s and 1930s originals which are far more beguiling, the old printed
chiffons being much more subtly-hued than latterday versions.
The latest collections from Jean Paul Gaultier and many others, took us on a
National Geographic tour of the far east, particularly Tibet and Mongolia.
But why not buy a 19th century Mandarin's quilted silk jacket instead?
Pictured here are just a few pieces discovered during a single week.
You have to shop on spec, for the one-off is quickly sold.
Try to team a spectacular period piece with modern accessories - for
example, a naive, cream 1920s girl's dress with silvery platform sandals to
create the look of an ingenue - otherwise one looks more like a dusty Miss
Havisham or an extra who has wandered away from a film set.
The best haunts in London are Virginia's Antiques, The Gallery of Antique
Costume &amp; Textiles, Lunn Antiques, The Chenil Galleries, Cornucopia and the
regular costume and textile sales at Christie's.
Virginia's is an outstanding treasure trove. The eponymous owner, a 1960s
actress, is an inspiring role model and the supermodels, notably Naomi
Campbell, frequently buy from her, knowing that, in spite of the increasing
homogeneity of international fashion, they will stand out as originals.
Virginia selects period costumes but, if they are neither sexy nor winningly
pretty, no matter how historically important, she does not buy.
On a recent visit, the stock, which changes weekly, if not daily, included
two Proustian-pink gaufrage velvet 1920s opera coats, which could be updated
with silver leggings; at least half a dozen bias cut chiffon dresses which,
with the addition of a slip and laced La Goulou boots, could take you from a
lunch party to a ball; a beaded Dorothy bag, which I longed to fasten to the
belt loops of a pair of jeans as an unexpected version of the 'bum-bag'; and
a white lawn camisole which, peeping from under a strict suit for the
office, would immediately create the softer look that many working women
seek.
Prices range from Pounds 40 for a piece of silk lingerie to Pounds 1,000 for
a mussel-shell black and anemone pink, cut-velvet, fringed shawl that made
me weak at the knees with longing.
The Gallery of Antique Costume &amp; Textiles provides not only museum-bound
Victoriana but also unexpected treasures, such as a faded indigo cambric
child's dress for Pounds 40. It is particularly good on Chinoiserie: there
were at least six quilted Oriental jackets on a recent visit.
In addition, the proprietor produces a limited range of new pieces cut from
antique textiles along period lines. The choice is determined by both the
best-sellers in the shop and the whims of fashion.
Lunn Antiques is the ultimate lingerie paradise. Row after row of
immaculately ironed whites - camisoles, cami-knickers, petticoats - silk and
satin underwear and the odd pre-war riding habit, tea dance dress or 19th
century linen farmhand's smock.
Juliet Lunn's taste conjures up a wayward Thomas Hardy maiden who has
wandered into Jean Harlow's boudoir.
The Chenil Galleries, abutting the Town Hall on the Kings Road, houses three
costume stalls. Stock ranges from the frankly tatty to 1920s beaded shifts
that are destined for Oscar ceremonies. It is a favourite haunt of film
stars as well as collectors. But, unlike Virginia's or Lunn's, the service
is slapdash and surly; no effort is made to offer reassuring advice or weed
out the rags from the riches.
Cornucopia is just that - charity shop bric-a-brac alongside haute couture.
Over the years this scruffy emporium has yielded numerous couture pieces
from Balenciaga to Paquin.
It stocks endless amusing gew-gaws that perk up an old dress. Reflecting the
extremely reasonable prices (from Pounds 2 to Pounds 500), be prepared for a
real rummage, and pencil an entire afternoon into your diary. The service is
exemplary.
Christie's is auctioning an embarrassment of riches on June 21. It is an
extensive haute couture collection spanning four decades and was owned by
the late Mrs Heard de Osborne.
A score of Balenciagas, a few Givenchys, 14 Saint Laurents, one sequined
Pucci and one unworn Christian Lacroix are for sale alongside Ferragamo and
Roger Vivier shoes and various accessories.
Antique garments will stay with you, loved and complimented, for many years.
They become a shibboleth of your own look, rather than the passing,
expensive vagaries of designer fashion.
Virginia Antiques, 98 Portland Road, London W11 4LQ. Telephone:
071-727-9908.
Lunn Antiques, 86 New Kings Road London, SW6 4LU Telephone: 071-736- 4638.
Chenil Galleries Antiques Market, 181 King's Road, London, SW3. Telephone:
071-351-5353.
Gallery of Antique Costume &amp; Textiles, 2 Church Street, Marylebone, London,
NW8 8ED. Telephone: 071-723-9981.
Cornucopia 12, Upper Tatchbrook Street, London, SW1V 1AH. Telephone:
071-828-5752.
Christie's, 85 Old Brompton Road, London, SW7. Telephone: 071-581-7611.
Photographs: Paul Massey Styling: Jane Mulvagh Hair, make-up: John Gustafson
