FT  04 JUN 94 / Outdoors: Here is the weather flowercast . . . - Gardening /
How ordinary garden blooms may be an indicator of climatic changes
The story of the British climate is written in the nation's flower beds,
according to Fred Last, honorary professor of forestry and natural resources
at Edinburgh University. He believes the UK's parks and back gardens could
be used as early indicators of such climate changes as global warming.
Botany and meteorology have come together in Last's own garden in East
Lothian. It was pressed into service as a weather station in 1977 when he
decided to explore the impact of the previous year's drought on plants and
realised there was no bench mark for his observations.
Records of the flowering dates of plants all over Britain had been kept
between 1891 and 1945, but no one had analysed the data to see if it had a
story to tell about climate. So Last decided to use his garden to build a
definitive picture of how plants respond to their environment over time.
Since 1977, he has recorded the flowering date of every species in the
garden. At present, there are 450, of which 250 have been there since the
start.
The records show that some species - such as honesty, lilac and apple -
bloom on the same day every year. Indeed, the archives at Covent Garden (the
London fruit and vegetable market) show that home-grown apples have been
reaching the market on virtually the same date for more than a century. But
the flowering dates of many other species - such as grape hyacinths,
rhododendrons and roses - appear to be dictated by temperatures in the
months before blooming.
Using average flowering dates for the period from 1978 to 1988, Last has
been able to show that warm years such as 1988 and 1989 were registered by
changes in flowering dates. 'Maximum and minimum temperatures were both four
degrees higher than average in January and February 1989, and this resulted
in a total change in flowering patterns in the garden,' he says. 'By March,
there were three times more plants in bloom than normal, and the flowering
of sensitive species such as poached egg plant and rhododendron were
advanced by several weeks.'
These species flowered early in 1990, too. But the trend was not sustained
and 1991 saw the return of average flowering patterns. This season has seen
few highlights so far - at least in East Lothian.
While November and December were unusually cool, temperatures were normal
thereafter and the number of flowers in bloom from January to March
reflected this, being close to the long-term average. People thought it was
a cold winter, but the message from the flower beds is that while it was
long, it was not exceptionally hard.
Put simply, most sensitive species respond to air and soil temperatures a
month or so before flowering. Some also are moisture-sensitive, while roses
seem to respond to cumulative effects - two warm years such as 1988 and 1989
saw them flowering even earlier in 1990.
Plants which are not climate-sensitive are said to be photoperiodic - their
flowering triggered only by the length of the day. The underlying reasons
for these differing responses remain unknown but Last hopes his garden-based
studies might trigger more research into the basic biology of flowering.
These trends have obvious implications for garden design. A year-round show
could be guaranteed by mixing plants which unfold their flowers in an
orderly progression as the days lengthen, with those which are
climate-responsive; this would add interest and variability.
Bulbs, for instance, could include temperature-responsive snowflakes and
fritillaries alongside the yellow and white tulipa tarda, which is
photo-periodic. For the rock garden, saxifrage will bloom early or late
against a constant background of yellow alyssum. Photo-periodic shrubs
include the pink and white-flowered escallonia, while the buddleia (known as
the orange ball tree) is a climate responder.
As far as climate goes, it is still too soon to say if the trends of the
past few years amount to global warming. 'People thought that the warmth of
1988 and 1989 was bound to have a residual effect,' says Last.
'The fact that we were back to normal by 1991 suggests that those years may
have been part of a short-term trend. But with many more years of
monitoring, we will certainly pick up the longer term climate trends.'
Last would like to see climate change gardens used in a serious scientific
context - in schools, or attached to meteorological stations. At present, he
is designing a climate change garden for the Centre for Deep Sea
Oceanography, in Southampton.
The scientists there are looking at how the oceans act as a 'sink' for
carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere by anthropogenic emissions such
as power stations and car exhaust fumes. 'It's particularly appropriate to
have a climate change garden at a site where they're studying the effect of
climate on the ocean,' Last says.
Violet willow, witch hazel and lily of the valley are among the
photo-periodic responders which will provide constant and predictable
year-round colour for the scientists. Mexican orange blossom, blue-eyed
Mary, and Solomon's seal will work alongside them as early indicators of
climate change - as could many of the plants in gardens up and down the
country.
