FT  01 DEC 94 / Leading Article: Iberia's woes
Two years after receiving a Pta120bn emergency injection of public funds,
Iberia, Spain's state-owned airline, says it needs a further Pta130bn
capital infusion to avert the threat of bankruptcy. If the EU is to have an
efficient airline industry and prevent the spread of state aids from
undermining competition, the European Commission must firmly reject any
proposal by the Spanish government to stump up the cash.
For Brussels to do otherwise would contradict its insistence, when it
blessed the last rescue, that Iberia seek no more handouts before 1996.
Nothing could demonstrate more clearly that the Commission lacked the
resolve to enforce its doctrine that state aids to the sector be granted on
a 'one time, last time' basis. Such a precedent would only encourage other
troubled airlines to flout EU disciplines with impunity.
Iberia's recent history is a textbook lesson in why such disciplines are
needed. Its latest crisis could probably have been avoided had the airline
been privatised in the late 1980s, while it was in profit. Instead, it was
encouraged by INI, the state holding company which owns it, to embark on an
aggressive attempt to become a global player by buying up carriers in Latin
America. The idea was that increased scale would give Iberia a central role
in an eventual restructuring of the European airline industry.
The price of this misconceived expansion has been losses on the acquisitions
equal to the value of the 1992 capital injection. A privately owned Iberia,
free to follow commercial logic rather than INI's dictates, would have had a
stronger incentive to pursue a more realistic strategy which would have
concentrated on improved productivity, not greater size.
That is particularly important in Iberia's case, since much of the
international competition it faces is from cut-price holiday charter
airlines with far lower costs. Matching its leaner rivals' efficiency is
Iberia's only hope for operating profitably. The Spanish government's
priority should be to accelerate the necessary restructuring and require
Iberia to finance it by selling assets. That process would be greatly
encouraged by setting a timetable for privatisation of the airline.
Brussels, meanwhile, needs to ensure that it maintains a line on subsidies
which is not only firm but consistent. Regrettably, the Commission's recent
record - notably its approval of FFr20bn of state aid for Air France -
suggests that this has not always been the case. To apply rules unevenly,
particularly when doing so appears to favour politically more powerful
governments, is as unsatisfactory as having no rules at all.
