FT  27 APR 94 / International Company News: Akzo Nobel off to strong start
Economic recovery in Europe helped push up first-quarter net profit at Akzo
Nobel, the Dutch-based chemicals group, by 30 per cent to Fl 281m (Dollars
148m), from Fl 216m a year ago.
The company, formed after Akzo acquired Nobel of Sweden last year, said the
improvement, which was almost across the board, underlined what it described
as a 'good start' to the fortunes of the merged group.
A 9 per cent sales increase in the first three months, to Fl 5.78bn, was
attributed to higher sales volumes, increased prices and positive currency
movements. A continuing programme of cost-cutting enabled Akzo Nobel to
limit the rise in operating costs to Fl 5.3bn, an increase of 7.2 per cent.
The company's shares, one of the strongest performers on the Amsterdam stock
exchange in recent months, ended the day up Fl 6.40 at Fl 226.90, a rise of
nearly 3 per cent compared with Monday's close.
Until the first quarter, Akzo Nobel had relied largely on better results in
North America to compensate for the weakness in European markets. In
February, it predicted that the recession in Europe had bottomed out.
The economic turnround in Europe was reflected in coatings, where all of
Akzo Nobel's European business units posted higher results than a year ago.
At the same time, coatings operations in North America continued their
upward trend. Overall, the coatings sector saw operating profit rise to Fl
92m in the first quarter of 1994 from a pro-forma Fl 61m in the same period
of 1993.
Akzo Nobel, the world's largest salt producer, also benefited from bad
winter weather in the US and Europe, which boosted demand for its road salt.
Besides salt, all other business units in the chemicals sector put in
improved performances, enabling operating profit in chemicals to rise to Fl
199m from Fl 149m in 1993.
Operating profit for pharmaceuticals rose by 19 per cent to Fl 161m from Fl
135m.
In fibres, Akzo Nobel reported higher sales volumes. However, the gain was
largely offset by lower average selling prices. Cost-cutting allowed it to
post an operating profit of Fl 28m in the sector - traditionally its most
difficult - compared with Fl 14m a year earlier.
