FT  11 NOV 94 / Ulster killing shakes peace process: Dublin cancels plan for
early release of nine IRA prisoners
The Irish government abruptly halted the planned pre-Christmas release of
nine IRA prisoners after a post office worker in Northern Ireland was shot
dead yesterday by suspected republican gunmen.
The shooting, the first since the IRA and loyalist paramilitaries declared
ceasefires, cast a shadow over the Northern Ireland peace process.
It will almost certainly increase pressure on London and Dublin to step up
their efforts to secure the surrender of paramilitary weapons.
Reaction to the murder was generally restrained, though Mr Gerry Adams,
president of Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing, accused the Royal Ulster
Constabulary of trying to damage the peace process by blaming republicans
for the shooting. The IRA said its position on the two-month-old ceasefire
remained unchanged.
Dublin's decision to cancel the release orders for the IRA prisoners was
announced by Mrs Maire Geoghegan-Quinn, the Irish justice minister, after a
meeting with Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister. It came less than
24 hours after her department gave details of the men to be freed as part of
the Irish government's response to the IRA's ceasefire.
An embarrassed Dublin government said it had stopped their releases because
initial reports from the RUC suggested 'the possible participation' of
Provisional IRA members. Mrs Geoghegan-Quinn said the planned releases had
been 'based specifically on the premise that the Provisional IRA campaign of
violence was over for good'.
However after a cabinet meeting, government sources insisted the peace
process would not be derailed by the killing.
Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, said he was 'deeply angered'
by the 'callous and wicked' murder. It demonstrated, he added, 'the wanton
dangers of illegally held arms'.
The attack took place in Newry, Co Down. Three armed men, dressed as postmen
and using a post office van, entered a fenced sorting centre. An employee,
Mr Frank Kerr, 53, was shot dead after a struggle. Two of the armed men were
later arrested after a chase involving helicopters near the Irish border.
The third escaped and was last night being sought by police.
Sinn Fein insisted last night that the raid was not the work of the IRA and
did not represent a breach of the ceasefire.
Republican sources in South Armagh, a strongly nationalist area, said the
raid was the work of renegade, freelance republicans committing a
straightforward criminal act to make some money.
A statement from the IRA implied as much, asserting simply: 'On August 31
the IRA announced a complete cessation of military operations. All our units
were instructed accordingly. This position has not changed.'
Mr Adams was said to be 'visibly shaken' when told of the raid by a
reporter.
Yesterday's killing came on the eve of a meeting between British and Irish
officials to discuss the framework document which the two governments hope
will form the basis of a durable political settlement in the province.
Sir Patrick and Mr Dick Spring, the Irish foreign minister, are to discuss
the document in the Republic of Ireland on Monday.
British and Irish politicians said the shooting showed the need for a rapid
surrender of weapons. Mr Seamus Mallon, Social Democratic and Labour party
MP for Newry, said: 'It was an IRA operation whether it was sanctioned or
not by those they call their leaders.'
His view was echoed by Mr David Trimble, Ulster Unionist party spokesman on
legal affairs. He said: 'Freelance operations don't take place in that area
unless they're licensed by the IRA.'
