FT  05 SEP 94 / Ukraine and Russia patch up relations
Ukraine and Russia are moving towards normalising their often strained and
fractious relationship. A weekend ministerial summit yielded a series of
agreements to be signed when President Boris Yeltsin visits Kiev in early
October. Also signalling a thaw in military relations was a compromise
splitting land facilities in the Crimea that had held up a final agreement
on the division of the Black Sea fleet.
Many treaties have been signed and broken, but the installation of a new
president in Kiev and the changed political atmosphere in Ukraine hold out
prospects for a lasting reconciliation.
Ukraine and Russia in principle have agreed to avoid double taxation, ease
custom regulations and start work on a customs union and a free trade
treaty. 'The agreements will not resolve all problems existing between
Ukraine and Russia, but it should establish a basis for developing
relations,' said Mr Hennady Udovenko, Ukraine's new acting foreign minister.
A shift in attitude toward Moscow follows the election in July of Mr Leonid
Kuchma, who promised closer links between the former Soviet Union's two
largest states. His predecessor, Mr Leonid Kravchuk, a communist turned
nationalist, often squabbled with Moscow over various issues including
control of the country's nuclear weapons and the Black Sea fleet, based in
the Crimea.
Mr Valery Shmarov, the defence minister, said on Friday that Ukraine would
agree to split the on-shore facilities of the fleet, breaking with previous
refusals to even consider the issue. The two this April had agreed to divide
the ships, with a bulk going to Russia, but details on lease terms and
compensation have yet to be finalised.
Over two years, at least four attempts to divide the 300 vessel fleet's
assets and on-shore installations have failed. An agreement is likely to be
linked to forgiving part of Ukraine's large oil and gas debt.
In the dispute over secessionist moves by Crimea, a mostly
ethnically-Russian peninsula given to Ukraine in 1954, Russia recently has
dealt directly with Kiev, often bypassing Crimean President Yuri Meshkov and
most recently rejecting Sevastopol's bid to join the Russian Federation.
