FT  09 NOV 94 / The Fall of the Wall: When the people went over the top - In
the first of a series, Anthony Robinson analyses the consequences of the
fall of communism five years ago
The overnight transformation of the Berlin Wall five years ago today from
the symbol of divided Europe into a quarry for souvenir hunters marked the
end of a 200-year historical cycle. The wall which symbolised oppression was
built by the heirs to a violent revolutionary tradition which began in Paris
with dreams of liberte, egalite, fraternite.
The French revolution led inexorably from liberty through anarchy and terror
to tyranny before crashing to military defeat. The bloodier communist
revolution ended with the internal collapse of the militarised Soviet
dinosaur and the joyous shouts of liberated East Berliners.
The climactic moment of the 'six months that shook the world' in 1989
remains the surge of delirious crowds through the Berlin Wall on November 9.
But the spark that exploded communism and ended the cold war was struck at
the round table power-sharing talks between Solidarity and Polish communist
leaders that began six months earlier.
The talks began in the spring and ended in June with an agreement to hold
multi-party elections, heavily rigged in favour of the communists and their
allies. But the elections produced a tidal wave of anti-communist votes that
gave Solidarity most of the freely-contested seats in the Sejm, the lower
house, and all 100 seats in the largely decorative senate. It was a crushing
moral defeat for the communists and opened the way for post-war Poland's
first non-communist government, led by Mr Tadeusz Mazowiecki.
The Poles had shown that it was possible to remove a communist government
peacefully. But that was not enough for others to follow suit. Fear of
violent reaction from Moscow remained until Mikhail Gorbachev and his small
band of close advisers let it be known that Moscow would no longer intervene
in what they hoped would be limited to a generational change of leaders and
style.
The Brezhnev doctrine, which had led to the invasion of Czechoslovakia in
1968, was replaced by the 'Sinatra doctrine'. Each country would be free to
follow its own path, and 'do it my way', as Mr Gennadi Gerasimov, Mr
Gorbachev's smooth and cynical press secretary, crooned in reply to
journalists' questions about Moscow's policy on the changes in central
Europe. Throughout the region, subject peoples took the hint and regimes
began to fall like skittles in a bowling alley.
In September, Hungary's reformist communist leadership cut open the frontier
with Austria and thousands of East Germans fled through the holes. Soon
afterwards, old tyrants such as East Germany's Erich Honnecker and
Bulgaria's Todor Zhivkov were elbowed aside by younger apparatchiks. They in
turn were rejected by milling crowds in central Europe's towns and squares.
A month after the Berlin wall collapsed, Czechs and Slovaks exulted in a
'velvet revolution'. The communist leaders were peacefully replaced by
dissident writers, poets and, unremarked at the time, a steely-minded group
of passionate free-market economic reformers.
There was bloodshed only at the tail end of this extraordinary process of
rebirth. On Christmas day 1989, Nicolae Ceausescu, the Romanian dictator,
and his even more hated wife, Elena, were summarily tried and executed after
fleeing Bucharest by helicopter. Bloody street-fighting followed.
Overall, freedom brought euphoria. It did not last long. The cold light of
day and freedom of expression quickly revealed the extent of moral decay,
physical deterioration and economic backwardness bequeathed to the entire
region by 45 years of communism.
All over the former Soviet world, previously unknown and untried leaders
have since faced the daunting tasks of constructing a democratic state out
of the totalitarian wreckage and transforming their planned economies into
market systems.
In the European parts of the former Soviet empire, there have been few
witch-hunts. In Lithuania, Poland and Hungary, former communist politicians
have been returned to power in free elections as new-look social democrats.
All over, historic roots and ancient rivalries have been rediscovered. The
Soviet doctrine of 'proletarian internationalism' was quickly rejected by
peoples who were deemed by communist ideologues to have submerged their
identity into international working class solidarity.
In Europe, this led to the violent disintegration of Yugoslavia, instigated
by former communist officials re-packaged as rabid nationalists.
Further east, ethnic wars broke out in the Caucasus and parts of central
Asia. Russia itself faced disintegration as peoples subjugated for centuries
by Tsar and commissar alike re-opened claims for greater autonomy and the
revival of old customs and laws.
There remains a danger that a wider conflagration will erupt out of the
Balkans, the Caucasus or central Asia. But the threat of nuclear destruction
has been lifted from the world. Large parts of central Asia and the Baltic
and Black seas have been opened to normal trade and commerce. Above all,
economic, political and human rights and freedoms have been restored over
one sixth of the globe.
Western leaders have been slow, however, to recognise the momentous
challenge presented by the collapse of Soviet control over eastern Europe -
not least because the events of 1989 came largely as a surprise.
Germany single-mindedly concentrated on re-integrating the five eastern
Lander into a re-united state. But the initially generous emotional response
of western Europe was blunted by recession as the European Union grappled
with rising unemployment. Governments and lobbies often reacted to cheap
eastern labour and products as a threat rather than an opportunity to lower
costs and expand trade and investment.
Slowly Brussels embarked on a series of bilateral trade negotiations that
have resulted in 'association agreements' with the six former Warsaw Pact
countries. It began with the Czech republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia,
the fast-track reform states known collectively as the 'Visegrad 4' after
the Hungarian town where they sealed their loose alliance. The four, and
Slovenia, are working hard to bring their institutions, laws and economies
as close to EU standards as possible in the hope of full entry by the turn
of the century. The EU Copenhagen summit in 1993 opened up the prospect of
full membership but remained tantalisingly imprecise as to timing.
The timetable stretches further into the future for Albania, Romania and
Bulgaria and remains obscure for the former Soviet Baltic states, Belarus
and Ukraine, and the war-entangled former Yugoslav states. The greatest fear
of all the countries of east and central Europe is of being left in limbo
between a prosperous western Europe defended by Nato and an eventually
resurgent Russia claiming special privileges and influence over what it
terms 'the near abroad'.
The fall of the Berlin Wall signalled the end of the cold war and removed
the physical barriers to the creation of a united Europe. But creating the
political and economic structures needed to keep such a rich, varied but
potentially fractious family of nations pointing in the same direction
without frightening Russia back into its old aggressive defensiveness is a
task which has only just begun.
The next milestones are the forthcoming summit of EU leaders at the European
Council meeting in Essen next month and the Intergovernmental Conference of
1996. But it would be an illusion to imagine that the architecture of such a
Europe could be drawn up by politicians and bureaucrats alone. They are
already way behind the businessmen, bankers and investors whose contribution
to the creation of a pan-European market will be reviewed in the second
article of this series.
