FT  08 JUN 94 / Patten bows to pressure over truancy tables
The government will abandon its most controversial 'league tables' - those
for truancy - in English secondary schools this year, after complaints from
teachers, Mr John Patten, the education secretary, said yesterday.
In a series of concessions to teaching unions, most of whom oppose the
league tables, Mr Patten also announced plans to put exam results in more
context next year.
Last year the Department for Education published tables showing the
proportion of pupils at a school who had missed at least half a day during
the educational year. This produced high figures which many educationalists
dismissed as misleading. Several schools reported a truancy rate of more
than 80 per cent.
This year there will be two truancy tables. One will give the total
proportion of half-days missed by pupils without authorisation, while the
other will give similar figures for authorised absence.
Mr Patten also said that from next year he hoped to publish 'value-added'
figures to set exam results in context.
He suggested two simple measures in particular: one would convert schools'
performance in A-levels and GCSEs into an index and chart their improvement
over time, while the other would compare pupils' performance in national
tests taken at the age of 11 with their scores in tests taken at 14.
However, Mr Patten refused to promise value-added league tables for next
year.
The Schools Curriculum and Assessment Authority, the quango chaired by Sir
Ron Dearing, is investigating value-added measures. Mr Patten pointed out
that the team includes Professor Michael Barber of Keele University, a
former official of the National Union of Teachers.
Teachers' unions gave the changes a lukewarm reception. Mr Doug McAvoy,
general secretary of the NUT, said: 'Mr Patten's U-turn over the blunt
instrument he used to measure truancy last year hasn't changed his attitude
to crude statistics.'
Schools will also be required to publish information on the amount of time
pupils spend in class each week, after a finding by Ofsted, the education
watchdog, that the school day at some schools was 20 per cent longer than at
others.
Mr David Hart, general secretary of the National Association of Head
Teachers, said: 'The overwhelming majority of heads remain of the view that
the work involved in compiling these statistics is a monumental waste of
time.'
The Association of Teachers and Lecturers said teachers still had 'a lack of
faith in a system of league tables which gratuitously misunderstands how
schools work'.
