FT  07 JUL 94 / Survey of Italy (3): Deficit needs tackling - Robert Graham
on a recovery still in its early stages
The Italian economy is in the early stages of an export-led recovery which
is expected to gather momentum in the second half of the year.
But domestic demand remains weak and much here depends on the government's
economic management. The new administration has begun by seeking to
encourage investment with tax breaks and to kick-start activity by
unfreezing a large stock of public works contracts put on hold as a result
of the corruption scandals of the past two years.
In contrast, it has been much slower in formulating policies to tackle the
budget deficit and the huge mountain of Italian debt, now equivalent to
almost 120 per cent of GDP. However, the speed and success of the domestic
recovery will be conditioned by the continuing need to hold down public
spending and reduce the budget deficit, which is still over 10 per cent of
GDP.
Also central to the management of the recovery will be tight control over
inflation and a continuing wage constraint. Inflation is now below 4 per
cent on an annualised basis but is still marginally above projected levels.
All these factors will affect the market's confidence in policy and by the
same token the level of interest rates. Italy's real interest rates remain
high and Confindustria, the industrialists' confederation, insists there is
scope for a further percentage point drop despite uncertainties in the
international financial markets.
The economy began to pull out of the two-year-old recession in the final
quarter of 1993. The growth trend, albeit modest, is now firmly established
and should be around 1.5 per cent by the end of 1994 (against -0.7 per cent
in 1993), rising to an annualised 2.5 per cent by 1995.
Domestic demand is projected to grow 0.3 per cent this year, rising to 1.5
per cent in 1995. However, the impact of external demand on the recovery
should be more favourable than envisaged last autumn when the annual
macroeconomic figures were prepared. World demand is expected to rise over 6
per cent, almost double the previous year.
Italy has been increasing its share of world trade since the 1992 lira
devaluation and in 1993 exports grew a remarkable 8.5 per cent in volume
terms. This performance was largely responsible for a dramatic improvement
in the balance of payments. Last year the current account swung from a
deficit of L34,200bn to a L17,900bn surplus - the best result since 1975.
The export drive continues, especially in emerging markets and the US. In
the first quarter sales to Asia were up 53 per cent in value on the same
period last year. Exports are due to increase 7 per cent in volume and 11
per cent in value this year.
The January-February trade balance of L3,300bn was double that in the same
period of 1993; but the annual surplus may not remain so large. Imports are
expected to increase towards the year-end as the recovery strengthens, up by
8 per cent in value terms during the year. The upwards trend in commodity
prices (oil being especially important for energy-dependent Italy) could
further raise the cost of imports.
Industry still has spare capacity to meet export orders and accommodate the
gradual pick-up in domestic demand. Utilisation of industrial capacity is so
far up one percentage point to 74 per cent this year with growing evidence
of selective rebuilding of stocks. The latest business opinion surveys
reflect a return of manufacturers' confidence, while Fiat, having sustained
heavy losses in 1993, is beginning to see higher sales of cars and trucks.
But the overriding sentiment is caution after an abrupt 5 per cent fall in
domestic demand last year. The construction business and heavy industry were
especially hit, with the automotive sector making large-scale lay-offs.
Investment in machine tools, machinery and transport equipment dropped over
15 per cent.
Despite the beginnings of a recovery, unemployment still continues to rise
and is now over 11.3 per cent of the active population. Since 1991 1.2m jobs
have been lost. The real figure is far higher because of the Italian
practice of resorting to temporary lay-offs that can stretch over two years
and more. Last year the number of hours covered by temporary lay-off
payments increased 23 per cent.
Unemployment is also concealed by the use of early retirement, which is an
extensive factor in the restructuring of the automotive industry, steel,
defence industries, chemicals, shipbuilding and the railways. It is worth
stressing the uneven geographical picture of unemployment. In the industrial
north, unemployment is on average below 7 per cent while in the south, where
the public sector economy is still in recession, the level is 20 per cent
and more in some places.
The jobs crisis has forced the unions to place employment above wage
demands. This, coupled with an increased productivity drive, has helped to
hold down wages and production costs. Since 1992 wages in most sectors have
fallen in real terms. Last year average wages increased 3.1 per cent, a good
percentage point below inflation. Meanwhile, unit labour costs increased
only 2.5 per cent. Wage restraint was particularly important among the 3.6m
employees in the public sector and the resumption of talks with the
government on pay increases in the autumn will be watched with great
interest.
The government will try to hold down public sector wages as part of its
efforts to control the public sector deficit. The deficit itself looks set
to overshoot the 1994 budget projections of L144,000bn and reach L160,000bn,
over 10 per cent of GDP. This is due to lower receipts as a result of the
recession carried through from the previous year, plus the increased cost of
social security benefits, particularly pensions. These developments will
probably halve the projected size of the primary surplus (the balance of
revenues and receipts less interest payments) to around L12,000bn.
But the public accounts have been further complicated by a June decision of
the constitutional court, ordering the government to pay arrears on certain
types of pensions dating back to 1983. The cost of the decision has been put
at L32,000bn - the size of the spending cuts and extra revenue measures in
the 1994 budget. Payment can only be delayed until 1995 and at present it
looks as though the monies will have to be covered by a special tax.
As it is, the government will probably introduce a pre-summer mini-budget of
L5,000bn to hold the deficit to below L160,000bn. At the same time, a
further L35,000bn to L40,000bn will have to be found in 1995 just to keep
the deficit at around 9.5 per cent of GDP, which is well above the EU
average.
The government has little room for manoeuvre while the debt stock remains so
high. Annual debt service is equivalent to the entire deficit; and every
percentage point fluctuation in interest rates either adds or subtracts
L15,000bn from the servicing bill. In the 12 months to March 1994, the debt
stock increased 9 per cent. The total volume of debt is now expected to
stabilise in 1995-96 at a maximum of 123-125 per cent of GDP.
Unless the new government takes decisive action to curb spending, little
will be achieved. The prime target will be cuts in generous state pension
benefits.
