FT  13 JUN 94 / Plants from Argentina rescue home-grown crop
English strawberries are as much an essential part of the British summer as
the Wimbledon tennis tournament and racing at Ascot, but this year's crop
could well come from plants shipped from Argentina last year.
Britain's Pounds 80m strawberry industry - the bulk of it is concentrated in
England - has managed to manipulate the growing season for its crop to such
an extent that it can ensure a steady flow of strawberries from April until
early October.
In the face of rising demand English fruit farmers have extended the
boundaries of the traditional three-week season.
Plants from typical English varieties are cultivated in Argentina and
shipped to Britain while still dormant from the southern winter. They start
to produce fruit much later in the season.
Other plants will have spent the past few months in the deep freeze, which
means they can be planted out later in June and July to produce fruit in
early September.
Discerning customers are so eager for English fruit that in the early
season, when fruit is grown under glass, they are prepared to pay almost
twice as much as for Spanish and US strawberries.
Mr Simon Brice, who has 1m plants in his cold store at Mockbeggar Farm near
Higham, Kent, said: 'We've always grown a few late berries but now there's
such huge demand for English strawberries. The supermarkets are not
interested in anyone who has a three-week season for anything.'
Mr Brice, who sells 500 tonnes of strawberries a year, said that about half
of the nation's strawberries are now eaten outside the traditional season,
compared with about 30 per cent 10 years ago.
He said: 'For every three strawberries we sell in Wimbledon fortnight, we
want one in August and half of one in September.'
Mr Richard Harnden, managing director at Commercial Fruit Plants on Romney
Marsh, Kent, has pioneered the growing of plants in Argentina. These plants
are being frozen for the trip back to Britain, where they are planted in
greenhouses in late July. They produce their first crop in September and
early October and manage to fruit again in April the following year.
Mr Harnden's initial trials with relatively small numbers of plants have
been so successful that he is hoping to expand significantly next year.
Young British-grown plants go into cold store in January and February, but
by the time they are planted out in July they are beginning to exhaust their
reserves of starch, making them weaker and more vulnerable than their
southern-hemisphere counterparts.
Mr Brice said the young plants had to be mollycoddled to protect them from
disease and dehydration. 'Once they are planted out, the fight is on for the
plant to grow an adequate root system to support its flowers,' he said.
The fields at Mockbeggar Farm are regularly sprinkled by automatically
activated irrigation sprays to reduce stress on the plants. But more often
than not Mr Brice is struggling to harvest his fruit in the drizzly
conditions of a typical British summer.
