FT  27 JUN 94 / Hutus see France as their saviour: The intervention force's
arrival
A notice at the border post between Bakavu in eastern Zaire and Cyangugu in
south-western Rwanda, one of the last remaining bastions of the country's
Hutu government and army, reads:
'Attention Zaireans and Bantu people] The Tutsi assassins are out to
exterminate us. For centuries the ungrateful and unmerciful Tutsi have used
their powers, daughters and corruption to subject the Bantu. But we know the
Tutsi, that race of vipers, drinkers of untrue blood. We will never allow
them to fulfil their dreams in Kivuland.'
Those crowding around the border post nod their heads in agreement. They
have welcomed with open arms the French intervention force which began
deploying last week. Red, white and blue bunting festoon the dusty town of
Cyangugu. French flags flutter from cars and mopeds.
'The French have come to save us from the (Tutsi-led rebel) Rwandan
Patriotic Front,' says a local craftsman. 'The RPF is the army of the
Tutsis. They kill their president and now they want to kill all Hutus who
wield power.'
Less than 10 miles away, French troops guard the last 8,000 Tutsis who
remain in the locality. It is not known how many were killed in the 10 weeks
of slaughter that followed President Juvenal Habyarimana's death in an air
crash in April. The first French forays into western Rwanda have uncovered
mass graves. In the village of Shangui, women were washing blood stains off
the walls of a parish church.
The refugee camp at Nyarushishi sits among tea plantations. The makeshift
shelters cling to the steep slopes like rows of terraced tea bushes.
'When the killings began,' says Mr Claude Bavugameshi, who is tall and
desperately thin. 'We took refuge in Cyangugu parish. The mayor said he
could protect us here, so we were taken to the stadium. Later, the mayor
came with soldiers and a list of people, who were taken away. The mayor and
the soldiers came three more times. Always they took people away. The last
time we rioted, that is why we are in this camp.'
Despite the French presence, Hutu government soldiers and gendarmes still
patrol the camp. Voices drop to a hush when they approach. The refugees fear
the would-be Hutu protectors, who, until last week, would turn a blind eye
when Hutu militia raided the camp.
Since the arrival of the French five days ago, the militias have melted into
the background. Road blocks and the menacing guards have disappeared.
The classification of western Rwanda has made the intervention of a few
hundred French troops appear devastatingly simple. But the change is
deceptive.
The French presence may act as a deterrent to further killings, but the gulf
that separates the Hutus in Cyangugu from the Tutsis at the refugee camp
cannot be bridged by a foreign intervention force alone.
The Hutus' welcome is based on a misunderstanding: they regard the French as
their allies, not as the neutral humanitarian force they profess to be.
Having propped up General Habyarimana's military government for years, the
Hutus clearly expect the French to push the rebels, who control two thirds
of the country, back into Uganda.
Even if the French expedition avoids taking sides in the conflict, their
presence in western Rwanda may act as a buffer force between retreating
government troops and the rebel advance.
At the camp, the refugees worry about what will happen to them when the
French leave. Rather than salvation, the Tutsis fear they have only a brief
reprieve.
