FT  20 JUN 94 / Boost vocational qualifications, says CBI
More resources should be devoted to maintaining the 'quality and
credibility' of the new vocational qualifications aimed at improving skills,
the Confederation of British Industry says today.
The organisation says in a review that the quality assurance systems that
underpin the vocational qualifications, which measure an individual's
competence to do a job, must be 'sound and robust'. Labour MPs claimed
recently that former employees of a training provider had made fraudulent
claims for attainments of NVQs, which are awarded by internal assessors but
are verified externally by awarding bodies.
More than 68 recommendations for general reform of NVQs and the bodies
responsible for administering them are given by the CBI in the first big
independent review of the system. The CBI was one of the pioneers of the
national system, which is based on measuring an individual's competence in
day-to-day tasks.
The review treads a careful path between endorsing NVQs and making radical
proposals for change.
Mr Dominic Cadbury, chairman of the CBI's education and training committee,
said: 'The overwhelming message of the report is one of widespread support
from employers for the NVQ system.
'Just because it contains so many recommendations for change, it should not
be taken as a negative document,' he said. 'Indeed, the reason why so many
recommendations are made is because employers want to see NVQs succeed.'
Recommendations in the report, which will be put out for consultation,
include:
Redesigning NVQs to increase their flexibility. This could be achieved quite
easily in many cases but could require substantial change in a number of
task-specific NVQs.
Expanding the policing role of the National Council for Vocational
Qualifications, the government-funded body that set up NVQs. This would give
it more responsibility for quality and marketing. Additional staff and
funding should be provided to enable this expansion to take place.
Marketing NVQs more effectively. The present marketing is seen by companies
as confused and ineffective with no central co-ordination, the CBI says.
Quality Assured. From CBI Publications, Centre Point, 103 New Oxford Street,
London, WC1A 1DU. Pounds 5 members or Pounds 10 non-members.
