FT  21 SEP 94 / IFC financing to double by 1999
The International Finance Corporation, the World Bank's private sector arm,
expects to double its financing in the next five or six years to Dollars 5bn
to keep pace with the rapid growth in emerging markets and the shift towards
private sector development.
According to its annual report released yesterday, it approved a record
Dollars 2.5bn in financing last year and increased its net income 82 per
cent to a record Dollars 258m (Pounds 166m).
'If you put together policy reform plus a vibrant private sector, the result
is a strong demand for financing in the developing countries. That means a
strong demand on the services of the IFC,' said Mr Jannik Lindbaek, the
executive vice president.
Last year's 15 per cent increase in financing helped to fund 231 projects
valued at Dollars 15.8bn. The projects ranged from farm privatisation in
Russia, to capital market development in Zambia, privatisation of
telecommunications systems in eastern Europe, investment in the first
leasing company in Romania, and the formation of private pension funds in
Peru and Argentina.
Past IFC projects have proved to be profitable investments. Sell-off of
mature investments last year produced Dollars 241m in capital gains.
The IFC has been placing increased emphasis on developing infrastructure,
where a quarter of financing went last year. However, its efforts in
infrastructure pall next to the need, which the World Bank Development
Report estimated at Dollars 200bn a year over the next decade.
To mobilise investment in infrastructure, the IFC is creating special
investment funds like the Asian Infrastructure Fund, which has a target of
Dollars 1bn. It has also stepped up its efforts to develop capital markets,
including setting up finance and leasing companies, commercial banks,
pension funds and life insurance companies.
According to Mr Lindbaek, this is 'for the long term the only acceptable
solution' to sustained development because 'domestic savings are then
channeled through domestic financial institutions into the project of the
country.'
The Dollars 579m in capital markets projects approved by the IFC last year
include four credit lines to commercial banks in Lebanon, investment in
Romania's first leasing company, and assistance in Vietnam and China for the
development of legal and regulatory frameworks in their capital markets.
Sub-Saharan Africa remains a big challenge for the IFC. and Mr Lindbaek
expects the agency to beef up efforts to set up small and medium enterprises
in the region.
