FT  16 APR 94 / Property: Frozen in a time warp - A look at the restoration
of an English mansion / Heritage
After nearly five years of preparation, work begins in earnest this spring
on saving the great half-built Victorian 'timewarp' mansion at Woodchester
Park in Gloucestershire.
However, in spite of the efforts of conservators and craftsmen, the vast
building, buried in woods in a valley near Nailsworth, will never achieve
its intended glory.
For the intention is to preserve the Gothic-revival style mansion as a
unique example of work-in-progress, rather than fulfil the grandiose
architectural ambitions of its builder, merchant William Leigh.
The grade I building is to remain 'frozen' in the state it was when the last
workmen left in 1870, leaving their scaffolding, ladders and some of their
tools behind in the forlorn hope that later generations of the Leigh family
would one day be able to afford to complete the task.
The legend is that, after the builders left, one of the family continued to
live in a completed room, surrounded by packing cases with the names of the
rooms for which the contents were destined.
But it never happened. Over the years the house became home to a colony of
rare Greater Horseshoe bats. These are housed in a section of the building
separated by an iron grill from visitors and fed by the bugs from cattle
dung - a herd is kept specifically for the purpose in the adjoining
parkland.
Formed in 1989, the Woodchester Mansion Trust has succeeded, with help from
the owners, Stroud district council and English Heritage, in carrying out
vital stabilisation and emergency repairs. This month (April 18 for two
weeks) sees the first small section of permanent restoration work.
Six masonry students from the City of Bath College will, under the guidance
of supervisor Gary Newton restore the first of six dormer windows that are
letting in water and badly in need of attention.
'Parts of the building are in remarkable condition considering it has been a
shell with a roof on for the past 124 years,' said stone mason Jamie Vans,
the trust member responsible for training the large number of specialist
craftsmen who will work on the project.
'However the architect, Benjamin Bucknall, a local man, used unlined stone
guttering and in places the rainwater system has failed catastrophically,
resulting in severe damage to whole sections of wall both inside and
outside.'
In other parts of the building the Cotswold stone slate roof has given way.
The chapel, with its soaring lines and graceful stone vaulting, is shored up
by massive timbers and will probably be one of the last sections of the
complex to be restored.
Later this year it is hoped to start work on the grand stair. 'It is a very
complicated and high-quality piece of Victorian stonework and will need
great care in the way it is restored.
The Getty Foundation has already given us Pounds 21,000 towards the work,
provided we can show them we are including training in traditional skills in
the restoration programme we are hopeful it will give us up to another
Pounds 140,000,' Vans said.
The total cost of restoring the mansion to its 1870 state has been estimated
at Pounds 3m and is likely to last well into the next century.
'Now we have our conservation master plan intact we hope to be able to make
real progress,' said Vans. 'But we are in no desperate hurry. It depends on
how fast we can raise money but above all we wish to do justice to an
extraordinary building in a magical site that has been described as one of
the greatest achievements of 19th century domestic English architecture.'
For information on the Woodchester Mansion Trust, conservation training
courses, and 1994 tours of the building contact the trust office, 1 The Old
Town Hall, High Street, Stroud, Gloucestershire GL5 1AP. Tel: 0453-750455.
