FT  05 APR 94 / London and Dublin give ceasefire short shrift
The British and Irish governments yesterday remained united in a rejection
of the three-day ceasefire which the IRA begins at midnight tonight to try
to win 'clarification' of the Downing Street peace declaration.
London and Dublin again criticised the short ceasefire as an inadequate
gesture and made clear their exasperation at the IRA's refusal to declare a
permanent end to violence, which they say could pave the way to lasting
peace.
The two governments hope their firm refusal to give any ground might
encourage the IRA to consider an extension of the ceasefire, though there
were no indications from the republican movement that such action is likely.
Republicans continued to insist that the next move must come from the
British government in the shape of an offer to open direct talks.
One Easter rally yesterday heard a warning that Britain could expect more
violence unless talks began.
Dublin, which has already provided Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA,
with clarification of parts of the Downing Street declaration, is making
clear that it will not put pressure on London to provide further
clarification.
Both governments have rejected suggestions that low-level talks might take
place with Sinn Fein during the ceasefire. But in the unlikely event that it
is extended beyond Friday, pressure to restart some form of contact would
soon mount.
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, who is on holiday, is being
kept abreast of developments, according to a government spokesman. But the
latest statements from Sinn Fein leaders at the weekend 'have not changed
the situation', he said.
In separate speeches made on Sunday in Belfast and Dublin to commemorate the
1916 Easter rising, Mr Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein president, and Mr Martin
McGuinness, a prominent member of Sinn Fein's national executive, called on
London to respond to the 'potential' offered by the ceasefire initiative.
Cardinal Cahal Daly, the Roman Catholic Primate of all Ireland, yesterday
added his weight to that pressure saying that a 'meaningful extension' of
the ceasefire would help encourage a 'constructive response' from the
British and Irish governments.
Such hopes appeared to fade after a warning delivered at a rally in County
Tyrone, Northern Ireland by two masked IRA men who said: 'The British will
be glad to get out of Ireland when our work is done.' They claimed the
republican movement in Tyrone had never been stronger, more united and
confident and said last month's mortar bombings at Heathrow airport had
'worked wonders' for morale.
Editorial Comment, Page 15
