FT  12 JUL 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: EU aims to short circuit
subsidy payment disputes
The European Commission has set up a new body to speed up settlement of
disputes with member governments about money being wasted through incorrect
payment of subsidies under the European Union's common agricultural policy.
The establishment of the five-man committee is seen as a serious effort by
the commission to address the practical problems of overspending on
agriculture - which accounts for about half the European Union's Ecu70bn
(Pounds 55bn) budget.
The group is to be chaired by Mr Jo Carey, a former UK Treasury official. He
will act as a mediator in disputes between the commission and EU member
states about how much agriculture spending individual countries should repay
to EU funds in cases where the commission thinks that they have not stuck to
spending rules.
Mr Carey is viewed as a robust, non-establishment figure and an such is
expected to bring a common sense approach to bear on difficult disputes. For
nine years until end of 1992 he was the UK's representative on the
Luxembourg-based Court of Auditors, the EU's main spending watchdog.
According to the commission, Mr Carey and his team will probably review
about 20 cases a year involving disputes over spending totalling more than
Ecu500m a year.
The other members of the group will be Mr Walter Kittel, a former official
in the German agriculture ministry; Mr Bernard Vial, a former inspector
general in the French agriculture ministry; Mr Albert Simantov, a Greek who
is former agriculture director at the Paris-based Organisation of Economic
Co-operation and Development, and Mr Sabatino Loreto, an Italian Treasury
official.
The type of cases Mr Carey will investigate will include disputes such as a
long-running argument between Italy and the commission over milk quotas and
allegations that Greece overspent by up to Ecu50m in 1991-92 through handing
out subsidies to cotton farmers.
The committee, which is schedule to start work in September, will be
part-time and its judgments will not be binding. However a commission
official said that he hoped the group would 'reduce the tensions' in
arguments over spending by bringing to bear outside judgments.
Commission officials also express that hope that establishment of the new
committee will give to those member states that complain about commission
judgments an alternative way to press their cases instead of going through
the lengthy procedure of bringing a case at the European Court of Justice.
