FT  18 OCT 94 / US to push for GM truck recall
The US transport secretary said yesterday he would push for a compulsory
recall of General Motors pick-up trucks with side-mounted fuel tanks in a
move that brings to a head a long-running dispute over the vehicles' safety.
Mr Robert Pena said research carried out by the National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration showed that about 150 people had died in crashes
involving the GM trucks as a result of the side-mounted tanks and that a
further 32 more lives were likely to be lost, based on past trends.
Critics of the trucks say they have a tendency to burst into flames when
involved in collisions from the side. GM has already refused a 1993 request
from the NHTSA for a voluntary withdrawal of the pick-up trucks, of which
around 9m were built between 1973 and 1987 and 4.5m are still on the roads.
In a potentially damaging rebuke of GM management, Mr Pena also said the
carmaker was aware of the alleged design flaw 'possibly as early as the
mid-1970s but certainly by the 1980s.' Despite this, the company 'chose not
to alter the design for 15 years', he said, adding that the GM management in
place at the time 'appears to have made a decision favouring sales over
safety'.
After 1987 GM redesigned the vehicle to locate the fuel tanks inside the
main frame.
GM responded angrily to Mr Pena's comments, claiming his verdict was
'totally unjustified'. It would fight a recall, if necessary in court, and
said 'the suggestion that GM puts sales ahead of safety is outrageous and
wrong'.
The announcement comes 18 months after the transport secretary took the
unusual step of intervening personally to review the case in the absence of
a full-time administrator of the NHTSA.
His decision sets the stage for public hearings on the matter on December 6,
after which a final view will be taken on whether to order a compulsory
recall.
Yesterday's announcement was the transport secretary's initial decision
having reviewed the evidence put to him by the NHTSA. He will take a final
decision based on evidence from interested parties at the public hearing.
The direct harm to GM from such a recall could be minimal, since the US
authorities' decision would only apply to vehicles made within the past
eight years. However, it would hand valuable ammunition to lawyers
attempting to extract settlements from the carmaker under product liability
suits.
Last year a federal court approved a settlement under which GM was to offer
discount vouchers to owners of the pick-up trucks, enabling them to buy new
GM trucks for Dollars 1,000 less than the list price. That agreement,
however, has since been thrown out by state courts in Texas and Georgia.
