FT  15 SEP 94 / London Stock Exchange: Shares fall heavily after August
inflation data - Market report
The UK stock market suffered its largest one-day drop for nearly four months
yesterday after an unexpected jump in the August retail price index raised
concern that this week's rise in base rates might soon be followed by
another. Led by selling from the futures markets, the FT-SE 100-share Index
fell 41.6 points, breaking through an important support level, to finish at
3,079.8.
The 0.5 per cent rise in headline inflation in August was worse than
expected and served to explain the factors behind Monday's  1/2 percentage
point increase in Bank of England lending rate - one agency reporting that
Treasury ministers had seen the preliminary headline figures last week.
Average earnings statistics remained steady but a dip in the August
unemployment rate was seen as indicating strengthening economic recovery.
Equities opened firmly, benefiting from overnight strength on Wall Street,
but were quickly overwhelmed by the RPI figures and the consequent setback
in UK government bonds. Attempts to rally proved unsuccessful and the
Footsie was already down by 41 points at midsession.
The mood was not helped in the afternoon by negative comments on German
interest rate prospects from the deputy president of the Bundesbank, ahead
of today's meeting of the central bank's policy committee; a survey of
analysts voted heavily against the likelihood of a rate cut today by the
Bundesbank.
The Footsie teetered on the 3,080 mark for some time, as UK equity chartists
warned that a move below this level would leave the index vulnerable down to
3,050 and then, perhaps, all the way to 2,970. But the late afternoon saw
further weakness, with the September futures contract on the Footsie traded
down to 3,067.
London paid no heed to the New York market, where the Dow Industrial Average
was two points off in UK hours following the announcement of the latest US
wholesale price statistics.
Although trading volume was not greatly different from recent daily levels,
there was no doubting the waves of red on the trading screens as
marketmakers lowered their prices in the face of determined selling. At
least one large selling programme was identified, said to be from a London
trading house noted for its astute dealing instincts.
The setback spared no sectors of the market. The FT-SE Mid 250 Index, taking
in a range of non-Footsie stocks, dropped by 50.7 points to 3,628.4. There
were substantial losses among the consumer and leisure stocks. Building and
construction shares suffered more modest losses, but only because they had
already reacted sharply when base rates were raised at the beginning of the
week.
Bank shares reacted badly to worries that their customers might slide back
into the bad debtor category if domestic interest rates continue to rise.
Even the utility sectors, which have been seen as defensive areas in a
nervous market, proved unable to resist the general trend.
The speed of the market's reaction restrained the would-be sellers, who saw
prices tumbling before they could reach their telephones. The day's Seaq
total declined to 539.6m shares from the 587.2m recorded on Tuesday, when
retail business was worth Pounds 1.16bn.
The stock market went home in a thoroughly chastened mood, with traders
awaiting the further economic data due this week from both sides of the
Atlantic. Today brings the UK retail sales figures for last month, which
analysts believe will show a slowdown from the 0.4 per cent growth of the
preceding month.
The latest UK Public Sector Borrowing estimates are due tomorrow, when
markets also face the August production figures from the US.
