FT  10 FEB 94 / Technology: Hotline to a happy ending - How a tapeless
answering machine saved a company
British Telecom began selling its first solid state telephone answering
machine last December. Messages are recorded on microchip rather than on
tape, making it quicker to retrieve them and play them back, with clearer,
digital sound.
The Response 120, as BT calls it, is not the world's first tapeless
answering machine. But it is the first answering machine designed and built
in Britain, and it comes from a tiny company which employs only 10 people.
Furthermore, the machine has a remarkably elegant interior. Whereas the
first tapeless machines contained up to four printed circuit boards studded
with components, the Response 120 has just one board, measuring 12 cm by 14
cm. It is combined with a telephone in a casing similar to one of BT's
standard domestic telephones, the Relate.
BT, which controls about half the UK answering machine market through its
sales and rentals, believes the Response 120 will be a success and expects
to sell 120,000 of them a year at Pounds 69 each.
The story of the Response 120 is a positive one. It was designed by
Cairntech, based at Inverkeithing, Fife, and manufactured under contract in
nearby Glenrothes by Hughes Microelectronics of the US. In March 1992,
Timothy Laing, a former army officer who owns 95 per cent of Cairntech,
warned his staff that the business would have to close by June if it did not
win another good contract. Over the years it had lost Pounds 2m making
specialised telecommunications equipment.
But he also asked his four-strong technical team why no one had solid state
answering machines. Within two weeks the company drew up a specification.
Because it had already dealt with BT it was able, unlike some small
manufacturers, to take it direct to the telecommunications company.
'For a minute the man at BT didn't speak,' says Laing. 'Then he said our
specification was almost exactly the same as one they were about to put out
to tender. We were told to keep in touch.' In mid-June 1992, BT issued the
tender and Cairntech had two weeks to meet BT's design specification and
cost the manufacture of 100,000 machines a year. Laing obtained a
competitive quote for making the product from GEC Marconi in nearby Dalgety
Bay.
BT evidently liked what Cairntech was offering: its machine would have a
pre-recorded outgoing message ('a lot of answering machine owners forget to
record one and then can't understand why no one leaves any messages,' says
Laing) and a default setting on the volume control that guaranteed messages
would be audible ('many people set the volume too low'). BT was struck by
the quality of Cairntech's digital sound, Laing says.
By October, BT had visited Cairntech and was close to signing a contract.
Then GEC pulled out of manufacturing the machine. A furious Laing got
through to Lord Weinstock, GEC's managing director, who told him it was not
possible to manufacture telephones competitively in the UK.
As a small company with a poor financial record, Cairntech had difficulty in
being listened to by several of the big electronics manufacturers based in
Scotland. Eventually Laing chose Hughes.
BT signed a contract with Cairntech in November 1992 and the product went on
sale 13 months afterwards, one month late. Hughes assembles the printed
circuit boards, installing components imported from east Asia and loading
Cairntech's software, putting the finished boards into plastic mouldings
made in Kent.
Laing believes BT preferred Cairntech to rival east Asian suppliers because
it offered more features and superior voice quality.
However, the extra features, plus the fact that the product was originally
costed when sterling was at Dollars 1.90, will mean that The Phone Box, the
subsidiary Cairntech set up to handle the new product, will make only a very
small profit on the Response 120.
The initial order for the machine is worth Pounds 10m. Demand is forecast at
120,000 units a year over the 2 1/2 -year life of the product. For the
company, monthly turnover should rise sharply from around Pounds 20,000 to
Pounds 700,000.
Might other UK companies have had the same success? Cairntech had the
advantage of employing a specialist in telecommunications electronics, a
relatively rare breed in the industry, according to Laing. It benefited from
the flexibility and commitment of a small company, and was fortunate in
having contacts with BT. It also had good luck.
