FT  19 OCT 94 / International Company News: Experience gives ambitious TPI
an edge - Thai Petrochemical's expansion is seen as a shrewd move
Anyone criticising Thai Petrochemical Industry for being over ambitious with
plans, announced this month, to expand in chemicals, risks receiving a sharp
reminder from the company, or from repentant stockbrokers, about TPI's
experience in the cement industry.
When TPI Polene (TPIPL), the listed TPI subsidiary, broke into the cement
oligopoly dominated by Siam Cement two years ago there was much talk of
oversupply and bad timing.
'Now they are seen to be shrewd,' admits one Bangkok broker. Demand for
cement has been strong and TPIPL has turned in handsome profits. A second
cement plant is set to double the company's capacity to 5m tonnes a year.
'It's been a success for us,' says Mr Prachai Leophairatana, the TPI chief
executive whose ethnic Chinese family controls the group. 'We have 10 per
cent of the cement market. Next year it will be 15 per cent and in three
years, 20 per cent.'
TPI's latest proposal is to invest Bt40bn (Dollars 1.6bn) during the next
few years in expanding its petrochemical complex in Rayong, south of
Bangkok. The company is already the country's biggest producer of the
plastics used in a range of consumer and industrial products from bottles to
car parts.
Planned investments include an oil refinery - Thailand's sixth, with initial
capacity of 60,000 barrels a day, rising eventually to 300,000 b/d - an
olefins plant to supply raw materials for TPI's downstream plastic
production, and several other projects designed to make TPI the country's
first integrated petrochemical producer. TPI even intends to open its own
petrol stations.
Projects already under way include a doubling of low density polyethylene
(LDPE) production to 150,000 tonnes a year, and a 108MW power station that
will provide 40MW of electricity to the petrochemicals complex and sell the
surplus to the Thai grid. Mr Prachai says both are due on stream at the end
of the year.
To help finance further expansion, the Leophairatana family plans to float
TPI on the Stock Exchange of Thailand later this year. They expect to raise
about Dollars 450m by selling 12 per cent of the company, which they say has
an annual turnover of about Dollars 1bn.
The TPI group says it was hit by low world plastic prices and barely made a
profit last year, but it anticipates a firmer market for its products -
one-third of which are exported - in the next few years.
'The timing of TPI's expansion is particularly beneficial as it coincides
with the beginning of the cyclical upturn in world plastic prices,' Mr
Prachai said recently.
Much will depend on whether TPI can bring its new capacity into operation
quick enough to take advantage of the upturn.
The planned olefins plant for ethylene and propylene feedstock will be
crucial. At present TPI buys one-fifth of its requirements locally, but has
to import the rest and pay heavily for transport to Thailand by refrigerated
tanker - which is a substantial proportion of the total cost.
'If we set up by ourselves we should save at least Dollars 150 a tonne,'
says Mr Prachai.
The transport cost of crude oil for the planned refinery, which would in
turn feed the olefins plant, would be relatively modest. The olefins plant
would produce 300,000-500,000 tonnes a year of ethylene and 160,000-250,000
tonnes of propylene.
Stockbrokers are bullish about TPIPL, which controls the cement and LDPE
interests, and admire the proven determination of Mr Prachai to bring his
schemes to fruition.
They say the flotation of the TPI parent is likely to be boosted by local
enthusiasm for oil and oil-related stocks - a new sector on the Thai stock
exchange following recent partial privatisations of several state companies,
including olefins producer National Petrochemical (NPC).
But it is doubtful that TPI and other Thai petrochemicals producers could
survive global competition without the tariff protection they enjoy in the
Thai home market.
Mr Prachai is critical of the way tariffs in the Association of South East
Asian Nations are to be reduced under the Asian Free Trade Area. He favours
protection for Thailand for the time being:
'If you want the country to flourish, you have to protect it,' he says. But
he is hostile towards Indonesian, Malaysian and Singaporean attempts to
promote their own petrochemical industries.
Mr George Morgan, of stockbrokers HG Asia in Bangkok, believes that TPI's
expansion 'does reflect the need of Thailand to move into higher value-added
industries; but the disadvantage is that they don't have oil or a large
amount of gas'.
