FT  26 FEB 94 / The Long View: Trimming the hedges
Speculation, my old textbook told me, was a good thing, in moderation. It
lubricated the market and helped provide the liquidity which enabled
long-term users of markets to move in and out. Sometimes, though, the
gambling gets out of hand.
This week we have seen the powerful impact of the unwinding of speculative
positions in the global securities markets. Bond prices have been tumbling -
the long gilt yield has soared from 6.5 to 7.3 per cent since the start of
the year - and London's FT-SE 100 Index took a dramatic 74-point dive on
Thursday.
Such corrections generate all sorts of rationalisations. People argue that
expectations about inflation have worsened, or that fears of rising
short-term interest rates upset sentiment.
Ostensibly the trigger for all the damage of the past few weeks - which has
seen Hong Kong's Hang Seng index tumble by 15 per cent from its peak, for
instance, has been a modest quarter-point rise in dollar short-term interest
rates. But what we are actually seeing is a reversal in which the markets
are moving back to levels at which prices will again be set essentially by
long-term investors.
A clue to the nature of recent events can be discerned in the role of
derivatives. The biggest movements in the London stock market this week have
been seen in the blue chips which make up the Footsie Index, which in turn
is the basis of the Liffe futures contracts. Small capitalisation shares, in
which there is no derivatives-based trading, have remained comparatively
stable - although their prices are inherently more volatile because of poor
liquidity.
Another clue is that different kinds of securities have been tumbling in
price together. On Thursday, for instance, long-dated fixed interest gilts
and index-linked gilts were tailing sharply, just like equities. What has
been happening is not a reappraisal of prospects for economic growth or
inflation but an upward shift in real interest rates.
This is the most fundamental of all measures of the return to investors, and
it appears that so far there has been a rise of nearly half a percentage
point in the real long-term interest rate since the end of 1993. Last year
this rate declined, despite the surge in government and other borrowing
around the world which might have been expected to lead to a shortage of
savings.
Essentially what happened in the second half of last year was that large
inputs of speculative money entered the international securities markets.
Some of this was reflected in the banking statistics in the US and the UK,
which showed a sharp increase in lending to securities firms and investment
banks.
I have written before about the activities of US banks in making big profits
out of the spread between 3 per cent money market deposits and bond yields
of 5 or 6 per cent. An increasing role has also been played by the so-called
hedge funds, of which the most famous is George Soros's Quantum Fund (which
was this week reported to have lost Dollars 600m: on the recent unexpected
jump in the yen against the dollar).
The name 'hedge funds' is something of a misnomer. It certainly does not
mean that they hedge their risks. Today's hedge funds are the ultimate in
speculative offshore vehicles, ready to trade on any kind of financial
market, and often in commodities as well, and prepared to leverage the risks
and returns by taking on positions which are several times as large as their
underlying capital.
Hedge fund managers receive hefty performance-related fees, often of
something like a basic 2 per cent of funds managed, topped up with 20 per
cent of any gains over a modest benchmark rate of return. There is thus a
strong temptation to go for broke, because the managers can earn millions if
their geared-up gambles pay off. If things go wrong investors can lose
everything but managers only lose their jobs.
Operators like Soros have been playing this game for years but the talk
recently has been of the establishment of several new hedge funds. Last year
the profits were generally spectacular as markets around the globe trended
higher, with a particular surge in the final quarter as new money piled in,
The trouble is there are no statistics which might shed reliable light on
the volume of this kind of speculative money (although Fortune magazine this
week estimated that the worldwide total value of all kinds of derivative
contracts is about Dollars 16,000bn). Risks arising from major shifts or
even panics can only be guessed at.
The activities of aggressive players on this kind of scale can lead to a
kind of feedback - which Soros, an intellectual among speculators, has
dubbed reflexivity. Rising markets suck in still more money until the bubble
bursts; new hedge funds can find backers in these circumstances. The biggest
of all these bubbles in terms of capital committed - although by no means in
terms of size of capital gains - appears to have been in US Treasury bonds.
Prices peaked out as long ago as last October, since when the interest rate
on long-dated dollar bonds has risen by almost a full percentage point. The
game subsequently shifted to European bonds, but this gamble is now coming
to grief as well.
Naturally the market is buzzing with scare stories about the size of the
losses suffered by some of the hedge funds and banks. The motive of Quantum
Fund in disclosing a figure appears to have been to counteract some of the
wilder rumours. There is no way of knowing how long the sell-off will
continue. But in the bond markets, at least, yields have now climbed to
levels at which long-term investors are going to start absorbing the paper
being dropped by the short-term players. I would not be so confident about
UK equities; the average dividend yield on UK equities offers too small a
margin over the 3.3 per cent real yield on index-linked gilts.
There is trouble when speculation produces not liquidity, as in my textbook,
but liquidation.
