FT  03 OCT 94 / Media Futures: Magic market for Microsoft - The world's
biggest software company has a mission to 'edutain'
Bernard Vergnes, president of Microsoft Europe, describes his ambitions in
multimedia carefully. Without wanting to appear arrogant, he says, he wants
to be the leading supplier of educational and other programmes  - sometimes
known as 'edutainment' - published on CD-Rom. These are the building bricks
of the multimedia revolution.
Microsoft, the world's largest software company, helped pioneer the genre in
1992 with Musical Instruments, a CD-Rom ideally suited to demonstrating the
combination of text, video and quality sound which characterises multimedia
presentations.
Today, Musical Instruments still impresses but looks dated compared with
newer offerings such as The Magic School Bus, a series to be released
shortly. It is said to be Microsoft president Bill Gates's current
favourite, and features a yellow US school bus with driver and passengers
which can be shrunk to navigate through the digestive system in The Human
Body or the cosmos in The Solar System. Microsoft's best-selling Dinosaurs
of 18 months ago included five moving video clips; Dangerous Creatures, a
new release, has more than 100.
Vergnes, who has worked for Microsoft since 1983 and has been its European
president since 1990, believes that the domestic market for CD-Rom is about
to expand rapidly, especially in Europe. He reckons that personal computers
equipped for multimedia will reach the 'magic price' this Christmas at which
substantial domestic sales can be expected.
He defines that price as just below Pounds 1,000 in Britain or FFr10,000 in
France. For this, customers will get a PC built around a high-performance
Intel 486 or 'Pentium' chip with 16 megabytes of fast memory and a
300-megabyte hard disc together with a CD-Rom player and sound capabilities.
In France, he says, some 25 per cent of PC sales are now through
supermarkets. Carrefour, the large French chain, is marketing its own range
of five models, some of which can handle multimedia.
Microsoft is taking the home market seriously. It has some 500-600 people,
including educationists, psychologists and software specialists, in its
consumer group, and is spending just under Dollars 100m a year on developing
new titles. Sales are about Dollars 300m a year.
In total, Microsoft spends about Dollars 600m on research and development,
most of it on software, which brings a much greater financial return. 'We
are over-investing for the future in these areas,' says Vergnes.
Success in consumer markets is critical to Microsoft's plans. Its worldwide
sales - Dollars 4.7bn (Pounds 2.97bn) last year - comprise desktop
applications, PC operating systems, word processors, spreadsheets and
database managers. Revenue growth last year was 24 per cent.
However, Vergnes admits that 'the traditional PC software market will not
grow forever. One day, probably sooner rather than later, most desktops in
developed countries will have a PC with a complete suite of business
programs'.
The company plans to reach sales of Dollars 8bn by 1995-96, but Vergnes says
the extra Dollars 3bn will not come entirely from desktop applications.
'Unless we make at least Dollars 1bn from consumer products, we shall not
achieve our target.'
He is encouraged by research showing that each professional PC installed
leads to purchases of - on average - five software packages during its life.
But up to 15 purchases of software a year can be expected for domestic PCs
if the price is right. The consumer software division is turning out three
new titles a month.
The competition is not sitting idle. Microsoft's principal competitors,
Lotus Development Corporation and Novell, have their own consumer products
divisions. Recently Novell, the market leader in networking, announced a
series of home education CD-Roms focusing on reading, writing and
arithmetic.
Microsoft's ambitions in multimedia, however, range across the board. It is
spending about Dollars 120m a year on software for the digital superhighway
through its advanced consumer technology research group, an elite operation
headed by chief technologist Nathan Myhrvold and reporting directly to Bill
Gates.
Microsoft interprets the highway as an electronic pipeline into each home
able to convey an almost limitless stream of information. Database computers
or servers provide the data which is unscrambled by a black box on top of
the television set. Earlier this year Myhrvold's group announced 'Tiger':
video server software which Microsoft says is the first phase of a complex,
interactive video system.
It runs on conventional personal computers. According to Vergnes: 'We
believe that traditional PC technology will develop fast enough so that we
can build these servers from inexpensive hardware. We can share the
processing load between the network server and the set-top box which, after
all, is only a powerful personal computer.'
There is, thus, a close similarity between Microsoft's model of the
information superhighways and the modern data-processing concept of
client-server computing where server computers provide data to a network of
PCs.
Microsoft's latest operating software, Windows NT, is intended to manage
client-server networks. Indeed, Vergnes believes that business will be first
to find applications for the information superhighway, with domestic
applications following later.
He echoes Bill Gates's complaints that most multimedia trials involve only
video-on-demand (VOD) - the ability to call a video of choice to the TV
screen. While technically complex, he does not believe that VOD is a true
test of demand for multimedia services.
In consequence, Microsoft's own trials - to be held with the US company TCI
in Denver and Seattle next year - will be sophisticated and involve a range
of services. Example: Vergnes envisages an education forum where teachers
from a broad range of schools and colleges could exchange views and
experience.
