FT  09 MAY 94 / Ideals of Hungary right spurned: Chrystia Freeland and
Nicholas Denton explain socialists' poll success
Hungarians joke that the right has achieved in four years what the
communists failed to pull off in 40: Make socialism popular.
On one level, the socialist revival is part of a wider eastern European
tendency. Like their neighbours in Poland and Lithuania, Hungarian voters
are venting their bitterness at the pain of the transition from communism to
a market economy by rejecting the parties which ushered in the change in
1990.
'Partly, it is a general eastern European phenomenon,' explained Mr Ivan
Lipovecz, editor of hvg, Hungary's influential political and business
weekly. 'The first reform generation has to be punished for the prosperity
which the economic transition has not yet produced.'
But in Hungary, voters also appear to be rejecting the conservatives' vision
of Hungary's future, which bears a resemblance to the inter-war past. The
ruling conservative coalition of the Hungarian Democratic Forum and the
Christian Democrats has tried to make the sharpest break with the past -
even pursuing 'war crimes' trials of those who crushed the 1956 uprising -
of any post-communist government in the region.
'The government has tried to create an atavistic Hungary,' says Mr Viktor
Polgar, who, as campaign manager for the socialists in Budapest expects to
profit handsomely from the electorate's lack of enthusiasm for this effort.
'But history is what it is - history. You cannot recreate the past.'
Alongside the effort to bring back the halcyon inter-war past, Hungary's
ruling conservatives have sought to wipe out all traces of the communist
period. 'It is partly each individual's own past which is being dragged in
the mud and I think many voters are reacting against that,' said Mr Andras
Simor, managing director of Creditanstalt Securities, the Hungarian branch
of the Austrian investment bank.
In its efforts to remould the Hungarian nation in its own image, the
government has tried to use the media to reshape the national soul. The
government has purged suspected left-wingers, recently sacking 129 radio
journalists, among them prominent broadcasters, and the conservatives at the
television station have done the government's negative campaigning for it.
But the crude pro-government propaganda has backfired, alienating many
voters, who had their fill of media distortion under the communist regime.
Moreover, attacks against liberals and leftists in the media have distracted
the government from the economic issues on which the election hinges.
Lack of attention to economic issues has reinforced the conservatives' image
as a collection of historians, poets and writers who should stick to their
original professions.
The irony is that it is the conservatives who are paying the political price
of the pain of economic transition, and the socialists, who were responsible
for the communist system in the first place, who could reap the political
benefits of the market-driven economic recovery which has already begun.
The conservatives were out of power for a generation; they may have
condemned themselves to another long spell in the wilderness.
