FT  07 DEC 94 / World Trade News: Scania plans attack on Renault's
domination of French bus sales
Scania, the Swedish commercial vehicle maker, is to start assembly of buses
at its plant at Angers in western France.
It is also raising truck output at the plant, which was opened in 1992 as
the group's third European truck assembly facility, to meet rising demand in
Europe.
Mr Bengt Klingberg, president of Scania Production Angers, said truck
assembly in France had risen from 7 units a day last January to 25 units a
day now. In that time the workforce had doubled to 400.
Production would be raised to 34 trucks a day by April with an increase in
the labour force to 485 as the plant reached its full single shift capacity
of more than 7,000 trucks a year.
The move to begin bus assembly in Angers is part of the group's strategy for
expanding its share of the west European heavy bus and coach market from 6
per cent at present to 10 per cent by the end of the decade.
In France it is seeking to weaken the domination of the market by Renault,
the French state-owned car and commercial vehicle maker, and Heuliez, its
bus-making affiliate.
Mr Arne Karlsson, head of Scania Buses &amp; Coaches, said the company planned
to begin bus production in Angers in the second half of 1996. It would
produce a range of city and inter-city buses with capacity planned to rise
to around 300 a year by the end of the 1990s. The project will create around
250 jobs at full production.
Mr Karlsson said the move signalled Scania's increased interest in the
French market. The ability to offer locally built products would provide 'a
major competitive edge' over European rivals importing buses into France.
France has a total market of around 3,000 city, route, and tourist buses and
coaches a year, of which more than 75 per cent are supplied by domestic
manufacturers. Around two-thirds of the market are city and route buses.
The bus industry in Europe is going through a period of far-reaching
restructuring with several of the leading truck and bus chassis makers such
as Mercedes-Benz, Volvo and Scania moving to take over small bus and coach
body builders in a sector which has been highly fragmented.
Earlier this year Scania, the world's fifth largest manufacturer of
heavy-duty buses and coaches, acquired DAB-Silkeborg, the Danish bus
manufacturer, with an annual capacity for 300 buses. It has also entered
joint ventures to assemble buses in Poland, Russia and Estonia.
Mr Karlsson said the restructuring in the bus industry would 'continue for
some time yet'. He warned that there was a large number of coachbuilders in
particular in southern Europe, that 'may run into trouble' because of new
market requirements and more stringent legislation.
