FT  21 NOV 94 / Leading Article: Rare species
It is possible that, within years, tigers could become extinct. The
conference to update the Cites convention on endangered species, which
concluded this weekend in Florida, made that clear. Would extinction matter?
On one view, it might not: the loss would pose no immediate threat to human
health or wealth.
But on several counts, it is worth putting effort into saving rare species.
In western eyes, tigers, elephants, whales and the like are romantic beasts,
whose existence is valued even by those who never see a live specimen. For
local communities, the animals can add greatly to tourism revenues. For all
countries, the animals represent a pool of genes which has potential value.
What is the best means of saving these species? The threats they face are
poachers who want to sell tusks, hides and meat for profit, farmers who
resent the damage they do, and the steady encroachment of human societies
into wild habitats.
The essence of the task is to give people an economic incentive to keep the
animals' numbers at sustainable levels. But there are two particular
problems. One is that, as some east and central African countries have
found, the benefits of the live animals, through tourism, generally go to
the government and companies, while the value of dead animals is received by
poachers and farmers. Governments have found it hard to redistribute the
benefits of tourism at a local level.
Second, demand for products such as rhino horn, driven largely by Asian
markets, has not yet been checked by rising prices. Given the disparity
between Asian wealth and African poverty, it is possible that species would
be extinct before prices rose by enough to choke demand.
One solution is simply to improve enforcement of national rules against
killing animals. South Africa, which devotes considerable resources to
protecting its wildlife, has found numbers of elephant and white rhino
growing rapidly, even though it allows limited domestic trade in ivory.
But that requires funds which are beyond the resources of poorer countries.
One of the best arguments for maintaining an international ban against trade
in products of endangered species is that it makes guarding the animals
easier and cheaper even for the poorest states. The Worldwide Fund for
Nature estimates that the budgets for protecting elephants have dropped by
nearly 90 per cent in Zimbabwe, Zambia and Tanzania since the worldwide ban
on ivory trade in 1989
A third device is to reduce demand for the products. Environmental groups
argue that since the start of the ivory ban, the price of ivory has fallen -
where it can be obtained - while the price of rhino horn has increased. That
is, they say, partly because the main markets for ivory were in western
countries which have enforced tough import controls on ivory. Meanwhile,
western public opinion has turned against ivory,
There is no single solution to the problem of supporting rare species. But
the Cites conference was right to uphold the ban on elephant and white rhino
products, as one of several mechanisms. The next useful step would be to
increase pressure on those governments which have so far taken a relaxed
attitude towards import of banned products.
