FT  15 DEC 94 / Manufacturers report record labour costs fall
Manufacturers recorded their sharpest fall in unit labour costs in October
since records began in 1970, figures released yesterday by the Department of
Employment showed.
The improvement in competitiveness has flowed from productivity gains
outstripping the pace of earnings increases.
Manufacturing output per head was 6.5 per cent higher in the three months to
October than in the same period of 1993. Output has been growing rapidly,
helped by buoyant export demand, while manufacturing employment has been
largely flat.
Meanwhile, average earnings in the manufacturing sector rose by an
underlying 4.75 per cent in the year to October. This followed an upward
revision in the September figure from 4.5 per cent to 4.75 per cent.
The net effect was that manufacturing wages and salaries per unit of output
were 1.7 per cent lower in the three months to October than in the same
period of 1993. In September, the fall was 1.5 per cent.
The increase in manufacturing earnings bumped up the whole economy earnings
annual growth rate to 4 per cent in October from 3.75 per cent in September.
Production and service sector earnings rose at unchanged rates of 4.5 per
cent and 3.5 per cent respectively.
Underlying earnings figures are calculated using a three-month rolling
average, and this helped push up the October annual rate, despite the fact
that the sector increases were unchanged from September. The seasonally
adjusted annual rise showed a fall to 3.8 per cent in October from 3.9 per
cent in September.
The Department of Employment said that overtime and bonus payments, rather
than a general rise in the level of pay settlements, prompted the pick-up in
the October average earnings figures. However, a number of higher
settlements will feed through into the November figures.
Mr Chris Trinder, chief economist at the Chartered Institute of Public
Finance and Accountancy, said there were substantial discrepancies between
the average earnings figures and other official information on pay.
National accounts figures from the Central Statistical Office indicated a
level of pay growth nearer to 3 per cent than 4 per cent.
