FT  07 FEB 94 / Survey of Emerging Markets (25): Continent of hazard and
opportunity - Africa
Which of the world's emerging markets can boast an investment fund where a
Dollars 1,000 stake a year ago has risen to nearly Dollars 1,500?
Surprisingly, the answer is Africa. Even more surprising, the country
concerned is Nigeria, where the economic reform programme has collapsed  -
but a shrewd purchase of Nigerian debt is paying off for investors.
The New York-based International Asset Transactions decided in 1992 that
Nigerian promissory notes (issued in the mid 1980s to clear Dollars 4.2bn in
trade arrears) and par bonds (which discounted commercial bank debt at 40
cents to the dollar in a 1991 settlement with the London Club) were
underpriced.
Gus Udo and Donna Young of IAT noted that servicing these deals cost Nigeria
comparatively little - around 14 days a year of the country's 1.4m-barrel
daily production of oil. They reckoned that no sensible government would
alienate the banks and the trading houses by defaulting on the terms of the
two settlements.
So, in January 1993 they launched the Nigeria Emerging Market Fund, an
open-end mutual fund registered in the Cayman Islands, with about two thirds
in Nigeria Central Bank promissory notes and most of the balance in Brady
par bonds. The results have been remarkable.
Behind the general view that Africa's debt instruments are generally
undervalued lies a fundamental reappraisal of the continent's prospects.
'Africa is poised for growth,' declares Morgan Stanley, which has launched a
Dollars 40m Africa Investment Fund. Its bullish 50 - page appraisal of the
continent argues that the economic and political reforms under way for the
best part of a decade are coming good. Prices for the region's exports such
as cocoa, coffee, gold are recovering, and industrial metals are bottoming.
Africa, argues the report, which includes a useful guide to the dozen stock
markets operating and the 20 others being developed, 'harbours undervalued
assets, particularly in the natural resource and manufacturing sectors'.
'Where stock markets are up and running,' says Morgan Stanley, 'investors
can find attractively priced issues, both on a price-earnings and
price-to-book basis.'
By international standards the African market - excluding South Africa,
which ranks just outside the world's top 10 - is tiny. Its exchanges have a
combined market capitalisation of around Dollars 12bn compared to India's
Dollars 91bn.
Nevertheless, the belief in the resurgence of Africa's fortunes, led by
hopes for a thriving post apartheid South Africa, has caught the imagination
of international fund managers.
Mr Miles Morland, of London-based Blakeney Management, calculates that at
least Dollars 3bn of foreign money is being targeted at South Africa and a
further Dollars 1bn at the rest of Africa in 1994: 'Peanuts in Mexico or
Hong Kong, but they are liable to blow the African market apart at the
seams.'
The total amount of stock available in the whole of Africa (excluding South
Africa) is about Dollars 2.2bn, he reckons: 'If almost half of this turns
over in 1994, a huge increase on the 1993 levels, there will still only be
Dollars 1bn of African equities to be fought over by local investors, global
investors and all the new Africa funds.'
The continent's heavyweight is South Africa. With a market capitalisation of
some Dollars 150bn, South Africa is not so much an emerging market but a
re-emerging market, comments Nigel Scheckter of Micropal, the Boston-based
fund performance measurement service, which monitors 26,000 funds.
But 'the true float is tiny relative to the wave of US guilt money that will
elbow its way into the market this year,' says Mr Morland.
Foreign buyers have already made their mark on Diagonal Street. Figures
supplied by Baring Securities show that for the foreign investor, who
benefited from a 13.3 per cent strengthing in the financial rand, the
investment currency for overseas investors, the overall index rose by 63.4
per cent, the gold index by 184.1 per cent and the industrial index by 41
per cent.
'The market is the best one-way ticket I can think of, barring the 20 per
cent bloodbath prospect' - a reference to fears that the April elections may
trigger destabilising violence.
Elsewhere, Mr Morland singles out Ghana, a tiny market but likely to grow
rapidly as the privatisation programme led by Ashanti Gold moves ahead,
Zimbabwe, where foreign buying in the second half of 1993 helped more than
double the industrial index, Morocco and Tunisia.
Is the excitement warranted, are the risks appreciated, and how well do the
analysts know Africa?
Morgan Stanley's upbeat view of the continent does not overlook the problems
 -pointing among other things to weak management, and what it calls Africa's
'fear and distrust of foreign business influence'.
But the overall picture that emerges may strike some readers as too rosy.
The assertion that 'tribal tension in most of black Africa is probably less
of a problem than racial tension in the US' may simply be an unorthodox
view. More serious is the assertion that 28 of Africa's 50 states 'have
economic reform programmes in place'.
This list is based, says Morgan Stanley, on World Bank evaluations - not
always, it should be said, the best judge of its own reform efforts.
Some examples of reform listed by Morgan Stanley are risible - such as
Zaire, where the political and economic malaise deepens by the day.
Also on the list is Burundi, where the recent coup (which took place after
the report's publication) illustrates the volatility of the African
condition. The inclusion of Sao Tome, little more than a dot in the ocean,
trivialises the list.
Nigeria - 'a powerhouse waiting to happen', according to Morgan Stanley -
'perseveres with its structural adjustment programme, launched in 1986',
writes the analyst.
At the time the report was published (October 1993) it was clear that
Nigeria's erratic attempt to implement the programme was the reason an IMF
agreement lapsed some two years ago.
Any hopes that Nigeria's military regime would revive the lapsed programme
were set back last month, when it fixed the exchange rate and local interest
rates at unrealistic levels.
Africa's performance in general has been weak. As Professor Tony Hawkins of
the University of Zimbabwe writes in a recent paper: 'More than a dozen
years after the launch of aid-funded structural adjustment programmes, it is
impossible to identify a single mainland sub-Saharan country that has made a
success of economic reform.'
'The best that can be said,' he continues, 'is that in countries such as
Ghana and Uganda, the spiral of decline has been reversed, but it will take
well into the next century before earlier living standards are regained.'
A somewhat tougher investment appraisal comes from the Meridien BIAO group
which runs a network of banks in 20 countries across Africa, led by Andrew
Sardanis and Colin Goodwin, two veteran Africa hands.
The investment climate is improving, says Colin Goodwin, president of the
group, 'but by nothing like enough.
'Investment through individual African stock exchanges is not the best route
for the emerging market fund,' he adds, 'as these exchanges are still too
small and surrounded by too many restrictions'.
The response of Africans with resources abroad may well prove the acid test
of whether an African investment makes sense: if the continent's
politicians, businessmen, civil servants are not risking their capital,
foreign investors may suspect that Africa's elite knows something they do
not.
*Africa: Wrestling with the stigma of history. Morgan Stanley, 1251 Avenue
of the Americas, New York, New York 10020 Tel: (212) 703 1000.
