FT  10 JUN 94 / UK Company News: Gt Southern faces Pounds 87m bid from US
Service Corporation International, the largest operator of funeral homes and
cemeteries in the US, has set its sights on the UK, through an Pounds 87m
takeover bid for Great Southern Group.
SCI, which buries one in nine people in the US, has already expanded into
Canada and Australia and it is now attempting its first foray into the UK.
Great Southern, the third largest funeral director in the UK, look set to
reject the bid. Mr Barry Field, a director, described the bid as 'totally
unacceptable'.
Mr Field is chairman of JD Field, which controls 56 per cent of Great
Southern's shares. If his decision stands, it will be almost impossible for
the current bid to succeed.
Mr Bill Heiligbrodt, SCI's president and chief operating officer, said his
company was offering a high price for a business, which it intended to use
as a springboard for aggressive expansion into the highly fragmented UK
funerals market.
'My job is to become the biggest and most successful player in every market
where I operate', said Mr Heiligbrodt. But he was adamant that SCI had no
intention of changing the face of British burials. 'We want to maintain UK
traditions,' he said.
The SCI offer was pitched 26 per cent above Wednesday's closing share price,
but the board of Great Southern urged shareholders 'not to take any action'.
Mr Field said Great Southern had fought off an unwanted bid from Amalgamated
Tobacco back in 1959, and would provide good reasons why the current bid did
not represent fair value.
However, it faces a formidable opponent. SCI was set up by Mr Robert
Waltrip, who inherited a funeral home in Houston 32 years ago. He is still
chairman.
Mr Waltrip transformed the US burying business through the development of a
full service industry; as a spokesman said 'as long as its legal and in good
taste, we will try to do what the family wants.'
He has also recently attempted to elevate the status of the entire industry,
by setting up the Americal Funeral Service Museum, in Houston.
SCI has 843 funeral homes, 201 cemeteries and related businesses in 50
states, along with Canada and Australia, and it made Dollars 101m (Pounds
67m) net profit last year, compared with Great Southern's after tax profit
of Pounds 4m.
The company is keen to build up economies of scale by expanding Great
Southern, which has about 4.5 per cent of the funeral market.
SCI is offering 600p per share, compared with Wednesday's closing price of
475p. Yesterday Great Southern's shares closed up 133p at 608p.
It is also offering 239p per convertible share. Mr Heiligbrodt said that
upon conversion, the Field stake would fall below 50 per cent.
