FT  14 DEC 94 / The strong whiff of trouble: The US tobacco industry is
facing a wave of potentially ruinous lawsuits, says Richard Tomkins
Should cigarette manufacturers be made to pay for the harm smoking does to
people? Many believe justice would be better served if they were  - perhaps
nowhere more than in the US, where the anti-tobacco lobby is strong and
litigation is a national industry.
Even so, US courts have proved stubbornly unsympathetic to the idea. Over
the past 40 years, some 700 lawsuits have been lodged against US tobacco
companies by people claiming damage to their health from smoking. None has
ultimately succeeded, and no cigarette maker has paid a cent in damages.
Now, however, the tobacco industry is facing a new wave of litigation. On
Monday, a court in Miami ruled that non-smoking flight attendants could sue
US cigarette makers for health problems caused by passive smoking. Worse, in
two much bigger cases to be heard in the US over the next few days, lawyers
will be trying out new types of claims against cigarette manufacturers
which, if successful, could prove financially ruinous.
The main reason earlier attempts to sue the tobacco industry have failed is
straightforward. In nearly every case, juries have concluded that the health
hazards associated with smoking are so well known that anyone taking up the
habit automatically accepts the risks.
One notable exception came in 1988 when a jury awarded damages of Dollars
400,000 to the family of Rose Cipollone, a smoker who died after getting
lung cancer. However, the award was overturned in a federal appeal court in
1990, and the family, faced with the formidable legal costs of a case that
had lasted seven years, gave up the struggle.
That case illustrated another big difficulty of taking on the US tobacco
industry: cigarette makers, with their vast financial resources, can easily
outgun lone plaintiffs represented by small law firms. Anti-smoking
activists accuse the tobacco industry of waging a war of attrition on its
opponents, citing an internal memorandum written by a lawyer working for RJ
Reynolds Tobacco in 1988. 'To paraphrase General Patton, the way we won
these cases was not by spending all of Reynolds' money, but by making that
other son-of-a-bitch spend all his,' the note said.
Yet both difficulties  - the assumption of risk and the costs of legal
action  - could be overcome in a case due to be heard in a federal court in
New Orleans today.
The Castano case  - named after Dianne Castano, one of the five plaintiffs
 -does not seek compensation for health damage caused by smoking. Instead,
it seeks compensation for addiction to nicotine. The plaintiffs want each US
cigarette company to refund all the money they have spent on cigarettes,
meet the cost of health monitoring for addiction-related problems,
compensate them for emotional distress and pay punitive damages.
The plaintiffs are also backed by big money. Some 60 law firms have formed a
consortium to pursue the case in an attempt to turn it into a class action
that will pursue similar claims for millions of present, former and deceased
US smokers reaching back 50 years. Each firm has undertaken to invest up to
Dollars 100,000 a year in the case, providing total backing of Dollars 6m a
year  - easily enough to fight the cigarette manufacturers.
Paradoxically, this fresh approach comes at a time when the political
pressure on cigarette companies has died down. The Republicans' crushing
victory in last month's mid-term elections has produced a Congress much less
inclined to attack the tobacco industry with tighter regulations and
increased taxes.
Further, the cigarette manufacturers' arch-foe  - Representative Henry
Waxman, the Californian Democrat who chairs the House subcommittee on health
and the environment  - is to lose his position in January. This will end a
series of hearings in which chief executives of US tobacco companies have
repeatedly been hauled before the subcommittee to answer hard-hitting
questions about their industry's activities.
The change in the political climate, however, has not erased the memories of
events earlier in the year when internal tobacco industry documents were
leaked to the media and Mr Waxman's committee. Together, these documents
built up a picture of an industry that not only knew of the addictive and
carcinogenic properties of cigarettes, but had concealed the evidence for
decades.
The anti-smoking lobby believes these disclosures have transformed the
outlook for litigation. 'The notion that tobacco companies were innocent
purveyors of an agricultural product has been changed to a more accurate
notion that they are very knowledgeable and sophisticated manufacturers of
an addictive drug,' says Mr Richard Daynard, chairman of the Tobacco
Products Liability Project at Boston's Northeastern University.
The disclosures have not only prompted the Castano case, but encouraged a
second type of litigation now being brought against cigarette manufacturers.
Two US states  - Florida and Mississippi  - are suing the tobacco industry
for the costs of treating smoking-related diseases under public assistance
programmes (notably Medicaid). The Mississippi case reaches a crucial stage
next Monday when a state judge hears arguments about what defences the
tobacco industry should be allowed to deploy.
The state cases are clever because they seek to avoid complex arguments
about whether individuals knew the risks when they started smoking or which
brands harmed their health. Their sentiment is: Smoking has cost us (in
Florida's case) Dollars 1.2bn in Medicaid payments over the last five years.
We want our money back. Liability for damages would be split between the
cigarette manufacturers according to their market share.
The tobacco industry says the states have some nerve: after all, they
collect far more in cigarette taxes than they pay out for the treatment of
smoking-related diseases. But its main argument is that it would be unfair
for states to roll up all their smoking-related medical costs into one
undifferentiated sum. Before paying up, the cigarette companies say, they
would have to study each person's case individually to determine whether
smoking was really the cause of his or her illness and to see whether their
medical costs could be fully justified. In all likelihood, they say, they
would dispute the facts of every patient's case in court, so overwhelming
the US judicial system.
But what of today's case in New Orleans? The Castano case is a little more
complex than those in Florida and Mississippi because it raises the question
of nicotine addiction.
Tobacco lawyers say cigarette smoking cannot be addictive because large
numbers of people have given it up. By that definition, say anti-smokers,
neither is heroin.
The tobacco industry argues that, if smoking is addictive, then so are (for
example) tea and television, yet no one until now had suggested that
addiction in itself was a personal injury. Anti-smokers observe that
addiction to tea and television rarely results in damage to people's health.
The immediate issue in the Castano case, however, is whether the case can be
turned into a class action. As in the state lawsuits, the tobacco industry
says it is vigorously opposed to lumping individuals together as every
smoker's case differs. The industry's lawyers threaten that, if a class
action were allowed to proceed, they would insist on a court hearing for
every smoker who sought to join the class and dispute his or her entitlement
to membership. The result  - as in the state cases  - would be to overwhelm
the US judicial system.
For the tobacco industry, the stakes are high. If it were defeated in this
new wave of litigation and had to meet all the claims that followed, the
bill would make the Dollars 10bn so far paid out to victims of
asbestos-related diseases look like petty cash.
Would the courts dare do it? Tobacco companies say it would make no sense
for society to condone the manufacture and sale of cigarettes but penalise
the tobacco industry when people smoked them. A decision against the tobacco
industry would also set a disturbing precedent for manufacturers of other
products carrying health risks, such as high-fat foods and alcoholic drinks.
But times change, and the fact that cigarette makers have triumphed in the
courts for the last 40 years does not make the outcome of the latest
litigation any more predictable.
