FT  12 DEC 94 / International Company News: Bidding closes on an 'efficient
dinosaur' - Europe's biggest steelworks, has bowed to privatisation
The steelworks at Taranto - located inside the heel of southern Italy - now
claims to be that rarest of beasts, an efficient dinosaur.
Certainly, the world will not see Taranto's like again. With an installed
production capacity of more than 10m tonnes of crude steel a year (before
EU-inspired capacity cuts), and a surface area of 1,500 hectares, it is the
biggest steelworks in Europe, and possibly the biggest in the world outside
Russia. No government could now afford to build a similar monster.
That is partly because of the cost of caring for such animals. In its
30-year lifetime, Taranto and its parent company Ilva have ravened up
thousands of billions of lire of state subsidies, including one last gulp,
reluctantly endorsed a year ago by the European Union, of nearly L5,000bn
(Dollars 3bn).
Further subsidies are politically and financially impossible; privatisation
is the only way forward.
Hence, at noon today IRI, the Italian state holding company, will close the
bidding for Ilva Laminati Piani (ILP), the flat steels subsidiary which owns
Taranto and its sister plant at Novi Ligure in Piedmont.
A year ago, Taranto's public image would have deterred even the bravest
punter from betting on a sale before the EU deadline of December 31.
Demonised by the European Commission and attacked almost daily by
unsubsidised German steelmakers for its rampant inefficiency, Ilva was
supposed to be the villain of the overcapacity problem blighting the
European steel industry.
Mr Nicola Muni, director of the Taranto plant, is still indignant about that
treatment. The overall EU plan to rescue the industry has withered.
European demand has picked up and other producers have said they will wait
for the next recession to make the capacity cuts everybody once deemed
essential.
However, Mr Muni claims that Ilva, and Taranto in particular, is one of the
few European steelmakers to have met its commitments under the original EU
plan.
Taranto has already closed down two reheating furnaces, cutting overall
capacity by some 1.2m tonnes a year, and has prepared the way, with the help
of EU funds, for 2,500 voluntary redundancies, taking the workforce below
10,000 for the first time in the plant's history.
Mr Muni points out that Italy is the biggest consumer of steel in Europe
after Germany, and yet ILP supplies only 45 per cent or so of the country's
requirements.
'It's obvious that the other producers in Europe had the objective of
closing ILP because then they would have had the Italian market to
themselves,' he says.
'It's a strategic, essential plant, not only for Ilva, but also for Italy,'
adds Mr Romolo Vescovi, responsible for international relations at ILP.
Not only that, it is a source of pride and income for the neighbouring town
of Taranto, which sits in the shadow of the plant's chimneys, furnaces and
piles of ore and coke.
The town is said to benefit each year to the tune of L1,100bn in wages and
services from the presence of the steelworks. Workers like to remind you how
the people of Taranto streamed into the plant last year to form a symbolic
human wall around one of the three reheating furnaces that Brussels had
originally wanted to close.
However, the Taranto works claims to have achieved more than an emotional
turnround in the past five years. Analysts agree that from being only a
middle-ranking steel producer in terms of efficiency, the company has moved
into the top five in Europe, belying the criticisms of the Commission and
competitors.
Mr Bill Scotting, an analyst with CRU International, the UK-based metals
industry consultancy, estimates that Ilva's net operating costs for the
production of hot-rolled coil - the dominant product emerging from Taranto -
fell by 14 per cent between 1990 and 1993.
Even stripping out the positive impact of the September 1992 devaluation of
the lira on ILP's performance, the company has cut costs by nearly 7 per
cent over the same period.
Mr Muni, a Taranto director since 1989, estimates that between 1993 and 1994
industrial costs will come down another 3 per cent, while workforce
reductions next year should improve the cost base still further.
Other European steelmakers may still smart from the way Italian politicians
delayed the restructuring of the state-owned industry, and there are dark
hints that ILP may still be receiving hidden subsidies, but IRI is at least
talking about ILP returning a profit this year.
Whether that makes the company an attractive prospect for buyers is a
different matter.
Taranto is a comparatively modern plant; it is well-sited next to a deep-sea
port for raw material deliveries; and its great size is not necessarily a
disadvantage as demand for steel improves.
The hot steel process used at Taranto also has a certain edge over the
much-vaunted 'mini-mills', which are sometimes hampered by the scarcity and
cost of the scrap on which they depend.
But firm bids have been hard to come by. Over the past six months, most of
Italy's private steelmakers and many of the world's largest producers have
been mentioned as possible buyers.
Within the last fortnight, at least one consortium has broken up and another
was only just finalising its offer before the weekend.
IRI has gambled that by setting a December 12 deadline, it will have time to
strike a deal before the end of the year. But if the offers tabled today are
not satisfactory, the state company may have to open a second, high-pressure
round of negotiations.
Meanwhile, Taranto will hope to convince potential new owners that it really
has shed its tarnished dinosaur image, and is living up to the metre-high
exhortatory slogans placed around the plant: 'Efficienza - Produzione -
Qualita'.
