FT  24 DEC 94 / Weekend Money: Santa's package for rich executives - Barry
Riley pens a heart-warming seasonal story on top people's pay, ho] ho] ho]
Thud] Swoosh] Father Christmas landed his sleigh just outside his front
door. 'Whoa]' he shouted to the reindeer. 'Jolly good. Another blooming
Christmas over. But my feet are just like blocks of ice. Time for a good hot
cup of tea.'
He looked round at his old, familiar kitchen. The kettle had begun to bubble
on the gas cooker. The boiler cast a red glow as he stretched his feet
towards it. 'Ho] ho] ho]' he laughed as he thought of the presents being
unwrapped all over the country.
All the same, his contentment was tinged with regret. Another long year
stretched before him with nothing much to do except feed his reindeer and
re-paint his sleigh. With the new Jobseeker's allowance scheme being
introduced, he might even find it more difficult to register on the dole.
'Things are getting so much tougher,' he complained, with a sigh. 'There's
hardly a proper decent chimney left across the land and I have to try to
squeeze through all those blooming balanced flues. What a lack of
consideration. And, anyway, how can I satisfy all the requests sent to me
when every blooming Power Rangers toy is contracted exclusively to Toys 'R'
Us? And I still have an attic full of Cabbage Patch dolls.'
It couldn't go on like this, he thought. 'There's no doubt I need another
job in the new year. Something part-time so I can continue to carry out my
Father Christmas responsibilities. But who will employ me when all I know
about is giving presents to everybody? I would be no use as a banker -
except, perhaps, in a property boom, ho] ho] ho] And I couldn't become
chancellor of the exchequer until just before a general election.'
Sighing, he picked up the jobs section of the newspaper. 'What's all this?'
he said, turning the pages and reading aloud. 'Excellent remuneration
package . . . highly competitive package to be negotiated . . . flexible
compensation package plus benefits. Well, I certainly know all about
attractive blooming packages.'
He sat up, abruptly. 'That's it,' he exclaimed. 'I will become a
compensation consultant.'
So it was that, early in the new year, Father Christmas went to a nearby big
city and looked around for a place to start finding work. Very soon, he
passed an expensive-looking office block with a big new sign above the door:
North Trent Electric.
'This will be one of these newly-privatised utilities which the government
gave away for almost nothing the other Christmas,' he recalled. 'At the
time, I thought it was trying to put me out of a blooming job. Now, the
electricity companies are trying to do the same thing by giving lots of
money away to investors.
'Anyway, with such big profits, they must have plenty of gen-erous pay
packages to work out in here. I'll go in and see the human resources
director immediately.'
He was shown into a large office which, for some reason, was full of piles
of documents labelled P45. 'Blooming delighted to meet you, Mr Snipstaff,'
boomed Father Christmas.
'Have you ever thought what I could do for you as a remuneration consultant?
I can suggest all sorts of bonuses and packages. I've been spreading
happiness around for many years. I can guarantee you that lots and lots of
new employees will want to work for you. After all, new boys and girls are
writing to me all the time. No blooming advertising, just word of mouth.'
Snipstaff looked at him in disbelief. 'You don't seem to be very
well-informed, if I may say so, Mr Christmas,' he snapped. 'We're
down-sizing here. The saving from every job we de-emphasise goes straight on
to the bottom line. Not that we really like it, of course, but it's the way
the regulatory regime was designed. So we can't use you - unless . . .'
He paused for a moment and glanced at a folder on his desk marked Global
Remuneration Benchmarks. 'Wait a minute. How about boardroom pay? Will you
advise on top executive pack-ages?'
Father Christmas beamed. 'Of course,' he replied. 'Rich kids, poor kids,
they're all the blooming same to me, ho] ho] ho] But there is just one
condition: you must convince me that you really believe in Father
Christmas.'
Snipstaff's eyes narrowed for a moment, then he nodded. 'In this respect, at
least, you can be sure that we sincerely do,' he conceded.
And so Father Christmas was appointed formally as consultant to the
remuneration committee of the board. The committee consisted of three
non-executive directors: the chairman, Lord Duffer, and two outsiders who
happened to be the chief executive officers of South Midlands Electricity
and West Central Power.
His advice was simple. The chief executive's pay should be as good as that
of any of his competitors, plus a little bit for luck. The two outsiders on
the committee agreed this was a fine idea and asked if Father Christmas
would like to become a consultant to their companies, too.
He was overjoyed. In fact, he said, this was just like having Christmas
every single day. They all agreed.
Father Christmas had a busy year. His reputation spread rapidly and he was
called in by many big companies, including manufacturers and retailers -
even some big City of London finance companies which agreed that their
directors must be awarded competitive rolling packages. Otherwise, they
would not have the incentive to act as responsible investors and
proprietors, making sure that the companies in which they put money were run
properly.
'After all,' said Father Christmas, as he recommended they adopt rolling
three-year contracts, 'we must make sure that market forces will blooming
well operate in this risky environment.'
Sometimes, he got repeat consultancy calls. One came from North Trent
Electric, which called Father Christmas back to consider what Lord Duffer
called the 'knock-on consequences of unforeseen trends in top executive pay
elsewhere in the electricity industry'.
'Yes, we must add a bit more,' Father Christmas advised. 'We can't have
anybody being paid less than the average, can we?'
All too soon, it was autumn. 'Crumbs,' said Father Christmas, 'I must soon
overhaul my sleigh and start loading it up. I have time for only one more
consultation before I prepare for Christmas Eve, ho] ho] ho]'
Who was it to be? The phone rang, and a voice said: 'British Gas here. Come
at once, we need some urgent advice.'
At British Gas headquarters the chairman, a charming American, came quickly
to the point. 'Frankly, it's a bit embarrassing,' he said. 'My pay is Pounds
450,000, although I work only part-time as a non-executive. But our
full-time chief executive, Mr Brown, is paid only Pounds 270,000. It looks
out of line. What do you advise?'
'Well,' said Father Christmas, 'you could reduce your own pay. But after
all, it is nearly Christmas. What's more, I have a database of top executive
pay all around the world - except in poor countries, of course - which
proves that Mr Brown is blooming well substantially under-compensated.
'Now, Pounds 500,000 might look a bit much, so let's split the difference.
Therefore, I recommend that you pay him, er, Pounds 475,000. Plus, of
course, the right to test all the latest luxury gas appliances free in his
own home. But no bloom-ing balanced flues, please.' Outside, it was snowing.
'I must hurry,' said Father Christmas. 'It would never do to be late. This
is my real job.' The sleigh was packed in no time and the tarpaulin fixed
over the presents. 'If I just harness the blooming reindeer, we'll be
ready.'
The sleigh flew through the sky. 'Work, work, work,' grumbled Father
Christmas. It was almost dawn when he finished and led the reindeer back
into their stable.
Father Christmas turned on the gas cooker to make himself a good hot cup of
tea, but it blew itself out with a loud pop. 'Never mind,' he said. 'I'll
just nip down to the gas showroom after the holiday. They are so helpful
with service enquiries there. It's because they are happy and well-paid, I'm
sure.'
So, he put the kettle on top of the boiler and settled down in front of the
fire to open his own cards and presents. The biggest envelope of all
contained a huge Christmas card with a glowing flame pictured on it.
It said: 'Thanks for everything - Cedric Brown. PS: To think that, until
this year, I didn't believe in Father Christmas]'
With apologies to Raymond Briggs
