FT  03 OCT 94 / Business Travel: Watch out, the drive ahead could be rough -
Eurotunnel's competitive challenges as it launches its Channel shuttle
service
Eurotunnel, the Channel tunnel operating company, will today begin carrying
car passengers through the Channel tunnel on its specially-designed shuttle
trains - nearly 18 months behind schedule.
The passenger car shuttles are the most important element in Eurotunnel's
strategy to wrest dominance of the cross-Channel market away from ferries.
The company confidently predicts that it will be transporting at least half
of all accompanied car journeys by the end of 1996.
But Eurotunnel's ambitions do not end there. While interest to date in car
shuttles has focused on their impact on tourist travel, Eurotunnel
commercial director Mr Christopher Garnett has also set his sights on
winning a share of the potentially lucrative business market.
Traditionally, businessmen have only taken a car across the Channel if they
had sales samples or equipment to carry. But improvements to the continental
motorway network have encouraged many executives to use their cars for more
general business travel.
Eurotunnel estimates that about 10 per cent of cross-Channel journeys are
made for business-related purposes, mostly by hovercraft. Both the
hovercraft and the Eurotunnel shuttle service are twice as fast as a ferry
crossing. Mr Garnett believes that most executives who put a premium on
speed will switch to the more comfortable shuttle ride. Business customers
could account for 15-20 per cent of all shuttle travellers, he says.
For the first six weeks of the new service, travel through the tunnel will
be by invitation only. Eurotunnel hopes to carry 60,000 passengers chosen
from among its shareholders - selected by ballot - and from the ranks of its
bankers, MPs, MEPs and the travel trade. The company hopes to win over
sceptics by impressing these opinion-formers before it launches its
'turn-up-and-go' service in November.
For the business traveller making a last-minute journey, Eurotunnel's
'no-booking service' will be a particular appeal. The frequency of the
shuttle departures - four an hour once the service reaches full capacity
sometime next year - should ensure few delays.
The actual journey for the motorist will be spent in a brightly-lit,
air-conditioned metal tube, as guests found out on a special shuttle launch
trip last Friday. The motorist drives down the length of the train and when
all vehicles have been accommodated, fire-proof shutters descend from the
ceiling. These shutters isolate the carriages, each of which has two decks
with room for five cars. Passengers can still move from carriage to
carriage, however, through doors alongside the shutters. Toilets are located
in every third carriage.
Unlike truck drivers, who may leave their cabs for a meal in a separate
carriage, car drivers must remain with their vehicles. There is little for
the traveller to do during the 35-minute journey except read.
The journey through the tunnel is smooth, even at top train speeds of 80mph.
The small carriage windows - there is, after all, nothing to see during the
underground part of the journey - combined with the comfortable ride mean
that travellers may not notice when the train actually dips into the tunnel.
The cost of the journey will not be disclosed until November when Eurotunnel
launches its 'turn-up-and-go' service, though the company does concede it is
likely to be comparable with the cost of a ferry crossing.
Ferry tariffs have stabilised recently after a bout of price-cutting in the
spring and early summer, but ferry companies will be watching Eurotunnel
closely to match its special offers. Both sides are keen to avoid a price
war; however, with Eurotunnel injecting considerable new capacity into the
cross-channel market, the competitors will be eager to grab market share.
Although the ferries have most to fear from the launch of the shuttle, it is
airlines which will initially be hit by the launch of fast Intercity
Eurostar services between London, Paris and Brussels. The railways of the
three countries which will operate this service have yet to announce a
starting date but it is expected to be no later than November. Demand for
seats on the Eurostar trains are expected to outstrip that for the shuttles.
