FT  09 APR 94 / Conservative group proposes welfare opt-out
National Insurance rebates should be offered to anyone who wishes to opt out
of receiving state welfare payments, the Conservative Way Forward group will
argue in a forthcoming policy paper.
The paper, which claims that the time for welfare reform has arrived, will
set out detailed proposals that the Thatcherite pressure group says offer
the prospects of 'a better way ahead'.
According to the group, the government must be prepared to encourage people
to opt out of the basic state pension and other benefits in a phased way.
The paper's main proposals are:
The state earnings-related pension scheme should be abolished. The group
says contracting out has been 'a great success' but 'those who remain in
Serps threaten to place an intolerable burden on the state when they
retire'.
The state pension age should eventually be raised to 67.
Child benefit should be allowed to 'wither' while income support and family
credit are used to ensure those families most in need continue to receive
help. Individuals with 'substantial' private pension income should not be
entitled to full invalidity benefit.
The group adds: 'In the welfare society of the future, benefits will be paid
out of private insurance contributions for the majority, alongside a state
benefit system which caters for those for whom private insurance is not an
option.'
Alison Smith writes: People on income support will not be able to claim for
interest payments on mortgages which they have taken out or increased while
receiving benefit, under rules introduced by the government yesterday.
The rules, which are due to come into effect at the start of next month, are
intended to prevent any higher payments of income support to meet the
interest on new home loans or any rise in existing loans.
Mr William Hague, junior social security minister, said yesterday: 'The
regulations represent a timely preventative measure at a time when the
housing market is showing some signs of improvement.'
There are a few exceptions to the new limit: for example, where a loan is
taken out for essential repairs.
The move represents a further curb on the availability of income support to
meet mortgage interest repayments. Ministers have made clear that they want
to cut such benefit.
In August, a ceiling of Pounds 150,000 was imposed on the mortgage amount
for which income support would be available, and this will be lowered to
Pounds 125,000 for new claimants from Monday.
Mortgage lenders have expressed unease about the prospect of more reductions
in availability of income support for interest repayments.
The original crackdown came after ministerial embarrassment over a case in
which mortgage interest payments of almost Pounds 2,000 a week were made to
a former insurance sales executive.
Social Security - Time for a Revolution. Conservative Way Forward, PO Box
66, Westminster, London SW1P 3JL. Pounds 2.
