FT  02 SEP 94 / Northern Ireland: Business hopes for up to 30,000 jobs -
Economy
The IRA ceasefire has injected a mood of cautious optimism into Northern
Ireland's business community, but has also triggered warnings that economic
support to the province must be maintained to underpin the hoped-for peace.
Business leaders and economists in Belfast estimate that a lasting peace
could bring between 15,000 and 30,000 new jobs to the province over the next
five years, but this would be partially offset by job losses in
security-related employment.
One other benefit from a peace settlement, mentioned by a number of business
executives yesterday, would be that companies would find it easier to
attract senior managers to the province.
Mr Nigel Smyth, the director of the Confederation of British Industry
(Northern Ireland), said if the ceasefire proved to be permanent, 'there
will be a lot of business opportunities in the medium and long term'.
He thought job growth through inward investment would quadruple, from about
500 per year to 2,000 over a two-to-three-year period, while an additional
10,000 jobs could be created in the tourist industry.
'On a per capita basis, tourist numbers here are presently a third of those
in the republic and a quarter of those in Scotland,' he said.
Mr Michael Smyth, an economist at the University of Ulster at Jordanstown,
said the CBI figures erred on the conservative side. Tourism contributes 1.5
per cent to GDP in the province, compared with 7 per cent in the republic,
so catching up with the south could create 20,000-30,000 tourism jobs in
Northern Ireland. Unemployment is currently 98,000 - 13.1 per cent of the
workforce.
Stena Sealink, one of the main ferry operators across the Irish Sea, said
interest in Ireland as a holiday destination 'is weighted very much towards
the south because of the troubles in the north. Clearly, a permanent end to
the violence would do no end of good.'
The CBI said a climate of peace would allow manufacturing and service
companies to focus their marketing on quality production. Mr Nigel Smyth
said Northern Ireland businesses had one of the best records in Europe for
quality awards, but that had been overshadowed by the province's image
problem.
The downside of the peace will be the inevitable cuts in the security forces
and security-related industries. Reductions in policing levels and the
prison population, and eased security in shops, offices and factories will
mean less overtime, job losses, and less money going into the economy - the
loss could be as much as Pounds 300m to Pounds 400m per year.
The more pessimistic forecasts envisage job losses in the region of 20,000,
a figure calculated by Dr Graham Gudgin of the Northern Ireland Economic
Research Council. He said that over four to five years the province's
economy 'will be lucky to break even on jobs'. Mr Smyth of UUJ said the
number of job losses was more likely to be around 10,000 to 12,000, but he
admitted there could be further indirect losses.
Mr Michael Smyth said the transition to a peacetime economy would have to be
managed very carefully. The government would be 'extremely foolish if it
were to send any savings it made through an end to the violence straight
back to the Treasury.'
The CBI said any security-related savings and exchequer benefits achieved
through economic growth 'should be redirected towards wealth creation and
training'.
The Department of Economic Development in Belfast acknowledged that there
was a danger of short-term job losses. 'But any change will not be a jolt
but gradual, and will be balanced by new jobs over a period. The economic
development budget is very substantial at Pounds 400m and is expected to
remain that way.'
It said the Treasury would decide whether additional resources through
savings on security could be redirected towards development.
There may also be help from other sources. Last night Sir Leon Brittan, the
European commissioner, said the European Union was ready to consider
increasing the aid and assistance it gives to Northern Ireland.
Mr Clem Parkes, chief executive of CV Carpets which is based in the
north-east of the province, said: 'It is always difficult to get managers
and specialists that we cannot find here to relocate from Britain. That will
become much easier. And our experience is that when we do get them here they
don't want to leave.'
