FT  23 FEB 94 / SmithKline confident of Tagamet's successors
Sales of new products from SmithKline Beecham, the Anglo-US healthcare
company, will be strong enough to counter 'a dramatic fall' in sales of
Tagamet, once its best-selling drug, according to Mr Jan Leschly, incoming
chief executive.
Tagamet loses US patent protection in May and at least 10 generic versions
of the drug would then be launched, Mr Leschly said yesterday.
Concern over the impact of Tagamet's patent expiry has been one reason for
the company's near 5 per cent fall in share price over the past year.
But Mr Leschly was 'quite confident' that sales of four new drugs '
antidepressant Seroxat (Paxil in the US), arthritis treatment Relifex
(Relafen), cancer drug Kytril and hepatitis A vaccine Havrix ' 'will be able
to offset the declining sales of Tagamet'. Sales of the four new drugs more
than doubled from Pounds 212m in 1992 to Pounds 463m last year.
Pre-tax profits for 1993 rose 12 per cent to Pounds 1.22bn, at the top end
of analysts' forecasts. Turnover increased 18 per cent to Pounds 6.16bn,
thanks to a strong final quarter. But price pressures in several large
pharmaceuticals markets meant that the trading profit margin fell 1.5
percentage points to 19.1 per cent.
A fourth quarter dividend of 3.3p per A share makes a total of 10.9p, up 24
per cent. Earnings climbed 5 per cent to 29.1p.
Mr Bob Bauman, who leaves to chair British Aerospace in April, said that the
dividend cover had now reached the company's target level.
SmithKline Beecham eliminated year-end debt for the first time since the
1989 merger of SmithKline Beckman of the US with Beecham of the UK. Net cash
amounted to Pounds 38m, compared with Pounds 392m debt.
In the divisions, pharmaceuticals sales rose 21 per cent to Pounds 3.48bn.
When currency factors are taken out, the growth was 9 per cent. The rise was
driven by sales and not prices, said Mr Bauman.
Tagamet sales fell 6 per cent to Pounds 673m, with currency gains stripped
out. After more than 15 years as SmithKline Beckman's and then SmithKline
Beecham's best selling product, it is now second to Augmentin, the
antibiotic whose sales rose 17 per cent to Pounds 760m.
To improve drugs sales further, Mr Leschly said the group was prepared to
enter into alliances both in the US and Europe.
Other divisions saw steady progress. Sales at Consumer Healthcare, which
includes brands such as the soft drink Ribena and toothpaste Aquafresh, rose
12 per cent to Pounds 1.33bn.
Lex, Page 22
