FT  20 DEC 94 / British Steel forges US venture
Three big steelmakers from the US, the UK and Japan announced a joint
venture to produce low-cost steel in the US, a move which could be followed
by similar ventures around the world.
LTV has a 50 per cent stake in the venture, called Trico Steel, with British
Steel and Sumitomo Metal Industries holding 25 per cent each. Together they
will spend Dollars 450m (Pounds 274m) to build a 'minimill' in the
south-eastern part of the US, with production due to begin in 1996.
Minimills make steel from scrap, skipping many of the steps in traditional
steelmaking. By employing newer technology and non-unionised labour, small
minimill companies have become the low-cost producers of the steel industry.
Led by Nucor, which pioneered the technology in the US and which is now the
country's most profitable steelmaker, they have taken more than a third of
the US steel market from old-line makers.
The plant will have the capacity to manufacture 2.2m tons of flat-rolled
steel a year, making it one of the biggest minimills in the US.
Mr Brian Moffat, chairman of British Steel, said the venture would expand
the company's involvement in the US and in the 'rapidly evolving minimill
technologies'. LTV said of the three-way relationship: 'This will be very
important long-term. This is now a global business.'
Big old-fashioned steel companies, which have spent much of the past decade
reeling from falling demand and prices, are trying to regain the lead in new
production technology. US Steel, the US's biggest producer, recently
announced a feasibility study with Nucor into a new generation of minimill
technology which could bring down production costs still further.
Through the Trico venture, all three companies 'will have the chance to gain
experience of minimill technology', said LTV.
The venture signals renewed expansion at LTV, once one of the US's biggest
and most diverse industrial conglomerates. In June 1993 the company emerged
from seven years in bankruptcy, having been stripped of many of its
businesses. It is now the US's third biggest steelmaker, with production of
7.9m tons last year. Trico will make flat-rolled steel to compete in the
hot-rolled and higher-value cold-rolled markets.
