FT  15 MAR 94 / 'Whispering arrow' on target
There was an anxious silence in the cabin. One of the Transrapid executives
had been explaining the ins and outs of the so-called 'whispering arrow' but
as it exceeded 380kph (236mph) he stopped talking.
The green liquid crystal display over the doorway to the cabin showed 400kph
and the 50 or so passengers watched carefully as the figures crept up to
421kph and locked in.
Mr Peter Wiegelmann began talking again. 'Ladies and gentlemen, there you
have it - 421kph. For safety reasons we cannot take you up to the maximum
speed of 450kph but I am sure that was quite impressive enough.'
The tree tops, which were at window level outside, blurred into a green mass
and not one of a cluster of buildings which made up the Transrapid test site
in Lathen, near the Dutch border, was recognisable as we shot past. Writing
at 421kph was not a problem and expansive seats - larger than they are
likely to be in the real Transrapid - made for ample leg-room. Sound levels
inside the cabin were not louder than those in a French high-speed Train a
Grande Vitesse (TGV) or the German ICE.
A murmur of approval could be heard as we slowed down to 170kph and heads
nodded in awe at the world's fastest magnetic-levitation train.
'You should see what it's like in the summer,' Mr Wiegelmann said as we
climbed up the stairs to board the train. 'People pull up here in their
campers and wait for days to get a ride. It's amazing.' The Transrapid,
which tears around on a 32km concrete track built on stilts, has lured
thousands of visitors to this flat corner of north-western Germany,
difficult to get to and visited by few.
Half the train is a cabin to seat about 50 people while the other houses a
bank of computers at which engineers from Thyssen Industrie, the engineering
group which built the Transrapid, test the train's capabilities.
On March 2 the German cabinet approved plans to build a 300km track from
Berlin to Hamburg, the country's two largest cities, which would reduce the
present travel time of more than three-and-a-half hours to 53 minutes.
'Travelling to either one of those cities will then be the same as taking a
subway to one of the outlying areas of Hamburg,' said Mr Wiegelmann who does
publicity work for Magnetschnellbahn, the company created to oversee the
introduction of the Transrapid.
However, the opposition Social Democratic party (SPD) has vowed to block the
project in the upper house of parliament. It says the Berlin run would be a
white elephant, failing to meet the projected annual passenger target of
14m, an eight-fold increase on the present volume.
Thyssen Industrie is pushing hard to have the project approved. Company
executives are bullish all the same. When the TGV from Paris to Lyon was
first being considered 6m passengers a year were predicted. Last year 21m
people travelled that route, proof, Thyssen says, that if the Transrapid is
built passenger volume will rise dramatically.
The train is also safer than all other forms of conventional transport, Mr
Wiegelmann says. It cannot derail because the entire train straddles the
concrete runway. And only one train will travel along the route at any one
time, making collisions impossible. All that can go wrong is that the
electricity - needed to drive the magnetic motors - is cut off, but even
then the train has its own emergency generating system which will enable it
to coast to a standstill.
While environmentalists say the concrete runway on stilts is an unwarranted
eyesore, Transrapid supporters point out that cows and wildlife are free to
graze underneath the track which causes much less disruption than
conventional railways. In answer to charges that the train is too noisy,
independent experts have recorded just 81 decibels at 300kph, half the noise
generated by the TGV.
