FT  20 MAY 94 / Survey of Greek Banking and Finance (6): Regulations become
stricter - Kerin Hope meets Manolis Xanthakis, president of the Athens stock
exchange
Professor Manolis Xanthakis, president of the Athens Stock Exchange, is
taking a sabbatical in order to put some of his ideas into practice.
A financial markets specialist in the economics faculty at Athens
University, he taught many of the brokers now working on the bourse.
He deals briskly with the suggestion that an academic background may not be
ideal for controlling a boisterous emerging market: 'The university's
financial markets group has already done much to shape the development of
capital markets in Greece. I'm continuing the practice.'
Prof Xanthakis's appointment last autumn coincided with an unprecedented
spate of applications for listings on the stock exchange which shows no sign
of diminishing. However, regulations for public offerings have become
stricter as the role of the capital markets committee, which approves
proposed listings before they reach the stock exchange board, was
strengthened.
From a loose grouping of bankers from the big state-controlled banks and
financial experts, all holding other jobs, the committee is 'becoming a more
independent and serious regulator of the market,' he says.
So also is the stock exchange board.
Its latest requirements include stricter auditing of companies seeking
listings, while listed companies planning large rights issues will be
subject to audits of results for the five previous years, to be carried out
by the quasi-state Body of Sworn Accountants (SOL). 'We don't want to deter
applications, quite the contrary. But there has to be more transparency,'
Prof Xanthakis says.
Bringing more small companies to the market is another priority.
A study is under way to determine whether to add a third tier to the Athens
stock market - 'not exactly an over-the-counter market, but one designed to
speed growth by small companies that have little access to bank financing at
present and are forced to go outside the the system to raise funds.'
The tokoglyphoi - the private lenders who charge exorbitant interest rates
to small companies in need of cash advances - are part of the demonology of
Greek business life.
The parallel market, set up three years ago, is not much of a success,
attracting only half a dozen entrants in the three years since it was
established. It has also suffered as participants moved more quickly than
expected to join the main board. But Prof Xanthakis believes the parallel
market remains the 'natural home of small but sophisticated companies', such
as electronics manufacturers and software companies in need of relatively
small amounts of capital.
Introducing new products such as futures and options will depend on how fast
the electronic trading system can be upgraded, he says. 'What is more
important, for the moment, is extending access to the system, for example by
starting on-line trading for brokers based in Thessaloniki.'
Although Thessaloniki is as big a manufacturing centre as Athens, and trade
is growing as more northern Greek companies set up joint ventures in
Bulgaria and Romania, only a handful of companies based there are listed on
the Athens stock exchange.
'There are a number of dynamic smaller companies in northern Greece that
ought to be listed. Setting up closer trading links with Thessaloniki should
help to encourage them,' Prof Xanthakis says.
