FT  07 APR 94 / Swedes pull out of deal with French packager
Sweden's second-largest forestry and packaging group, SCA, yesterday tore up
a FFr2bn (Pounds 230m) plan to buy 89.8 per cent of Otor Holding, one of
France's biggest packaging companies.
SCA also scrapped plans for a SKr1bn (Dollars 127m) share issue to foreign
investors which would have provided some of the funds for the purchase.
The company said: 'SCA and the principal shareholders of Otor have not been
able to agree on final terms for the acquisition of Otor by SCA.'
The Swedish group appears to have become disenchanted with the deal after
Stora, its leading domestic rival, claimed to have first refusal rights over
the stake being sold. Stora is the minority shareholder in Otor with a 10.2
per cent holding.
SCA said that Otor's main owners, Mr Jean-Yves Bacques and family, had shown
that the pre-emption rights did not exist. However, Stora was sticking by
its position yesterday.
SCA stressed that it was not blaming Stora for the collapse of the deal,
noting that the companies had had a 'constructive dialogue'.
Stora insisted it had not planned to exercise its first refusal option and
said it had been willing to sell its existing stake to its rival.
SCA announced the preliminary agreement to buy Otor less than three weeks
ago. It would have been the largest European acquisition by a Swedish
forestry group for three years.
The acquisition would have increased group share in the European packaging
market in products such as corrugated board to 11 per cent from 9 per cent,
assisting its wider ambition of building a 15 per cent market position. SCA
would have increased its packaging market share in France from 4.5 per cent
to nearly 17 per cent.
The group maintains that its expansion strategy will continue. However,
analysts interpreted the announcement as a setback for SCA.
SCA would have paid FFr1.77bn initially, and up to FFr255m more under a
profits-related formula.
Mr Bacques and family would have subscribed to SKr300m of the share issue.
SCA's B shares yesterday closed SKr4 higher at SKr134 on the Stockholm
exchange.
