FT  05 MAY 94 / Gaza-Jericho Autonomy: Biggest obstacle to peace process -
The settlers
Dotted throughout the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, home to more than
120,000 Israelis, the 140 Jewish settlements constitute arguably the largest
potential obstacle to a successful conclusion of the Israeli-Palestinian
peace process.
Yesterday's agreement on Palestinian self-rule in Gaza and Jericho will
theoretically have no impact on Gaza's 4,000 Jewish settlers or on the
half-dozen small settlements close to Jericho.
It was an Israeli precondition that no settlement be dismantled, not a
single Jewish settler forced to return to sovereign Israel, in the initial
stages of the autonomy process.
Only in more than two years from now, when Israeli and PLO negotiators begin
another round of intensive talks on a permanent solution in the occupied
territories, will the status of settlements be on the agenda.
As they pull out of Palestinian population centres in Gaza and Jericho over
the next few days, many Israeli troops will not be leaving the occupied
territories altogether.
They will be redeploying at new bases built alongside settlements,
patrolling newly-erected settlement perimeter fencing, ensuring the security
of Jews who were assured under previous Israeli governments, hardline and
moderate alike, that their presence in the heart of hostile Arab territory
fulfilled a vital Israeli security interest.
If anything, the army's newly-limited role in Gaza and Jericho - protecting
settlers rather than ruling Palestinians - should provide a greater sense of
security. But most settlers have read the writing on the wall.
If the autonomy process unfolds as planned, and the Labour party of Prime
Minister Yitzhak Rabin remains in office, they are living on borrowed time,
with probably no more than five years before enforced evacuation.
While a substantial proportion of West Bank settlers moved there for a
better standard of living - house prices in Ma'aleh Adumim, for example, are
a fraction of those in Jerusalem, just 10 minutes away - Gaza's Jews are
highly ideologically motivated, digging roots in soil they regard as an
integral part of biblical Israel.
The few dozen Jews at the Gaza settlement of Dugit, who moved there to set
up a fishing community, are an exception; they are already clamouring for
financial compensation that would enable them to leave. Most of Gaza's
settlers, like their counterparts in Hebron, Kiryat Arba and other West Bank
ideological hot-houses, will do their utmost to resist evacuation. Some
extremists have threatened to use force against Israeli soldiers who may try
to drag them out.
For the time being, Mr Rabin is standing by his commitment to leave the
settlements be. Even after February's Hebron mosque massacre, when the
Hebron settlers themselves expected to be forced to leave, he did nothing.
His aides say privately that, long-term, Mr Rabin will negotiate hard to
maintain a strip of settlements along Israel's border with Jordan, a ring
around Jerusalem, and the areas of Arab East Jerusalem where Jewish
neighbourhoods have sprung up since 1967.
The aides believe Mr Rabin will give up the rest of the settlements, more
than 100 of them, offering their residents the choice between government
compensation or staying put under Palestinian rule.
Labour party members have opened a kind of disenchanted settlers register,
listing names of families who would leave if offered alternative
accommodation inside Israel proper. The Treasury is said to have drawn up a
working paper on settler compensation, with an overall price tag of Dollars
10bn (Pounds 6.6bn).
Mr Rabin has forbidden his ministers to discuss the compensation issue. But
several times he has spoken out against settlers, lambasting their frequent
demonstrations against the autonomy plan.
On Monday, he declared their role in protecting sovereign Israel was
'marginal', adding it made his blood boil to have to deploy elite paratroops
to protect Hebron's 400 Jews. Such language would suggest Mr Rabin is ready
to evacuate settlements in the West Bank and Gaza, in a final deal with the
Palestinians.
