FT  20 SEP 94 / Flux emerges in Malaysian politics: An intense debate in the
ruling party
Locals call it the good news show. Each evening television feeds Malaysians
a series of generally upbeat items about the state of their country. The
considerable achievements of the Malaysian economy are the main focus of
attention. The activities of Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the prime minister,
feature prominently.
But lately the news has been a little more subdued. While the economic
outlook, in the short term at least, appears good, Malaysians have been
puzzled to hear about the government's tough actions against a Moslem group.
They have been intrigued that talk about a sex scandal involving a senior
government figure has been allowed to surface in the official media.
There have been a series of fires at Kuala Lumpur's international airport
and two 'near misses' between aircraft. Even the weather forecast looks
worrying. Some of the worst pollution in years has clouded the skies of much
of the Malay peninsula in recent weeks and has led to government health
warnings.
Dr Mahathir and other senior figures in government have made clear signals
that a general election will be called soon, possibly at the end of the
year. There seems very little chance that Dr Mahathir, in power since 1981,
will lose his tight grip on power. But a degree of flux is evident in
Malaysia's body politic.
In June the government launched its campaign against Al Arqam, a Moslem sect
that claims 100,000 followers in Malaysia and many more in the region. In
early August Malaysia's Islamic authorities banned Al Arqam's teachings,
describing them as deviationist. Since then the government has declared the
sect illegal, launched police raids on the group's communes and carried out
a number of mass arrests of followers.
Many, particularly in the majority Malay Moslem community, question the
government's heavy-handed tactics. Mr Ashaari Muhammad, Al Arqam's leader,
had his passport revoked by the Malaysian authorities while in Thailand. Mr
Ashaari, along with at least seven followers - including his wife and
six-month old daughter - are being held under Malaysia's Internal Security
Act (ISA), which allows for up to two years' detention without trial.
The Malaysian Bar Council has protested that the ISA, which usually involves
harsh isolation treatment and round the clock interrogations, is being used
for purposes for which it was never intended and says Mr Ashaari has been
denied the right to legal representation.
Critics say there are political motives behind the move against Al Arqam.
They say Dr Mahathir had become worried about the growing popularity of Al
Arqam within his own United Malays National Party (Umno), the dominant group
in the ruling national front. Al Arqam says it is being used as a scapegoat
to take attention away from scandals and corruption within Dr Mahathir's
government.
The government says it acted against Al Arqam because the sect had strayed
from proper Islamic teachings and could pose a threat to public order. Dr
Mahathir has made a number of allegations against Al Arqam, including that
through the practice of polygamy, the sect treated women as 'little better
than prostitutes'.
At the same time and to the deep embarrassment of the government, the case
of Mr Abdul Rahim Tamby Chik hit the headlines. Mr Rahim is chief minister
of the state of Malacca and head of Umno's youth wing. Mr Rahim is under
police investigation after allegations that he sexually abused a 15-year-old
girl. He has also been accused of accumulating a vast fortune through
dubious property deals.
Mr Rahim is a leading member of a new generation of Umno personalities who
came to prominence within the party along with Mr Anwar Ibrahim, the deputy
prime minister and Dr Mahathir's heir apparent, in elections late last year.
Dr Mahathir has been forced to suspend Mr Rahim from his official posts. Mr
Rahim was allowed to go abroad on holiday. The girl he is said to have
abused has been kept under police custody.
What intrigues Umno watchers is that the allegations against Mr Rahim have
been allowed a public airing in the heavily government-influenced media.
There are suspicions that senior figures in the party might be out to rock
Dr Mahathir's political powerboat.
Dr Mahathir faces few problems from Malaysia's weak and divided opposition
parties. But within Umno there is intense debate about the future direction
of the party. Many of the Umno rank and file say the party has lost touch
with its rural roots and is now dominated by urban-based politicians with
close links to the country's corporate elite.
Some sections of Umno have voiced concern about corruption within the party
and a nationwide cult of vote-buying called 'money politics'. Dr Mahathir
has pledged to put a stop to abuses within his own party.
Economic success has brought a large degree of political complacency to
Malaysia. But politics has been give a shot in the arm by recent events. The
evening news could be more interesting in future.
