FT  07 JUL 94 / From abacus to automation: China is embarking on an
ambitious programme to overhaul its financial system
China has at last begun the tortuous process of reforming its unruly
financial sector with the referral of a new central bank law to the standing
committee of the country's parliament.
Among China's plethora of new laws and regulations guiding its economic
transformation, few items of legislation are more important. Not only does
the legislation seek to redefine and strengthen the People's Bank's
supervisory role over the banking system, it also makes clear that the
bank's primary responsibility is to lead the fight against inflation.
China, in its efforts to speed its integration with the world economy, is
seeking to build a central bank with the authority to match that of the
Federal Reserve of the US or Bank of Japan. At the same time, it intends to
reform its debt-burdened commercial banks along international lines.
That, at least, is the plan; but an enormous effort is required to convert
theory into practice in a financial system in many ways still rooted in the
age of the abacus. Among the most pressing tasks facing reformers is to end
the central bank's traditional role as milch cow for lossmaking state
enterprises. Mr Di Weiping, a deputy director of the bank, says that under
the new charter the People's Bank would be uncompromising in its fight
against inflation. 'We need a further tightening of money supply growth,' he
says. 'We are not going to compromise with state enterprises.'
Those fighting words reflect a newfound zeal among central bank officials
operating under new rules and with high-level political backing - senior
vice-premier Zhu Rongji is also People's Bank governor - but it is early in
the bank's transformation to a western-style central bank, and political
counter-pressures are certain to build.
As the state sector sinks further into the red in what is proving to be a
fairly brutal transformation from a state-controlled economy to a
market-driven system, so will demands intensify for an easing of credit.
Indeed, there have been indications in recent weeks of a loosening of the
purse strings, with funds being made available to keep faltering enterprises
afloat.
Since the Chinese Communist party's policymaking central committee gave
approval last November for sweeping changes to the financial system, China
has moved ahead fairly quickly on reforms aimed both at revolutionising the
People's Bank's role, and at removing responsibility for lending for
infrastructure projects from the four specialised commercial banks. These
institutions, which account for 90 per cent of the country's banking
business, include the Industrial and Commercial Bank, the Agricultural Bank,
People's Construction Bank and Bank of China.
Lending for China's vast infrastructure requirements, including such
projects as the UDollars 10bn Three Gorges dam on the Yangtze, will be
vested in the new State Development Bank and Agriculture Development Bank
(see accompanying article).
The wide-ranging banking reforms will also have profound implications for
western banks seeking to extend their reach in the China market but
frustrated by the difficulties of penetrating an archaic, inward-looking
system. At present, the 100 or so branches of foreign banks in China are
restricted to foreign currency business on behalf of joint ventures. But the
'commercialisation' of China's banking, allied with international pressure
on China to open its services sector - Beijing's desire to enter the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade is being used as a lever by the US and others
 -will facilitate greater foreign involvement in the financial sector,
although progress will be slow.
Chinese officials acknowledge that their task is awesome, given that the
banking system has changed little in the more than four decades since the
Communists took over in 1949. At the People's Bank, for example, plans are
in hand to reorganise the bank from 'top to bottom'; it has 170,000
employees and 3,000 branches and sub-branches, many of which will be
redundant under the bank's new charter. The streamlining is intended to
enhance the bank's authority over monetary policy and its supervision of
financial institutions both at the centre and in the provinces.
Further evidence surfaced this week of the extraordinary difficulties facing
the central bank in imposing discipline on an unruly financial sector,
including, it seems, its own branches. According to the official Business
Weekly newspaper, the Shenzhen branch in southern China of the People's Bank
went ahead last year and approved the establishment of four investment funds
in defiance of regulations that only head office in Beijing had the right to
approve such funds.
People's Bank officials - who have been studying the German Bundesbank, Bank
of England, Singapore Monetary Authority, Bank of Japan and US Federal
Reserve, among others - plan to establish about a dozen regional centres
with increased responsibilities to impose much-needed discipline on local
financial institutions. In this respect, the Chinese central bank's evolving
structure will resemble that of the Federal Reserve - although the People's
Bank will have nowhere near the same degree of statutory independence as the
American model.
Independence was a key issue among Chinese leaders in their deliberations
about an appropriate relationship between the government and the central
bank. In the end, they decided that the People's Bank should be subordinate
to the state council (cabinet), but they also sought to define clearly the
bank's responsibilities to resist possible political interference.
Any dream of real independence for China's central bank may remain just
that. In the opaque Chinese system, where most important decisions are taken
far from the public gaze, the political clout of the top People's Bank
official will be the critical factor rather than the wording of the new
charter. The redoubtable Mr Zhu has made it clear that his role as central
bank governor is temporary. His successor, who will be appointed by the
state council, is unlikely to match his seniority.
For all the reservations of western economists and bankers about China's
ability to manage its way through a minefield of new financial reforms,
there are those who give Chinese reformists the benefit of the doubt in this
testing phase.
Mr Peter Bottelier, head of the World Bank's resident mission in Beijing,
praises measures already adopted this year. These included, principally,
unifying competing exchange rates, thus abolishing the managed official
rate, as a vital step towards full convertibility of the Chinese yuan by the
end of this century.
'I have not seen currency reform introduced so smoothly and with such
success,' said Mr Bottelier. 'They pitched it at the right rate (about
USDollars 1 = Yn8.7 compared with the previous official rate of Yn5.7), and
they kept monetary policy very tight, which is exactly what the currency
reforms needed.'
In turn, currency unification opened the way for the establishment of an
interbank market which began trading on April 1. The currency market in
Shanghai appears to be operating relatively smoothly, although foreign banks
were unhappy at being excluded for the time being.
Currency unification, an interbank currency market linked electronically
with some 20 cities nationwide, improvements under a World Bank-sponsored
programme to China's archaic payments clearing system, and eventually the
establishment of a short-term money market, are part of an effort to bring
the banking system into the 20th century.
But problems abound, including a singular lack of automation in the banking
system. Moreover, according to a 1992 report on China's banking system
prepared by Capital Intelligence, a Cyprus-based consultancy, 'modern
technology-based internal management programmes, such as asset and liability
monitoring, accounting and financial information systems, forecasting and
strategic planning are hardly available'.
The difficulties of transforming China's dominant four specialised banks are
thus immense, not least because these institutions are weighed down by a
huge burden of 'problem' loans. No reliable statistics are available for
what in the west would be described as 'non-performing' or 'doubtful' loans.
But a clue to the extent of the problem was given by China's State
Statistical Bureau, which reported that at the end of the March quarter
nearly 50 per cent of the country's 11,000 medium and large-sized state
enterprises were in the red.
Among China's myriad new laws and regulations is a new accounting law. It
aims to help establish new classifications for 'problem' loans which accord
with international standards. These would help banks to satisfy criteria
laid down for bad debt provision and ultimately open the way for much-needed
corporatisation - a Chinese half-way house to privatisation - of the
unwieldy banking system.
These and other gains could easily be squandered later under political
pressures if the government bows to demands from the state enterprise lobby
to maintain its access to cheap credit.
China's reformers know that financial sector reform, of which credit
controls are the key element, cannot succeed without strict discipline being
imposed. While they have made a respectable start, changes to the financial
sector have some way to go before they catch up with China's other market
reforms. At stake are China's considerable ambitions to integrate itself
with the international financial system.
