FT  18 JUL 94 / Shipbuilding nations avert trade dispute over subsidies
Leading shipbuilding nations agreed yesterday to scrap subsidies to their
shipyards in a landmark deal for the industry, averting a potentially
serious trade dispute.
France, however, opposed the deal, reached after a week of negotiations at
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development in Paris. Its
rejection indicates a rift with its European Union partners, represented in
the talks by the European Commission, which are unlikely to be swayed by the
French stance.
The agreement, between the US, the EU, Japan, South Korea, Finland, Norway
and Sweden, follows five years of talks and was concluded in the early hours
of yesterday. It will end direct and indirect subsidies to shipyards in
these countries and includes an anti-dumping code, drawn up in response to
concerns about Japanese and Korean pricing.
Officials said failure to conclude an agreement could have provoked a
subsidy war between the bigger shipbuilding nations and triggered US
retaliation against ships built in subsidised foreign yards.
'Given the huge increase in capacity in Korea and the rise of producers like
China and Ukraine, European countries might have been forced to provide
increased aid to their yards, prompting a subsidy and price war,' said one
official involved in the negotiations. 'It was clear as well that the US was
considering unilateral action if a deal wasn't reached.'
The agreement must be ratified by all participants and is due to take effect
at the beginning of 1996. But it faces opposition from France, which sought
to suspend the talks at the weekend, and which is concerned about jobs at
its remaining shipyards, notably Saint-Lazare and Le Havre.
France, on its own, would be unable to stop a qualified majority vote on the
deal in the European Council of ministers and appears isolated in its
opposition.
Yesterday's agreement followed the resolution of several protracted
disputes. These included European concerns about the Jones Act, which
restricts US coastal trade to vessels built in US yards. Under the terms of
the agreement, the Jones Act will remain in place, but there will be a cap
placed on the tonnages it covers and counter-measures will be available in
the case of misuse.
The agreement, which also overhauls dispute settlement procedures and
equalises export credit arrangements for ship exports, covers about 75 per
cent of the world's shipbuilding capacity. Officials involved in the
negotiations said efforts would be made to extend it to smaller and emerging
shipbuilding nations.
Subsidies to shipbuilders have been reduced over recent years, but have
remained the principal source of dispute in the industry.
Danes attack Brussels over ship subsidies, Page 3
