FT  15 JUL 94 / London Stock Exchange: Overseas buying drives FT-SE Index to
3,050 - Market report
Buyers from continental Europe were out in force in London again yesterday,
driving share prices ahead against a background of strong gains in bond
markets following benign retail sales figures from the US. Confidence in the
recovery in the UK economy, encouraged this week by the latest producer
price data, has been emphasised for overseas investors by sterling's
weakness against the German D-Mark, according to market strategists.
The closing reading showed the FT-SE Index at 3,050.4, for a gain on the day
of 45.1. Equity chartists pointed out that the Footsie had recovered an
important testing level, which was last seen in the first half of June. The
December futures contract, which had prepared the ground for the explosion
in the stock market, reached 3,078 in after hours trading.
The stock market was very firm from the opening and extended its gains on
favourable trading comments from Marks and Spencer, the leading British high
street retailer. Interest in the retail sector was also kindled by the bid
by Tesco, second largest UK food retailer, for Wm Low, the Scottish food
group. After market hours, Sainsbury, the most likely name to contest
Tesco's move, said it would make a statement 'in due course', thus whetting
market appetites for a bid battle.
The first peak of the day came when the FT-SE gain moved to 30 points after
the news that US retail sales had risen by only 0.6 per cent in June. This
reduced worries over the strength of the US economic recovery, and therefore
over the danger of a tightening of Federal Reserve policy.
But the final boost came from a strong rise in German bond futures which
caused UK gilts to move ahead very sharply, leading to exhaustion of three
recent taplet stocks. Led by a rapidly expanding premium on the Footsie
December future contract, the stock market powered ahead in the final
minutes of the session. Further encouragement came from the gain of 30
points in the Dow Industrial Average early in the new session on Wall
Street.
Traders admitted that London marketmakers have been caught out by the sudden
bullish turn in the market and that share prices had been subjected to a
powerful 'squeeze' as the big securities houses struggled to buy stock.
However, it was clear that the relative weakness in sterling has rendered UK
stocks very attractive to the overseas buyers who have been making the
running this week.
At the same time, London benefited from the relaxation of tensions in the
dollar following both the US retail sales figures and also comments from Mr
Tietmeyer, president of the Bundesbank.
Trading volume, as measured through Seaq, the electronic trading system,
increased to 733.2m shares, with non-Footsie business making up a moderate
55 per cent of the total. On Wednesday, 720.8m shares traded were worth
Pounds 1.43bn in retail, or genuine customer business.
Oil shares continued to forge ahead on the back of strong buying from the US
but most other dollar stocks lagged the market as the US currency remained
uninspired. There were gains among defence industry stocks as the market
absorbed the latest plans for the UK armed forces. However, leisure and
consumer sectors stood out, as expectations of revived personal spending in
the UK took hold.
