FT  09 NOV 94 / Survey of Finland (12): Stakes cut gradually - Elections may
stall pace of state asset sales
The momentum of the Finnish privatisation programme - stalled for so long by
the country's deep recession - has increased sharply in the last 12 months.
The government has sold out stakes in five companies, raising a total of
FM7.4bn both for itself and the companies concerned. The question is whether
the pace of the programme will be maintained after next March's general
elections when the Social Democrats look likely to return to power.
The Finnish privatisation programme has been a cautious one. Indeed,
privatisation is probably too strong a word for a process that is better
characterised as a broadening of ownership. The government has chosen to
reduce its stake gradually in a number of the country's biggest industrial
groups and, in most cases, it still retains more than 50 per cent of the
shares.
The companies themselves have been the main beneficiaries of the process,
garnering FM5.84bn out of the proceeds to strengthen their recession and
debt-weakened balance sheets. The government could have done with the funds
to reduce its budget deficit, but it is precisely because of budget
constraints that it has not been able to service the risk capital needs of
the companies itself.
Over the past 12 months, stakes have been sold in Outokumpu, the mining and
metals group; Rautaruukki, the steel producer; Valmet, the paper machinery
manufacturer, Kemira, the chemicals group, and Veitsiluoto, the pulp and
paper group.
In the case of Outokumpu, Rautaruukki and Valmet, which were already listed
companies, the targeted buyers have been domestic and international
institutions. With Veitsiluoto, on the other hand, an industry buyer was
preferred, which resulted in Enso-Gutzeit securing a 35 per cent stake for
FM1.5bn. Kemira was introduced via an initial public offering which raised
FM1.14bn and cut state ownership to 75 per cent.
The government is free to sell more shares in all five companies before it
reaches the limits of its parliamentary authorisation. Outokumpu is the only
member of the group where state ownership has already fallen below 50 per
cent.
Altogether, there are some 12 groups on the government's privatisation list,
including Neste, the oil and petrochemicals group; Enso-Gutzeit, the pulp
and paper group; Finnair, the national airline; and Imatran Voima, the big
energy company.
Some commentators believe that the state could have been more aggressive,
selling out more stakes earlier in the cyclical upturn which has favoured
the country's big exporters and driven the stock market up sharply in the
past two years.
But there are good reasons for the government's caution. One is Finland's
three-year long recession between 1991 and 1993 which dragged many companies
into the red and sent share values plunging. 'We have always had a very
company specific orientation,' says Mr Matti Vuoria, secretary-general of
Ministry of Trade and Industry.
Another consideration has been the small size of the domestic market which
could easily have been swamped if the government had been too ambitious.
The momentum of the process has shown no signs of abating. Indeed, one of
the most ambitious parts of the programme - a partial privatisation of
Neste, the oil and petrochemicals group - is likely to be next, possibly as
early as the spring of 1995. Neste has been valued at FM10bn, so that even
if only 20 per cent of the company is sold initially, it would be the
biggest Finnish privatisation so far.
In addition, the government is looking for parliamentary permission to
reduce its stake further in three other companies: Rautaruukki, Valmet and
Kemira.
A key question will be the attitude of the Social Democrats who, the polls
say, will return to power in general elections next March. They have been
less enthusiastic about the privatisation process than the current
centre-right administration and they could try to slow the process down.
International investors have played a crucial role in the privatisation
programme, largely because there has been too much stock for domestic
institutions to swallow and there has only been a limited retail element.
More than 50 per cent of the shares offered so far have been taken up by
foreigners.
This reliance on the international market has helped to drive up foreign
ownership of Finnish companies at a time when foreign buying has in any case
been heavy due to strong fundamentals and the 1993 liberalisation of rules
on foreign ownership. Today around 30 per cent of Finnish shares are in
foreign hands.
In some companies, the level is much higher. For example, more than 50 per
cent of Nokia, the high-flying telecommunications group which launched a
FM2.4bn share issue during the summer, is now foreign-owned. This prompted
the group to seek a listing on the New York Stock Exchange, the first
Finnish company to do so.
Some commentators worry that high foreign ownership levels and the
continuing privatisation programme could unsettle the development of the
stock market at a time when it is within striking distance of its 1989
all-time high.
A sudden withdrawal by foreigners could quickly cause the market to plunge
simply because domestic institutions could not handle it. This is what
happened in the Finnish bond markets earlier this year. The risk of
profit-taking in the equity market has been heightened by the strength of
the markka which has amplified dollar earnings.
With privatisation, the worry is one of over-loading. Mr Ari Lahti, managing
director of Protos Stockbrokers, says parliamentary authorisation exists for
a further FM11bn worth of privatisation excluding Neste. He argues that this
is too big a burden for the market to absorb in the short term, when the
total supply of cash from mutual funds, foreigners and domestic institutions
is unlikely to exceed FM18bn.
Mr Vuoria says foreign institutions will continue to play a crucial role
both in the privatisation process and the development of the stock exchange,
but he expects their interest to become 'more focused' and 'selective'. At
the same time, he believes the growing domestic interest in the country's
privatisation process will continue.
