FT  28 JAN 94 / Technology: Sandoz splits the R&amp;D difference
Like many big pharmaceutical groups, Sandoz of Switzerland has lived the
nightmare of discovering a drug in a new category and then seeing another
company bring a competitor compound to market first.
That is one reason why it has split its development department away from its
research activity. Britain's Glaxo announced a similar move last year.
'Once you decide to develop a product, you have to go full out. There is no
room for half measures,' says Urs Barlocher, chief executive of Sandoz.
The other reason for the change comes from the research side, where the
rapid advance of biochemistry is changing the nature of research management.
In the past, pharmaceutical research was chemical-based, and proceeded at a
relatively gentle pace. Now, with the rise of biochemistry, it has become
more fast moving.
Pharmaceutical companies have recognised that the speed of advances in
biotechnology makes it impossible to keep their in-house laboratories up to
speed on all fronts. Consequently, they have tended to set up co-operation
arrangements with independent biotechnology laboratories and start-up
companies.
Sandoz now has more than 30 such arrangements, consuming a tenth of its
SFr1.2bn (Pounds 540m) R&amp;D budget, and Barlocher is convinced the number
will rise. 'We do not yet have a good feel for the right balance, but the
trend is increasing,' he says. He points out that it has always been
difficult to find researchers with management skills, and now the
requirements are much greater.
'You need someone who knows what is happening in basic research, where we
can find leads for new compounds. He has to be able to decide quickly which
co-operation deals we should enter and which ones we should keep. It is a
matter of judgment, and in the past we have been too slow.'
Assuming such a person can be found, he argues that it is now too much to
ask him to look after development as well. In any event, he believes that
the management of development, which involves testing a discovery to the
point where it can be put on the market, demands different skills from
research management.
'In development, it is a question of setting priorities. For the most part
it is systematic, not creative. It should be run in a way very similar to a
production centre. You can measure results and set clear targets.'
Sandoz has had a notoriously slow development department in the past. A few
years ago, it brought in the management consultants McKinsey to try to speed
the process, and last year it set up a project team approach. 'We still feel
we are not among the very best,' Barlocher admits, 'but we are now confident
that we can catch up.'
He claims that the split will not lead to greater bureaucracy. 'We have
tried to segment responsibility by flow of product. We want to give full
responsibility to the heads of different sections, and reduce the matrix to
a minimum.'
Development is by far the most expensive part of the R&amp;D process, especially
the clinical studies. Thus, the group believes it must concentrate its
research efforts on finding what it calls number one compounds, those that
are clearly ahead of the competition.
'It is no longer worth following the other guy. Even if you have a fast
development department, it will become more and more difficult to catch up,'
Barlocher says. 'And you cannot count on the other guy to make a mistake.'
