FT  23 FEB 94 / Personal Viewpoint: Lesson in maximising human capital
The British education system is badly skewed. Performance is good at the
higher end, but inadequate at the primary and nursery level. To remedy this
defect, the National Commission on Education last November put forward
proposals in its report, Learning to Succeed (Heinemann, Pounds 4.99), to
recoup Pounds 1.3bn a year from public expenditure by 2000. This saving
would finance part of the Pounds 3.2bn-a-year public cost of its other
recommendations, notably universal nursery education, now accepted as a goal
by the prime minister, Mr John Major.
The NCE proposals are in line with current discussion by the government and
opposition on harnessing more private finance for public projects.
The average graduate can expect a good return on investment in a degree,
with higher lifetime income. Yet the risks and time-lags are such that few
would-be graduates can borrow from banks on expectations alone. The market
in investment in human capital has to be helped by government. This can be
done at lower cost to the public purse than grants and student loans, which
are both charged against the public sector borrowing requirement.
The present student loan scheme is entirely financed by the government
although some of the money is to be repaid in later years. The alternative
is to obtain finance from the private sector - banks, pension and insurance
funds - and give it a Treasury guarantee, in return for an assured return of
about  1/2 per cent over the cost of money. Such guarantees are given in the
UK for export loans, and in the US for student loans and some mortgages.
Loans would be as good as gilt-edged, and would thus not need capital to
back them in bank balance sheets. They could be securitised and traded in
the bond market.
Only the likely default percentage, not the whole loan, would be counted as
part of the PSBR. The default percentage would be reduced by changing
another Treasury rule - that the tax system cannot be used to collect
student loan repayments. The use of tax returns for this purpose would
reduce the risk of default. The NCE has put a high figure of 20 per cent on
the default risk, and it might well turn out to be less. The present sums
allocated for student loans could thus be made to go five times as far.
This scheme would involve higher interest payments than the present zero
real rates for student loans. The burden on graduates could be reduced by
giving tax relief on the loan interest, bringing it down from 6 per cent to
4.5 per cent at current figures. Savings from the phasing out of mortgage
interest relief could be recycled into student loan interest relief. As at
present, loan servicing would be suspended while graduates were out of work.
While they were in work it would be related to their income above a certain
minimum level. Once the interest and the loan had been repaid, graduates
would not pay any additional tax. The NCE has therefore called its scheme
the 'higher education contribution', or maintenance allowance, to show that
it is not a graduate tax.
Students would not be forced to enter the scheme, and would get a discount
for payment up-front. They would be expected to finance 20 per cent of
average tuition fees each year, and would be able to borrow their
maintenance at more generous levels than the present inflation-eroded
allowance, thus incurring a total obligation of perhaps Pounds 12,000 by the
end of a three-year course, repayable over up to 20 years.
This would end the present system of free tuition even for students from
high-income groups, without penalising those pursuing more expensive
subjects. It would avoid the most sought-after universities using the scheme
to finance top-up fees, enabling them further to enhance their relative
advantage. There would also be an end to the present grants for students
from lower-income households. The graduate's future income, not the parent's
present income, would determine the ability to pay.
This type of scheme is different from that turned down by the banks in 1989.
The banks were then expected to administer and monitor individual student
loans provided by the government, involving extra work without adequate
recompense. Here the roles would be reversed, with the banks and other
financial institutions providing the finance for loans guaranteed,
administered and monitored by the government, the student loan company and
the universities.
Private financial institutions should welcome the opportunity to invest in
the human capital essential for the UK to close the gap with its economic
competitors.
The author is a member of the National Commission on Education, and former
chief economic adviser to Lloyds Bank
