FT  08 APR 94 / Survey of East Kent (4): Poised for take-off - Ashford
Civic leaders and the business community of Ashford have faced decades of
frustration. The town, well-placed in the centre of East Kent to take full
advantage of improved communications and the opening of the Channel tunnel,
has been earmarked as a growth centre for years, but take-off has been
disappointingly slow, writes Richard Evans.
The vision is there and much of the infrastructure has been put in place,
but fresh difficulties keep on emerging to delay the full realisation of the
ambitious plans.
Ashford, an historic market town, began to diversify in the 1950s when it
agreed to take some of London's overspill population, and growth was steady
if unspectacular.
It was earmarked more specifically as a growth centre in Kent County
Council's structure plan, being ideally situated to take advantage of
growing trade links with Europe. The intention was that it should become a
focus for inward investment that would benefit the whole of East Kent. The
town's potential as a centre for strong economic growth was further boosted
by the channel tunnel project and the decision to build an international
passenger station in the town as part of the fast rail link from the tunnel
at Folkeston to London. It is here that problems continue to dog development
plans.
When Mr John MacGregor, transport secretary, announced the approved route
for the rail link in January, there remained two areas of uncertainty. One
was near Gravesend in north Kent and the other was around Ashford. The
battle is still being fought and its outcome is regarded as crucial to the
full development of Ashford as a growth centre.
There are three possible routes under discussion, central and southern ones
that would go through the new station, and a more northerly one that would
bypass it.
The northerly route parallel to the M20 motorway would, in the view of the
town's civic leaders, be a big economic blow as it would mean a smaller
number of diverted trains would call at the station. Most would travel
straight to and from London.
Mr Ernie Mexter, chief executive of Ashford Borough Council, expresses a
common view: 'We strongly favour a line going through the new station as it
would bring greatly increased prosperity to the whole of East Kent. The
northern option would mean we'd have all the environmental drawbacks of the
rail link - and none of the economic benefits.'
Preliminary work has already started on building the station and completion
by a consortium led by John Laing is expected by the end of next year. The
Pounds 50m project involved the redevelopment of the BR Network South East
site and the construction of new platforms and an international terminal
building with parking for 2,000 cars.
If the main line goes through the station rather than a spur, the service to
be known as Eurostar, will run between 10 and 15 trains a day with Brussels
just two hours away and Paris slightly more. Overnight trains will also run
to Amsterdam, Cologne, Frankfurt and Dortmund. Ashford would be the only
passenger stop between London and the continent.
An important infrastructure element is Ashford's southern orbital road which
provides access to two business parks including the 100-acre Orbital
development. The adjacent 114-acre Waterbrook site, owned by Eurotunnel
Developments, has outline planning permission for the relocation of
Ashford's cattle market, and for hotel and leisure uses as well as office,
industrial and warehouse developments, a truck stop and customs clearance
facilities.
The truck stop will be the only area on the M20 corridor identified for
trans-shipment, warehousing and wholesale distribution. On the town's
northern outskirts is the Eureka science and business park, a 135-acre site
owned by Trinity College, Cambridge and aimed primarily at international
companies requiring prestigious landscaped sites for research and
development.
A question mark hangs over the development as the controversial northern
route for the rail link would cut across a corner of the park and prevent
the construction there of leisure facilities planned by the local authority.
A final decision on the route is expected within weeks and if it goes as the
council hopes, everything will then be in place for the long-awaited surge
in growth that will enable the town to fulfil its role as the catalyst for
jobs throughout the East Kent area - 'we are poised for take-off and we have
a good reputation for getting things done,' says Mr Mexter.
