FT  09 AUG 94 / International Capital Markets: Syndicated loan for Spain
Volatile conditions in the bond markets, its traditional funding source,
have prompted the Kingdom of Spain to return to the syndicated loans market
to secure standby liquidity.
Its new Ecu6bn five-year revolving credit facility, which is being arranged
by Chemical Bank, comes one year after NatWest Capital Markets put in place
a Ecu5bn three-year facility. About one-third of the latter has been drawn
down.
Banks are keen to lend to Spain, which has a double-A credit rating and a
zero-risk weighting, but some in the syndicated loans market have decided
not to participate in the multi-currency deal because ofthe terms.
Their criticism is levelled mainly at the large underwriting commitments:
Ecu750m for senior lead managers and Ecu500m for lead managers. These levels
pose problems for banks at or close to their country limit as a result of
underwriting last year's loan.
Their feathers have also been ruffled by Chemical's decision to invite
around 25 banks and to publish the terms before the deal is underwritten.
This more open strategy runs counter to the practice of not disclosing terms
until a small underwriting group has been formed.
They add that Chemical is breaking the market practice of reducing
underwriters' commitments on a pro-rata basis if a deal is oversubscribed.
Chemical's Ecu1.65bn commitment will be reduced to Ecu800m before
commitments taken on by other senior lead managers are reduced.
Chemical confirmed there had been some declines but said three banks had
already committed at the higher level. 'The strategy has been put in place
to get the best results and to bring the banks as close as possible to their
desired targets,' said an official. In the case of senior lead managers,
this was Ecu375m, and Ecu250m for lead managers.
Spain will pay an annual interest rate of Libor plus 4.5 basis points and a
facility fee of 4.25 basis points. Underwriting fees for senior lead
managers are 2.5 basis points and lead managers 2 basis points.
