FT  11 OCT 94 / Management (The Growing Business): Forging links of survival
 -Europe's single market can provide a rescue route for companies
In its heyday in the late 1980s, Pershke Price Service, a privately-owned
distributor of printing machinery in the UK, had sales of more than Pounds
70m and employed 340 people. Then, as with many companies in the printing
industry, recession hit with a vengeance. Plans to list on the USM were put
on the back-burner. The workforce was cut by one-third, sales halved and the
company is only now profitable again after losses in two of the last three
years.
But this week the prospect of a considerably brighter future for PPS came
with the announcement of a significant merger, made possible by the opening
up of Europe's single market.
After nearly a year of delicate talks led by accountants KPMG, PPS and seven
other mainly family-owned European companies have formed a new company -
Omnigraph Group NV - in the Netherlands. It will have annual sales of Pounds
250m.
The group will initially combine all the operations of its eight member
companies, which already all distribute MAN Roland equipment; they will
expand to sell pre-press and post-press equipment from other suppliers.
Also, to reduce dependence on equipment sales, which experience has shown
are highly vulnerable during recession, Omnigraph will place greater
emphasis on sales of consumable items such as rollers.
Chris Marks, until the merger the chief executive of PPS and now one of
three directors on Omnigraph's executive board, says the new company will
have an international network similar to those run by the competition.
The main distributor for MAN Roland's large competitor, Heidelberger,
already operates through a single European distributor, Dutch-based
Buhrmann-Tetterode.
'A lot of our customers are investing in the graphic arts business across
borders,' says Marks. Customers do not want to talk (to their distributors)
country by country.'
The move also gives PPS's shareholders - the Werkmeister family and Montagu
Private Equity - a considerably increased chance of floating the company.
'One of the major driving forces behind creating a European company of this
size is the intention that we will go to the market in three to four years,'
says Marks.
The driving force behind the merger was the creation of Dutch paper giant
KNP BT, which was formed early last year when KNP, Buhrmann-Tetterode and
VRG amalgamated. This merger gave KNP BT a stake in distributors of both MAN
Roland and Heidelberger equipment, which together had more than 80 per cent
of the Belgian and Dutch market, a situation the European Commission would
not allow.
KNP BT responded by injecting its interests in the Dutch and Belgian
distributors into Omnigraph, where it will play no part on the executive
board.
Corporate financiers say, however, that the gradual arrival of a level
playing field in Europe may make similar transnational mergers more common
and give private as well as quoted companies something to consider.
Many companies - like PPS - suffered both volume and margin falls in the
recession. While volume might be returning, retrieving margin may be more
difficult. This is particularly true in the printing machinery industry,
where Japanese distributors quickly built market share when established
European press manufacturers could not meet demand in the 1980s.
The only way they might be able to regain margin is by exploiting synergies
by combining stocks of parts and engineering support.
For controlling families, the prospect of the loss of control is not easy.
'It is a break of a long family tradition,' Marks says. 'But in today's
world it is difficult for family businesses with high capital requirements
to maintain long-term independence.'
