FT  16 AUG 94 / Killings shatter Zurich's orderly drug scene
Zurich's infamous open hard drug scene has been witness to many shocking
human dramas in the past few years. But it has been virtually free of
violence - as if even drug addicts and dealers agreed to respect the Swiss
insistence on order in all things.
No more. In the past month, four people have been murdered near the
abandoned midtown Letten railway station where some 1,000 dealers and
addicts huddle together over a thick carpet of syringe wrappers and blood
soaked cotton wool.
Last Friday night, a Lebanese youth was shot dead in the back, setting off
an unprecedented chain of violence and threats of further violence.
Street fighting broke out between gangs of dealers and between dealers and
the police. A police car was overturned and several private vehicles damaged
as rumours spread that the police were responsible for the shooting. Then,
following the arrest of a Lebanese youth, a group of Lebanese dealers
threatened to bomb the city.
The stunned Swiss authorities believe the cause of this deterioration has
been the attempt by Lebanese and other Arabs to muscle in on drug dealing in
Zurich, a trade hitherto dominated by former Yugoslavs.
Police also believe the violence is related to the sharp fall in the street
price of heroin - to about SFr50 (Pounds 25) per gram, about a quarter of
the price prevailing two years ago. In a bizarre show of power at the
weekend, angry Letten dealers withdrew from the market, driving addicts out
into the city streets in a desperate search for their fixes.
'We are observing a virtual drug war. The fight for market share has become
harder and has escalated in recent months,' Ms Monika Stocker, Zurich's
social services director, said on Sunday.
The violence first broke out in mid-July when a North African man was knifed
to death in the drug quarter. Then early in August, two Algerians were shot
in the head.
'We cannot let murders like this happen every week,' a spokesman for the
city's overstretched police said yesterday. But he had few ideas for
preventing them.
Ironically, the escalation has come at a time when the Swiss finally seemed
to be getting to grips with their outsized drug problem.
Last year, the federal government authorised a limited experiment in legal
distribution of heroin to Zurich addicts, with a view to breaking the
criminal distribution system. Next month, parliament is to vote on a bill
making it more difficult for immigrant dealers to take advantage of the
asylum law to escape detention and expulsion.
Next spring, another 300 prison cells will become available in Zurich. At
the moment, prosecutors tend to release minor drug offenders because of the
lack of prison accommodation.
For Ms Stocker, it is all too little too late. She says that if the federal
government does not soon authorise a widening of the controlled distribution
of heroin, the city could act unilaterally by declaring a health emergency.
Such a radical step may not be necessary. The Swiss people, who have long
preferred not to recognise their drug problem, may finally have been shocked
into an awareness of its seriousness by last Saturday's bombing threat.
And that, in turn, could spur the country's timid politicians to push
through long-discussed drug related reform measures.
