FT  09 NOV 94 / Arts: Alice Revisited - Theatre
And back we go into the nursery, into the place where we now analyse
childhood enchantments in context of disenchanted knowledge of adult life.
Can there be one simple reaction to Alice's Adventures Under Ground,
Christopher Hampton's new adaptation of Lewis Carroll's writings and aspects
of his (ie Charles Dodgson's) life? On the one hand, since this Alice is
full of episodes from those classic books, it is a bracing dip back into a
sane child's discovery of the nonsensical grown-up world. On the other hand,
it is a disturbing study of the stammering, polite, scholarly Dodgson's
melancholy fascination with little girls.
Hampton means, I take it, to examine Carroll's creativity in terms of what
Edmund Wilson called 'the wound and the bow': the wound, in this case, being
Dodgson's paedophile inclinations, the bow being the tales he told to
enthrall his listeners. The wound/bow theory proposes that the spot where
some artists are psychologically vulnerable is precisely what gives them
their archery - their creative genius. In Martha Clarke's staging, there are
only five actors, and the overlap between little Alice Liddell's real world
and the dream world that Dodgson creates for her in the nursery is
considerable.
Hampton's view of Dodgson/Carroll is compassionate - too much so. The bow
only interests him as far as it reveals the wound, and many of the books'
multi-faceted quotations are so placed that we read them in terms of
Dodgson's private feelings. 'Seven and a half] Uncomfortable sort of age. If
you'd asked my advice, you'd have left off at seven.' We also watch Dodgson
start to cry as he slowly unbuttons little Alice's dress.
But Carroll's own mind, for all its pathos, is weak tea beside the
intoxicating concoctions of his tales. Though Alice's Adventures Under
Ground is sensitively shaped, its eventual thrust is merely sentimental. And
sentimentality, surely, is wrong for the man who made Alice cry out 'You're
nothing but a pack of cards]'
At the Cottesloe Theatre, Robert Israel's nursery set is eloquent. One look
at its rocking-horse, its white walls, its large dark looking-glass above
the mantel, and we are prepared for meanings both surreal and psychological.
John Carlisle, Gabrielle Lloyd, and Joseph Mydell play a marvellous range of
supporting roles. Martha Clarke has them act with a fine dash of exaggerated
intensity.
Little Sasha Hanau would be an ideal Alice - grave, focused, precise,
responsive - if she did not gabble rapid lines. Such manners are affecting
in so small a child. Michael Maloney (despite overdoses of vocal virtuosity)
beautifully creates a Carroll/Dodgson of immense courtesy, birdlike staccato
head movements, and eyes both burning and pleading. He is adult among
children, child among adults. Judiciously, Hampton and Clarke have him play
his own Dormouse.
In repertory at the Cottesloe, Theatre, South Bank, into 1995.
