FT  15 JUN 94 / International Company News: Franco-German pact defies
sceptics - FT writers look at yesterday's three-way global telecoms link-up
Last autumn the French and German state telecommunications companies were in
talks about a union extending to a full merger of their international
activities, and the possibility of an equity swap. In the event they
produced a far more modest joint venture.
Six months later, the sceptics warned that the talks between the
Franco-German alliance and Sprint, the third-largest US long-distance
carrier, would end the same way. The state-owned European monopolies had
enough problems forging their own alliance: subsequent talks with AT&amp;T, the
large US group, came to nothing: and the challenge in linking with any
operator in the highly competitive US market seemed Herculean.
Yesterday was no time for sceptics. France Telecom and Deutsche Telekom went
the whole way, spending Dollars 4.2bn on a stake in Sprint and mapping out a
structure promising that the new alliance would serve the world. Mr Helmut
Ricke, Deutsche Telekom's chairman, called Sprint 'the ideal partner' for
implementing his global strategic goals.
The Franco-German-Sprint deal mirrors last year's alliance between British
Telecommunications and MCI of the US. The amount of cash involved is roughly
similar; in both cases it is flowing from Europe to the US; and the goal
proclaimed for the international alliances - to exploit the large corporate
market for one-stop international telecoms services - is identical.
A third alliance may be in the offing - between AT&amp;T and Unisource, a joint
venture between the Swedish, Swiss and Dutch national operators. If the
talks between the two yield another US-European tie-up, the financial
arrangements are likely to be different to the other two: but the rationale
and objectives will be the same.
However, the parallel between the BT/MCI and Sprint/Franco-German deals
should not be pressed too far. The alliance announced yesterday is between
three, not two companies, and bears all the hallmarks of complex tripartite
haggling. While BT and MCI are to establish one joint venture company to
spearhead their joint efforts, Sprint and its partners are promising at
least three separate entities, with a variable balance between the three.
The regulatory barriers are also likely to be far higher for Sprint, France
Telecom and Deutsche Telekom than they were for BT-MCI. It has taken the
latter a year to get approval from US authorities, in spite of the fact that
the UK is arguably a more competitive telecommunications market than the US.
France and Germany, by contrast, remain monopolies for voice and leased-line
business - the most lucrative parts of the telecoms business. Neither the
French nor the German operators will face 'voice' competition in their home
markets until 1998, and given Mercury's experience in the UK it may take
years for competition to become a reality.
Within minutes of the announcement of yesterday's deal, AT&amp;T was vowing to
fight it strenuously through the US Federal Communications Commission and
other forums. US analysts believe it stands some chance of success.
The French and Germans claim that the alliance will provide services only in
sectors - notably data telecoms and private corporate networks  - already
open to competition in their home markets. Nonetheless, claims and
counter-claims as to the cross-subsidies being provided from monopoly
revenues look set to preoccupy regulators, possibly for years.
The spotlight is now firmly on AT&amp;T, whose European strategy has been
difficult to discern since BT announced its purchase of 20 per cent of MCI
last June. AT&amp;T has to decide whether to work with established European
operators, or to compete aggressively against them as and when it can.
An alliance with Unisource may offer it the best of both worlds - taking it
into Europe in respectable domestic company, but leaving it free to compete
head-on with the EU's larger operators, which control most of the telecoms
business of Europe's multinationals.
