FT  18 MAY 94 / VW espionage inquiry methods under attack
The premier of Lower Saxony and five leading German lawyers yesterday
launched a concerted attack on the state prosecutor in charge of the
Volkswagen-General Motors industrial espionage probe.
Mr Gerhard Schroder, Social Democrat premier of Lower Saxony and effective
holder of the state's 20 per cent stake in VW, complained of an alleged lack
of fairness and the use of 'questionable' methods in the investigation. His
attack was based on weekend reports that lawyers working for Adam Opel, GM's
German subsidiary, last year hired private detectives to stalk suspect VW
employees - all formerly employed by the US group - and used subterfuge to
win their confidence and gain access to their private property.
Meanwhile, lawyers representing Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriotua, GM's
former global purchasing chief, and colleagues who followed him to VW, said
they planned to investigate the methods used on behalf of the prosecution.
Yesterday's events represented the most vigorous retaliation so far against
the US-based GM group's allegations of the theft of masses of corporate
secrets by Mr Lopez and his associates.
'We will carefully examine the extent to which the state prosecutors' office
tolerated or had knowledge of inadmissible deceptions,' the lawyers said in
a statement issued by VW.
Referring to 'indications' that the Opel detectives had used subterfuge in
their probes, the lawyers said they would also examine the extent to which
the private detectives' methods might have prejudiced the findings of the
official probe.
The statement from Mr Schroder seemed aimed at exerting pressure on the
Social Democrat government in the state of Hesse, Opel's German base and the
seat of the criminal investigations, to intervene. The lawyers' intervention
appeared to signal the start of legal retaliation. While the Darmstadt
prosecutors' office issued a firm denial of the VW lawyers' allegations, the
events may present a chance for VW to open a new front in the legal battle
between the two companies, which has already lasted more than a year.
