FT  30 MAY 94 / Business Travel: Planes, trains and tunnels - UK airlines'
response to the new Channel crossing
The UK airline industry is gearing itself up for increasing competition next
year on short-haul European routes from high-speed rail services through the
Channel tunnel.
British Airways plans to revamp its Club Europe business class services
later this year, and is launching new services from London to Orly, which,
being south of Paris, offers a competitive alternative to high-speed trains.
British Midland also plans services to Orly from September, and to launch
new routes to more distant destinations in Europe which will not compete
directly with the tunnel.
But one airline has decided that, if you cannot beat high-speed trains on
shorter routes, then join them. Mr Richard Branson sees the new network of
high-speed train services linked to the Channel tunnel as a chance for his
Virgin group to expand its travel business in Europe.
'We see high-speed trains as complementing our Virgin Atlantic long-haul
airline operations,' says Mr Branson. 'We have no intention of expanding in
the short-haul European airline business, but trains would give us a big
foothold in the market.'
Mr Branson will join forces with one of the five consortiums bidding to
build the fast rail link from London to Folkestone - Virgin will decide
which one in the next three weeks. The winning consortium will run the UK
end of the joint venture with SNCF, the French railway company, operating
Eurostar trains through the tunnel.
Mr Branson wants to extend his Virgin Atlantic airline formula of 'comfort
and fun' to the proposed rail services. He plans to introduce individual
seat video screens, and equip trains with telephones and faxes.
His recent investment - to manage jointly with Shirayama Shokusan of Japan
the Pounds 150m hotel development on the site of London's old County Hall
building, near Waterloo station - is also linked to his Channel tunnel
ambitions. 'County Hall is next to the new Channel tunnel London rail
terminal, and will make an ideal base for our long-distance air travellers
to connect into the Eurostar rail network,' he said.
Virgin Upper Class air passengers would be driven by limousine from Heathrow
airport to spend the night at County Hall, before travelling to the
continent by high-speed train the next day.
British Airways, however, believes that, while the tunnel will have
short-term impact, in the longer term it will expand the overall travel
market for both airlines and trains.
Sir John Egan, chief executive of BAA, the UK airports operator, also
expects only a modest impact. 'Most business travellers start their journeys
from home to the airport. If they live in the home counties, they will still
find it more convenient to go straight to Gatwick or Heathrow rather than
travel to the city centre to catch a Channel tunnel train.'
