FT  21 JUN 94 / Management (The Growing Business): Quality under fire -
Richard Gourlay on a broadside attack against BS5750
Quality in management, manufacturing and the provision of services is a bit
like motherhood and apple pie; everyone these days is in favour. How this
elusive goal is best pursued, however, is increasingly contentious.
Last week the quality industry, which has sprung up in the UK around the
BS5750 quality standard, received a broadside from the heart of the British
scientific establishment. In a 100-page report, the Science and Engineering
Policy Studies Unit, a body whose parents are The Royal Society and The
Royal Academy of Engineering, accuses the national quality 'industry' of
being inward-looking, insufficiently focused on the customer and attracting
its 'share of cowboys'.
It says the BS5750 quality standard is but a small part of total quality
management and that it tends to enshrine existing practices rather than
encourage continuous improvement. Sepsu argues for greater recognition for
companies doing their own quality assessments and says UK competitiveness
needs more award schemes such as the UK Quality Award launched earlier this
year.
'The quality assurance business is run largely by . . . assessors,
certifiers, accreditors, consultants,' the Sepsu report says. 'It is not run
by its customers. Indeed, there is a temptation for the assessors etc to
regard each other as their customers with the real customer nowhere to be
seen.'
Sepsu's criticism comes just two months after Brussels entered the debate
with a European Commission document called Elements of Community Quality
Policy. This paper aims to put ISO 9000 - the European equivalent of BS5750
 -in perspective as part, but only part, of the quest for competitiveness.
Elements of the Sepsu report are likely to be endorsed in the autumn when
they are incorporated in a Department of Trade and Industry document called
Managing in the 90s.
Looming largest in Sepsu's sights is the British Standards Institution,
which not only sets quality standards but, through its BSI Quality Assurance
arm, certifies more than 50 per cent of companies seeking BS5750. Describing
BSI's domination of the accreditation market as 'unhealthy', the Sepsu
report says: 'There is thought to be too much scope for partiality between
the quasi-legislative BSI, which is under constant pressure to increase the
income from non-government sources, and its commercially successful
offshoot.'
Derek Prior, director of communications at the BSI, agrees some of the
infrastructure that has sprung up around BS5750 certification does need
over-hauling. He rejects the report's suggestion that BSI's certification
and standards-setting functions should be split. And he also doubts whether
self assessment could ever replace external assessment by certification
bodies.
The report reviews existing research into quality management and draws on
interviews with 12 companies and 58 witnesses, including the quality
assurance director of Nissan Motor Manufacturing UK and representatives from
the Confederation of British Industry and the DTI.
'We are putting ISO 9000 in its place, it has a place but it is not the
whole game,' says Peter Collins, Sepsu director. The two standards address
only a small fraction of what companies need to manage if they are pursuing
a total quality approach, he says. 'If unimaginatively implemented, ISO 9000
can easily become a tool for codifying and freezing current practice; total
quality management is much more concerned with continuous improvement.'
Sepsu contrasts the scope of the BS5750 standard with the nine areas the UK
Quality Award seeks to examine - a definition of quality that was originally
taken from the acclaimed Baldrige Award in the US. In focusing on processes,
BS5750 addresses only one of the nine areas that the award's architects
consider contribute to excellence. The other eight, which are largely
ignored, are leadership, people management, policy and strategy, resources,
people satisfaction, customer satisfaction, the impact on society and
business results.
Collins says more than 1m copies of the Baldrige Award questionnaire have
been sent to companies, simply because they are useful tools for
self-assessment.
The report questions BS5750's place in smaller companies. While few small
businesses would not benefit from adopting its basic principles, the costs
of obtaining third party accreditation may be inappropriate.
It suggests the government could provide funds to spread the idea that
self-assessed quality management programmes are a powerful catalyst for
sustained improvement in performance.
The British Quality Foundation could also consider developing another
quality award category for companies with fewer than 50 employees. Quality
awards, the review says, have proved an effective stimulus to change. 'The
value of Baldrige, the European Foundation for Quality Management and the
British Quality Foundation awards is that they are sophisticated tools for
self-assessment, rooted in experience,' Sepsu says.
The review also makes recommendations about the people and organisations
behind BS5750.
As a minimum measure, certification bodies should employ only registered
assessors.
The encouragement of mergers between the 34 certification bodies should be
considered by the government. The fact that some certifiers are themselves
not accredited by the National Accreditation Council for Certification
Bodies weakens the whole BS5750 system.
The government should ensure that consultants used to help businesses
prepare for certification meet the most rigorous standards if they are to be
used by companies subsidised by DTI schemes.
The report also questions the wisdom of the DTI's decision to reject a
suggestion that BSI and its certification arm, BSI Quality Assurance, be
split. The DTI has instead already asked BSI to reinforce the ring-fencing
of functions.
At the heart of Sepsu's recommendations is the assertion that truly enduring
quality improvement programmes originate within an organisation and are not
imposed from outside.
It is one view. The 'external' certification industry, worth Pounds 80m a
year to consultants and assessors, according to one estimate, not
unexpectedly has another.
*UK Quality Management - Policy Options, Sepsu. Tel 071 839 5561
