FT  25 JUL 94 / Sport: Keep betting in the dark
In 1961, the year that murderous upheaval in South Africa was putting the
country beyond the pale as far as liberal democracy - and, later, cricket -
was concerned, a small social upheaval was taking place in Britain. On May 1
the first legal betting shops were opened, and a message was printed on the
cover of the Sporting Life from Home Secretary Rab Butler to all those who
were waiting, in their metaphorical traps, for their first race to the
bookmaker. Within its dry paragraphs, Butler's statement conceded that
off-course gambling had become so rife it could no longer be ignored. 'The
old law had fallen into disrepute' - yes indeed, what with policemen
directing likely lads to the nearest illegal betting shop, and informing
street bookmakers, via a manly and bribe filled handshake, that later that
day they might be arrested. The Betting and Gaming Act was a sensible and
adult piece of legislation, which admitted the existence of certain,
helpfully improper, human impulses and which, by admitting them, ensured
that they did as little harm as possible.
Of course, the first betting shops did not set themselves up next door to
Harrods and proclaim their trade with decorative shop window displays. They
were legal, but they still had the aspect of something illegal; they were
covert chambers, made puritanically uncomfortable in order that people
should not be tempted to linger in them.
And yet by 1968 there were over 15,000 of these murky little places. Today
around Pounds 4bn a year is gambled off-course on horse racing, and around
Pounds 1.6bn a year on greyhounds (as well as all those other bets on
whether, say, England will ever win another test match.) Of the 10 per cent
tax that is paid on these bets, the Treasury receives 7.75 per cent: the
government that gave grudging life to the first betting shops also gave to
its successors a magnificent annual present.
In 1986 the importance of gambling was again acknowledged when legislation
was passed allowing betting shops a tentative entry into the smart, spry,
designer world of the late 1980s. They were permitted to serve refreshments,
which encouraged people to stay in them for hours at a time, and to show
live races on television (previously, punters had stared at the wall and
listened to a stream of consciousness voice-over, which passed with surreal
ease between Red Rum's third Grand National win and the 3.36 at Hackney
Wick).
The shops also began to install carpets and shiny frontages and smooth
lighting. Some of them became very comfortable indeed. Behind their darkened
windows lay what was, for many, the perfect living room: coffee, cigarettes,
a seat in front of your favourite TV programme and a feeling, even during
the hours when the world around you was at its busiest, of absolute
seclusion from that world.
And, for all the agreeable physical changes that have been wrought upon
betting shops, it is in that unchanging sense of seclusion that their
attraction truly resides: that sense of apartness from the bright streets in
which people walk with no knowledge of the gamblers' contrived, complicated
and personal communion with the future. Outside the betting shop, into which
daylight never intrudes, what do those people in the real world know of the
alternative world that the gambler has fabricated for himself?
What do they, with their one Grand National bet a year, know of the terrible
hope placed in that horse running at Lingfield, the one that showed such
improvement last time out, the one that the gambler has singled out as his
horse and that will maybe infuse him with emotions that soar and rampage and
have little, in the end, to do with the desire to win money? What do they
know of the gamblers' world, of its rigid codes of behaviour, of its
addictive rhythms, its terse camaraderie, its supreme pointlessness, its
powerful reality?
For all of us, life is an attempt to control our fate within the
unpredictability of its existence. But the gambler does this in his own way:
a way that is compressed, dramatised, specialised and, above all, intensely
private, because it is he who chooses the arena within which he will battle
against the odds.
This privacy, or self-containment, is something that he relishes. That is
not because he is ashamed, but because he is actually rather proud. And if
he wants to keep his gambling hidden behind the darkened windows of the
betting shop, then he should be able to do so.
However, the government has decided that it is time to dabble again in
betting shop legislation, and has advised that the occluded glass which
separates gamblers from the world outside should be replaced with something
cheerily transparent. It is a ridiculous idea, partly connected with the
contemporary urge to sweep all atmosphere out of every institution; but
mainly concerned with getting more people into betting shops by attempting
to conceal the difference between gamblers and non-gamblers.
That is an impossible thing to do. My prediction is that the bright new
betting shops will lose more customers than they attract. The day that I
walk into Ladbrokes to find that the shrewd, squint-eyed old boys have gone
home to watch Teletext and do their business over the phone, and the place
is full of women sipping tea and placing Pounds 2 each way on Housewives
Choice, ridden by Lester Piggott, is the day I shall know the late 20th
century has destroyed yet another of its links with a more fascinating past.
