FT  25 APR 94 / Lloyds may use shares option to secure bid for C&amp;G
Lloyds Bank may try to pay Cheltenham &amp; Gloucester Building Society members
in preference shares if its Pounds 1.8bn cash bid to take over the society
is blocked by the High Court in a hearing set for May 23.
Legal advisers to the two organisations believe that although the 1986
Building Societies Act was intended to prevent cash bids for societies, the
law was not drafted precisely enough to stop Lloyds making cash payments.
The 1.4m C&amp;G savers and borrowers who are eligible under the Lloyds offer
could be paid in preference shares if the bank was barred from paying cash.
It could then offer to exchange the preference shares into cash on the day
of issue.
The Treasury said yesterday that the intention of the 1986 act had been to
prevent cash bids causing 'speculative flows' of deposits. Since the Lloyds
bid was unveiled last Thursday there has been speculation as to the best
society in which to open an account in anticipation of a bid.
The Treasury said it was awaiting the outcome of the court case before
deciding whether to take any action in response to Lloyds' bid. It is
already reviewing mergers and acquisitions provisions in the 1986 act.
The act prevents a successor company to a building society paying cash to
people who have been members of a society for less than two years. The
successor company to C&amp;G under the Lloyds bid would be the C&amp;G subsidiary of
the bank.
But the act does not specifically bar the holding company of the successor
 -in this case Lloyds  - from making cash payments. Nor does it prevent the
successor company making payments in the form of shares to former members of
the society.
Although the latter option was chosen by Abbey National in its 1988
flotation, Lloyds wants to pay cash to absorb its surplus
capital. If it distributed preference shares, some recipients might choose
not to swap them for cash.
Lloyds said yesterday that it could not comment on issues involved in the
court case. The bank and C&amp;G have received strong legal guidance that the
bid is unlikely to be blocked.
Although Hansard records of the debate on the 1986 act show that ministers
wanted to prevent cash bids, legal advisers believe the court will be unable
to refer to Parliamentary intention in reaching a judgment.
If the government decided to tighten the wording of the 1986 act to prevent
cash bids for other societies, it might be able to introduce changes under
the Deregulation Bill which could be passed this autumn. But substantial
changes to the act would require fresh legislation.
Capital becomes a burden for banks, Page 21
