FT  09 SEP 94 / Kmart to close 110 discount stores
Kmart, the embattled US retailing giant, is to close 110 of its discount
stores with the loss of 6,000 jobs. It is also to reduce its management
workforce by 10 per cent during the next two years, resulting in a further
1650 job losses.
The closures are part of a retrenchment programme announced in January this
year, when Kmart took a Dollars 1.3bn restructuring charge against 1993
earnings. Kmart said yesterday that the programme, which covers relocation
of stores as well as outright closures, is now 65 per cent complete.
The group's profits have fallen for seven quarters in a row, chiefly because
of weak trading in the discount store business.
Yesterday's announcement was seen by Wall Street as evidence that Kmart is
concentrating on problems in its basic business. The company has been
wrangling with shareholders over its specialty retail operations, ranging
from sports goods to bookselling. In June, Kmart agreed to float off four of
its five specialty chains.
Kmart, which has been overtaken as the world's biggest retailer by its
younger US rival Wal-Mart, said the stores to be closed had not met
requirements on sales, profits or investment returns. The 110 closures
represent slightly less than 5 per cent of a total 2,350 stores in the Kmart
chain.
Kmart also announced the recruitment of Mr Ronald Floto as head of its Super
Kmart operation, its move into superstores. Mr Floto is was head of Kash
N'Karry Food Stores Inc.
Mr Joseph Antonini, Kmart president, said yesterday's announcements, and the
impending flotations of the specialty store chains, represented 'strong
steps towards focusing on the core US Kmart business.' However, he added,
'much remains to be done.' Kmart shares rose Dollars  3/4 to Dollars 18 1/4
on the news.
Concentration on the traditional discount chain is a recent departure for
the group. Previously, Mr Antonini insisted that Kmart should retain control
of its specialty chains as well, proposing that the company should issue
special categories of stock linked to the chains' performance. It was this
proposal which was thrown out in June by the investing institutions, who
preferred outright sale of the non-traditional business.
