FT  12 NOV 94 / Fashion: Menswear still marches to military bea - Fatigues
are 'in' with chic young clubbers, but Richard Rawlinson sees old soldiers
and sailors wherever he looks
This season, international menswear designers from Ralph Lauren to Dolce e
Gabbana have taken inspiration from military uniforms. Colours range from
rifle brown to gunmetal grey and cut and detail take on a parade ground
formality.
While Versus, Gianni Versace's diffusion line, offers herringbone pea coats
with military buttons and slim 'guards' leg trousers, Valentino presents
suits with storm flap pockets and epaulettes.
Katharine Hamnett's camouflage trousers are being worn by young night
clubbers along with khaki Gap T-shirts and combat boots, Ferre's fur-trimmed
parka coats would be appropriate for polar expeditions, his greatcoats for
first world war trenches.
Carlos de Freitas, menswear buyer for London department store Harrods, says
the military influence is a perennial favourite. 'It comes round cyclically
and this time Ralph Lauren has created the look with green skinny-rib
roll-neck jumpers under quilted coats and also country tweeds and cords. It
is all part of the continuing interest in practical clothes for active
lifestyles.'
Inno Aguib, menswear buyer for London designer store Browns, says the
military mood among designers is influenced by styles on the streets of New
York and London, whose younger inhabitants have, for a long time, worn
secondhand army gear. 'Dolce e Gabbana often take their inspiration directly
from street fashion,' he says. Their collection includes combat trousers and
Ethree quarter length army coat/jackets.
Horse guards, Vietnam GIs and colonial officers may be marching into
fashion, but military clothing has a much deeper influence. The origins of
most of today's civilian tailoring - whether for a double-breasted overcoat,
a single-breasted suit or a fashionable Nehru collared jacket  - can lie in
the naval and military uniforms of 200 years ago.
The classic suit worn by the professional classes of the 19th and 20th
centuries were not created by the Giorgio Armanis of the day. They evolved
from the uniforms of the armed forces.
Before the end of the 18th century, uniform coats were round-necked and
collarless, rather like the Beatles' jackets of the 1960s or some modern
Chanel women's jackets. They were worn either completely buttoned up or
buttoned back on themselves to reveal a triangular-shaped dash of
distinctive lining. The lining was usually white to contrast the darker
shade of the coat. It formed the basis for the lapel as we know it, although
the fold-down collar had not yet been devised.
By the 19th century, stand-up, tunic-style collars had been introduced to
uniforms, buttoning up below the chin to protect the neck from the elements
without the need for flouncy, Beau Brummel-style cravats. When the stand
collar was turned down, it formed the ghillie collar or the top half of the
contemporary lapel. The front part of the lapel was still part of the coat's
torso but, when it too was turned back, it established the precursor of
today's two-piece lapel with a notch at each side, or gorge cut, as it is
known.
The gorge cut has been stylised over the years to sit comfortably on the
neck, shoulder and chest. But if you put up your jacket collar, you will
still be able to identify its origins - the collar stands up like that of a
tunic and the front sections will kiss at the tips of the notches.
The buttonhole on the left side of the lapel is not merely to insert flowers
into, but is a continuation of an historic tradition in men's tailoring.
That also explains why truly authentic double-breasted suits should have
button holes on both sides.
Nowadays only shooting coats have a button corresponding to the lapel
button, allowing protection from the wind and rain on grouse moors. But most
early examples of the jacket, particularly country clothes worn by estate
workers and artisans, buttoned high like the military tunic.
The more adventurous and monied aristocracy and the expanding bourgeoisie,
wishing to show off their expensively starched cravats, began to have their
coats cut with a lower revers.
Tailors experimented with the fundamental component of the coat for the sole
purpose of aestheticism. The cuff buttons originated after the evolution of
the civilian frock coat out of the military uniform, but it also has more to
do with function than fashion.
In the Victorian era, protocol decreed that gentlemen wore coats in public.
They were deemed undressed if they revealed their shirts. Doctors, for
example, who needed to wash their hands in front of patients, required cuff
buttons which could be undone, allowing them to roll up their sleeves before
their ablutions at the basin. Modern off-the-peg suits usually have fake
buttonholes in order to cut the cost of manufacturing, but bespoke suits
still have working cuff buttons.
Most menswear designers continue to show more concern for traditions than
innovation. While womenswear designers often let their imaginations run
wild, men's tailoring changes little from decade to decade. Menswear
designers may alter the number of buttons for a jacket, the shape of its
lapel and the flaps of its pockets for decorative purposes.
They may decree that the sporty preppy look is 'in' one season and the
effete, Edwardian dandy look the next. But they are faithful to certain
rules, set down by previous generations.
Richard Rawlinson is acting editor of Fashion Weekly.
