FT  23 JUL 94 / Markets: Advisers who want their cake up front - Serious
Money
What is worrying about the life insurance industry is not just its faults
but its attitude. The most obvious faults are failure to train or check up
on sales staff.
Barclays and Nationwide are the two latest big names to be damned for bad
training of sales staff - the very problem that earlier caused Norwich Union
to pull all its salesmen off the streets and put them back in the classroom.
Lack of proper control systems was the sin at Legal and General and
Cornhill.
Bad, but not really that surprising: the criticisms merely confirm what the
public had suspected already. And perhaps the companies will repent and
amend their ways.
More disquieting is a recent survey by Sun Life asking independent financial
advisers what commission structure they would like in future - ie, when
disclosure becomes compulsory in January. It is hard to believe that the
public will continue happily to buy life insurance when they realise quite
how big the commission bite is, particularly at the start of a policy.
Outsiders had predicted that fear of the public reaction to disclosure would
prompt companies to spread commissions more evenly over the policy period.
Hence Sun Life's tentative survey suggestion that the advisers might like to
give customers a better deal by handing some or all of the customary
commission back - or, at least, spread it over a longer period. No dice.
More than 90 per cent of the independent advisers polled said they would
still like to get the same money, thank you. And more than half of that 90
per cent want to stick to the present system - whereby they get the vast
majority of their money at the time they clinch the sale - rather than
spreading commissions more evenly over the life of the policy.
Sun Life, for its part, disclaims any intention of trying to force a change
in commission structures. It reckons the decision is up to the advisers,
since they are the ones who will have to sell the policies. No worries about
what will happen if they fail. Impotence or complacency run mad?
'Quem Jupiter vult perdere, dementat prius.'
First catch your phoenix. Extraordinarily good fund managers, such as Warren
Buffett and Peter Lynch, do exist. But they are very rare and very hard to
identify without hindsight. So, why not abandon the futile search and settle
for something that is attainable - an index fund?
This is one of the main messages of a splendid American book called Bogle on
Mutual Funds*. (These are the US equivalent of unit trusts). And what is so
disarming about this particular messenger is that the author, John Bogle,
runs a Pounds 100bn mutual fund business called Vanguard, renowned for its
rock-bottom management fees.
Index funds, also known as tracker funds or passive investment funds, follow
a particular stock market index - such as the FT-SE-A All-Share index - by
investing in a bunch of shares selected statistically to mimic the index,
rather than beat it.
Mimicking the index sounds a distinctly wimpish ambition. Surely real fund
managers beat indexes - or die in the attempt?
The trouble is that most fail but soldier on. If you take account of costs,
only one in five funds beat the market, says Bogle. And ' . . . it is
certain that passive investment strategies have, will, and must, outperform
active investment strategies in the aggregate'.
So, why are index funds still in a minority? Three reasons. First, indexing
is counterintuitive: most people feel safer in a train with a driver.
Second, investment advisers and managers make less from index funds than
from actively managed funds; commissions and charges are lower. Third, hope
springs eternal. Fortunate investors brag about their success; others envy
and attempt to emulate.
If you are humble enough to settle for an index fund, which should you
choose? Even low charges make a slight dent in performance and mean that all
index funds are likely to do slightly worse than the index they mimic. But
go for the index fund with the lowest expense ratio, and never pick one with
a front-end charge, says Bogle.
The only UK tracker fund with no initial charge is Gartmore UK, which also
has an annual charge of only 0.5 per cent. It has a good and consistent
performance record.
The new issue market has flickered back into life. Both venture capital
group 3i and money broker Exco started trading at modest premiums - ie, the
price in the stock market after normal dealings started was more than the
launch price.
That should not encourage stags to come out of hibernation, though. Most
company sponsors aim for a modest premium. And both 3i and Exco were priced
when the market was groggy, so the pricing was not ambitious.
3i at least, always looked bound to appeal to large investing institutions,
while Exco has its own groupies. And, of course, the whole stock market has
picked up a bit recently. But that is no reason to say 'yes' to the next
tinpot outfit that passes the hat round.
*Bogle on Mutual Funds, by John C. Bogle. Irwin Professional Publishing, New
York; Pounds 20.95.
