FT  29 JUN 94 / Arts: Streets ahead of EastEnders - Television
Oh Raquel, Raquel] If only you knew] Even as you complacently warn sexy
Tanya against carrying on with married men ('They always go back to their
wives') your very own Des is sneaking off for a bit on the side. And who
with? Why Tanya, of course] You may know all about her affair with Alex
Christie, but you little realise what we - the viewers - know: that your
'friend' Tanya is herself a two-timing little hussy] This trick, of letting
the audience in on a secret still concealed from one of the key characters,
used to be described by teachers of Eng. Lit. as 'dramatic irony'.
Shakespeare, we were told, was a dab hand at it, and what is good enough for
him is good enough for Coronation Street. It is one of several ways in which
ITV's 34-year-old northern soap is superior to its johnnie-come-lately
southern cousin, EastEnders.
Coronation Street has remained Britain's favourite programme for years, but
EastEnders is not far behind. The most recent BARB figures for the week
ending June 12 show the three episodes of Coronation Street at Nos. 1, 2,
and 3 in the ratings with 16.23m, 14.96m and 14.72m. EastEnders took 4th and
5th slots in the Top 10 with 13.77m and 12.79m. The figures vary with the
seasons, Coronation Street ranging from 14 to 20 million with EastEnders
usually a couple of million behind.
And what do these millions - many of them the same people, watching both
soaps presumably - get in their twice or thrice weekly fix? In some ways the
two are remarkably similar. Each is defined by a small urban area:
Coronation Street in Weatherfield and Albert Square in Walford. Both are
working class districts. In each a pub and a cafe are the most important
meeting places and the consumption of liquid occupies startlingly large
amounts of script time. Coronation Street has several shops as secondary
locations and EastEnders several market stalls. Nobody in EastEnders ever
watches television, listens to the radio or reads a paper. In Coronation
Street such things do occur but only once in a blue moon.
In both series more time is devoted to the characters analysing and
discussing their feelings and relationships than to anything else. It seems
that this is the sort of activity that many women would like men to join in
more often, but which many men, in real life at any rate, find pretty
tedious. Grant, the bullet-headed bully of a landlord in Albert Square's
Queen Vic, was seen to join a morose male customer at his table last week
and say 'So, joo wanna tell me abaht it?' for all the world like a trained
psychotherapist. Unlike The Bill with its police procedure or Casualty with
its medical crises, neither series contains a natural supply of dramatic
themes beyond the daily lives of its characters, this absence being, in my
view, the most important defining characteristic of a true soap opera.
But the differences are more significant. While Coronation Street remains
solidly white (among the scores of characters appearing during the past four
weeks just two looked non white: Felicity from the hairdresser's and a
croupier - a non speaking role - in the gambling club where Steve was
leading his brother and Curly astray) EastEnders is studiously multi-racial.
Coronation Street is funny, sometimes very funny, as in last week's
desperate attempts by Jack Duckworth to stop his wife Vera seeing the
accounts in the tabloid press of his exploits as a window cleaner ('Ee, that
Dulcie Foggett . . .'). Eventually, of course, she spotted the story on her
chip paper and flung her chips at Jack's head. EastEnders, on the other
hand, is almost invariably serious, and when it does attempt a bit of funny
business, as with Arthur's efforts last week to smuggle back the dress he
had given to Pauline, or the request for a 'cupid' gorillagram which
resulted in a 'stupid' gorillagram, it tends to be embarrassingly clumsy.
Most important of all, there is about EastEnders an elusive yet powerful
sense of worthiness; a feeling that the BBC is intent upon teaching us
something. It is not as blatant as the old Archers propaganda on such
subjects as foot and mouth disease or posting early for Christmas, but it
would come as no surprise to learn that, beyond the script writers,
EastEnders had an advisory committee of social workers feeding in research
notes on one-parent families, multi-racialism and urban stress. The cast are
used as blackboards on which to chalk up character traits like exam notes:
'Asian, macho, insensitive' or 'Fat, hypochondriac, spendthrift', and much
of the time most of them are extremely unpleasant to one another. Indeed,
even after several weeks of dedicated viewing it is impossible to find
anyone very much to like in EastEnders.
In Coronation Street it is hard to find anyone to dislike. From Bet Gilroy
with her ludicrous hairdo to Percy Sugden with his pre-war code of morals,
from silly-clever father-to-be Ken Barlow (who has stayed with the series
since Episode 1 in 1960) to scatty Mavis, they are fully formed characters.
Some are as unlikely as those in Dickens, but there are no blackboards here,
these are vividly real human beings. Far from the script writers projecting
sets of social formulae onto them, the characters in Coronation Street have
such well defined personalities that new writers might well feel story lines
were being dictated to them.
Coronation Street sets out first and foremost to entertain, and its
confidence in its ability to do this is so strong that it can toy with, and
then toss away, such subjects as chaos theory and the semiotics of
artificial stone cladding - both featured in the past four weeks, and in
those very words, what is more, each producing a hearty laugh. Had such
subjects crept into EastEnders you can be sure it would have felt like an
Open University programme produced by Blue Peter.
The odd thing is that, contrary to the confident assertions of my addicted
acquaintances - 'Watch for a couple of weeks and you'll be hooked too' - at
the end of four weeks assiduous viewing even Coronation Street has still
failed to trap me. I mean, yes, I suppose I would quite like to know whether
Charlie goes back to Bet. And if Denise agrees to marry Ken - giving them
six marriages between them. And whether that irritating prat Steve returns
to the bosom of his family. And of course whether Tanya manages to keep her
hooks in Des now that Alex has left his wife. But I can take it or leave it.
Honest . . .
