FT  26 MAY 94 / Society levies members after property losses
Members of the Lancashire &amp; Yorkshire Assurance Society have approved a rule
change under which a 12 per cent levy has been imposed on their policies to
create a fund to pay compensation to most of them.
The decision at the society's annual general meeting in Rotherham yesterday
follows a high court ruling last year that 39,000 policyholders who lost
money because of unauthorised investment in property by the society must be
compensated.
The society may also have to pay compensation to a further 7,000
policyholders whose lump sum policies may not be tax exempt, contrary to
their understanding when they invested. Negotiations between the society and
the Inland Revenue are continuing.
Some members at the AGM complained at the society's decision to impose the
levy last year before consultation. Only three of the 100 attending the
meeting voted against the rule change, which was also endorsed by all but 88
of the 2,280 proxy votes received.
Afterwards, one disgruntled policyholder, Mr Andy Anderson, who made a
950-mile round trip from Morayshire, condemned the levy as 'robbing Peter to
pay Peter' and said he would pursue the society's past investment practices
with the regulatory authority.
The problems of the Rotherham-based friendly society, which has 63,000
policies in force and total assets of Pounds 90m, relate partly to its
Capital Secure Fund which invested Pounds 6.8m in a hotel development
although policy holders believed their money was invested in cash deposits
and gilts.
Mr John Ramsden, who became chairman in 1990 after the hotel purchase, told
the AGM the property, now valued at about Pounds 2m, had still not been
sold.
Mr Ramsden, whose sympathetic manner defused much of the AGM's potential for
hostility, said the compensation fund stood at Pounds 10.4m and contingent
liabilities at Pounds 8.5m.
He said no final decision on possible legal redress against those
responsible for the society's past actions had been taken but he would not
be party to the 'vindictive and fruitless trail of legal cases'. He could
support expensive legal action only if there were reasonable chances of
success.
Mr Ramsden said he hoped compensation would be paid in September or October
after which members would be consulted on the society's future.
The options, he suggested, included a transfer to another society or a
relaunch, possibly under a different name. He had had discussions with
'quite a number of institutions' and would make a recommendation in the
autumn.
'In a sense there will be no better society than this to invest in once we
get everything sorted out,' he said. 'It's the one society where you know
the stables have been cleaned out.'
