FT  18 JUN 94 / The Nature of Things: Scientists on the ball - A form of
carbon shaped just like a football
What does chemistry have in common with the World Cup? Answer: great
excitement about balls.
The most significant molecule discovered in the past 10 years is C, the
football-shaped form of carbon known officially as buckminsterfullerene -
fullerene or buckyball for short. An astonishing range of applications has
been proposed for fullerene and related compounds: from batteries to Aids
treatment; better photocopiers to super-slippery lubricants; rocket fuel to
ultra-strong fibres.
But chemists are not just excited about the potential uses of fullerene.
They marvel at its spherical shape - more symmetrical than any molecule
previously known to science. And they are delighted that pure carbon - long
known to exist in two forms, graphite and diamond - can take a third form so
different to both of the others.
In diamond, the hardest natural material, each atom is linked to three
others in a three-dimensional tetrahedral arrangement. In graphite, one of
the softest, the atoms lie in two-dimensional hexagonal sheets. Fullerene is
a 'truncated icosahedron', one of the 13 Archimedean solids known since
classical times. Its 60 carbon atoms are arranged in a regular cage whose
sides consist of 20 hexagons and 12 pentagons - just like a soccer ball
(which usually has the hexagons coloured black and the pentagons white).
But the scientists who discovered C in 1985, Harry Kroto of the University
of Sussex in England and Richard Smalley of Rice University in Texas, were
not soccer fans. Instead they named the molecule after the late Buckminster
Fuller, the American engineer who designed geodesic domes with a similar
shape.
The discovery illustrates the spin-offs that can come from 'blue skies'
research pursued out of intellectual curiosity. The driving force behind it
was Kroto's desire to understand the nature and structure of matter in
interstellar space.
Kroto believed, on the basis of spectroscopic evidence, that long chains and
other clusters of carbon atoms existed between the stars. To investigate
further, he convinced Smalley to join a co-operative project, using special
equipment designed by the latter to generate atomic clusters from a
supersonic jet of gas in a laser beam. They found that molecules with 60
carbon atoms were particularly stable - and proposed the correct fullerene
structure - but could only produce them in microscopic quantities.
As it turns out, fullerene is widespread in nature. Spectroscopic studies
show that Kroto's 'celestial spheres' are indeed almost certainly present in
interstellar space. On earth, tiny traces of C have been detected in
65m-year-old rock dating from the end of the Cretaceous era; they may have
formed in the cataclysmic collision with a comet that exterminated the
dinosaurs.
The breakthrough towards practical applications came in 1990 when Wolfgang
Kratschmer of the Max Plank Institute for Nuclear Physics in Heidelberg and
Don Huffman of the University of Arizona in Tucson discovered a simple way
of making relatively large amounts of C. They vaporised graphite electrodes
in a low-pressure helium atmosphere, producing a sooty black mist from which
pure fullerene could be extracted as a reddish solution and then
crystallised as a slippery yellow solid.
Within months of the process being published, many scientific groups were
making their own fullerene and today the material is available commercially.
For example, Dynamic Enterprises, a UK supplier, sells more than 99.5 per
cent pure C at Pounds 100 a gram - and an educational Buckybox kit for
schools to make their own fullerene costs Pounds 95.
As well as C, the Kratschmer-Huffman process produces smaller quantities of
other previously unknown fullerene-like molecules. Most common is an
elongated form, C, which looks like a rugby ball.
More exotic variants include buckytubes - fullerene stretched out
indefinitely in one direction - and bucky-onions - concentric shells of
successively larger fullerenes. Researchers at NEC, the Japanese electronics
group, have recently made buckytubes only a few millionths of a millimetre
thick but more than a thousandth of a millimetre long, and filled them with
metal atoms. They are the finest wires ever made and are potentially far
stronger than the conventional carbon fibres used in industry.
At the same time, scientists are making chemical derivatives of C by
attaching other elements to its carbon atoms. One example is a fullerene
with two water-soluble molecular groups attached to its surface. This turns
out in test-tube experiments to block an essential enzyme in HIV, the Aids
virus, and is a long-shot candidate for development into an Aids drug.
Another avenue of research is to make fullerenes in which the cage itself is
made of elements other than carbon. Japanese researchers are investigating
N, a buckyball made entirely of nitrogen, which would release huge amounts
of energy as it reverted to nitrogen gas. It could be a rocket fuel or
explosive.
But the first application of fullerenes may well be in photocopiers. Xerox
recently received US patents for a process to improve the resolution of
photocopies, taking advantage of the fact that carbon buckyballs are 1,000
times smaller than the particles in conventional toner. The company is also
experimenting with a range of coloured fullerenes for colour reproduction.
From the English point of view, fullerene fever is sadly like the World Cup.
We invented the game and now all the action is taking place elsewhere.
