FT  11 FEB 94 / Arafat briefs King Hussein on latest agreement
Mr Yassir Arafat, Palestine Liberation Organisation chairman, yesterday
briefed King Hussein of Jordan on the latest PLO-Israeli agreement,
responding to Jordan's previous criticism that the PLO had failed to
co-ordinate with the kingdom over the peace talks.
Mr Arafat presented the king with a copy of the security arrangements agreed
with Mr Shimon Peres, Israeli foreign minister, in Cairo, and discussed
future aspects of co-operation between the East and West Banks.
Mr Abdel Salam al-Majali, Jordan's prime minister, said the king was
'extremely happy' Mr Arafat had kept his promise of enhanced co-ordination
with Jordan.
Since it was disclosed that secret Israeli-PLO talks had taken place in
Norway last summer, leading to the historic peace accord signed last
September, King Hussein has repeatedly complained Jordan has not been kept
up to date with meetings on the future of the occupied territories.
Despite accords signed between the Jordanians and Palestinians on economic
ties and security this year, and assurances from the PLO that it supports
co-ordination, Jordan remained sensitive about being left out.
Recently, King Hussein said: 'Our basic position is supporting our
Palestinian brothers as regards regaining their rights on their national
soil, but I cannot say our co-ordination until now is what it should be,
while between us and Syria and Lebanon co-ordination is normal.'
Jordan is keen to play a central role in the West Bank after an Israeli
withdrawal. Fifty per cent of the kingdom's population is of Palestinian
origin and the West Bank was ruled by King Hussein until 1967. Agreements so
far will allow Jordanian banks to re-open branches in the West Bank where
the Jordanian dinar will be the main legal tender. This will give Jordan's
central bank a key role in monetary policy in the new Palestinian entity.
Jordan wants a bilateral pact on trade and joint ventures in business and
manufacturing. Next week a Jordanian-Palestinian committee will begin
discussing these details as part of the economic protocol signed in January.
