FT  19 DEC 94 / Equity Markets: Lisbon to take global path for rest of
programme - Portuguese privatisation
Portugal is preparing to tap international markets with its first global
equity issues as the privatisation programme that has raised more than
Es936bn (Dollars 5.8bn) over the past five years move beyond the capacity of
domestic investors.
A simultaneous offer of 25 per cent of Portugal Telecom in New York, London
and Lisbon next May, raising an expected Es240bn, will be the centrepiece of
several Portuguese equity issues in 1995 that will test the government's
adroitness in approaching international markets.
Global offers of substantial holdings in Cimpor, one of Europe's top 10
cement companies, and Companhia Portuguesa de Producao de Electricidade, a
power production utility, are also in the pipeline. But only the Cimpor
issue is likely to be completed before a general election due in October
1995 at the latest.
The move into international markets is attracting global banks to a
privatisation programme that stimulated little interest when it was limited
to domestic issues. Merrill Lynch, the US investment bank, will lead the
global issuing consortium for Portugal Telecom. Morgan Stanley is advising
on the structure of Cimpor's offer.
Sale of a first tranche of 20 per cent of Cimpor in July provided some
important lessons that the Portuguese authorities appear to be assimilating.
Although a domestic issue, Cimpor had hoped to attract strong interest from
overseas. But foreign investors acquired only a disappointing 32 per cent -
although foreign institutions underwrote 47 per cent - in an operation that
raised Es39.61bn.
The most damaging drawback was the fixing of the issue price by government
decree almost two months before the sale. The market dropped 15 per cent in
the interim and investors shied away. The authorities are committed to
eliminating this risk from future offers by setting only a price range by
decree and delegating the exact fixing for a few days before the operation.
Guaranteeing flexibility for the PT issue, Mr Eurico Cabral da Fonseca,
chairman of Comunicacoes Nacionais, the state holding company for the
telecommunications sector, said: 'The global offer will be subject to the
principle of open pricing, giving priority to the level of demand and to
establishing an equilibrium price as a trading reference for secondary
markets.'
Criticisms were also levelled at the government for failing to give a
sufficiently authoritative mandate to Cimpor's underwriting banks - led by
state-owned Banco Fomento e Exterior in Portugal and overseas by Baring
Brothers - to organise the issue efficiently. 'Potential investors were
being called up by 10 or 12 different banks without any co-ordination,' said
a London dealer.
This was another valuable lesson. Portugal is now counting on leading global
banks to mount efficient book-building systems and co-ordinate complex
operations over several markets.
The PT operation is an ambitious first step. One tranche, expected to raise
about Es80bn, is be sold in Portugal. An offer of American Depositary
Receipts will be made simultaneously in New York, together with an issue in
London including separate UK and international tranches.
A further 25 per cent of Cimpor originally due to be issued in New York is
now expected to be postponed. 'Cimpor would have to be offered by the first
week of March to avoid draining liquidity from the market before the PT
operation,' said an analyst in London. 'But the company is unlikely to have
its 1994 results and financial holdings sufficiently clarified to be ready
by then.'
