FT  18 MAR 94 / Survey of Poland (24): Airwaves hit by a storm of criticism
 -Television
Poland's attempt to establish an independent commercial television channel
has run into a storm, confirming the special place politicians continue to
accord the medium.
Neither the granting of national broadcast licences to two private radio
companies, the Warsaw-based Radio Zet and RMF from Krakow, nor growing
concentration in newspaper ownership, seem to attract as much emotion and
attention as recent appointments in state-owned television or the granting
of the national commercial television licence to Polsat.
Polsat is wholly-owned by Mr Zygmunt Solorz, a 38-year-old entrepreneur from
Wroclaw, in south-western Poland. He won the licence in the face of
competition from several mixed Polish and foreign consortia.
These consortia included Bertelsmann, CLT, the Luxembourg-based European
broadcaster as well as CNN and Time Warner. But almost as soon as the
decision was announced by the nine-strong National Broadcasting Council, it
was criticised.
Most prominently, it was attacked by President Lech Walesa, who dismissed Mr
Marek Markiewicz as chairman of the council which was appointed last year by
the previous Solidarity-dominated parliament and the president to oversee
the airwaves under the country's new broadcasting law.
Mr Walesa would have happily removed Mr Markiewicz from the council itself
if he had had the power to do so.
Mr Markiewicz had already run foul of the president late last year when he
appointed Mr Wieslaw Walendziak, an even-handed journalist in his early
thirties with a right-wing background, to head Poland's state-owned TV.
Mr Walesa had wanted Mr Janusz Zaorski, the incumbent, to continue in the
job. He was seen as a guarantee that the president would get his fair share
of TV coverage during the presidential election campaign in the autumn of
1995.
But Polsat, where Mr Solorz employs both former communist functionaries and
young right-wing journalists of whom Mr Walendziak was one, is also
mistrusted by President Walesa, who has publicly accused Mr Markiewicz of
'giving the licence to the communists'.
The governing coalition, which is at present poorly represented on the
council has, stayed aloof from the fray. But it could be tempted in the
coming months to pack it with its own supporters.
In the meantime, President Walesa's attempts to undermine the council and
have the Polsat decision reversed are being eagerly watched by the losing
consortia in the licensing process.
They feel tricked by Mr Solorz, who made great play in public hearings on
the licence that his was a solely Polish-owned venture, a ploy which helped
win a consensus for his bid among the council members.
Now Mr Solorz says he is talking to many foreign broadcasting companies,
which are thought to include Mr Rupert Murdoch's News International, and it
could well be that, sooner or later, one will take up the 33 per cent stake
which Polish law permits a foreign partner to hold in a broadcasting
venture.
Polsat's competitors also argue that as things stand at present Mr Solorz
does not have the financial resources or the expertise to run the channel.
Because of problems with wresting frequencies from the military, for the
first few years the channel will be able to reach only 12m viewers, or a
third of the potential Polish audience.
But if Polsat faces considerable political uncertainty, the financial
problems could be just as great. The Broadcasting Council has imposed very
tight rules demanding that Polsat put out locally-made programmes and
information programmes. This will increase costs. The council will also have
the final say on Mr Solorz's eventual choice of foreign partner.
Meanwhile, the lion's share of the Dollars 130m annual advertising market
will continue to go to state TV, with its two channels which cover the
entire country. At the same time Mr Solorz, whose company is capitalised at
a mere 250bn zlotys, has been bound by the council to increase its capital
to 500bn zlotys and then to 1,000bn zlotys before looking abroad for
financial support.
Given initially low revenues and the political uncertainty surrounding the
licensing decision, that could prove difficult.
The storm also threatens to cloud the chances of the French Canal Plus pay
TV company to which the Broadcasting Council has said it will give local
licences. The French company's offer proved non-controversial and will not
have to depend on a still-to-be-developed advertising market for its
revenues.
But Mr Richard Miazek, one of the council's members, has already resigned,
complaining of stress. Others could follow. Parliament is due to vote on the
council's annual report next month.
Should this be rejected by parliament, the council will have to resign and
that would give the present governing coalition the chance to appoint its
own supporters. Presumably the process would then start all over again.
