FT  27 JUN 94 / People: Facilitator, not instigator - Michiyo Nakamoto
assesses Keidanren's new leader, Shoichiro Toyoda
If there is anything that might give the uninitiated a clue about the new
leader of Japan's business community, it is cleverly hidden behind the
gold-rimmed spectacles, the dull navy suit and blue tie that adorn the
slightly rotund figure of Shoichiro Toyoda, the new leader of Japan's
largest and most powerful business group.
In the spacious reception room of the Keidanren, the Federation of Employers
Associations, the soft-spoken Toyoda, who is also chairman of Toyota, the
car company, comes across as the typical stuffy Japanese businessman.
But as he reads carefully prepared answers to questions, like a Buddhist
monk reciting his chant, Toyoda is twiddling his thumbs.
The image hardly befits the chairman of Japan's most powerful economic
organisation who is charged with steering the Keidanren through one of the
most uncertain periods in its 48-year history.
The old order, in which business, the bureaucracy and politicians worked
hand-in-hand to build Japan into the world's second largest economy, is
crumbling. A huge political realignment is under way with politicians under
pressure to reform their corrupt practices. The bureaucracy, which helped
form many Japanese industries into world leaders, is under attack for its
resistance to the deregulation intended to create a more consumer-oriented
economy.
The Japanese business community is debilitated by one of the most prolonged
economic downturns in recent history. It has been demoralised by the
punishing surge in the value of the yen and frightened by the realisation
that there are few leading lights in industry to guide the economy out of
slump.
Amid the crumbling political and economic order, the Keidanren faces a
decline in its influence over the nation's development and is searching for
a new role better suited to the changing times.
Yet it seems unlikely that Toyoda will provide the leadership people in
Japan expect to come from big business. Almost one month into the job, he
acts like a man who has unexpectedly found himself in the spotlight, playing
a role created for someone else.
The predominant question in the public's mind has been whether he can live
up to the job. Even by his own account, he is not endowed with the stuff of
which leaders are made.
In one of his most revealing remarks, the modest Toyoda once said of his
predecessor Gaishi Hiraiwa, former chairman of Tokyo Electric Power,
'Hiraiwa has the air of the philosopher. It takes a focused person like him
to serve as chairman of Keidanren. I cannot devote myself like that now or
in the future.'
Indeed, until Akio Morita fell ill last November, Sony's chairman was
thought to be the favourite to succeed Hiraiwa.
It is not that Toyoda lacks the formal credentials. As leader of a
corporation with global operations, he has experience of the international
community and the cosmopolitan outlook that his predecessor Hiraiwa felt
were key pre-requisites for the job.
After much agonising, Toyoda took responsibility for starting up
manufacturing operations in the US. That he achieved that task successfully,
to the satisfaction of the extremely cautious Toyoda clan, is to his credit.
His position at Japan's largest vehicle manufacturer makes him particularly
vulnerable to the controversy - especially in the US - over the Japanese
trade deficit and Japanese trading practices.
His family-run automobile company gives him clout in the domestic business
community, but he is also known to be somewhat of a visionary. His idea of
building homes worthy of a leading economy led to the establishment of
Toyota Home which, despite its lacklustre performance, has been allowed to
continue. It built up a decent operation in the Nagoya area where Toyota is
based, but cannot compete with the larger housebuilders with nationwide
networks.
Other relevant experience for leading the Keidanren was gained when, as
president of Toyota Motor Sales, he oversaw the painful merger in 1982 of
that company with Toyota Motor, the manufacturing parent. Bringing the two
companies together entailed overcoming entrenched corporate loyalties which
Toyoda managed by spending a year at the sales company before the merger.
An engineer by training, at Nagoya and later Tohoku University, he won the
prestigious Deming prize in 1980 for his contribution to quality control.
But to make his mark as the Keidanren's chief, Toyoda will need to show more
determination and political skill than he is known for.
As the leader of an industry that is at the centre of US-Japanese trade
tension, his role at Keidanren will also be scrutinised more than usual
overseas.
Toyoda believes deregulation must be the centrepiece to reform in Japan. One
of the first things he did on assuming the Keidanren chairmanship was to ask
Prime Minister Hata to cut the number of bureaucratic regulations by half in
the next five years.
Regulation, he argues, gives politicians and the bureaucracy too much
influence over the private sector, which in turn is partly responsible for
'the inscrutable administrative guidance and incomprehensible practices that
receive so much criticism from abroad'.
Excessive regulation also hurts the Japanese consumer, he says. It is mainly
responsible for the huge price differentials between Japanese and overseas
markets and it stifles the kind of creativity that is needed to give birth
to new ideas and technology which could revitalise the economy.
'Keidanren is very anxious to bring about an environment in which the people
at large can truly enjoy the lifestyle of a more affluent society.'
The Keidanren last year decided to back its words with action; it stopped
its tradition of co-ordinating contributions from corporations to political
parties, in particular the Liberal Democratic Party which, until last year,
had ruled Japan for 38 years.
The battle to reduce the scope for regulation in the Japanese economy,
however, will not be easily won. The automobile industry itself, whose
interests Toyoda will be keen to protect, is under pressure to ease the
rigorous vehicle inspection system which has long been blamed for making it
unnecessarily costly to own a vehicle and which benefited the industry by
encouraging car-owners to replace them regularly.
Toyoda is adamant, however, that the Keidanren is serious about
deregulation. 'It is true that deregulation will cause pain when certain
industries and sectors have to adjust. However, there is a consensus in the
business community that deregulation must be vigorously promoted so that
consumers and other citizens can benefit.'
That position is a dramatic turnround by the organisation that has long been
one of the pillars, together with the politicians and the bureaucracy, that
supported Japan Inc.
'When the economy was still preoccupied with catching up other advanced
countries and perhaps overtaking them, very close relationships between
politicians, the bureaucracy and the business community were necessary to
increase general standards of living,' Toyoda points out.
'But in the future we must establish a relationship between the three which
could be characterised by healthy tension, so that they will be mutually
checking on each other.'
That the Keidanren and Japanese business will be changed by the recession,
the progress of political reform and by pressure from Japan's trading
partners, is beyond doubt. But judging by Toyoda's approach, his role will
be to facilitate rather than instigate, change.
