FT  10 OCT 94 / Personal View: Sleepless and irritable in suburbia
At the height of Washington's long hot summer, my house was without power
for 48 hours as storms swept through the area. It brought home to my family
the extent to which we rely on electricity for air conditioning, television,
to keep food fresh - even to make a hot drink.
After two sleepless nights and irritable days, we felt we had been through a
major disaster. But we had simply experienced a few inconveniences. We knew
we could escape to the car's air conditioning, we could buy fresh food at
the supermarket, we could go to the cinema if we became bored with family
conversation.
As an employee of the World Bank, which is committed to improving the
quality of life of the world's poorest people, I could not help comparing
our 'devastating' inconvenience with the reality of daily life for the 2bn
people in developing countries who have no electricity.
The same number of people lack adequate sanitation - at least our bathrooms
continued to function during our blackout. We did not much enjoy our
lukewarm water and beer, but 1bn people do not have access to safe water. It
is little surprise, therefore, that every year more than 3m children in
developing countries die of diarrheal disease, not to mention all the other
illnesses that result from their living conditions.
The 17 per cent of World Bank lending that supports investments in
population, health, nutrition and education helps people in ways that are
easily recognised. These investments tend to be mutually supportive:
educated women, for example, have smaller families and healthier and
better-educated children.
Such projects often have obvious appeal to the public. An example is the
World Bank-financed project which will enable 8m blind people in India -
one-fifth of the world's blind - to see again as a result of cataract
surgery.
Less appealing is that portion of World Bank lending that pays for the
provision of electricity, clean water and sewerage. In the last decade the
bank has committed Dollars 25bn to electric power projects and more than
Dollars 8bn to water and sanitation.
The fact is that, in the past 30 years, life expectancy in developing
countries has been extended by some 15 years, the number of children dying
before the age of five has been halved, and literacy has increased
dramatically. Most of the credit must go to the people of the countries
themselves, but the investments the World Bank has supported have made a
valuable contribution to improving living standards and reducing the
incidence of disease.
Why then does the World Bank come in for so much criticism - especially over
its lending for dams that create electricity and for other large projects?
Small can often be beautiful but, for all the advances of the last few
decades, the number of people who lack the basics in life is massive.
Many can be helped by small-scale, grass-roots efforts, but these must be
complemented by the big investments that will bring electricity, water and
sanitation to very large numbers of people. Similarly, irrigation projects
have contributed to a doubling of food production and an increase in average
nutritional intake per person of 20 per cent over the past quarter century.
Unfortunately, such larger efforts have the potential to cause environmental
damage, and people may have to be resettled. The challenge for the bank and
its partners in development is to work with the countries it is trying to
help, to keep negative effects to a minimum.
The bank has not always been as successful as it would wish - and its own
self-critical reports, designed to improve future performance, provide ample
fodder for critics.
But a vocal minority does not want the bank to do a better job. This group
would like the bank to steer clear of any activities that challenge the
right of people to live in pristine poverty if there are any negative side
effects. Unfortunately, the bank does not have the luxury of turning its
back on that which may be controversial or difficult.
In 1651, Thomas Hobbes, the English clergyman and philosopher, characterised
the life of people living in a simple world of nature - without industry,
without trade, and without the benefits of modern inventions - as 'poor,
nasty, brutish, and short'. The inconvenience of a few hours without
electricity in suburban Washington is a modest reminder of what life is like
for the millions without electricity, clean water or sanitation in
Bangladesh, Bolivia or Burkina Faso.
They must not be condemned to the state described by Hobbes.
The author is chief spokesman for the World Bank
