FT  09 DEC 94 / Budget Statement: Manufacturers 'paying for ineptitude' -
Drink and tobacco
The chancellor's increases in drink and tobacco duties drew a chorus of
criticism from producers who thought they had detected in November's Budget
the first signs of government sympathy for their loss of trade to
cross-channel shopping.
'We're shocked. We're picking up the tab for the Tories political
ineptitude,' said the Wine and Spirits Association.
'We're outraged and quite shocked. We really feel he's panicked and made an
irrational decision,' the Scotch Whisky Association said.
Distillers, brewers and tobacco companies had lobbied with unprecedented
force before the main Budget, arguing that the flow of low-duty paid imports
and smuggled goods had reached damaging proportions.
Brewers claim that such imports account for about 4 per cent of total beer
consumption and 15 per cent of the take-home trade. The UK's third largest
brand of tobacco for hand-rolled cigarettes, Drum, is not officially for
sale in this country.
'No chancellor can remain unmoved in the face of this,' Mr Kenneth Clarke
said in his November Budget speech. However, he said the government could
not cut alcohol excise duties without raising other taxes to compensate for
the lost revenue.
Recognising the inroads made by imports, the November Budget left duty on
beer, wine and cider unchanged but cut it on sparkling wine by 27p per 75 cl
bottle and by 13p a bottle on fortified wine to remove anomalous tax rates
between different types of alcoholic drinks.
Yesterday, Mr Clarke added 1p on a pint of beer and litre of cider, 5p on a
bottle of wine, 7p on sparkling and fortified wine and 26p on a bottle of
spirits, effective from January 1.
'This is a kick in the teeth of British beer drinkers,' the Brewers and
Licensed Retailers Association said. The increases will make cross-border
shopping even more of a problem, it added.
The government's strategy for reducing the attractiveness of cross-Channel
imports is to negotiate with Continental governments to raise their duties.
'The solution is for the government to work with our European partners to
bring duties more in line,' the chancellor said in his November Budget
speech.
'The forthcoming review of Europe-wide minimum excise duties gives us the
opportunity to make a start at that.'
But the Scotch Whisky Association said: 'The chancellor now goes into those
European talks with a weakened position.'
'This is a bad decision and bad timing,' said Mr Anthony Greener, chairman
of Guinness, the largest distiller. In November, the chancellor 'made it
clear that for the sake of British exports to Europe the discrimination
should not be increased. Today he has done just that.'
The chancellor raised tobacco taxes in November in line with government
policy of increasing prices faster than inflation to curb consumption for
health reasons. Duty on a packet of cigarettes was raised 10p in November
and 6p yesterday, cigars were raised by 5p and 3p, and pipe tobacco by 6p
and 4p. Hand-rolling tobacco was raised by 12p in November but left
unchanged yesterday.
A packet of cigarettes will typically cost Pounds 2.70 in the UK against
Pounds 1.70 in France, the Tobacco Manufacturers Association said. 'The
chancellor has handed tobacco smugglers two wage increases in a fortnight,'
the association said.
The government has expressed some scepticism about the claimed level of
drinks smuggling, while acknowledging that criminal gangs operate in
tobacco. Tobacco retailers are losing Pounds 980m a year and the government
is losing Pounds 750m a year in taxes, the Tobacco Alliance, a lobby group
for retailers, said yesterday.
