FT  29 NOV 94 / Survey of Bristol (11): More air services needed - Transport
links serve the city well
A strength of Bristol is its geographical location near the motorway
crossroads of the M4 and M5. One can drive directly by motorway to London,
south Wales, the Midlands and north, or to the far south-west, writes Roland
Adburgham.
Bristol also has two mainline railway stations, Parkway and Temple Meads,
with a journey time to London of an hour and 20 minutes.
It has a flourishing port, which is close to the Severn bridge and to the
second crossing which is being built. The one obvious weakness is its lack
of an international regional airport.
While Bristol airport, south of the city at Lulsgate, has established itself
as the south-west's leading airport, there is an irony. The transport links,
which otherwise serve Bristol so well, serve Lulsgate badly. It has no
railway. The road into the city is a single carriageway.
The airport is only a few miles from the M5 motorway, but the roads to it
are tortuous.
It is this issue of location which hovers over a public inquiry being held
by the Department of the Environment. British Aerospace wants to develop the
airfield next to its Filton works in north Bristol into a commercial
airport, with freight and scheduled services.
It has all the transport links which Lulsgate lacks.
Although, under the terms of BAe's application, Filton would not be a
fully-fledged regional airport, business groups such as the regional
Confederation of British Industry regard it as an essential step forward in
the region's economic development.
The inquiry was called after Northavon council, the planning authority,
failed to rule on BAe's application within the statutory period. In recent
years, thousands of houses have been built near Filton, and the council has
been put under pressure by residents worried about noise.
Northavon is now opposing BAe's plan, even though the company argues that it
must make better use of its airfield to safeguard the Filton works, where
more than 5,000 people are employed.
Bristol city council is also opposed to a Filton airport because it owns
Lulsgate, which plans a new Pounds 14m terminal capable of handling 2m
passengers a year but needs private investment.
It is the success of Lulsgate, despite its handicaps, which proves the
demand. It had 1.2m passengers in the year to March 31 and made record
pre-tax profits of Pounds 3.6m. While most of its passengers are for charter
flights, scheduled traffic is growing. In its winter timetable, Lulsgate has
170 scheduled departures a week, including flights to Amsterdam, Brussels,
Paris and Jersey. Although long-haul flights are restricted by its runway, a
daily Aer Lingus service has started to New York. Brymon, the British
Airways subsidiary, uses the airport as its hub.
BAe proposes not more than 350,000 passengers a year at Filton and contends
that the two airports could co-exist, with Lulsgate handling charter
traffic. Bristol council says that Filton, if restricted to BAe's announced
limit, would do little to meet projected demand of about 4m passengers by
2010. This demand would therefore have to be met at Lulsgate, but the
council warns that the necessary investment might be frustrated by a second
airport.
What does seem certain is that any investment will remain on hold until the
outcome of the inquiry, due to end in January.
While this is the most contentious transport issue in the region, it is by
no means the only one. The construction of the Batheaston bypass, north of
Bath, drew national attention this year as objectors camped out in tents and
trees to try to stop the contractors.
While the protestors ultimately failed, they highlighted the dilemma of
striking a balance in satisfying two opposing pressure groups which are
particularly vocal in the west of England.
On one hand, there are the environmentalists and, on the other, business
groups calling for road improvements.
Where there would be agreement is on the need to upgrade rail services,
especially by the electrification of the London line. There are no through
passenger services to the Channel tunnel, although there is a firm proposal
for a freight terminal at Avonmouth which would link with the tunnel.
There is also general agreement that Bristol, where the road network is
overcrowded, needs a rapid transit system, despite the collapse of a
previous scheme for a metro tram system. Avon county council is the lead
promoter for what it calls the Westway network. It is preparing an
application for a government grant to finance most of the estimated Pounds
202m cost for the first stage. Private sector funding would also be
required.
The first line would run from north of the city to the south. Dr Roger
Newport, the project manager, hopes operations will begin by 2002 and the
network could eventually include other routes. While the type of vehicle has
yet to be decided, the council envisages vehicles using electrical overhead
lines. It believes two thirds of the passengers would otherwise be using
cars.
A 'people-mover' system is also proposed by Bristol Development Corporation
to connect its Quay Point scheme by light tram to the city centre. The BDC,
which has complained of 'a lack of urgency' in transport policy, opened a
spine road this summer which keeps some traffic out of the city centre by
connecting the M32 motorway and A4 Bath road. In contrast, the county
council says a proposed extension of the Avon ring road, badly needed to
help to regenerate south Bristol, is only in its 'longer-term ambitions.'
The local authorities have been criticised for seeking to discourage
vehicles in Bristol while doing little to provide an alternative other than
cycle-ways in what is a particularly hilly city. A more balanced policy has
begun to emerge, with bus and taxi priority lanes and the start of
park-and-ride schemes.
Mr Trevor Smallwood, chairman of Badgerline, which operates the City Line
buses in Bristol, says the first park-and-ride scheme, which opened this
year, is being used by 1,000 people a day, 'in advance of expectations.'
One imaginative project being promoted by Mr Smallwood's company is an Avon
Gorge expressway, which would use an old single-track railway as a guided
bus-way between Portishead and the city centre. Linking with two
park-and-ride schemes, it could run as many as 60 buses an hour in the
peak-hour direction of travel.
