FT  20 JUN 94 / Inefficiency and bad maintenance attacked: World Development
Report
The World Bank is urging a complete reorientation of policy on
infrastructure provision in developing countries, to shift the focus from
building new roads, electricity plants and water pipelines towards ensuring
such installations provide the service they were designed for.
An extensive analysis of infrastructure issues in the latest edition of the
World Bank's annual world development report shows that about Dollars 200bn
(Pounds 132bn) a year of infrastructure investment in developing countries
has greatly increased access to electricity, sanitation, paved roads,
telephones and water. But inefficiency and poor maintenance have meant that
money is wasted and service is patchy.
'The report's main message is clear: there has been too much emphasis on the
stock of infrastructure built and not enough on the service provided,' said
Mr Lewis Preston, the World Bank's president.
'The emphasis everywhere must be less on cutting ribbons to open new
facilities and more on ensuring that those facilities deliver the intended
services,' he added.
The report notes that spending Dollars 1m to reduce the very high losses of
electricity in transmission and distribution networks could save some
African countries Dollars 12m in generating capacity, while the proportion
of water delivered to the field in irrigation projects is typically only
25-30 per cent, compared wth 40-45 per cent in the most efficient projects.
World Bank highway projects primarily involving maintenance produce returns
that are almost twice as high as those concentrating on new road
construction. But almost Dollars 13bn worth of roads - one third of those
built in the last 20 years - have eroded for lack of maintenance.
Overall, the World Bank estimates that technical inefficiency such as
leaking water pipes, electricity transmission losses and railway
overstaffing costs the developing world Dollars 55bn a year.
In addition, it calculates that inefficient pricing structures that fail to
recover costs fully from users cost developing country governments Dollars
123bn a year.
These inefficiencies cause great hardships not only for the very poor but
also for businesses, the report says.
A study in Istanbul showed that nearly all households used back-up water
supply systems such as wells, rivers and street vendors because of the
unreliability of publicly supplied water. For the poorest households,
however, these back-ups cost 5 per cent of total income, while for the
richest it was only 1 per cent.
Another survey of 179 businesses in Nigeria showed that more than half owned
their own electricity generators, an expense which amounted to around 10 per
cent of the total machinery and equipment for the largest companies but as
much as 25 per cent for the smallest.
Yet because Nigerian regulations prevent the sale of surplus power, they
operated their generators on average at no more than 25 per cent of
capacity.
While efficiency of operation is typically much higher in industrialised
countries, the report argues that there is nothing inevitable about this.
'Although the availability of infrastructure facilities does increase in
step with national income, the efficiency and quality of service delivered
is relatively independent of income - that is, low income countries can be
good performers, while chronic waste and inefficiency can be found among
middle and even high income countries,' said Mr Gregory Ingram, who headed
the team that wrote the report.
The report suggests three ways in which service can be improved:
manage infrastructure like a business, not a bureaucracy
introduce competition directly, if feasible, and indirectly if not
give users and stakeholders a strong voice and real responsibility.
Analysing 42 developing countries the report found that in those with
centralised road maintenance systems one third of unpaved roads and more
than 20 per cent of paved roads were in poor condition; in those with
decentralised systems only 15 per cent of unpaved roads and just over 10 per
cent of paved roads were in poor condition.
Another study of 121 rural water supply projects in Africa, Asia and Latin
America showed that of those where participation by the local population was
classified as high, 83 per cent had good maintenance levels and 81 per cent
were graded as effective in achieving their goals. Of those where
participation was low, 23 per cent had good maintenance levels and only 8
per cent were graded as effective.
While non-governmental development groups applauded the World Bank's call
for more emphasis on maintenance and for greater user participation, they
said that the Bank itself was part of the problem.
'What proportion of Bank infrastructure lending goes to maintenance? There
is no figure in the report,' said Mr Paul Spray, head of policy at
London-based Christian Aid.
The emphasis on improving infrastructural service rather than expanding the
stock of infrastructure contained in the world development report echoes a
theme which has been repeated in World Bank internal analyses in recent
years; most notably in the Wapenhans report, which found an alarming
deterioration in the success rate of Bank projects and attributed it in part
to an in-house culture that rewarded officers more for the volume of new
loans arranged than for success with which they followed through on
projects.
Although the Bank has taken steps to counter this cultural tendency, it has
so far failed to convince many of its critics that it has really changed its
spots.
World Development Report 1994: infrastructure for development. Published by
Oxford University Press for World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington DC
20433, US.
Economic Eye, Page 22
