FT  19 NOV 94 / The FT Christmas Show Guide: Sound of Nut-cracking -
Unneccessary conflict in London dance
Since Christmas is a deja vu phenomenon anyway, it is - I grudgingly suppose
 -no surprise that this yuletide's dance offerings should be the inevitable
Nutcracker and Cinderella. There is an unnecessary conflict in London this
year, since both English National Ballet and the Birmingham Royal Ballet are
offering concurrent cracking of nuts.
ENB plays its traditional Nutcracker season at the Royal Festival Hall. The
staging is the sugary Ben Stevenson version but the young enjoy it and there
are some interesting principal casts - to which Santa's promised gift of a
pair of wild horses may just be able to drag me. Nutcracker is at the Royal
Festival Hall from December 21 to January 14 - plenty of matinees.
There follows a week of Swan Lake in ENB's sensible Bolshoi-inspired
version, from January 16 to 21. The Birmingham Nutcracker receives its first
London showing in a season at The Coliseum from December 22 until January 7.
The staging is Peter Wright's handsome version, handsomely decorated by John
Macfarlane, which has much to recommend it, including a couple of
performances starring Irek Mukhamedov (December 22 and the matinee on
December 24) and three guest appearances by Petter Jacobsson. There are
plenty of matinees. BRB also plays Nutcracker in its home Hippodrome Theatre
from December 9 until December 17, with the elegant Peter Boal as a guest
from New York City Ballet at a couple of performances.
At Covent Garden, the Royal Ballet shows an Ashton triple bill - which
should appeal to older children - on December 15, and matinee and evening on
December 17. Then its visually desperate Sleeping Beauty staging is exposed
on December 20 (matinee and evening), 21,22,28 (m&amp;e) and January 4, with
Ashton's irresistible Cinderella to delight us all on December 23 (m&amp;e), 26
(m&amp;e), 27, 30, 31 (m&amp;e), January 3.
There is - quelle surprise - a single Swan Lake on January 5. Check timings
of all performances carefully: there are early matinee and evening curtains,
which can mean glum faces in the Crush Bar while the first act goes its
no-seats-until-the-interval way.
North of the border, Scottish Ballet offers Peter Darrell's Nutcracker at
Edinburgh's Festival Theatre from December 28 to January 7. Again, please
check dates and times.
In New York, City Ballet will play its usual happy season of Balanchine's
lovely Nutcracker from November 30 until December 31, and then follow with
an eight-week season of varied repertory.
The Paris Opera Ballet, installed at the Bastille Opera House, performs
Rudolf Nureyev's version of Swan Lake during December with a wonderful
roster of principals (who may include Altynai Asylmuratova for a couple of
performances). Check locally for details.
For anyone needing more precise information, The Dancing Times carries a
monthly calendar of future performances, dates, timings, both here and
abroad.
