FT  02 SEP 94 / Rowland wins fight with Bock to stay as Lonrho joint chief
Mr Tiny Rowland won a last-minute victory yesterday over Mr Dieter Bock, his
fellow chief executive at Lonrho, who had planned to strip him of his
executive duties.
The German financier, with 18.8 per cent of the shares, had been confident
that the group's 14 directors would remove the 76-year-old Mr Rowland as
joint chief executive after the disclosure that he was costing Lonrho Pounds
5.5m a year in salary, expenses and other charges under his control.
But Lonrho's three non-executive directors were instrumental yesterday in
preventing attempts to remove Mr Rowland. One explained that they feared
such an attempt could turn into a 'damaging confrontation'.
Instead of questioning whether Mr Rowland should continue in his post, the
board issued a statement saying that speculation regarding his role in the
company 'was totally unfounded'.
However, it also made clear that the remuneration committee, set up by Mr
Bock and chaired by Mr Peter Harper, would review expense levels at head
office.
The statement also said the review of all directors' contracts, remuneration
and expenses was part of an 'ongoing process of change within the group'. Mr
Rowland knew he had won an important victory before the start of the meeting
when he told waiting journalists: 'I am too young to retire.'
Mr Bock's supporters were putting a brave face on events, making clear that
the public disclosure of Mr Rowland's expenses had made it harder for him to
remain in his post in the medium term.
Some directors also remain concerned that the company sold a recently
completed film about the Lockerbie bombing to an Egyptian company linked to
Libya, in possible contravention of United Nations sanctions.
But one Lonrho employee questioned Mr Bock's timing in trying to remove Mr
Rowland. Mr Bock is said to believe that his timing was dictated by the
Lockerbie film disclosure.
Mr Rowland's two most prominent allies on the board retire in the autumn: Mr
Rene Leclezio, the chairman, goes at the end of October and Mr Robert
Dunlop, deputy chairman, retires at the end of the month.
With the disagreement between the two chief executives out in the open, some
analysts warned that a question mark over the group's strategy would remain
until it became clear who had won the power battle.
Mr Bock may now have to wait until the end of next year, when he can
exercise a call option on Mr Rowland's remaining 6.5 per cent stake.
He has made no secret of his desire to remove Mr Rowland, who he believes
has been frustrating his attempts to reorganise Lonrho's assets.
Editorial Comment, Page 15
Lex, Page 16
A 'civilised option', Page 17
