FT  03 DEC 94 / Travel: Getting lost in Gotland
Swedes go to Gotland to get lost. Although the ancient Baltic island belongs
to Sweden, Gotland is as Swedish as Wales is English. Stone-agers founded
the limestone outcrop 7,000 years ago and mainlanders have been turning up
there ever since.
Visby, the only city on the island, has an airport but I got there by ferry,
five hours south-east of the Stockholm archipelago.
High stone walls and towers built by wealthy merchants 600 years ago when
Gotland was an independent republic ring the city centre. Once there were
monasteries but a greedy Royal, King Valdemart Atterdag of Denmark torched
them in the 14th century when he plundered the city. Legend says a virgin
let him in the city gates. Afterwards locals buried her alive in one of the
city walls where, apparently, she is still heard wailing.
Visby is hardly a dead place, however. This is Sweden's wild side and they
act out Atterdag's conquest every August during a week of medieval revelry.
The tourist board put me up for a night in the Wisby Hotel which is the
place to stay if you have loads of money and don't mind bumping into an
American or a pillar.
I toured Gotland in a hired car with Robert, a local journalist and film
maker. He did not want to hang around in Visby and suggested we leave the
island.
The northern-most region of Gotland is a separate island, Faro - and Faro
means sheep. Driving off the car ferry I saw a desolate landscape of low
winding walls marking feudal boundaries. Among the heather are tiny stone
huts with wooded roofs in which to store wool and hay.
The sheep on Faro do not live alone. Their neighbours include vital military
secrets. Tread carefully. Army patrols check passports. Foreigners who step
out of line and into prohibited zones risk heavy fines and prison sentences.
You could be deported.
Travelling vaguely north on hot, narrow, empty roads, a red dot appeared in
the distance. It was a three-wheeled moped and its driver, John Ollson, a
local carpenter, was going to work. As well as Swedish, John spoke an
ancient Gotland dialect, similar to Icelandic. We sat and chatted on a
nearby beach among dramatic towers of limestone. These rocks have been
naturally sculpted into peculiar shapes and can be found on many beaches.
We left Faro for Katthanmaarsvik, a former fishing village on the east tip
of Gotland where international fashion magazines photograph their models and
dress up locals as fishermen.
Admiral Bodisco led an earlier invasion, in 1808, by a Russian fleet. Four
of Bodisco's sailors liked the place so much they deserted there. One hid in
a cupboard above a blacksmith's oven. Days later Bodisco discovered him,
cooked to death.
The oven is part of an ancient restoration at the Kalkpatronsgarden Borgvik
Pensionat and Restaurant by owner Bjorn Hakansson. Happily, it is not the
same oven Bjorn uses to cook dinner for his guests.
We found our place to get lost in Burs, a parish in south west Gotland, some
40 minutes drive from Visby. Among forests and meadows we came across Iwona
Hrynclenko, an artist who weaves tapestries. Many artists and craftspeople
live and work on Gotland. We helped a film student construct her home for
the summer. A farmer let her cut down 15 pines as poles for her tepee.
Swedish law allows you to pitch your tent or tepee on any public land.
Outside the tepee we ate a superb feast of pickled herring with new
potatoes, chives, sour cream and strawberries. We drank schnapps until a
pink sky sank into the sea, beyond our shiny new hired car.
My trip to Gotland was arranged by the Swedish Travel and Tourism Council,
73 Welbeck Street, London W1 8AN. Tel: 071-487 3135/6.
