FT  18 JUN 94 / Nuclear site clean-up costs more than double to Pounds 8.2bn
The cost of cleaning up the UK Atomic Energy Authority's nuclear sites has
more than doubled, according to government estimates released yesterday.
Mr Tim Eggar, the energy minister, said the authority's liabilities were now
estimated at Pounds 8.2bn, against a previous estimate of Pounds 3.4bn. That
consisted of about Pounds 6bn to decommission the authority's own sites, and
a further Pounds 2bn for fuels and wastes and for cleaning up British
Nuclear Fuels sites.
Mr Eggar said that the increase was because of:
Inclusion of new costs - for example, looking after sites during the various
phases of decommissioning, which can last 100 years.
Costs for assessment studies and research and development.
The completion of fuller studies of dismantling costs and the volumes of
waste created.
Greater allowance for contingencies.
The authority's sites are mainly experimental nuclear reactors at Windscale,
Dounreay, Harwell and Winfrith. Since April, responsibility for
decommissioning has been with UKAEA government division. The remainder of
the authority, renamed AEA Technology and comprising the technology and
consultancy operations, is now being prepared for privatisation. Its sale
value has been estimated at Pounds 250m.
Mr Derek Pooley, chief executive of UKAEA government division, said
yesterday he hoped the decommissioning work could be completed below the
estimates. 'It's our job to get the costs down,' he said.
The actual, or discounted, cost of the UKAEA clean-up will be Pounds 5bn. It
is normal practice in the nuclear industry to set aside financial provisions
well before they are needed, and allow them to grow with compound interest.
The discount rate used is 2 per cent.
The latest estimates suggest that the total undiscounted cost of
decommissioning the UK's existing nuclear installations will be about Pounds
22bn-Pounds 23bn.
A year ago, the National Audit Office put the total cost at Pounds 18bn,
using the AEA's earlier estimates.
But it warned that those estimates were 'understated because of optimistic
assumptions and significant omissions'.
The British Nuclear Industry Forum, a trade group, said the new AEA figures
had no bearing on estimates for other nuclear installations owned by Nuclear
Electric and Scottish Nuclear, the two state-owned utilities.
The government is conducting a review of the nuclear industry to see whether
further expansion can be financed by the private sector. Decommissioning
costs are one of the key issues determining the economic viability of
nuclear power.
