FT  08 APR 94 / Survey of Paints and the Environment (1): Producers in
compliance - at a price / Paint protects much of the modern world against
the environment and adds colour to life, but is itself an environmental
problem.  Paintmakers have already responded, but eco-friendlier coatings
are not always better, and their cost may be more than buyers will be
willing to pay
There is a new assertiveness about the environment in the paint industry.
Four years ago there was palpable fear at the industry's conferences about
what tighter environmental controls were going to do to profitability and,
in some cases, survival. Today, the industry is fighting back.
It is not that the industry is full of companies bent on profit at the cost
of pollution. Rather, its most reputable members have spent millions on
compliance with new laws, and in developing new and greener products.
They are now looking for compromise in an age of politicised
environmentalism, when the goal posts have tended to be moved farther away
as industry has achieved new standards demanded of it.
As gains get more expensive as you go on, is there a point where enough has
been done for most practical purposes? The greenest possible paint may well
cost more than anyone can afford.
Dr Manfred Hopp, head of BASF Lacke &amp; Farben, Germany's biggest paintmaker,
asserts: 'We are squeezed between two laws. There is the law of the land,
which imposes ever-stricter environmental controls at increasing cost. Then
there is the law of supply and demand, which determines what our customers
are willing to pay.
'If our customers will not pay more - and they won't, especially in a
recession - something has to give. So we have to make savings in costs. This
means using more technology and fewer people. It means lost jobs. This is
one of the costs of environmental control which people have yet to fully
realise.'
In BASF's case, it was 300 jobs in Germany last year, on top of DM80m on
environmental compliance in the last three years and DM250m in the last ten.
Dr Hopp says: 'None of this spending has made us more profitable, but it has
been necessary for survival. There is no choice if you want to go on
operating. It's to be or not to be.'
Given that paint factories themselves are tightly controlled, the main
pollution issue for the industry is the emission of volatile organic
compounds (VOCs) when the solvents used in paint evaporate.
Pollution is caused not by the paint industry, but its customers. Is the
industry therefore its customers' keeper? Competitive paintmakers know they
have to be: if a customer is faced with abatement costs to comply with
anti-pollution laws, an environmentally-friendly product that obviates the
need is going to have an edge in the market.
VOC emissions are being rightly regulated because they break down in
sunlight to form some of the constituents of acid rain and smog. The paint
industry's response has been to develop water-based coatings or put more
solids - pigments and resins - in the formulation.
Except for decorative emulsions used indoors on walls and ceilings,
'water-based' does not necessarily mean 'VOC-free' - 'green equals
reduction, rather than elimination,' says Mr Rod Watters, vice-president of
the US paintmaker, PPG.
Mr Herman Scopes, chief executive of ICI Paints, explains: 'Water is a
rotten solvent for paint. Customers' concerns are always with prices and
value for money. They are not interested in paying a premium just because
something is environmentally friendly. That is a bonus. The product has to
be good in its own right. You will only sell it if it does the job.'
Mr John Bernie, director of the industry-funded but independent Paint
Research Association, says inferior performance has been the bane of
water-based paints.
Some can be vulnerable to wet weather. Most do not last as long, requiring
earlier repainting of the surfaces they are supposed to protect. In
contrast, VOC solvents help the film spread and not sag or flocculate, while
producing a protective gloss water cannot usually achieve. Paint companies
have nevertheless solved many of the problems, greatly reducing VOC content
of most paints. In ICI's case, research started 15 years ago. Mr Scopes
claims its star product, which it developed for painting cars during
manufacture and has now redesigned for repairing automotive coatings, is
still the most technically advanced, although all competitors offer 'me too'
versions.
Ms Moira McMillan, director of the British Coatings Federation, says the UK
government's target of reducing VOC emissions by 30 per cent by 1998 is fine
in big markets like automotive paints, but difficult for medium-sized
engineering companies with correspondingly-sized paint shops. They will rely
on their suppliers for compliant coatings.
Paintmakers such as Kemira of Finland, Beckers of Sweden and Akzo Nobel,
which became the world's largest paint company when the Netherlands and
Scandinavian coatings businesses merged in November, have all spent large
sums developing water-based general industrial paints or buying rights to
the technology.
Sales growth - which they need to get their money back - will depend on
customers' readiness to change, but Mr Neville Petersen, the new chief of
Courtaulds Coatings, also confirms that 'a lot of customers are saying until
we have to change our systems, we are not going to. That's fine, but we have
to be ready for it when it happens, even if it means spending a lot of money
up front.'
In Courtaulds case, the bill this year will include Pounds 36m for a new
European resins development and manufacturing plant at Silvertown, in
London.
Ironically, therefore, the industry needs more regulation to force sales
growth of its compliant products, but worries if it can afford to go
further. Dr Hopp says many years of stability are needed to allow the
industry to recoup research and development costs, rather than be expected
to keep breaking new ground.
Mr Louis McCulloch, senior partner of James Consulting, an independent
specialist on paint, says: 'There is a danger in people getting too hung up
on environmental issues when other issues need addressing.
'Europe is in recession. Markets are down and there are mounting cost
pressures. The environmental issue is a long-term one. The immediate issue
is survival. I hope sense is prevailing. Environmental considerations are
important, but commercial considerations must not be lost.'
Dr Frank Rose, ICI's chief medical officer and an expert on safety, says:
'In the 1980s a lot of energy went into confrontation over regulation and
how to resist it. In the last few years, the industry has demonstrated
change.
'It's now in the interest of big companies to show leadership, especially
now people are being more cautious about putting pressure on if it causes
extra cost and loses jobs.'
Mr Herman van Karnebeek, director of Akzo Nobel, thinks big companies suffer
because they are easy targets for regulators, while small paint companies
are often let off the hook by local authorities fearful about jobs being
lost if they shut them down.
Large German paint companies have encountered similar prejudice, with small
operators sometimes treated leniently on the orders of local political
leaders who fear a backlash.
Mr Karnebeek says: 'The industry should set up its own means of policing
itself and needs to get organised on a European scale. Big companies should
have some leverage over supplies. Suppliers should also take a responsible
position.'
He wants controls harmonised, with universal standards of enforcement. This
is already a problem in Britain, says Ms McMillan, because different local
authorities interpret the same criteria differently against identical plant.
Harmonisation in timing new controls is also needed. Mr Roger Walters, who
runs Euramax, a UK coil coater, says British enthusiasm to enforce lower VOC
emissions ahead of other EU countries will force premature investment in old
abatement technology, giving EU competitors an edge if current trials of a
lower-energy catalytic conversion system prove viable.
The question is whether the industry's new assertiveness - and its record of
improvement - will help carry such arguments.
Paint markets and suppliers, Pages 2 to 5.
Industry trends, Page 5.
Product research, Page 6.
