FT  19 MAY 94 / How they are used as a hedge against future price changes
Instruments which provide protection against the shifting values of
agricutural commodities and currencies have been around for decades. But it
is only in recent years that the use of derivatives has become widespread -
mainly to hedge interest rate and foreign currencies movements and (more
recently) changes in equity and commodity prices. Their notional value
jumped from Dollars 7,198bn at the end of 1989 to Dollars 17,643bn three
years later, the GAO says (though the actual amounts at risk are much
smaller).
Like other financial instruments, they are also used to take a position on a
future price movement (critics prefer to call it 'speculation'). The
difference - and one of the factors which troubles regulators - is that all
derivatives are geared instruments, offering a much greater market exposure
for a smaller outlay.
Derivatives began as an extention of some underlying or 'cash' market: the
value of an equity index futures contract, when it expires, is based on the
underlying shares in the index. But values do not move mechanically in line
with a 'cash' market - and in many cases, the derivatives markets themselves
actually determine prices in the underlying instruments.
The plethora of complex financial instruments spawned recently can be broken
down into three main categories:
Swaps. The two parties to a swap agree that for a certain period they will
exchange regular payments. In an interest rate swap, for instance, one
institution pays the other a fixed rate of interest (say, 8 per cent) based
on some notional principal amount, while the other pays a variable rate of
interest, which changes as market interest rates changes. That enables
companies to turn floating rate liabilities into fixed rate ones, and vice
versa. Swaps represented some 27 per cent of the Dollars 17,643bn notional
value of all derivatives at the end of 1992.
Options. These give the holder the right to sell (a put option) or buy (a
call option) something in the future at a price determined at the outset.
For instance, an institutional investor wanting to protect investment gains
in its equity portfolio might buy put options. These would guarantee a
minimum level at which it can sell the shares in future - without at the
same time limiting its potential gains.
Forwards/Futures. Both require the holder to buy or sell an underlying asset
or currency at some time in the future: unlike an option, the holder cannot
simply let the contract lapse. Forward contracts - commonly used in forex
markets - accounted for 42 per cent of all derivatives at the end of 1992,
while futures were 18 per cent.
