FT  27 JUN 94 / Working Life: Lessons from within Toshiba - Reading
Alchemy of a Leader, John E. Rehfeld, John Wiley &amp; Sons, Dollars 22.95.
Fashionable as it has become for authors to point to Japanese tradition and
the Bushido, the 'way of the warrior', for handy, if vague, tips on crisis
management in the modern Western office, lessons are better learned from the
manoeuvring in the trenches of Toshiba.
The borrowing of Japanese techniques is a modern role reversal, given that
the art of borrowing, whether it be Chinese as a written language or a US
production line, has been been central to Japan's development. For western
managers, the challenge is learning from Japanese companies without
transplanting a corporate culture that has a worker introduced by company
name first, family name second.
Given that he is fond of the 'strategic silences' that punctuate Japanese
management, Rehfeld's exercise in alchemy begins without the characteristic
humility of a Japanese student before his sensei (master). He opens the book
with talk of 'unique' experiences in management and his skills of synthesis.
But a touch boastful begining becomes a book that does get down into the
Toshiba trenches to sift techniques. Having worked at that company in the
US, the author is aware that with the transplant comes the likelihood of
rejection, and that the style at headquarters is not necessarily common to
the large Japanese family of sub-contractors providing the components.
The most useful suggestions are of the 'getting to know your customer' type.
Japanese companies are relentless cultivators. If you have taken advantage
of the new-found freedoms in the Tokyo telecoms market to use other than
KDD, the old long-distance telephone monopoly, the folks at KDD will
persistently come a knocking, offering discounts, note pads and good reasons
why you should rejoin their phone fold.
And there are lessons, as Rehfeld suggests, in avoiding the 'hero' culture
of the west. The victories should be shared, and the corporate wins should
be 'celebrated on a frequent and modest basis'. While suggesting that
'silence' does have benefits, he also points to the need for positive
feedback often lacking in a Japanese office.
Japanese companies are being forced to reassess their own management styles.
Apparently conservative companies turned speculative in the late 1980s,
showing the lack of restraint generally seen late at night on Tokyo station
platforms when well-watered managers are stumbling home after an evening of
cultivation in the corporate interest.
And when these Japanese managers finally make it home, they will find a
family less tolerant of late-night commitment to the company that was
justifiable when the nation was devoted to 'building a strong Japan'. The
executive cited as saying that the company 'is what allows me to enjoy my
family . . . and to maintain the respect of my family' is in danger of being
fired by his family.
