FT  14 SEP 94 / Equities struggle to escape from bondage
After decoupling, might recoupling prove rather a painful process? This is
traditionally a tricky time of year for financial markets, a period of
foreign exchange crisis and securities market instability. Perhaps it is the
shock of returning to work after the summer, when finance ministers, for
instance, decide they should resume unfinished business and raise interest
rates.
In the securities markets the instability may be the consequence of
portfolio rebalancing and temporarily reduced cashflows. Stock markets tend
to reserve their seasonal strength for the period between November and
February, in anticipation of large cash receipts.
At any rate, words such as 'correction' and even 'crash' are beginning to
crop up in brokers' literature, which is normally so bullish. The reason is
that the August rally in equities was not paralleled in bonds and therefore
has pushed valuation ratios to awkward levels. For example, the Dow Jones
Average is still within 3 per cent of its all-time peak at the end of
January, while the US Treasury long bond yield has risen 150 basis points.
By and large, the key bond-equity ratios in the main national markets are
still some way short of the extremes reached before the crash of October
1987, but they are well above normal levels.
We are in that awkward period of the securities market cycle when bond
prices have topped out but equities are still trying to chase corporate
profits higher. In jargon, equities are trying to decouple from bonds. This
is a dangerous game.
The low level of dividend yields is the problem. In the US the stock market
has never been worth buying on its present yield of well below 3 per cent,
and the ratio of bond to equity yields at some 2.8 has risen to the highest
since 1987. The same is true in the UK, where the ratio is 2.3. Such ratios
can only be justified by exceptionally buoyant dividend growth. But with
short-term interest rates going up almost everywhere, rosier expectations
about corporate prosperity may need to be trimmed.
Of course, it can be argued that the interest rate hikes reflect strong
economic growth rather than threaten it. But there is a lack of sensitivity.
Wall Street in particular has come to seem almost immune to changes in the
financial environment over the past couple of years.
US blue chips have continued their run of amazingly low volatility, so that
the Standard and Poor's 500 index has fluctuated only 5 per cent either side
of the 460 level so far in 1994, continuing the pattern of 1993. When this
period of unusual stability comes to an end, might it do so spectacularly?
One explanation for the lack of movement in prices is that the US market is
regarded as a core investment by American institutions while the volatility
and speculation has been exported into derivatives contracts and overseas
markets. To take two markets in which US investors are active, Hong Kong has
swung between 12,200 and 8,300 this year, Mexico between 2,900 and 1,950.
Moreover the US bond market has been more volatile than blue-chip equities
this year (and European bonds more erratic still).
A pre-crash scenario can develop when the asset allocation mechanisms break
down. This can happen because of institutional rigidities, such as the bias
of UK pension funds towards equities. This is another way of looking at the
'decoupling' which the equity market salesmen are so enthusiastic about.
Some investors are also subject to irrational behaviour. US mutual fund
investors have stopped putting money into bond funds, even though the
returns have gone up. They are still buying equity funds, albeit at reduced
levels, although the value has not similarly improved.
Of course, a surge of economic growth could yet legitimise the stretching of
the bond-equity relationships. This is believable if you swallow the
rhetoric of the US and UK governments and accept that the recent short-term
interest rate rises have represented pre-emptive strikes against future
inflation.
A less encouraging interpretation is that persistent and excessive
government deficits around the world are crowding out the private sector's
recovery. The attempt by equities to break free could end in sullen
recapture.
