FT  13 OCT 94 / UK Company News: NW Water sells Malaysian stake
North West Water is to swap a 20 per cent stake in Malaysia's Indah Water
Konsortium for a holding in Indah Water Operations, a separately formed
operating company which has exclusive rights to maintain and operate the
assets of IWK.
The deal, which will leave North West with a 5 per cent holding in IWK,
would enhance the overall strength of the group's position in Malaysia,
directors said.
Under the terms of the transaction North West has agreed to sell the 20 per
cent stake to the Berjaya Group, one of its co-investors in IWK.
Consideration is Pounds 7m, the par value of the holding plus Pounds 1m. In
addition, North West has agreed to a 'deeprooted alliance' with Berjaya,
focusing on developing clean water opportunities in Malaysia and
establishing a manufacturing/ distribution base.
The two are also to create a jointly-owned company, based in Hong Kong, to
exploit opportunities in water and waste water in mainland China.
Berjaya South Island, a listed company, has offered to purchase all the
shares in IWK. That offer has been accepted by 80 per cent of the
shareholders, including North West.
In consideration for the disposal of its remaining 5 per cent stake in IWK,
North West will take equivalent stock in BSouth, which will be renamed Prime
Utilities.
The BSouth proposals are subject to approvals by the Malaysian government
and the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange, as well as shareholders. This process
could take up to six months.
IWK was six months ago awarded the contract by the government of Dr Mahathir
Mohamad to upgrade and construct a nationwide sewerage system.
Berjaya associated companies, controlled by Malaysian Chinese entrepreneur
Mr Vincent Tan, had a 35 per cent stake in Indah. North West had 25 per cent
and funds associated with Malaysia's army and police force had 20 per cent
each.
At the time opposition groups accused the government of favouritism towards
Mr Tan and Berjaya. However, criticism was somewhat mollified by the broad
composition of the Indah consortium.
Mr Bob Ferguson, North West's finance director, said the restructuring was
being undertaken because the Malaysian government wished to see ownership of
the recently privatised water operations vested in local publicly traded
companies.
