FT  25 APR 94 / Arts: Designs to help the process of recovery - Architecture
Architecture is not at the forefront of the mind when you are going into
hospital, but clearly the design of the surroundings can be important in the
process of cure and recovery.
I recently played a very small part in the judging procedure for a hospital
design competition run by the King Edward's Hospital Fund for London, better
known as The King's Fund. It has long taken an interest in improving
hospital design and has the great advantage of being able to take an
independent view of a field fraught with political, economic and social
tensions.
Any patient, whether in a NHS hospital or a private one, has certain
expectations. First, reassurance that you are not going to be forgotten in
some Kafka-like maze of corridors or left in a lift on the trolley, or put
in a ward where noise and confusion mitigate against sleep and recovery. Nor
do patients want to feel they are staying in either a health spa or a hotel.
They appreciate institutional organisation and hierarchy that provides
confidence. Patients need that starched cleanliness and a feeling that if
they call out in a troubled night Florence Nightingale will be there.
Hospitals suffered in the 1970s and 1980s from an undefined belief of health
authorities that large scale buildings and technology were the answer for a
state system of care. The large acute hospitals built in the last two
decades were neither beautiful or comforting. Architects faced almost
insuperable design problems combined with lack of money.
The King's Fund was aware of these problems and commissioned two reports.
The first report, by Rawlinson, Kelly and Whittlestone, looked at what had
been built in England and Wales during the last 25 years. They noted that by
the 1980s the NHS was building more medium sized schemes. There were
recurring faults - lack of privacy; too few lavatories and bathrooms; drab
decorative schemes; waiting areas that were too small. Poor car parking and
signposting were criticised.
In a second report Keith Critchlow and Jon Allen of the Prince of Wales's
Institute of Architecture were asked to identify criteria of excellence in
hospital design. They found ignorance of aesthetic principles and an
inability to convey any sense of welcome and reassurance. Critchlow and
Allen concluded: 'it is now clear that the requirements of technology have
played a leading part in the development of modern medical practice and
thereby modern hospital design. In the process, the wider and deeper range
of needs of patients and staff have suffered neglect.'
To supplement these useful reports the King's Fund held a design competition
for examples of excellence in hospitals opened in Britain between 1980 and
1990. The judges agreed that only one person mattered: the patient. In many
big new hospitals the patient still feels a cog in a medical machine. The
patient is really the client; but the bureaucracy and purse strings are too
powerfully in control. Even in a few years hospitals have had to change
because of advances in, for example, non-invasive surgery and faster
mobilisation of patients after surgery.
The winner of The King's Fund 1993 hospital design award is surprising. It
is a 124 bed private hospital, the Wellington Hospital (North) in London's
St John's Wood, designed by YRM Architects. The surprise lies in the fact
that the NHS entries represent a massive national investment, yet none quite
reached the standards or the level of patient satisfaction achieved by this
independent hospital. The judges made allowances for the different financial
positions of the hospitals visited.
The Wellington won because it was simply the best designed. It solved the
problems of building a large hospital on a small urban site and gave the
patients light and privacy and a sense of control of their own environment.
Patients and staff were interviewed by the judges and completed
questionnaires to provide a broad response about the effect of the design on
life in hospital. The dim entrance area and the small twin rooms were
criticised. The appearance of the building is not unlike that of any modern
hotel or office block but this did not seem to worry the patients, who felt
comforted by the overall impression of cleanliness and efficiency.
The other four hospitals selected for commendation are all NHS hospitals and
all have many virtues. Two are designed by the Percy Thomas Partnership: the
Surgical Wing at Stoke; and the West Dorset General Hospital in Dorchester.
Both appear much more friendly and welcoming than the winner, as they adopt
a 'traditional modern' approach to design with pitched roofs, brick walls
opening windows and courtyards with excellent landscaping. The other two
runners-up are the Homerton Hospital in Hackney designed by YRM Architects
and the Royal Brompton National Heart and Lung Hospital by Watkins Grey and
Partners.
All four commended schemes show how things have improved since the 'hospital
giantism' of the 1970s, but there is still a long way to go.
An excellent report is published with the awards, Improving Hospital Design
by Iden Wickens.
