FT  05 MAY 94 / Metals business booms: Exchange's sixfold rise in turnover
forces move to new home
The London Metal Exchange, written off by many observers after its members
collectively lost Pounds 600m in the 1985 tin market collapse, is now being
forced to move home because business is booming.
After a sixfold increase in LME turnover in the past five years the
exchange's premises at Plantation House in the City are now too small. In
the autumn it will move to 56 Leadenhall Street, less than a mile away and
only the third premises the exchange has occupied in its 117-year history.
The Leadenhall Street building, built about 1922, is no more than a shell
and this will enable the LME to install a trading floor and support
facilities tailored to its needs.
The trading floor will be designed to allow for an increase in the number of
members participating in the traditional ring formation, backed by modern
communication booths. For the first time, ring-dealing members will have
private clerical offices behind their booths.
But Mr Raj Bagri, chairman of the LME, stressed yesterday that there would
be no change in the way the exchange operates. 'Our customers are
well-served by the way we trade today,' he said.
Mr David King, chief executive, said the LME had signed a 30-year lease with
five-year break clauses with the Prudential Assurance Company. The break
clauses would enable the LME more flexibility.
'We don't know what lies ahead when technology is changing so fast. But we
believe we will continue to trade the way we are trading today for at least
another 10 years.'
Mr Bagri said the exchange would bear the Pounds 3m to Pounds 3.5m cost of
the move without charging a special levy. He said the Pru had asked for
financial details to be kept secret but, compared with Plantation House, the
LME would be paying less than half the cost per square foot.
British Land, owner of Plantation House, had offered an attractive deal
including extra space. 'But that would have been a compromise,' Mr Bagri
said.
'We can now create everything we need from a shell. The exchange has been
growing fast and we have every confidence that our members can continue to
make it grow in the future.'
The LME is the world's leading futures market for trading in copper, lead,
zinc, primary aluminium, aluminium alloy, nickel and tin. Most world metal
industry supply contracts are based on its official prices.
Turnover is about Dollars 5bn a day, having increased last year turnover by
43 per cent to a record 830m tonnes of metal worth more than Dollars
1,000bn. About 95 per cent of this business comes from outside the UK and 85
per cent of LME members have non-UK parent companies.
