FT  14 DEC 94 / Tobacco industry faces class action in US courts
The US cigarette industry, facing an unprecedented wave of
multi-billion-dollar lawsuits, was examining the implications of a Miami
court ruling yesterday.
A judge ruled that up to 60,000 present and former flight attendants could
together sue US tobacco companies for health difficulties they said had been
caused by inhaling passengers' cigarette smoke. It is the first time illness
caused by secondhand smoke has been accepted as grounds for a class action
lawsuit.
Mr Stanley Rosenblatt, the flight attendants' lawyer, said compensation and
punitive damages for all 60,000 plaintiffs might total in excess of Dollars
5bn (Pounds 3bn).
Today, in a court in New Orleans, lawyers representing tens of millions of
present and former smokers seek to bring a class action against the tobacco
industry claiming compensation for nicotine addiction.
In yet another type of case to be heard next Monday, tobacco manufacturers
will try to fend off a lawsuit from the State of Mississippi in which the
state attorney-general is demanding compensation for the cost of treating
smoking-related illnesses under public assistance programmes such as
Medicaid. Other states are bringing similar suits.
The flight attendants suing in Miami are employed by various US airlines.
They do not smoke, but say they were exposed to passengers' cigarette fumes
before the US banned smoking on most domestic flights in 1989.
US cigarette manufacturers say passive smoking has not been proved to cause
any illness, but last year the Environmental Protection Agency, a US
government body, declared that secondhand smoke was carcinogenic.
Judge Robert Kaye of the Circuit Court for Dade County originally turned
down the attendants' request to proceed as a group, but in March a state
appeal court overruled his decision.
Some tobacco companies were considering an appeal to the Florida Supreme
Court. They were also taking comfort from a footnote to Judge Kaye's
decision in which the judge said he was 'deeply concerned with the issue of
causation'.
RJ Reynolds Tobacco, part of the RJR Nabisco tobacco and food group, said
that indicated that the judge felt individual trials would still be needed
for each flight attendant to establish the precise cause of their illness
and the appropriate level of damages.
'As we have argued, thousands of separate trials to decide those facts
defeats the purpose of handling these claims as a class action,' RJ Reynolds
said.
The strong whiff of trouble, Page 17
