FT  16 MAY 94 / Leading Article: Competition and competitiveness
Government exhortations to British companies to raise the level of their
performance in world markets are welcome, as are intelligent government
actions to facilitate the private sector's efforts. No doubt Mr Michael
Heseltine's white paper on competitiveness, delayed as a mark of respect to
the late Mr John Smith, will be a virtuoso performance in this regard.
However, it will not obscure an undesirable by-product of the campaign -
namely, a relaxation in competition policy.
One symptom is the increasingly laisser faire approach to the investigation
of anti-competitive practices by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission. The
MMC has found no threat to the public interest in reports on the supply of
motor cars, perfumes and ice-cream. In each case, there had been alleged
abuses of power by dominant suppliers, with new entrants complaining of
barriers to entry. Yet the MMC has appeared willing to challenge such
anti-competitive practices. For example, the MMC rejected a complaint from
Mars, a recent entrant to the ice-cream market, about exclusive freezer
cabinets. The MMC was unconvinced, even though Walls has nearly two-thirds
of the market.
According to a report in today's FT, decisions such as these have alarmed
the Office of Fair Trading. Under Sir Bryan Carsberg, the former telecoms
regulator, the OFT has taken a strongly consumerist approach to competition
issues. Sir Bryan gives the impression of believing that anti-competitive
practices should be removed unless it can be shown that they benefit the
consumer. He wishes to attack vertical barriers to competition such as
agreements that tie retailers to manufacturers.
Consumer interests
In contrast, the chairman of the MMC is Mr Graeme Odgers, a former
businessman. He points out that there is no shortage of competition within
the industries that have been investigated. His view is that it needs to be
shown that anti-competitive practices damage the consumer before the MMC
interferes in an industry. He says that companies that have achieved
competitive advantage should be allowed to profit from their investment,
innovation and enterprise. However, there is a fine line between legitimate
rewards for investment and seeking to exclude competitors - and practices
such as exclusive freezer cabinets smack uncomfortably of the latter.
The actions of the Department of Trade and Industry reinforce the impression
that competition matters less these days. Early in Sir Bryan's term of
office, Mr Heseltine over-rode him on two references to the MMC. The first,
a merger of two infra-red defence components businesses, was a relatively
unimportant case. But the second, less than two weeks later, caused a bigger
stir. Mr Heseltine decided not to refer the hostile bid by Airtours for
Owners Abroad, although it would have created a situation in which two
companies controlled two-thirds of package tour sales.
Further intervention
This year has seen a further intervention by Mr Heseltine over the Arran bus
case. The OFT was investigating claims that a company with a fleet of two
buses was attempting to drive a much larger competitor off the island of
Arran by running services at a loss. Mr Heseltine instructed Sir Bryan to
call off the enquiry as the size of the case did not justify the costs and
burden. Whether this was true is debatable: with the market worth almost
Pounds 300,000 a year, the investigation could have been cost-effective. In
any case, most bus competition cases involve small local markets where
established operators attempt to drive off new entrants, often by predatory
pricing. The decision appeared to legitimise such practices.
Many businesses would welcome a relaxation in competition policy because it
confers freedom to profit richly if not fairly in the UK market, enabling a
company to take bigger risks overseas. But the idea that the UK can build
strong international businesses by protecting them in the home market is a
chimera. Companies that have grown flabby in the UK because they have not
felt threatened by competitors breathing down their necks are unlikely to
succeed in the more demanding world of global markets.
