FT  09 JUL 94 / BCCI chief pleads guilty in US court
Mr Swaleh Naqvi, former chief executive of the defunct Bank of Credit and
Commerce International, pleaded guilty to three criminal charges involving
fraud, conspiracy and racketeering in Washington yesterday, as part of a
plea bargain with federal prosecutors.
Mr Naqvi pleaded guilty to defrauding US banking regulators and to engaging
in a criminal conspiracy with Mr Agha Hasan Abedi, BCCI's founder, to take
over several US banks, including First American Bankshares in Washington.
As a result of the plea deal, which was accepted by presiding Judge Joyce
Hens Green, Mr Naqvi is likely to be sentenced in October to between six and
8 1/2 years in jail. This takes into account nearly three years that Mr
Naqvi spent under house arrest in Abu Dhabi.
The government of Abu Dhabi was BCCI's majority shareholder and Mr Naqvi is
already appealing against a 14-year sentence handed down there in his
absence for his role in the BCCI fraud. BCCI, which claimed assets of almost
Dollars 24bn, was shut down worldwide in July 1991 after regulators
uncovered massive fraud.
As part of his plea deal Mr Naqvi agreed to co-operate with the continuing
investigation into BCCI. His co-operation could be very important in federal
and other cases involving BCCI, at the regulatory level and to the bank's
worldwide liquidators, government lawyers said. As a result of the deal, two
further sets of federal charges against Mr Naqvi, in Tampa and Atlanta, were
dropped.
However, Mr Robert Morgenthau, the New York district attorney, wrote to
Judge Green on July 5 attacking the proposed plea bargain, on the grounds
that it failed to provide an adequate penalty. 'The defendant's crime was a
long-term crime of treachery,' the letter said.
'Tens of thousands of hard-working human beings trusted their earnings to
BCCI, only to lose them as a result of the defendant's criminal actions.
Small businessmen with goods in transit, money in the bank, children at home
and a business to run woke to find. . . the business ruined because of a
small group of thieves,' the letter said.
The New York district attorney's office, which has aggressively pursued the
BCCI case, is likely to attempt to bring Mr Naqvi to trial on separate fraud
charges in New York. The office bitterly resents the Justice Department's
strategy of negotiating a plea bargain with Mr Naqvi, who it believes holds
the key to the BCCI fraud, and yesterday expressed its determination to
pursue the matter.
The office is also sceptical of Mr Naqvi's agreement to help with the
continuing investigations.
Government lawyers in Washington said yesterday they were entirely happy
that they could have proved their case against Mr Naqvi, but concerned about
initiating lengthy court proceedings at huge cost to the US taxpayer.
