FT  07 JUL 94 / FT Exporter (15): Exporters find more on offer - Paul Melly
looks at the variety of cover available for both commercial risks and
so-called 'political' risks / Short-term insurance
The market for credit or political risk insurance to protect trading income
from payment losses overseas is changing. The choice of underwriters ready
to take on export risk is wider than ever, even if their appetite is limited
by a shortage of capacity in the reinsurance market.
The underwriters - licking their wounds from the Lloyd's demise and European
recession - may feel more gloomy. This, in some cases, has led to premium
rises.
But for exporters, who find difficulty obtaining bank finance without
insurance policies, a wide variety of insurers offer varied forms of cover
against commercial business risks and so-called 'political' problems such as
war, nationalisation or a shortage of hard currency in the buying country
(transfer risk).
Lloyd's has focused on political risk business since restrictions were
introduced on trade credit risks in the 1920s after a Lloyd's underwriter,
which had provided financial guarantees, experienced heavy losses.
However, in response to the worldwide trend towards privatisation which is
gradually transforming many traditional sovereign 'political' risks into
purely commercial ones, Lloyd's is gearing itself up to becoming a
significant source of trade credit risk underwriting.
Liberalisation of the European market has spawned a host of new insurers and
spurred old established ones to become more flexible and move into new
areas.
In many cases, the exporter will find several different companies are
willing to offer cover, according to Nigel Bovingdon, managing director of
the Credit Insurance Association (CIA), a leading broker.
Operators may have certain specialist niche skills. But several major
factors may influence the exporter's choice of underwriter and, conversely,
the underwriter's selection of exporters.
Is cover needed for credit risks or political risks, or both? Does the
exporter need cover for just a few selected deals or a continuing flow of
business? Does the exporter want the freedom to decide how much to sell to
customers or does he want to rely on an insurer to set maximum credit limits
on the amount of exposure he may have towards each customer abroad?
In such a complex market, it is often easier for the exporter to rely on the
advice of a broker, who will analyse his particular trading needs and shop
around to find the most suitable underwriters.
NCM Credit Insurance - before privatisation the short-term arm of the Export
Credits Guarantee Department (ECGD) - is the market leader in the UK in
terms of insured turnover and is able, along with its main UK competitor,
Trade Indemnity, to handle companies of any size.
NCM normally covers a broad package of business, written under an annual
policy and it is usually able to cover a significant amount of business in
'difficult' countries in the developing world, provided an exporter can
balance these risks with an amount of export sales to more stable and
prosperous markets in Europe, North America or south-east Asia.
NCM has underwriters specialising in particular countries, an approach that
contrasts with its main rival Trade Indemnity, where the underwriters
specialise in industry sectors and each looks after a portfolio of export
clients. A TI customer deals with the same underwriter for all aspects of
the underwriting process.
Like NCM, TI offers 'whole turnover cover', with a policy covering a spread
of business over the course of a year and it, too, offers a limits service.
It is keen to cater for large companies, though is prepared to make its
policies available to smaller clients - reducing the size of its minimum
cover to Pounds 10,000 per policy from Pounds 25,000 earlier this year.
A third operator in this vein, offering whole turnover cover and a limits
service, is Namur Assurances du Credit. This Belgian group has just been
taken over by the German insurance giant Gerling. Together, they have a
network of local underwriting offshoots that will soon cover most of the
European Union. In Britain, it is Namur that will continue to provide the
group's credit insurance service.
Namur, NCM and TI can all supplement protection against normal commercial
problems with political risk cover.
They could soon face increased competition from France's Coface, which has
expanded its operations in Britain after concentrating at first on companies
with a French connection. In France, Coface underwrites commercial risks on
a private basis, while acting on behalf of the government to cover most
political business. In the UK, it has made private political risk
arrangements so that it can offer a full service to exporters.
Germany's Hermes is also seeking to establish a significant niche in the UK
market.
The US has emerged as a valuable source of extra export insurance capacity,
through Citicorp International Trade Indemnity, American International Group
and, recently, Foreign Credit Insurance Association of America (FCIA), owned
by the Great American Insurance Company, which formerly acted as managing
underwriter for the Export-Import Bank of the US. When this association
ended, acting on behalf of Great American, FCIA began underwriting on a
private sector basis for US export business. Since last year it has been
taking on European export clients as well.
Another US-backed newcomer is TUA, which writes both whole turnover and
single risks on behalf of Reliance Insurance Company of the US.
Among UK insurers, Sun Alliance covers one-off risks and some continuous
export turnover, particularly 'key account' cover of an exporter's main
buyers. Commercial Union is a mainstream political risk underwriter, which
can provide credit insurance policies designed to cope with certain
specialist business risks.
Few private sector underwriters are able to match the medium-term cover
provided by ECGD and other national export credit agencies for exporters of
capital goods. One that does is Exporters Insurance Company, which began its
operations in 1990 and will consider risks of up to 15 years. It is a mutual
insurer, and to qualify for cover, exporters must first become members.
This is expensive, but for large exporters requiring specialist cover it can
be worthwhile, especially because EIC will often cover deals on much more
relaxed payment terms than those demanded by national export credit
agencies.
