FT  06 SEP 94 / Tests for pupils aged 11 ordered
Mrs Gillian Shephard, the education secretary, yesterday announced that all
pupils aged 11 in England and Wales must take national curriculum tests next
year.
She also unveiled a package of concessions designed to ensure that the tests
are not disrupted by a teachers' union boycott for the third year running.
The Department for Education will reduce teachers' workload by paying for
all written tests to be marked externally, at a cost of between Pounds 12m
and Pounds 18m.
Central government funds will also meet 60 per cent of any costs of supply
teachers needed to supervise primary school tests, creating a potential
extra bill of Pounds 11m. The remaining costs would be paid by local
education authorities.
Mrs Shephard also announced that no league tables of school performance
based on the tests would be published this year. Plans to publish them for
pupils aged seven and 14 have been abandoned completely, while league tables
of tests for 11-year-olds will not be published until 1996 at the earliest.
Teachers' assessments of children's work will be given equal importance to
the tests, and all mandatory external audit of the teachers' own assessments
will end.
The move means that national curriculum tests, which have been widely
boycotted by teachers' unions for the past two years, will now be compulsory
for all children at the ages of seven, 11 and 14.
Mrs Shephard said that acceptance of the testing regime was increasing, with
half of primary schools and 30 per cent of secondary schools reporting
results from this summer's tests, compared with only 2 per cent last year
when all the three biggest teachers' unions boycotted them.
Mr Doug McAvoy, general secretary of the National Union of Teachers, the
only union to boycott the tests this year, said he would consult his members
before deciding whether to continue the industrial action for a third year.
But he was initially sceptical. He said: 'It's my belief that teachers,
particularly in primary schools, will find the introduction of external
markers a threat to their professionalism.'
The National Association of Head Teachers maintained its opposition to
'totally unjustified' league tables. Mr David Hart, the association's
general secretary, said the decision to employ external markers had 'more to
do with political imperative than educational need'.
However, Mr Nigel de Gruchy, general secretary of the National Association
of Schoolmasters Union of Women Teachers, which called off its boycott last
year, said: 'With a slimmed-down national curriculum, a slimmed-down testing
and assessment system, teachers can now concentrate on teaching in the
classroom, which should always be their first priority.'
