FT  28 SEP 94 / Brussels urged to adopt radical farm reform: Controversial
study disputes step-by-step change to Common Agricultural Policy
The European Commission will shortly release a controversial report
recommending wholesale reform of the Common Agricultural Policy, including
scrapping farm production quotas and set-aside payments to farmers.
The report's recommendations challenge the view that favours step-by-step
reform of the CAP and are certain to provoke a stormy reaction among the
farm lobby in Europe, particularly in France.
But the authors of the study argue that radical reform of the CAP would
lighten the burden on taxpayers, reduce consumer prices, and ease the
integration of farm-intensive economies of central and eastern Europe into
the European Union.
'The objective should be a level of market protection no higher than that
enjoyed by other sectors in the EU economy,' the report concludes.
The discussion document was drawn up by a group of independent agriculture
experts under contract by the Commission's economic and financial affairs
directorate.
It is one of several internal Commission papers being prepared ahead of the
1996 intergovernmental conference to review the Maastricht treaty.
Its chief recommendations for reform of the CAP - which consumes more than
half of the EU's annual Ecu 70bn (Pounds 65.2bn) budget - are:
EU farm prices should be cut to near world price levels in all sectors. All
remaining import levies and quotas should be transformed into flat-rate
tariffs.
The phasing of farm subsidies into national budgets over 7-10 years. This
would allow member states to decide how to share out the freed-up funds.
Member states liable to suffer heavy penalties through loss of EU financial
support could be compensated through increased contributions from the
regional, social and 'cohesion' funds.
In a foreword to the discussion paper, the Commission makes clear that it
does not support the 'far-reaching' recommendation written by the report's
authors who include a group of agriculture experts headed by Mr Arne Larsen,
chief of staff to Mr Finn Gundelach, a former Danish vice-president of the
European Commission in the 1970s.
'This is a really hot potato,' said a senior Commission official who
referred to a 'very painful debate' before the decision to publish the
report. The consensus had been in favour of publication in the interests of
stimulating discussion and debate, the official explained.
The most recent CAP reform was agreed in 1992 and is still being digested.
By 1997, it aims to virtually eliminate export subsidies which EU producers
use to dump food on world markets, thereby reducing overproduction.
The report repeats the oft-cited criticism of the CAP for being
over-bureaucratic, as well as causing environmental damage and trade
tensions. It claims the proposed changes would allow member states to lower
their EU budget contributions and reduce consumer prices.
They would also increase the EU's 'flexibility towards trading partners and
new entrant states', says the report, referring to pressure to admit Poland,
Hungary, the Czech republic and Slovakia into the Union.
