FT  28 NOV 94 / Turks express despair over entry card to the Fatherland
Becoming a German citizen is easier said than done. Not only does Germany
have no immigration laws, but its nationality laws, which date back to 1913,
are based on blood.
Nationality is automatically granted - provided one of the parents is
German. Otherwise, if you have no German relations, and no German spouse,
you must wait at least 10 years before applying for citizenship. Even then,
there is no guarantee it will be granted.
'At first, when I started to address the crowd, they could not believe I
could speak German. Then they were surprised that I did not have a Turkish
accent. And they were even astonished that I was going to stand for
parliament,' says Mr Cem Ozdemir.
Born in 1965 in the town of Bad Urach in the state of Baden-Wurttemberg, Mr
Ozdemir last month was elected to the Bundestag, the first time anyone from
an immigrant family had attained such a status. His election coincided with
a spate of recent attacks on foreigners, particularly in Berlin, and a
renewed debate among Germany's political parties about whether to liberalise
the country's strict nationality laws in an effort to integrate foreigners.
'It was a long road to the Bundestag,' says Mr Ozdemir, a member of the
Greens/Bundnis 90 party. 'But I hope I can have some influence in trying to
make it easier for the German government to integrate the millions of
foreigners who are living in this country.'
More than 6.8m foreigners live in Germany. For economic reasons, many were
invited as Gastarbeiter (guest workers) in the 1960s. But those who chose to
remain soon discovered that despite paying taxes, and meeting all their
social commitments, they were not entitled to vote unless they became German
citizens. The matter is further complicated by the fact that in the case of
the 1.9m Turks living in Germany, the immigrants are reluctant to give up
their Turkish citizenship.
The reason is that they become foreigners in the country of their birth, or
their parents', and lose the right to inherit property. And since Germany
does not allow dual citizenship, many Turks are reluctant to take up German
citizenship.
Mr Ozdemir soon discovered - when he applied for German citizenship when he
was 18 years old - that Turkey was reluctant to relinquish ties. 'Ankara
wants the sons of those Turks living in Germany for military conscription,'
said Mr Ozdemir. Mr Ozdemir claimed that the vast majority of Turks born in
Germany paid a DM10,000 (Pounds 4,000) fine rather than serve in the army.
Mrs Cornelia Schmalz-Jacobsen, head of the federal office for foreigners'
issues, wants children of foreigners born in Germany to be granted dual
citizenship until the age of 18, at which time they can choose their
nationality.
'We have to create the instruments for integrating these children,' she
said. 'The present situation plays into the hands of the far-right
extremists.'
Mrs Schmalz-Jacobsen added that the recent proposals by Chancellor Helmut
Kohl's coalition government for amending the citizenship regulations verged
on the absurd. For instance, if they became law, a child could have German
nationality until the age of 18 provided one of the parents had been born
and had lived in the country for 10 years and the other parent had lived in
Germany for a decade. 'These proposals will be impossible to administer,'
said Mrs Schmalz-Jacobsen.
'Can you imagine the bureaucracy involved and the interpretation of the law?
People will ask had they in fact lived in Germany for 10 years if they had
spent the summer with their grandmother in Turkey. It's a nightmare.'
Mr Ozdemir agrees. 'But the laws will have to change sooner or later which
will make it easier to integrate,' he said. 'The 1913 law is an anachronism.
It will take time. But what I fear is that the politicians are reluctant to
even ask when is the right time to change'.
