FT  15 JUN 94 / London Stock Exchange: Oil bid falters
The Enterprise Oil/Lasmo bid battle came to boiling point as the former
surprised the market by unleashing an increased offer for Lasmo, which it
said was worth 165p a share, or a 12 per cent premium on Lasmo's closing
price on Monday. Enterprise had until the end of the week to launch a new
bid.
The market's immediate response was to lift the Lasmo share price to 153p.
However, Lasmo gradually declined, closing a net 4 off at 143 1/2 p after
turnover of 14m, with many specialists adopting the view that the Enterprise
bid is likely to fail. Enterprise fell to 389p before ending 9 down at 390p
after heavy volume of 7.5m.
'The market is clearly indicating the bid will not be successful,' said one
analyst. He said that with Enterprise at its present quotation, Lasmo should
be trading at 160p-plus, rather than the current price of around 143p; the
feeling is that the Americans, who speak for more than 20 per cent of the
equity and paid upwards of these prices, will not sell, nor will Philips &amp;
Drew Fund Management, which speaks for 15 per cent.
Mr John Toalster, oil analyst at Strauss Turnbull, was even more forthright.
'Enterprise is overpaying for Lasmo at the expense of its own shareholders,'
he said.
Institutions now have until July 1 to make up their minds whether to accept
Enterprise's new and final bid.
British Gas shares eased a fraction to 288 1/2 p ahead of publication this
morning of the Ofgas document on rates of return for British Gas's
transportation and storage businesses, which is expected to approve the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission recommendations.
London Electricity, 3 off at 587p, will be the first of the recs to announce
full-year numbers and will set the standard for dividend rises, analysts
said. 'A dividend increase of 15 per cent is expected; anything less will
get the thumbs down; much more will be seen as likely to upset the
regulator, ahead of the distribution review expected in early August,' said
an analyst.
Unigate jumped 22 to 384p after brokers upgraded profits expectations
following the release of better than expected figures.
Smith New court raised its current year estimate by Pounds 4m to Pounds
118m, while BZW upgraded its figure from Pounds 116.5m to Pounds 120m. But
Mr Carl Short at Strauss Turnbull, who lifted his forecast by a modest
Pounds 1.5m to Pounds 118m, sounded a note of caution when he said: 'It is
important to point out that benefits of acquisition will have less of an
impact on the current year's figures.'
Profit-taking hit ICI, which dropped 17 at one point before closing 10 down
at 789p. The fall was in spite of news that the group is considering
spending Pounds 200m on a chemicals plant in Pakistan, a move which analysts
considered promising.
Pharmaceutical stocks recovered their losses from Monday, with Glaxo up 13
1/2 to 563p, Zeneca gaining 14 at 708p and Wellcome rising 5 to 594p. The
main increases came in the early afternoon after the US markets opened
strongly, and the relative performance of SmithKline Beecham units,
predominantly US-owned and up 12 to 370p, compared to the 'A' ordinary
shares, ahead only 8 at 406p, suggested that the main interest came from
America.
However, UK analysts were equally positive; Mr Robin Gilbert at Panmure
Gordon, which recently turned positive on Glaxo, said the bearish stories
surrounding the stock had faded away and the dividend prospects were
improved as the likelihood of buying US drugs distributor McKesson lessened.
The NatWest Securities buy recommendation on National Westminster helped the
shares move up 5 to 464p, but worries that the stalled acquisition of
Cheltenham &amp; Gloucester Building Society may yet encounter further problems
saw Lloyds dip 10 to 566p.
Merchant banks were hit by renewed worries of big losses in international
bonds and gilts, with SG Warburg closing a further 8 off at 721p.
Mirror Group, up 3 at 171p, clambered back up above the psychologically
significant 170p mark, the price at which the joint administrator placed its
54.8 per cent share of the stock last September. The rise was on the back of
ABC figures for May, which showed that the Independent had boosted its
circulation from April.
News that Mr Michael Heseltine, president of the board of trade, has
referred the Daily Mail's bid for T. Bailey Forman, publisher of the
Nottingham Evening Post, to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission had little
effect on the shares; Daily Mail &amp; General Trust lost 5 to 1175p. Ms Lorna
Tilbian at SG Warburg said that, with an estimated value for the shares
being around the Pounds 12 mark, the stock would be regarded as 'dead money'
until the autumn.
Discount supermarket group Shoprite suffered a further fall, sliding 27 to
51p on news that the sale and leaseback of 11 Scottish supermarkets had
fallen through.
With the main supermarket chains still maintaining strong pressure on prices
and improving their targeting of specific products for competition, analysts
felt Shoprite had to complete the deal within six months if the group were
to maintain any credibility.
Inchcape relinquished 5 to 468p on reports that it was about to mount a bid
for Gestetner, in which it has a 24.6 per cent stake. The latter rose 3 to
168p.
Suggestions that the impact of the detergent war on Unilever's balance sheet
will not be as great as originally feared saw the shares improve 10 to 1010p
amid trade of 1m.
Other statistics, Page 33
