FT  29 MAR 94 / Arts: Ionesco, master of tragic farces - Obituary
The controversial playwright Eugene Ionesco, master of the Theatre of the
Absurd, died yesterday in Paris at the age of 81.
His work was characterised by a blend of black humour and farce which he
used to caricature the conventions of middle class family life and explore a
wider philosophical anguish at the intrinsic loneliness of man.
His most celebrated play, The Bald Soprano, in which two couples exchange
banalities, was inspired by his experience of learning English - many of the
phrases, such as 'the ceiling is up, the floor is down', were taken directly
from his grammar books. The play opened to catcalls in 1950 but has since
been performed more than 25,000 times.
Born in Slatina, Romania, on November 26, 1912, the son of a Romanian lawyer
and a French mother, Ionesco spent his early years in Paris. French became
his first language before he returned to complete his studies in Bucharest.
He wrote poems, dabbled in literary criticism and became a high school
teacher in France before writing his first play, The Bald Soprano, in 1948.
At the premiere of his next play, The Lesson, in which a professor spends an
hour verbally assaulting a pupil, the leading actor had to flee the theatre
through a back door while an outraged audience clamoured to demand its money
back.
The bizarre slapstick of his work has left its legacy in contemporary comedy
as well as drama. But behind the studied absurdity, there was a serious
intent. Ionesco was a longtime foe of political tyranny, particularly of the
regime of Nicolae Ceaucescu, and his work conveyed what he viewed as man's
struggle to survive in a society that formed barriers between human beings.
The Chairs (1951) was a bleaker statement about man's inability to share
experience. Two elderly people living in a lonely tower on an island wait
for their guests to arrive to hear the message that the old man wants to
leave for posterity. Since he cannot express it himself, he has hired an
orator. Empty chairs accumulate on stage, crowding out the couple who
finally jump to their death. Ionesco described his plays as 'comic dramas'
or 'tragic farces' because he viewed both elements as inextricably linked.
In The New Tenant, (1954) furniture mushrooms to the point where the whole
flat, street and city and even the Seine river are clogged with furniture.
Other successful works included Victims of Duty (1954) and The Killer
(1957).
His international stature was confirmed with Rhinoceros (1959), a play in
which everyone but the play's two main protagonists turns into aggressive
pachyderms. The work, which made its Paris premiere with Jean-Louis Barrault
directing and acting, was seen as the playwright's response to the rise of
Fascism in pre-war Romania.
'When people no longer share your opinions, when you can no longer make
yourself understood by them, you have the impression of being confronted
with monsters - rhinos, for example,' Ionesco told Le Monde. 'They have that
mixture of candour and ferocity. They would kill you with the best of
consciences.'
