FT  24 NOV 94 / Investors look for Russian climate change: Prospects for
cutting through the bureaucracy
They are easy enough to spot: hands thrust firmly into pockets, they pace
Moscow's hotel corridors muttering obscenities about the local population
and the need to return to 'civilisation'. The western businessmen, who have
wearied of trying to conclude deals in Russia, are still a common, if
unhappy, sight.
Quite apart from the unquantifiable political and economic risks, Russia has
retained its reputation as a byword for bureaucracy. The list of deterrents
to foreign investors is endless: companies are allowed only one hard
currency bank account; there are strict limitations on cash dealings; the
legislative climate can change overnight with little possibility of
international arbitration; taxes can be arbitrarily imposed and lifted;
there are conflicting priorities between federal and local government.
It is perhaps little wonder that an Ernst &amp; Young study of the investment
intentions of multinational companies found that only 6 per cent considered
the former Soviet Union a priority compared with 57 per cent for China.
But meetings held in Moscow this week between a group of western business
leaders and Russian ministers under the aegis of the Foreign Investment
Advisory Council, have provided fresh reason for hope. Russia's new
economics team, headed by Mr Anatoly Chubais, first deputy prime minister,
and Mr Yevgeny Yasin, economics minister, impressed many with its candour
and willingness to confront the main concerns.
Mr Chubais promised that a presidential decree would be issued 'within a few
days' halving the import duties on a range of goods for five years for those
companies which had a minimum 10 per cent stake in investment projects worth
more than Dollars 100m. He also vowed to change quickly the banking rules
preventing foreign companies opening more than one hard currency account and
to ease the limits on cash dealings.
Mr Yasin, meanwhile, said his ministry would assume chief responsibility for
responding to the concerns of foreign investors, with Mr Alexander
Gorokholinsky, deputy head of the foreign investment department, being named
as an 'ombudsman' to help sort out bureaucratic problems.
Although not hugely significant in isolation, these moves were interpreted
as a sign of intent. 'We thought here were a team of people who wanted to
find solutions and who wanted to encourage people to invest here,' said one
businessman.
Mr Michael Henning, chief executive of Ernst &amp; Young, said it was
'extraordinary' that such senior ministers were prepared to lock themselves
in a room for two days to discuss foreign investors' problems. Mr Neville
Isdell, senior vice-president of Coca-Cola, said he had never 'been to a
more productive meeting'.
A similar, if less overtly excitable, reaction also followed last week's
energy and law conference, jointly sponsored by the US and Russian energy
departments. Mr Yury Shafranik, Russia's energy minister, appeared to take
on board many of the concerns raised by western oil companies and accepted
the need to introduce 'strict rules of the game'. Legislation on tax
concessions and production-sharing agreements was promised as early as next
month.
But it is one thing to persuade senior ministers of the necessity for
change, quite another to create a stable legislative and fiscal environment,
which can inspire sufficient confidence for companies to invest substantial
long-term capital.
Russia's reformers have yet to fight many political battles both within the
government and with nationalists, who are mounting an increasingly vocal
campaign against 'selling out' to foreigners.
Mr Chubais, at least, appears firmly convinced of the need to mobilise both
domestic and foreign capital investment if the country is ever to stop using
the printing press as a means of financing industry. His primary goal of
achieving financial stability would be substantially eased if he could lift
the impediments to foreign investment and regulate the stock market to
attract productive long-term capital.
If successful, the prize for both Russian and foreign investors could be
enormous. Several western oil companies have completed in-depth feasibility
studies to develop new oilfields. Industry experts suggest some Dollars 60bn
of foreign capital could be forthcoming if Russia could establish a more
predictable and stable investment climate. That is about three times the
size of all foreign direct investment in China last year.
Western companies in other areas, such as heavy engineering and consumer
products, also sense big possibilities in Russia. Investment banks in Moscow
say there are many potential deals in the pipeline which could emerge in a
more favourable environment.
Mr Percy Barnevik, chairman of ABB, the Swedish-Swiss heavy engineering
company which has already set up 16 joint ventures in Russia, predicts the
country could attract up to 10 per cent of the world's foreign direct
investment within five years if it could successfully reduce its internal
barriers to trade and promote itself more effectively abroad. Russia
currently accounts for less than 1 per cent of all such investment.
Having just raised expectations among western business leaders to such a
pitch, Russia's government would cause grave disappointment if it now fails
to deliver. While in Moscow, the western executives stressed Russia risked
being sidelined in a competitive world for capital if did not do more to
attract investment. That would only make the government's future economic
battles that much harder.
