FT  30 NOV 94 / Budget 94 (News and Analysis): Little to bolster consumer
confidence - Retailers' reaction
The chancellor offered little in his Budget to bolster directly consumer
confidence in the short term which remains unusually fragile for so healthy
an economic recovery. Analysts and business leaders in the retail sector
said the message seemed to be 'wait until next year when I've got more to
give you'.
Mr Douglas McWilliams, chief executive of the Centre for Economics and
Business Research, said: 'The chancellor has written a post-dated cheque.'
Mr Clarke's strong suggestion of tax cuts next year were unlikely to spark
consumer confidence in the meantime, he added.
Mr Stanley Kalms, chairman of Dixons, the UK's largest electrical retailer,
said the Budget would have 'no impact whatsoever' on short-term trading or
on Christmas but was optimistic for the longer term.
He welcomed Mr Clarke's forecasts of a reduced public sector borrowing
requirement and said prospects of steady growth with low inflation enabled
businesses to plan for the future with confidence. He said he was glad the
chancellor had not tried to boost consumer confidence artificially, leading
to a 'boom'.
'The last thing we needed was another boom,' said Mr Kalms. 'Every single
boom I have lived through has been a disaster. This Budget was all about
laying down good wine, not to be drunk today, but (for) three years' time.'
Mr Archie Norman, chief executive of Asda, the UK's fourth-largest
supermarket retailer, agreed that the chancellor was right to resist the
temptation to boost short-term consumer confidence.
'We have all got used to Budgets with a bit of sizzle and this was a
no-sizzle Budget. I think the chancellor has done the right thing.
Retailers got some direct help, however, on the uniform business rates. Mr
James May, director general of the British Retail Consortium, which
represents 300,000 retail outlets, welcomed the decision to limit the
increase in business rate bills to 10 per cent for large businesses and 7.5
per cent for small businesses in any one year.
Overall, the Budget appeared to offer little to relieve the prime causes of
consumer insecurity which include the stagnant housing market, slow growth
in disposable incomes and employment uncertainty.
Low inflation is also a factor. Mr Ian Shepherdson, the UK economist at HSBC
Markets, said: 'People suffer from money illusion. They feel happier with a
10 per cent pay rise and 9 per cent inflation rather than a 3 per cent rise
and 2 per cent inflation.'
The chancellor's forecast of inflation continuing at 2.5 per cent next year
will prolong that phenomenon, which risk becoming a particular problem in
the housing market. The failure of house prices to rise still leaves some
500,000 to 750,000 people with negative equity, others with large mortgages
and renters with little incentive to buy.
Some analysts suggested that the chancellor's further reduction in mortgage
relief and capping of housing benefit could depress the rental market and
make some people less willing to take on a mortgage.
'Job security is the vital missing ingredient in this recovery,' said Mr
Peter Spencer, a Strathclyde University economist and adviser to Kleinwort
Benson. This has been induced in part by a relatively slow creation of
well-paid professional jobs, a sharp fall in real incomes for people in
menial jobs and the hiring more part-time, temporary or female employees, he
said.
Job creation measures in the Budget were aimed at getting the long-term
unemployed back to work. These were widely applauded by business leaders but
they stressed the measures were aimed more at encouraging people to apply
for jobs rather than at business to create the jobs.
In the short term, the measures will mean 'more people are competing for the
same number of jobs', said Mr McWilliams. Moreover, these newly employed
people were unlikely to have much money to spend in the retail sector, other
analysts suggested.
