FT  30 JUL 94 / England: the west's one-party state: Over the last century
the Tories have ruled Britain longer than the Communists ruled Russia.
Andrew Adonis explains how they did it
It will be interesting to be the last of the Conservatives. I foresee that
will be our fate.
Such was the private prediction of Britain's longest-serving, and arguably
most successful, Conservative leader of the past century. It was not
Margaret Thatcher but the Marquess of Salisbury, prime minister for 13 years
at the zenith of Victorian Britain's imperial power between 1885 and 1902.
No modern Tory leader, least of all Baroness Thatcher, would express such
forebodings, even in private. Not in their gloomiest moods contemplating
opposition to a Blair Labour government do Tories fear for the annihilation
of their party. The 'Canadian scenario' - the ruling Conservatives were
reduced to just two seats in last year's Canadian general election - is
nothing but a party game in Britain (name the two Tory MPs you would like to
see survive).
The reason for this goes to the heart of contemporary English culture and
politics. Since Lord Salisbury's day the Tories have, above all, been the
voice of the English middle class. As that class has grown, and its values
and aspirations permeated English society at large, the strength and inner
self-confidence of the Tories has increased.
Not that the Tories were previously weak. The Conservative party is the
oldest and most successful political party in any western democracy. It has
governed Britain for 76 of the 110 years since the creation of the mass
electorate in 1884 - longer than the Communists ruled Russia, but with the
inconvenience of 29 free elections in between.
Why, then, do the Tories appear so adrift? John Major's failings and
survival prospects have preoccupied the Westminster world since the day he
succeeded Thatcher - a grey man leading a grey cabinet, dominated by
uninspiring political managers whose driving ambition is to stay in office.
Some believe that the Tory malaise goes far deeper. In a recent pamphlet,
John Gray, the political philosopher, argues that British Conservatism has
committed suicide on the altar of free market economics. 'Traditional
conservatism no longer exists in Britain,' he claims. 'It is dead - killed
off by the radical market liberalism which the Tories adopted in the late
1970s, and which has governed the policies of successive Conservative
governments since that time.'
The idea is appealing. Insofar as 'Majorism' represents a programme, it is
the dregs of Thatcherism - taking privatisation to lengths Thatcher dared
not go (the railways and the Post Office), and advancing remorselessly with
public sector reforms - notably in health and education - launched in the
mid-1980s.
However, Gray is on shaky ground in arguing that modern Toryism is
'thoroughly uncongenial to the tolerant and sceptical temper of the British
electorate,' and that the Conservatives are bound to reap the electoral
whirlwind. The likelihood of a Tory defeat is the wisdom of the political
establishment, whose horizons rarely extend beyond the latest opinion poll,
by-election or leadership change. But an historical perspective puts the
Tories' present predicament in a different frame.
In the first place, there is no such thing as the 'British electorate'. For
much of the last century Scotland, Wales and (Northern) Ireland have refused
to conform to the English pattern. Scotland and Wales have been markedly
less Tory than England. Until the inter-war years their professional
classes, never fully anglicised and more collectivist-minded, looked mainly
to the Liberals for political careers. Since, the same impulses have led
them to Labour.
The Tories are the English National Party. 'My politics are described by one
word, and that word is ENGLAND,' Disraeli told his electors in 1832. Norman
Tebbit's Euro-sceptics could not put it better today. 'That word' has been
nothing but a boon to the Tories. Although it rarely speaks its name,
English nationalism is as potent a political force as its more naked
counterparts on mainland Europe, and England accounts for four-fifths of the
seats in the House of Commons.
Fighting the separatist tendencies of the other parties has always been a
prime source of Tory ideology and morale, from Gladstone's Irish Home Rule
plans of the 1880s to successive schemes for Scottish and Welsh devolution
supported by Liberals, Labour and Nationalists in recent decades.
For the Conservatives it was only a short step to fighting the Brussels
bureaucrats - or, at any rate, refusing to give in to them as much as the
other parties. It is potentially just as popular a cause in England.
Nationalism inevitably creates problems of government. Salisbury had to
govern Parnell's Ireland without too much repression. John Major cannot
afford total isolation in Brussels - and when Baroness Thatcher achieved
that, she had to go. Yet Tories have ever been masters at tempering visceral
campaign rhetoric with compromise in office.
Moreover, Tory England is expanding England. The last 30 years have seen a
sharp contraction in the manual working class, a population shift to the
home counties, and an inexorable rise in home ownership.
The 'salariat' comprised 18 per cent of the UK electorate in 1964; it now
extends to about a third (more in England), with the proportion of home
owners up from about one-third to two-thirds (ditto). Over the same period
the 'petty bourgeoisie' of small shopkeepers and other self-employed
tradespeople, consistently the most pro-Tory of social groups, has remained
a solid 10 per cent of the electorate.
England now has more actors than miners, and each parliamentary boundary
review sees a redistribution of seats from the cities to the suburbs.
The Tories have long been the party of home-owning suburbans. Lord Salisbury
called it 'villa Toryism,' and favoured single-member parliamentary seats as
the best means of isolating it from less reliable - but often still pro-Tory
 -urban working-class districts. Most of today's English electorate are
villa Tories in lifestyle and aspirations.
Villa Tories do not invariably vote Tory. In mid-term local and European
elections they have always been liable to defect en masse - particularly, in
southern England, to the various incarnations of the Liberal party. Since
the mid-1970s the Liberal Democrats, as they have become, have garnered a
sizeable vote, appealing particularly to non-metropolitan manual workers and
public-sector professionals anxious for more public spending. Tony Blair's
Labour party will mine the same seam.
It is important, however, to understand the strength of the Tory bedrock.
The Conservatives have never polled less than 40 per cent of the English
vote in a general election. Exclude the inner cities, and at the last
election they took more than half the vote across England. Under a similar
electoral system to the UK's, France's ruling Gaullists triumphed in last
year's French election with the support of a mere 28 per cent of the
electorate.
Furthermore, the non-Tory vote is deeply divided - and divided most of all
on the issue of opposing the Conservatives. Since the 1950s about half the
Liberal vote has typically been second preference Tory: the rise of the
Liberals in the last 20 years signifies, above all, a decline of support for
Labour among the English electorate.
True, Liberal MPs and activists have typically been closer to Labour than
the Tories, but knowing their electorate to be more ambivalent they have
been wary of saying so. Even now, with policy divisions between Liberal
Democrats and Labour infinitesimally small, the two parties glare at each
other across a raised drawbridge.
What, then, of Gray's notion that under Thatcher the Tories converted to a
radical variant of market liberalism profoundly offensive to the English
middle class?
The Conservatives have, in fact, long been the party of market liberalism.
Back in the late 18th century William Pitt's Tory party was committed -
until deflected by the wars against revolutionary France - to tax cuts and
an assault on tariffs and budget deficits.
The early 19th century saw a struggle between the free market and the
landlord consciences of the party. It was resolved in favour of the free
marketeers by Sir Robert Peel's repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846. This
established the Tories' commitment to minimum levels of taxation and
economic intervention consistent with the winning of wars and elections,
although trade protectionism continued to be an issue.
Disraeli's 'one nation' rhetoric in the 1870s was a smokescreen for a social
policy consisting of two essential and enduring principles: the
identification of the Tories as the party of all property-owners, not just
landlords; and the trumping of whichever social reforms - enacted or likely
 -of the party's Labour or Liberal opponents were judged necessary for
electoral success.
Under Salisbury that meant upholding Gladstone's extension of the franchise.
Under Stanley Baldwin, in the inter-war years, it meant accepting a social
safety net. After the second world war it meant preserving the welfare
state.
What happened in the 1980s was not a conversion to market liberalism, but a
social change within the Tory elite which strengthened its startling
discovery that the party had become Britain's natural governing force. A new
self-confidence, bolstered by Thatcher's leadership, led the party to
espouse its market liberalism more forcefully than it had done for decades.
The social transformation was dramatic. In 1939, the Tory party's 400 MPs
included just 10 solicitors, eight accountants and four teachers. 'When the
call came to me to form a government,' recalled Baldwin of his first
government in 1923, 'one of my first thoughts was that it should be a
government of which Harrow should not be ashamed.'
Tory cabinets were stuffed with aristocrats and their close relations as
late as Harold Macmillan's premiership in the early 1960s. Macmillan's
successor was the 14th Earl of Home, and most of the old brigade survived
under his successor, Edward Heath.
Neither Thatcher (Grantham High) nor Major (Rutlish Grammar) were - or are -
much concerned at the shame of Harrow and Eton. Under Thatcher, the sons of
teachers, doctors, mainstream professionals and small tradesmen largely
replaced the landowners, barristers and wealthy businessmen on the Tory
benches in the House of Commons, and followed them into government. The
result is a Tory elite more representative of its electorate than ever in
the party's history. Major is its apotheosis.
For all its new-found radicalism, the new Tory elite has been wary of
reining back the public sector. Privatisation and the curbing of trade
unions, policies popular or at least inoffensive to middle England, have
been the most radical changes of the last decade. By contrast, spending on
state benefits, education and health services has risen broadly in line with
the expectations of the Tory middle classes.
Kenneth Clarke (Nottingham High School, Cambridge University), the
archetypal modern Tory MP, addressed four-square the question of the middle
classes and public spending in a recent lecture which brilliantly exhibited
the sensitivity of the modern Tory antenna. 'It is idle to think that middle
England does not sometimes feel worried,' he declared. 'Providing a sense of
security in an uncertain and changing world has nothing to do with
feathering middle England' - which, of course, is just what middle England
likes to think. Indeed, the greatest 1980s catastrophe - the poll tax -
occurred because Thatcher was too mindful of the raw prejudices of middle
England's home-owning ratepayers.
Clarke put his finger on the nub of Tory vulnerability in the next decade -
English middle-class insecurity in the face of employment uncertainties and
flat or falling house prices.
There is nothing new in such middle-class anguish, as a brief glance at
Agatha Christie's detective novels will confirm. In the past, however,
middle England looked to the Tories as a guardian from insecurity - in
particular from the evils, real and imagined, of Liberal and Labour
governments. Now, middle England appears to be laying the blame for its
insecurity at the feet of a Tory government. Just possibly, if the angst
persists, a new model Labour party renouncing redistributive socialism and
led by an impeccable public schoolboy could become the repository of middle
English anguish in a general election.
It is a paradox that successful Conservative parties are rarely conservative
in practice, since without a capacity to adapt to change they could never
succeed for long in government. Their conservatism lies in their rhetoric
and the emotional loyalties they inspire. For summer reading, Tony Blair
could do worse than a biography and collected speeches of Lord Salisbury.
This is adapted from A Conservative Revolution? The Thatcher-Reagan Decade
in Perspective, edited by Andrew Adonis and Tim Hames, Manchester University
Press, Pounds 35 hardback, Pounds 12.99 paperback.
