FT  13 DEC 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: RSPB attacks industrial fishing
Industrial fishing in the North Sea is endangering the marine food chain and
should be phased out, the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds said
yesterday.
The RSPB, backed by a majority of UK fishermen, is campaigning for controls
on the upsurge in industrial fishing in the run-up to tomorrow's fisheries
debate in the House of Commons and next week's meeting of the European
Union's council of fisheries ministers.
Industrial fishing fleets catch small shoaling fish such as sandeels,
capelin and sprats, which are usually eaten by larger fish, seabirds and
dolphins. The small species are turned into fertiliser or feed for livestock
and farmed fish.
This type of fishing, carried out mainly by Denmark, now accounts for about
50 per cent of the total catch from the North Sea by weight, says the RSPB.
Landings of sandeels, which are not subject to quotas, have doubled over the
past 20 years to 800,000 tonnes a year and represent half the industrial
fishing catch in Europe.
The UK charity is calling for quotas for sandeels and for a ban on all
industrial fishing in areas where fish are spawning or where there are
important colonies of seabirds or other wildlife.
It also wants the UK to stop granting licences for industrial fishing and
says the European industrial fishing fleet should be phased out by
decommissioning vessels.
Fishery scientists have calculated that yields of commercially valuable fish
such as cod and haddock on the Dogger Bank, an important North Sea fishery,
would increase by 10-20 per cent if the Danes stopped catching sandeels
there.
Mr Euan Dunn, RSPB marine policy officer, said: 'Fish stock enhancement is a
compelling argument for the government to press for controls on industrial
fishing, especially at a time when it is investing heavily in other measures
like decommissioning to reduce fishermen's impact on roundfish stocks.'
One model for regulation is a government plan for restrictive quotas when
the sandeel fishery off the Shetland Islands is reopened next summer, he
said.
The fishery was closed in 1990 after a sharp fall in stocks, which had a
crippling impact on breeding of arctic terns, kittiwakes and puffins. The
Scottish Office is proposing a quota of 3,000 tonnes, based on the two
lowest annual catches of sandeels in the area before its closure.
