FT  17 DEC 94 / Outdoors: Europe's fishing fleets prepare for war - Fish
supplies are running out, but the authorities seem powerless to act
The sea has always been a place of high feelings. It is becoming more so as
fishing nations worldwide try to extend, or consolidate, their fishing
zones. Nowhere are the issues as complex, fraught and politicised as in the
EU waters, under pressure from excess fish-catching capacity, lower stocks,
and the conflicting ambitions of member states, particularly Spain as well
as non-member Norway.
Protectionism has never been more old-fashioned than when Spanish tuna
fishermen defending their traditional, long-line fishery in the Bay of
Biscay brandished axes at the British arrivistes using deadlier modern
drift-nets.
Britain sent its own fishery protection service which proceeded to board and
inspect British, not Spanish, vessels.
The tuna furore took place outside the EU 200-mile fisheries zone, on the
high seas. Here the international law of the sea holds sway, theoretically
concerned only with piracy, slave-trading and the movement of illegal
narcotics.
Flag states may board their own nation's vessels anywhere. But in practice,
within the EU fisheries zone, each member state's fishery protection force
operates only in national waters. Spanish inspectors could, in theory,
appear off Scottish coasts to monitor Spanish fishermen but in practice they
do not. It is believed by other states' fishermen that Spanish inspectors
rarely police Spanish vessel.
Policing EU waters state by state, with fishery protection forces from
different maritime cultures, with differing motivations and muscle, is a
disaster. Each nation's fishermen accuses its own fishery officers of being
tougher than in other member states. British fishermen feel they are singled
out by their own inspectors for specially rigorous treatment, a claim denied
by protection officers themselves. Even so, the simplicity of dealing with
own-nation boats, UK registered, with UK addresses, is much more appealing
than dealing with foreign boats whose crews may not speak any English.
Even in British territorial waters, where England and Wales can call on nine
Royal Navy vessels and three aircraft, and Scotland on seven boats and two
aircraft, fishery protection is only a partial affair. 'We cannot search
every bit of the sea, but the fishermen know there is a presence out there,'
a ministry spokesman said. Britain has 33,000 sq miles of water to police,
but whereas the inspectorate has 170 employees, Spain, with the largest EU
fleet, had, until a recent increase, only 17 personnel.
Not only are national inspectorates a poor example of subsidiarity in
action, but the system is riddled with loopholes. For political reasons a
proposal from the European Commission to land catches in specified local
ports, where they could be more readily inspected, was turned down by the
council of ministers. Catches by EU vessels are routinely transferred at sea
into the holds of non-EU boats - thereby evading inspection and recording.
The most obvious example of catches leaving the European fish-pond without
proper recording is the klondykers. These factory ships are usually Polish
or Russian owned. They are often in poor physical condition. They lie off
Lerwick, Peterhead, Fraserburgh and Ullapool, lit up at night like gently
rocking cities, buying herring and mackerel and paying in cash.
The Common Fisheries Policy, formed in 1972 just before Britain joined the
EC, and which only produced its first conservation measures in 1983, is
abused on a giant scale. The 'black fish' catch is thought to have reached
50 per cent of the legitimate one and it has been estimated by a former head
of EC fisheries conservation that of the 2.5m fishing trips made annually in
EU waters, about 250,000 involve infringements. These include catching fish
surplus to quota, fish for which the boats have no quota, undersized fish
(pin hake 'as small as a Biro' were recently landed in northern Spain), or
fish from waters with exhausted quotas.
Such excesses need some explanation. There is one. It is simply that EU
member states have knowingly shrunk from implementing the recommended
conservation measures because of their political implications. There is
still public sympathy for fishermen, seen as hardy and independent souls
whose efforts play a critical part in the national diet. Such sympathy may
be misplaced. Scientists say catches that are now dwindling would have been
on the increase had their recommendations been accepted.
One of the most sensitive issues is the concept of a pan-European fishery
inspectorate. Nominally this exists in the form of an inspectorate of the
inspectors. This small force evaluates enforcement; it is advisory; it
handles complaints. But it lacks any vessels and its members must travel as
passengers on national fishery protection boats. These surveillance
programmes are often announced in advance, meaning the inspectorate is
unlikely to be involved in any bruising scenes.
Today's fishermen feel overwhelmed by a tightening net of regulations and
restrictions. They are hemmed round by limits on days at sea, area
restrictions, quotas, and most recently, intentions to limit fishing effort.
'All out rebellion is in the air' as a recent Fishing News leader put it.
Against this picture of unrest among the last of the hunter-gatherers, fish
consumption is rocketing, while improved fishing methods are harvesting the
shrinking resource more efficiently. An effective pan-European fishery
inspectorate may seem inconceivable given the nationalism and widely
differing fishing status and practices of member states. But before fudging
the issues again, politicians should consider how palatable it would be for
the fishing industry in these most fecund waters to wither away as a result
of its own abuses of the environment.
For the sea's boundaries are an abstract concept - an abstraction that is
coming to mean much. It stretches the concept of a non-federalist EU to the
limit. For if EU waters are to replace national ones, as they are
treaty-bound to do, the logical consequence is for EU inspectors to replace
local ones too.
The telephone number for Dourado Sports Fishing, given at the end of an
article by Tom Fort on fishing in Brazil, published on October 29, should
have read: 081-563 1988, fax: 081-563 2230.
