FT  06 SEP 94 / International Company News: Baby Bells call on Hollywood -
Phone and entertainment groups are linking
Links between the telephone and entertainment industries in the US have
traditionally, been restricted to phone companies employing actors and
celebrities to appear in their television advertisements. But that
relationship is changing.
In the past year, the big regional telephone companies have been beating a
path to Hollywood's door, seeking to forge alliances with entertainment
groups and film and television makers, hiring programme production
executives and exploring joint ventures with other industry powers, such as
talent agencies.
Why the enthusiasm? The telephone companies have the technology to provide
two-way, or interactive, television programming to phone customers via
broadband communications lines. But they do not have the product - in the
shape of movies, video games, educational programming and television shows -
to send to customers over those lines.
As Mr Jack Grubman, telecommunications industry analyst at Salomon Brothers,
says of the phone companies: 'These guys don't know anything about
entertainment.'
But Hollywood does - which explains why the Baby Bells have been rushing to
Los Angeles to talk to companies such as Walt Disney, which probably
originates and distributes more entertainment products than any other in the
US.
Those talks have borne fruit. Last month, three Baby Bell regional telephone
companies - Ameritech, BellSouth and Southwestern Bell - announced a joint
venture with Disney to create interactive video programming carried on the
phone companies' home video networks.
Each of the three has begun to build the distribution services for
entertainment programming. Ameritech is spending Dollars 4.4bn to provide
video services to 6m of its customers in the Midwest by the end of the
decade. Next year, BellSouth will start testing interactive multimedia
services to 12,000 homes in Georgia, and Southwestern Bell plans to have a
video-on-demand system for customers in Texas by 1996. Disney will help
provide the phone companies with the films, cartoons, and television
programmes.
Not to be outdone, three other Baby Bells - Nynex, Bell Atlantic and Pacific
Telesis - not to be outdone, are reportedly close to signing a similar
agreement with Creative Artists Agency, Hollywood's top talent agency.
CAA has moved beyond representing actors, directors and writers, and is
heavily involved in programming for films and television. Any deal is likely
to involve the agency agreeing to help commission and produce programmes for
the phone companies.
The phone companies have been tapping the entertainment industry for
executives to run their programming operations.
For example, Mr Patrick Campbell of Ameritech, responsible for co-ordinating
the company's venture with Disney, was previously president of Columbia
TriStar Home Video, and Ms Heidi Diamond, Ameritech's head of consumer
marketing and sales for its video and interactive services, used to work at
the Nickelodeon television channel.
The movement of talent has not been just one-way. Earlier this year, CAA
hired Mr Robert Kavner, AT&amp;T's multimedia chief.
These manoeuvres are aimed at preparing for when the government passes
legislation to deregulate the phone and cable television industries.
That legislation, still wending its way through Congress, will allow phone
companies to provide television programmes, and cable companies to provide
phone services. When the time comes, the phone companies want to have the
programming in place to wire to their customers.
As Mr Peter Shapiro, senior consultant in cable and telecommunications at
Arthur D. Little in New York, explains: 'All the RBOCs (regional bell
operating companies) are looking to build a broadband network and develop
interactive television multimedia services. Their one area of real
vulnerability is in the supply of programming . . . What they want to get
their hands on is the supply of programming to prime the pump for their own
systems when that's allowed.'
Phone companies are eager to secure programming because those with a head
start when deregulation arrives stand to make a lot of money. The three Baby
Bells that have linked with Disney, for example, serve more than 50m
consumers across the US, while the three phone companies reported to be
negotiating with CAA serve 46m customers between them.
While the phone companies are linking with Hollywood through joint ventures
and other alliances, few expect to see them buy a programme-producer - such
as a studio - outright. That would be taking too much of a risk, says Mr
Shapiro.
'It would be close to insane for an RBOC to put down money and buy a movie
studio. But getting in early to see if they can develop new forms of
programming with companies that can do programming, that may not be so
crazy,' he says.
The Baby Bells are prevented from owning programmers by federal restrictions
on cross-ownership in the telecommunications and entertainment industries,
points out Mr Grubman.
In spite of the recent flurry of activity across the increasingly-blurred
borders between the telecommunications and entertainment industries, there
is still a long way to go.
The phone companies' expansionist dreams of providing customers with
everything from films, entertainment and educational televisions shows to
computer games and shopping services, will not be realised for several
years. And during that time the rules of the game could change.
'These are early days for these sort of ventures. A lot will happen in the
next couple of years as the nature of programming becomes better defined,
and the roles of the participants are better understood,' says Mr Shapiro.
