FT  02 SEP 94 / US manufacturing output slows
Activity in US manufacturing slowed down in August, but inflationary
pressures continued to rise, according to the National Association of
Purchasing Managers' monthly index.
The NAPM index fell to 56.2 per cent last month, a drop from the 57.8 per
cent recorded in July, but still a level indicating strong expansion of the
economy.
'The past relationship between the purchasing managers' index and the
overall economy indicates that if the PMI were to average 56.2 per cent for
all of 1994, then real gross domestic growth should approximate 4.2 per
cent,' said Mr Ralph Kauffman, chairman of the association's business survey
committee.
However, the NAPM's index of prices paid for materials rose in August to
74.5 per cent, with every manufacturing sector reporting higher prices in
August than in July.
'This increase in material prices is one of the strongest concerns of
purchasers, with some indicating inability to raise product prices to cover
the increased material prices,' said Mr Kauffman.
Poor delivery performance by suppliers was also now a prime concern for
purchasing executives, said Mr Kauffman, with deliveries becoming much
slower in August as many material suppliers were now operating at maximum
capacity. Printing and publishing, plastics and rubber, clothing, textiles
and glass were among the industries reporting the most trouble in obtaining
deliveries.
Financial markets, meanwhile, are closely watching today's employment
statistics for further confirmation that the pace of growth is slowing.
The unemployment rate dropped in July to 6.1 per cent, close to the rate at
which many economists believe the labour market will start to tighten and
wage demands start to rise, and a further drop could prompt the Federal
Reserve to tighten monetary policy further.
One indicator that has suggested there is more slack left in the labour
market is an index of help-wanted advertising compiled by the Conference
Board, a New York-based organisation with more than 2,000 companies among
its members. That index rose only slightly to 121 in July after dropping in
June.
