FT  28 APR 94 / Opel plan 'strikingly similar' to VW idea
Plant X, the root of all the trouble between Volkswagen and General Motors,
has re-emerged at the centre of a criminal investigation into suspicions
that the US group's former global purchasing chief stole GM secrets before
his move to the German company just over a year ago.
As German prosecutors announced yesterday, there were striking similarities
between GM's secret Plant X - a shelved project to build a super-efficient
car factory in Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua's native Basque country -
and VW's 'own' version, Plant B.
The similarities were detected during the painstaking sifting of data seized
last August in a search of Volkswagen's headquarters and the homes of Mr
Lopez and seven colleagues who fled with him from GM to VW. Data on plant B
was found in Mr Lopez's office, prosecutors said.
Neither the find nor its location is really surprising. While still employed
by GM, Mr Lopez worked as project leader on Plant X. He personally
negotiated a deal with a Basque consortium. He had a site all ready for the
revolutionary new works, 'my dream,' as he liked to call it.
It was the shattering of this dream, with the discovery that the project was
not to go ahead - at least not in Mr Lopez's home town - which led to his
bitter and controversial desertion. Shortly after his move, as charges and
counter-charges flew about his head, Mr Lopez was to learn that VW was not
to go ahead either.
But while the plant represented Mr Lopez's 'dream', it could in no way be
considered his property. Investigations will continue, details will be
checked and cross-checked to discover how closely the two projects match one
another. The aim will be to determine if VW's project was copied from GM
data - essential if industrial espionage is to be proved.
The likelihood of more than passing similarities being found appeared to be
increased by other discoveries announced by the prosecutors' office
yesterday. These included diskettes and other material which were suspected
of being sourced or copied from documents belonging to Adam Opel, GM's
German subsidiary.
Another important find was a diskette in Mr Lopez's 'personal environment'
crammed with data on cost-saving programmes for GM cars.
Although a seemingly meagre harvest from almost eight months gleaning
through the 2m-plus sheets of paper seized in last August's raids, the
discoveries clearly nullify recent speculation that the chief investigator,
Ms Dorothea Holland, has reached the end of her tether and is about to fold
the whole investigation.
It will last for several months yet, according to her spokesman, and there
is no sign yet of whether it will result in charges either in Germany or the
US, where a federal grand jury is investigating. In the interests of
preparedness, VW appears to have a defence ready and based on the claim that
GM has an exagerated sense of what is secret. KPMG consultants, called in
after the VW raid last year, found some GM and Opel data, and declared the
lot non-confidential.
Yesterday's revelations followed last year's find of secret data on Opel's
sub-compact O-car in a house previously occupied by two of Mr Lopez's
closest lieutenants, and admissions from VW that large quantities of
'possibly sensitive' data was shredded on its premises.
