FT  23 JUN 94 / Democrats hit at 'religious right': Risky strategy to fend
off Republican challenge in elections
Democratic party organisers, searching for ways of heading off a possible
landslide of defeats in November's congressional elections, have embarked on
a strategy of attacking the rival Republican party as a captive of radical,
religious right-wingers.
The plan is a risky one that could backfire in areas of the US such as the
south and west, where conservatives and Christian evangelicals dominate the
electorate.
Many Democratic strategists, however, believe religious extremism could
become a 'wedge issue' they can use to peel voters away from their opponents
 -just what they need at a time when some of them fear their party could
lose as many as 45 or 50 of its 256 seats in the 435-seat House of
Representatives, throwing control to the Republicans.
Mr Vic Fazio, the California congressman who chairs the Democratic
congressional campaign committee, sketched his party's line of attack in a
speech in Washington this week in which he said the Republican party was now
dominated by a radical and intolerant fringe group.
'The Republicans accept the religious right and their tactics at their own
peril, for these activists are demanding their rightful seat at the table,
and that is what the American people fear most,' Mr Fazio said.
Democratic candidates in Penn-sylvania, California, Oregon, Missouri and
Idaho have already launched attacks in a similar vein on their Republican
opponents, calling them extremists and 'mouthpieces for the radical right.'
The attacks have been fuelled in recent weeks by Virginia Republicans'
choice of Mr Oliver North, the controversial Iran-Contra figure, to run for
a Senate seat, by the Texas party's choice of a new chairman backed by
religious groups, and by Minnesota Republicans' selection of a Christian
right candidate for governor in preference to the sitting Republican
governor.
Republican party officials and the Christian Coalition, a right-wing
religious organisation that has worked to get Republicans elected in many
states, hit back by accusing the Democrats of 'Christian bashing' and
religious bigotry.
And some Democratic campaign managers cautioned that their party had to be
very careful to focus its attacks on its opponents' positions on issues such
as abortion, school syllabuses and the position of women, and to avoid being
seen as attacking people for their religious beliefs.
The charge of religious extremism could prove effective in reducing the
electability of Republican candidates in suburban areas.
But it is likely to be counterproductive in rural districts, especially in
the south, where as many as half of the voters may count themselves as
born-again Christians.
Mr Fazio said the 1990 redrawing of district boundaries had made many more
districts competitive and reduced the Democrats' incumbency advantage. In
addition, of the 49 seats left open by a sitting member's retirement, 30 are
currently held by Democrats.
'Of those 30 seats held by the Democrats, we classify only two 'likely
Democratic'. The other 28 are extremely marginal and could go to either
party on election day,' Mr Fazio said.
Dissatisfaction with President Bill Clinton and continuing dis-trust of
Washington incumbents also make the Democrats' task more difficult.
But while Republican party strategists are confident of being able to build
on this to fashion a substantial victory in November's congressional
elections, some warn that they will need to develop a much more positive
message if they want to win back the White House in 1996.
