FT  06 AUG 94 / World Stock Markets: German analysts offer high hopes for
1994 - Earnings prospects
This week's call for a 'sensible' discussion of profit prospects from German
engineering industry leaders was aimed at two distinctly different
audiences. One comprised investors whose expectations of gains are being
fuelled by increasingly optimistic analysts.
The other consisted of their own employees - due back soon from the
Mediterranean shores - whose expectations of fatter pay packets have been
encouraged by trade union leaders preparing for the 1995 pay round and
calling for a 'fairer' distribution of rising profits.
Gesamtmetall, the engineering employers association, reminded anyone
prepared to listen that the industry lost DM7bn last year, the worst 12
months in its history, and that convalescence was likely to be a long
process.
But market professionals appear undeterred, and have upgraded industrial
stocks on a wide front. One reason is that concerns about interest rates and
the US currency's condition have receded more into the background - at least
while the Bundesbank is still on summer leave. Meanwhile, as a series of
indicators has shown the economy picking up momentum far more quickly than
expected, they believe they have discovered further, previously-hidden
profit potential locked up in the likes of Daimler-Benz, chemicals and even
in the battered steel sector.
In the past week strong incoming orders figures, with a healthy contribution
from domestic demand for plant and machinery topping up robust export
bookings, have embellished the picture further.
Schroder, Munchmeyer Hengst, the private bank, claims to have uncovered
potential earnings rises this year of around 80 per cent for the 30
constituent companies in the Frankfurt Dax index, with another 30-odd per
cent to come in 1995. Taking a wider sample of 170 quoted companies,
Commerzbank's analysts forecast average earnings growth of 25 per cent both
this year and next.
Meanwhile, the accelerating flow of interim results has provided a steady
supply of optimistic commentaries from the companies themselves, confirming
turnarounds and improvements in most sectors.
Opinion on the big banks remained divided as the mid-year reporting season
progressed. Deutsche - banker to the Mittelstand - produced
better-than-expected results. But Commerzbank disappointed when it turned
out that unspecified losses on own-account trading in June had severely
deflated earnings. Only weeks before Commerzbank reported its chairman, Mr
Martin Kohlhaussen, had been making extravagant informal claims for the
first five months.
Bayerische Vereinsbank also suffered a fat loss on its own account, much to
the satisfaction of its local rival, Bayerische Hypo, which at least managed
to show a black figure in spite of an 83 per cent slump in this department.
Although the Frankfurt stock exchange is still trapped in the summer lull,
the past week has demonstrated how ready traders are to lock on to the new
mood in the economy.
The arch-cyclical chemicals stocks, already performing relatively well on
the strength of early recovery indicators, were bolstered first by
impressive interim figures from foreign competitors. A further boost was
provided by a better-than-expected first-half report from the VCI industry
association which showed aggregate sales and volume up 4 per cent. While
average chemicals prices were still marginally down on the first half of
1993, brokers liked the report that the industry workforce had been reduced
sharply and that further cuts were on the way.
A similar combination of continued restructuring and strong sales of
Mercedes-Benz cars, recently reported by chairman Mr Helmut Werner, helped
to prompt a flurry of 'buy' recommendations for its parent, Daimler-Benz,
and sharpened interest in the whole vehicles sector.
Events in the automotive industry, which was worst hit by the recession, are
typical of the underlying attractions investors see in other sectors.
Statements and actions confirm that management is determined to press on
with the rationalisation deemed necessary to restore lasting
competitiveness.
The latest moves at Mercedes are certain to lead to sharp cuts in the
workforce and significant economies of scale. Capacity at BMW, meanwhile,
has been straining to meet demand this year so far. But the company insists
that higher productivity rather than new capacity is the way to ease the
pressure.
Then there is the 'personality effect'. The recent confirmation of Mr Jurgen
Schrempp - a hard man from Deutsche Aerospace - as successor to Daimler's
chairman, Mr Edzard Reuter, has reinforced expectations of continued
restructuring at Germany's biggest industrial group.
At Hoechst, after only a few months as chairman, Mr Jurgen Dormann has
administered a stern shaking to the chemicals giant's dozy bureaucracy. And
although BMW was not in need of any morale-boosting, the group's new head,
Mr Bernd Pischetsrieder, has already put his stamp on the company. Buying
Rover was one coup: another was his successful handling of the backlash from
the British group's disappointed partner, Honda.
