FT  10 MAY 94 / Gas industry proposals raise price rise fears
The government yesterday published its long-delayed gas industry
consultation paper outlining how full competition will be introduced to 18m
households by 1998, amid opposition charges that proposals would lead to
higher prices and a lower quality of service.
However, the report, prepared jointly by the industry regulator Ofgas and
the Department of Trade and Industry, attempts to allay fears about possible
price increases, saying price pressures which might emerge in the transition
to full competition could be limited by regulation.
The standing charge which household consumers pay will remain under a capped
formula at least until 1997. In addition British Gas tariffs are not
expected to 'increase by more than the rate of inflation' in the transition
period between April 1996, when 5 per cent of the market will be opened to
competition, and the full market opening two years later. The report
conceded, however, that regional prices could vary by plus or minus 2 to 4
per cent because of different transport costs.
Independent gas suppliers expressed disappointment that the document did not
go further in explaining how competition would be achieved. They are keen to
see the follow-up report, which will contain details of the costs of using
British Gas's pipelines system.
Mr Cedric Brown, British Gas chief executive, welcomed the report's
recommendation that 'the gas industry as a whole . . . should underpin the
special needs of the more vulnerable groups in society'. But he warned that
time was short for implementation of the programme. British Gas shares
closed yesterday at 285p, up 1 1/2 p.
The report also recommends that the Health and Safety Executive review the
safety aspects of deregulation. It makes clear that companies wanting to
compete with British Gas will have to provide extensive evidence of
financial strength. The report suggests British Gas might become the
supplier of last resort.
The report was due to be published in February. Mr Tim Eggar, energy
minister, said yesterday he would make 'no apology' for the delay. 'These
are complex issues which need to be thoroughly considered,' he said.
Government critics had charged that the document was being held up for
political reasons, and that implementation of the deregulation proposals
would lead to sharp price rises for less well-off gas consumers.
Mr Eggar dismissed such claims as 'rubbish', but Ms Clare Spottiswoode,
director general of Ofgas, said it was impossible to 'guarantee that prices
won't rise'.
The Labour party said the proposals, if implemented, would lead to higher
prices and a lower quality of service for many customers.
Ms Spottiswoode said she was confident that deregulation would deliver
benefits across a broad range of consumers, and not just to those which
consume large amounts of gas.
Document disapoints, Page 8
Editorial Comment, Page 17
Lex, Page 18
London stocks, Page 38
