FT  10 MAY 94 / Leading Article: School testing
The government's proposals for streamlining the national curriculum in
English schools, published yesterday, have been welcomed by teachers and
educationalists. Mr John Patten, education secretary, has broadly accepted
the reforms recommended by Sir Ron Dearing, his astute curriculum adviser.
It remains to be seen, however, whether he can deliver the other half of the
package: comprehensive and objective testing to ensure that all children
achieve higher educational standards.
In line with Sir Ron's recommendations, the new national curriculum aims to
fill no more than 80 per cent of school time for most children. It is
closely focused on basic skills such as literacy and numeracy. The
controversial technology curriculum has also been revised to emphasise the
importance of work skills and specify a coherent body of knowledge.
There remain, however, disquieting signs of Mr Patten's recurrent desire to
harness schools to populist causes. The streamlined curriculum gives greater
weight to team games and competitive sports, even for older children who
might prefer fitness activities or individual pursuits. And Mr Patten's
repeated interference in sex education has irritated health professionals
who say that his guidelines will do nothing to curb the growth in teenage
pregnancies and sexually-transmitted diseases.
This penchant for publicity-grabbing initiatives alienates teachers and
alarms parents. And it unnecessarily draws education into short-term
political controversy. That makes it harder to win acceptance for the
curriculum proposals which are essential to raising the quality of
education. Successive reports have indicated the failure of English schools
to equip a large minority of school-leavers with even basic skills.
Inspectors' reports too often find that pupils are not sufficiently
challenged by the teaching they receive, particularly in inner-city schools.
Getting the curriculum right is only one step in addressing these
shortcomings, however. It is just as important to ensure that schools are
teaching the new curriculum properly. The new independent schools
inspectorate can contribute to that with its more frequent inspections and
well-publicised reports to parents. Equally important is the regular testing
of schoolchildren to see whether they are reaching satisfactory standards.
Yet testing remains disrupted by a boycott by the National Union of
Teachers, the largest teachers' union. The boycott is largely ideological in
motive - it is against the principle of objective, external testing. Unlike
last year, it is opposed by unions representing the majority of teachers.
Yet this year's tests appear to have been severely disrupted by the
minority's action. Mr Patten's priority now must be to restore momentum to
the testing programme so that parents and employers can have confidence that
the national curriculum is more than just good intention.
