FT  25 AUG 94 / Arts: Osborne's 'Sarajevo' - Opera Factory
The first thing to say is that Sarajevo is not an opera, if that matters. In
assembling his material on the suffering in Bosnia, Nigel Osborne found
himself bringing together a variety of sources, which he has fashioned into
a trilogy, composed partly of theatre, partly of music.
The first performance at the Queen Elizabeth Hall on Tuesday was entrusted
to Opera Factory, with which Osborne has had a long creative partnership.
The company premiered one of his true operas, Hell's Angels, and also (more
relevant to the piece here) invited him to supply incidental music for two
plays. David Freeman, producer of Sarajevo, more accurately describes the
work as 'performance art'.
Part One of the trilogy begins unpromisingly. Wanting to make a connection
to the suffering of an earlier age, Osborne incorporates an adaptation of
Euripides's The Trojan Women, made by Don Taylor. In spite of an assertion
in an interview that this would have 'integral' music, there is almost no
music at all. The play is acted straight, albeit in a modern setting, but
too much of the text is mumbled or hysterically shrieked for the issues that
Euripides was addressing to come across. A week spent watching fringe
theatre at the Edinburgh Festival leaves one fairly immune to Freeman's kind
of full-frontal soul-bearing.
Part Two is a musical setting of texts written in Sarajevo, 'somewhere
between an opera, a cabaret and a song cycle', says Osborne. Reading the
poems in advance, I thought how moving they were. The unreality of living in
Sarajevo during the siege is marvellously captured by some of these
vignettes, like the boy wanting to keep his Levi 501s with the bullet hole
as a souvenir, or the well-dressed businessman going home with his briefcase
in one hand and a branch of a tree to burn in his home-made stove in the
other.
Unfortunately, most of their force gets lost when the music is added.
Osborne interweaves them and variously undermines their simple honesty,
although his trio of instrumentalists at least allows most of the words to
be heard. There is little feeling of pacing or overall shape to this long
section, and certainly not of drama. Freeman's attempts to provide a
dramatic subtext were inevitably futile.
These songs lead directly into Part Three, which is a setting in 'oratorio'
form of a libretto called 'Sandstorm', by Craig Raine. Here, for the first
time, music gains primacy over the words, which are in any case difficult to
catch without the text to hand. In the more impassioned outbursts, when the
four solo singers come together, one at last senses something of the anger
which Osborne says motivated him to write the work.
Maybe it is unfair to expect that a composer should be able to express his
sense of outrage with more eloquence than the rest of us, but summoning the
power of his creative abilities is surely the challenge. Sarajevo is an
undisciplined and inarticulate cry of pain.
Sponsored by Spero Communications. Further performances at the Queen
Elizabeth Hall until September 3 and then at Oxford Playhouse
