FT  25 OCT 94 / Plea to maintain Ulster spending
Public spending for Northern Ireland should be maintained at current levels
in the short term if the peace process is to be moved forward, says the
Northern Ireland Economic Council, an independent body set up to advise the
secretary of state.
The council's autumn review of the province's economy, which was published
yesterday and prepared after the IRA ceasefire on August 31 but before the
loyalist cessation, warns of short-term adjustment problems associated with
the peace process that will have to be handled 'carefully, sensitively and
gradually'.
The report says: 'It is important to stress that in the short-term
transitional period it is the composition of public expenditure that should
change rather than its overall level.'
With some local economists concerned that the Treasury is keen to see cuts
in the wake of the ceasefire, the review provides support to those opposed
to public spending cuts.
The NIEC stresses that, with the state accounting for 35 per cent of those
in employment, subventions - government subsidies - are 'the most
significant determinant of demand in the economy'. The report says that
government funding, which is planned at Pounds 7.4bn in 1994-95, helped to
damp the recession in a province with the highest number of long-term
unemployed.
Citing the example of the police and prison services, where employment
levels are three times higher than in other UK regions, the council says the
peace process calls for redeployment of personnel and the reallocation of
public spending towards 'more constructive' economic use.
It says: 'Peace, as well as conflict, involves difficult economic adjustment
problems. These, however, have to be handled with care and in a sensitive
manner to ensure that the 'peace process' is moved forwards rather than
backwards.'
The NIEC also voices support for the controversial issue of greater
north-south economic links, through increased cross-border trade, a more
fully integrated island economy and improved policy co-ordination in areas
such as energy and transport.
The extent of any new all-Ireland institutions is a central issue in the
negotiations between London and Dublin on the proposed framework document,
which will provide the basis for planned all-party talks on the new
political arrangements for the province.
London is aware of unionist sensitivity on the issue, however, and is
anxious that Irish moves to provide these bodies with executive powers are
not seen as a dilution of British sovereignty.
