FT  18 JAN 94 / Malaysian dam project termed 'abuse' of aid: Major agreed
deal against official's advice
Mr John Major took the final decision to sign an aid deal with the Malaysian
government which a top Whitehall official described yesterday as an 'abuse'
of taxpayers' money.
The aid programme, to build a hydroelectric dam on Malaysia's Pergau river,
has cost the British government more than Pounds 300m and is the largest
expenditure ever incurred on a single project by the Overseas Development
Administration.
However, Sir Timothy Lankester, the permanent secretary at the ODA, told MPs
yesterday that in early 1991 he repeatedly advised ministers not to sign the
deal because the dam would be uneconomic until 2005 and would have a
detrimental impact on the Malaysian economy.
The project has since been described by the National Audit Office, the
government's accountancy watchdog, as 'a very bad buy', while Labour MPs
claim that the aid was part of an illegal deal by which Malaysia bought
Pounds 1bn of defence equipment. Sir Timothy told the House of Commons
public accounts committee yesterday: 'It was an abuse of the aid programme
in terms that it is an uneconomic project.'
He said that he had sent 'many memoranda' to Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign
secretary, not to go ahead with the project but that, in February 1991, 'the
final decision was taken in consultation with the current prime minister'.
The preliminary decision to agree a deal with the Malaysian government was
first initiated by Lady Thatcher, when she was prime minister, in the summer
of 1988.
Ministers later realised that the costs of the project were far greater than
had been incurred on any comparable ODA programme. But in a statement made
to the public accounts committee yesterday, Mr Hurd said the deal needed to
be carried through 'because of earlier commitments' that had been made.
He also said the project had led to a significant increase in UK exports to
Malaysia.
However, there have been repeated allegations that the aid programme was
linked to a decision taken by Malaysia in 1988 to buy Pounds 1bn worth of
defence equipment. A formal link between the two deals could be illegal
under the 1966 Overseas Aid Act, but ministers have repeatedly claimed that
the two were unconnected.
Sir Timothy told MPs that, as a permanent secretary, he had taken the highly
unusual step of formally overruling the deal and demanding that Mr Hurd give
him a special 'direction' to 'sign the cheques' for it.
Under that procedure, Sir Timothy would have incurred no formal
responsibility for the decision.
He also disclosed that ODA officials undertook an appraisal mission to
Malaysia in 1989 which lasted only two days. Sir Timothy said that 'a more
substantial appraisal' was required. However, ministers at the Department of
Trade and Industry had put pressure on the ODA to come to a decision quickly
because of 'the commercial and industrial context'.
