FT  19 SEP 94 / UK Company News: Likely Pounds 60m tag for Filtronic Comtek
Filtronic Comtek, a manufacturer of components for the mobile
telecommunications industry, is coming to the stock market next month with
an expected market capitalisation of Pounds 60m.
The float will be made through a placing to US and UK institutions, which is
expected to raise Pounds 25m. Of this, Pounds 15m will be new money.
Formed in 1977, the company worked principally in the defence electronic
business, moving to work full-time on its telecoms developments with the
rapid expansion of the mobile market in the late 1980s.
As the number of telecoms systems and users has grown, base stations,
through which a mobile telephone connects to a telephone system, have had to
cope with an increasing number and variety of signals.
Filters used in the combining and separating of the signals are an integral
part of the base station. Filtronic also supplies subsystems which combine
filters and other electronic components to enhance a base station's
capabilities.
Sales have grown from Pounds 1.23m in 1992 to Pounds 10.22m in the year to
May 31 1994 during which pre-tax profits have increased 10-fold to Pounds
1.11m. Panmure Gordon, the company's broker, is forecasting profits for the
coming year of between Pounds 3.3m and Pounds 3.5m.
Professor David Rhodes, executive chairman, said: 'We are the first
equipment supplier in the telecoms industry to go public, giving investors
the opportunity to become directly involved in one of the fastest expanding
industries.'
He pointed to industry research forecasting the number of mobile subscribers
worldwide rising from 30.5m in 1994 to 125m in 2000.
The company's development has been funded through borrowings and venture
capital, most of which will be repaid following the flotation. Between
Pounds 5m and Pounds 6m has been earmarked to expand production facilities
in Yorkshire, Glasgow, Maryland and New Hampshire.
Prof Rhodes said the company wanted to increase its share of the
fast-growing south-east Asian market.
The company supplies most of the leading telecoms manufacturers in the
world, and has replaced AT&amp;T's in-house filter production facility.
