FT  16 MAR 94 / International Company News: NKK to cut 1,300 more jobs in
restructure
NKK, the Japanese steel company, plans a wide-ranging restructuring aimed at
reducing employees by a further 1,300 and increasing profits by Y175bn
(Dollars 1.65bn) over the next three years.
The company, which faces heavy losses this year, says the restructuring is
intended to return the company to profit so that it can resume dividends by
1995-96.
Earlier this month, the company revised its earnings estimate for the year
ending this month and said that it expects pre-tax losses of Y25bn.
The company is being forced to pass its dividend for the first time since it
was stock market listed in 1949.
Mr Shunkichi Miyoshi, president, said NKK aimed to increase its ratio of
profits to sales in the engineering division to 5 per cent from the current
3 per cent.
Under the plan, NKK will cut capital spending to a third of levels seen over
the past three years, or about Y140bn.
Steelmaking operations will be streamlined by reducing the product range,
integrating production of some products at one plant and shifting production
of other products to an affiliated electric furnace steel maker.
The latest plan brings the total number of employee cuts to 4,500. Last
year, NKK said it would reduce employee numbers by 3,200 by fiscal 1995.
Reductions would be achieved through transfers to subsidiaries, cuts in
graduate employees and natural attrition.
NKK expects to continue its operations in electronics and property
development which are two areas the company has been working in.
It also hopes to increase its involvement in south-east Asia where it is
considering local production of steel or joint ventures depending on the
needs of each particular country.
The restructuring plan is not expected to affect National Steel, the US
company in which NKK has a 50 per cent equity stake.
National Steel itself is beginning to enjoy the fruits of its own
restructuring, Mr Miyoshi said, and NKK hopes to support the running of
National Steel by its US management.
