FT  08 JAN 94 / Victory elusive for rebels with a cause: The uprising in
southern Mexico marks a society mired in poverty
In the main square of Ocosingo, a market town tucked in a mountain valley in
the southern Mexican state of Chiapas, the shooting sounded like fireworks
being set off to celebrate New Year. But when local people looked outside
they saw young men and women dressed in green with red scarves, wearing
balaclavas and brandishing machine guns.
Groups of guerrillas soon took over the modern town hall, killing four
policemen. Then they seized the radio station, the bank and other public
buildings. They broke open government stores and encouraged people to take
whatever they wanted.
Pierre Housin, a Parisian who had come to Ocosingo to see his daughter marry
a local businessman, said the rebels entered the hotels and told the town's
handful of tourists they were not at risk. 'At 7.30am I saw men in green
coming through the town with machine guns, and we were extremely worried.
But they weren't after foreign tourists and left us alone.' The men then
headed for the home of the town's wealthiest rancher, kidnapping him and his
family, ransacking the house. His son-in-law was still missing three days
later, but the rancher came back safely.
The rebellion in Ocosingo was repeated in two other towns in Chiapas and in
the colonial city of San Cristobal. It was the most violent uprising against
the Mexican state since the 1910 revolution which toppled the ruling
dictator. The fighters, members of the self-described Zapatista Army of
National Liberation, declared war against the government on behalf of the
country's 7m Indians.
Commander Marcos, the rebel leader who helped co-ordinate the attack on San
Cristobal, said it had been timed to coincide with the effective start of
the North American Free Trade Agreement. The insurgents were fighting for
democracy, land, food, housing, justice, they informed startled residents.
Speaking from the top floor balcony of the town hall, and wearing the
trademark green and red uniform, Commander Marcos told the crowd below that
he had taken over the town 'because there were no conditions for free and
democratic elections. In our declaration of war we call on the leaders of
the state to use their constitutional powers to depose the government of
President Carlos Salinas and his cabinet and in its place install a
transitional government.'
The words proved hollow. Three days after the uprising began, the rebels had
abandoned all the towns, leaving graffiti, burnt-out buildings and about 60
dead from clashes with the army. In Ocosingo some 30 were killed by army
forces, their bodies lying scattered in the market place which they had made
their headquarters. Six were lying face down with bullet holes in the back
of their heads.
Most of the guerrillas, up to 2,000 strong, were young Indians from small
villages in the surrounding hills and jungles. Many carried AK-47 machine
guns; others nothing more than wooden replicas. Some said they been training
for years, but others looked as if they had never carried a gun before.
The slick statements of their leaders seemed at odds with the inarticulate
explanations offered by the rank and file for the revolt. Along the road
from San Cristobal to Ocosingo, eight teenagers said they had never heard of
the free trade agreement. They said they had taken up arms to fight against
the poverty in which they live.
The group, one as young of 15, had lost its commander and had not eaten for
two days. 'We have nothing where we live, nothing to eat,' said the leader
in halting Spanish, as he clutched a radio with no battery. He said they
threw away their weapons as soon as they heard army rocket fire. They
thought they would continue to fight, but were not sure.
The insurgents come from Mexico's poorest state, which, with its large
Indian population and endemic poverty, is more akin to neighbouring
Guatemala than to the rest of Mexico. Indians have generally worked in large
farms belonging to landowners of Spanish descent or eked out a living from
the corn and beans they produce on small plots of land.
In recent years some 15,000 Indians from San Juan Chamula near San Cristobal
have been expelled from their land by caciques (local political bosses),
partly for embracing protestantism and also for becoming teetotallers, so
cutting the value of the caciques alcohol monopoly. Other Indians in the
jungle have lost land to loggers, the state oil company and cattle ranchers.
The abuse of their rights has long been criticised by the church.
Many residents of the region have been angered by the revolt, and
discrimination against an already oppressed minority may be stepped up as
the army and police search the area.
Outside Ocosingo, Elias Morales, a 30-year-old lorry driver, fled the town
with his lorry as soon as the fighting began. 'This is going to have a
terrible effect on commerce. Its going to make it difficult for us,' he
said. 'The rebels are people who do not want to work. They should defend
their rights peacefully. They have destroyed what we have built.'
Some people are more sympathetic to the plight of the peasants. Mr Jacindo
Arias, president of an organisation of Mayan and Zoques writers in Chiapas,
said: 'The situation of Indians has improved in some ways but they are now
demanding more. Modernisation and greater communication within the country
have made them more aware of their rights.' Indian groups throughout Mexico,
who have denounced the rebel action, have becoming increasingly organised in
recent years, following their counterparts elsewhere in Latin America.
As aircraft hovered over San Cristobal, firing rockets into the hills, the
government was trying to play down the significance of the revolt. Mr Eloy
Cantu, a senior official with the interior ministry, said peasants had been
manipulated by a group of violent extremists, probably trained abroad.
The political impact of the uprising is still unclear. The ruling
Institutional Revolutionary Party still remains the overwhelming favourite
to win this year's presidential election, but its candidate, Mr Luis Donaldo
Colosio, may come under some pressure to stress still further the social
aspects of his policies, and soften commitments to more economic change.
The more pressing challenge for the government will come in the weeks and
months ahead as the army seeks to root out the guerrillas who have returned
to their homes. The government is caught between wanting to capture those
involved as soon as possible and not wishing to alienate Indian villages
through excessive force, which would attract criticism from human rights
groups.
President Salinas said on Thursday that there would be full respect and
support for communities as action was taken against the rebels. But he also
warned that any further violence would lead to a political clampdown and
possibly to a curtailment of civil liberties. This could turn an isolated
uprising into something more widespread.
From Mr Arias came a note of warning. 'The rebellion is not a broad
indigenous movement, but if there is oppression, it could become one,' he
said. 'Indigenous peoples have to be given a voice in society.'
