FT  02 NOV 94 / Arbitrary justice in the City: Recent fraud prosecution
failures have advanced the case for more powers for financial regulators
When it emerged last week that former boxer George Walker had been cleared
of masterminding a Pounds 19m fraud at Brent Walker, the news was greeted by
financial commentators much as cricket correspondents treat another defeat
for England in an off-season. There was a ritual groan to the effect that
the UK's Serious Fraud Office (SFO) had done it again: another failed
prosecution at a cost of millions to the taxpayer.
The response is understandable, whatever the merits of the verdict in the
Brent Walker case, if only because of the cumulative evidence that justice
in white-collar crime trials is so arbitrary.
At one extreme, financial services salesman Roger Levitt inflicted serious
losses on scores of investors, for which he was required to do a mere 180
hours of community service after pleading guilty to fraud in a complex plea
bargain. At the other, Ernest Saunders made plenty of money for investors
and no fortune for himself in the Guinness takeover of Distillers, yet went
to jail.
There is nonetheless a risk that the SFO, for all its blunders, is picking
up an undue proportion of the flak. To judge a prosecuting authority by the
number of people sent down is a crude yardstick. Policemen are not rewarded
on the basis of successful convictions, or the effectiveness of a regiment
judged by the number of people it kills.
Moreover, the high burden of proof required in criminal cases, the
capricious judgments of some juries and the loopy behaviour of certain
judges are features of the criminal justice system as a whole, not of fraud
trials in particular.
The complexity of fraud raises questions about relying on financially
unqualified jurors to reach verdicts. But the frequent failure of juries to
convict in fraud trials might also reflect a lack of consensus about the use
of criminal penalties where there are either no obvious victims, or where
the losses are hard to identify.
There is, in fact, a growing tide of opinion among financial regulators that
the line between criminal and civil penalties has been wrongly drawn; and
that a beefed-up regulatory apparatus, applying a less demanding standard of
proof, could more effectively tackle some of the work now done by the
courts. What criteria should determine the division of labour?
Some financial fraud constitutes obvious robbery. In the Barlow Clowes case,
for example, Mr Peter Clowes took money from investors and used it to
finance personal expenditure, including the purchase of a yacht. He was
rightly convicted. In a country where more than 40 per cent of people found
guilty of thefts of under Pounds 200 go to prison, reducing the sanction in
such cases would be an unacceptable instance of double standards.
In contrast, nobody in the Brent Walker case was accused of having a hand
directly in the till. The nature of the alleged crime was that the company
inflated its profits by incestuously lending money to third parties to
enable them to buy the products of its film division.
Between 1984 and 1987, the manipulation of the figures caused Brent Walker's
shares to rise artificially high. This allowed the company vastly to enlarge
its capital by issuing fresh equity and to make acquisitions on the back of
misleading information. Investors paid too much for the shares, while
bankers were deceived on the creditworthiness of the company and its
director-shareholders.
Yet by the time Brent Walker ran into trouble in 1990, it was a larger, very
different group from what it had been in 1987, the last year misinformation
was propagated. The financial crisis at the company was due less to
falsification of the film division's profits than to excessive borrowing on
subsequent deals.
As a result it is impossible to attribute specific losses to the original
act of falsification. Yet there was substantial damage, in that many
shareholders and creditors would have lost less if the lower level of real
profitability in the mid-1980s had been disclosed. Bankers and investors
would not have advanced money on the same scale; so Brent Walker would have
gone into its financial crisis with a smaller share capital, owing less.
There are a number of misdemeanours here, as so often in fraud trials. Banks
and the investors who stayed in the shares were deceitfully coaxed - in the
jury's view, not by Mr Walker - into a loss-making course of action.
While nobody had a hand in the till, that does not mean that directors
reaped no personal benefit. Directors' pay packages and pensions usually
bear some relation to corporate size. If manipulation facilitates growth by
acquisition, the directors may be substantial financial beneficiaries.
At the same time profits manipulation led to market rigging, an activity
which can damage the City's international reputation and drive business to
other financial centres. Such issues about the integrity of markets might be
thought to be a matter for the regulators rather than the courts. Note,
though, that in the Blue Arrow case, where merchant bankers failed to reveal
a rights issue had flopped, convictions were reached, before being quashed
on appeal.
Finally there is a public policy issue on the economic consequences of
takeover activity, which arose with the Guinness takeover of Distillers as
well as at Brent Walker. If large companies change hands on the basis of
false information, a misallocation of economic resources could result. Most
people would agree that this is anti-social behaviour. They might not all
agree that it merits a jail sentence.
It is tempting to generalise about criteria for criminal as against
regulatory sanctions on the basis of a combination of incurred losses and an
intent to deceive. There was much sympathy with Mr Justice Clark last year,
for example, when he said in an SFO case against two former stockbrokers at
TC Coombs, who were acquitted: 'I cannot help thinking that this sort of
enquiry in a case where there has been no financial loss to any individual
would be far better left to the regulatory jurisdiction of the appropriate
bodies rather than a full-blown criminal trial.'
Yet in practice so many cases of corporate and financial skulduggery involve
grey areas that comprehensive generalisation is impossible.
Hence the merit of a pragmatic approach proposed by the chairman of the
Securities and Investments Board (SIB), Mr Andrew Large. Mr Large believes
that in cases with a potentially criminal dimension, regulators and
prosecutors should co-operate at an early stage to establish how the public
interest would be best served. If the high burden of proof required by the
courts is likely result in failure to secure a conviction, then regulatory
sanctions might be appropriate.
One precedent is the US approach on insider dealing. There, it is both a
criminal offence and an administrative offence, for which the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) may secure penalties of three times the profit
made. While the most serious cases are dealt with by criminal prosecutors,
there are many cases where the SEC confiscates the profits and imposes such
financial penalties.
'The knowledge that the criminal route is available is a deterrent,' says Mr
Large of the US approach, 'while the availability of civil settlement
provides a quick - and public - disposal in cases where prosecution is not
essential.'
The SIB has already explored the opportunities for greater co-operation with
the prosecutors. It has reached agreement in principle with the SFO about
the sorts of cases that might be better handled by the civil regulators. But
it lacks powers under the Financial Services Act to investigate insider
dealing and market manipulation. And, like the Stock Exchange, it lacks a
statutory power to fine.
In the light of the SFO's unhappy experience in fraud trials and the
perceived failure to pursue insider dealers, there are clear attractions in
an enlarged role for the regulators. The risk is that financially expert
British watchdogs may not be as tough on financial misdemeanours as those in
the SEC.
The trade-off is between financial expertise and the independence of the
jury. It follows that if the government does decide to tilt the balance in
the system towards regulatory sanctions, a much greater degree of
transparency will be required if public concern about potential coziness
between regulators and their peers is to be avoided.
