FT  03 MAR 94 / Treasury lawyer tells Scott of legal 'chaos'
A senior government lawyer yesterday backed a reform of the system for
handling public interest immunity certificates after admitting that there
was legal 'chaos' in the Matrix Churchill case and questioning whether it
should ever have taken place.
Mr Gerald Hosker QC, the Treasury solicitor and former legal adviser to the
Department of Trade and Industry, told the Scott inquiry on arms sales to
Iraq that in future prosecuting counsel would be expected to take a stronger
lead in ensuring disclosure of material relevant to the defence.
The inquiry heard that in September 1992, one month before the Matrix
Churchill trial, Mr Hosker received a memorandum from the intelligence
agency SIS - or MI6 - criticising the chaos affecting several Whitehall
departments in their preparations of PII claims on behalf of ministers.
The SIS note focused on the lack of co-ordination in a secret
inter-departmental Whitehall committee known as the Restricted Enforcement
Unit - involving the identification of documents subject to classification
under the PII system.
Earlier Mr Hosker said he had doubted whether the prosecution of three
Matrix Churchill executives on charges of selling arms-related goods to Iraq
should go ahead after hearing that senior Whitehall officials had accepted
that advice from Mr Alan Clark, the former trade and defence minister, may
have suggested to the executives that they had government support.
Lord Justice Scott questioned how the doctoring of official papers and the
drafting by civil servants of inaccurate witness statements could be
justified 'in the public interest'. He described one witness statement
prepared by government lawyers as 'junk'.
Mr Hosker returns to the Scott inquiry today, when he will be pressed about
the advice given to the ministers who signed PII certificates.
Mr John Major, the prime minister, yesterday avoided commenting on the row
over Mr Michael Heseltine's evidence to the inquiry. Mr Heseltine on Tuesday
accused Sir Nicholas Lyell, the attorney-general, of offering contradictory
advice.
The dispute between the two ministers is expected to dominate prime
minister's question time today, when opposition MPs will try to exploit the
government's embarrassment.
Pressure on Sir Nicholas eased yesterday as he continued to insist that he
would not resign unless he was criticised in Lord Justice Scott's final
report.
There were continued rumblings of unease among Conservative backbenchers
about Mr Heseltine's evidence, which some think has significantly increased
the danger that the judge's report will severely damage the government.
