FT  24 JAN 94 / International Company News: Coda banks on 'open' systems
Coda, the Harrogate-based software company which is coming to the main
market early in February, is hoping that an early move into 'open' systems
will propel it to the front of the international accountancy software field.
Open software is written to a specific industry standard; it will run on any
computer or computer network which complies with that standard. It is being
demanded increasingly by customers.
Coda ranks 14th in a market dominated by the large US companies Dun &amp;
Bradstreet Software and Computer Associates and the fast-growing German
challenger, SAP.
According to IDC, the marketing consultancy which compiled the list, no
other player has more than 3 per cent of the market. Coda has 1 per cent.
'We could be fourth,' muses Mr Rodney Potts, co-founder and chairman 'We
should be fourth.' To do so, it will have to overtake companies including JD
Edwards, Walker Interactive, Ross Systems and Software 2000. Last year Coda
made a pre-tax profit of Pounds 3.75m on revenues of Pounds 23.5m.
The prospectus is published today in the run up to the placing, which should
provide the best part of Pounds 25m, less expenses, to invest in research
and development and geographical expansion. Warburgs is managing the
placement.
The UK is seeing something of a renaissance in the development of
accountancy packages. Sage has established itself as market leader in
personal computing packages, while Quality Software Products continues to
show promise in very large scale modular packages.
Coda's product, featuring a fully-integrated unified database, is aimed at
companies turning over at least Pounds 100m.
Coda started 15 years ago by developing its software for three mid-range
computer families: Hewlett Packard, Digital Equipment and International
Business Machines.
In 1990, it began to develop an open systems version and now claims it is
its most highly featured product.
Expenditure on research and development is about 13 per cent of turnover,
which is written off in the year it is incurred.
Coda's second strategic aim is to develop critical mass in key international
markets. It sells only through wholly owned subsidiaries, rather than
dealers.
Mr Potts defined critical mass as a sound, locally recruited, management
team, 20 staff, up to 40 customers and between Pounds 2m and Pounds 3m
profits.
The US accounts for 46 per cent of group sales.
