FT  15 JUL 94 / Rise and fall of a house of cards: Emma Tucker on how the
carton-board price-fixers operated
Towards the end of 1990, carton printers in the UK did not like what their
books were telling them.
The government may not have noticed it, but their own orders suggested the
economy was heading for a sharp downturn. To make matters worse, they were
sickened by the relentless rise in the price of the cardboard they relied on
to print the brand names of toothpaste, cereal, make-up and frozen foods.
Such increases in a dead market would hurt the industry badly.
A number decided to raise the matter with the British Printing Industries
Federation which represented many of the UK's carton printers. The BPIF,
suspicious that a price-fixing cartel was unjustly squeezing its members,
contacted counterparts in France and other European Union countries and the
following year, armed with information from across Europe, took the matter
to Brussels.
'It was a very unusual step,' says Mr Colin Stanley, BPIF director-general.
'Only once in 10 years have our members felt so concerned that they have
asked us to take up a matter with the Commission.'
It did not take long for Brussels to decide that an investigation was
necessary. On April 23-24 1991, 40 officials from the Commission and member
states staged simultaneous raids on carton-board producers across Europe.
Based on what they found, they constructed the case which on Tuesday
resulted in 19 producers receiving the biggest fines ever to be levied
against a price-fixing cartel in Europe. The fines, which must be paid
within the next three months, total Ecu132.15m (Pounds 104.27m), the largest
single penalty being Ecu22.75m.
The cartel was, as Mr Karel Van Miert, competition commissioner, described
it, both pernicious and sophisticated. But much of what the officials
uncovered was also laughable.
Under the aegis of an ostensibly legitimate association known as the Product
Group Paperboard, ringleaders of the 19 member cartel met 12 times a year
for 'social' meetings, most often in Zurich, but occasionally in Nice or
Barcelona, to lend credence to the idea of a 'social' gathering.
Fake minutes were drawn up to disguise the real business in hand - arranging
concerted price rises. But among the documents found during the raids were
personal notes showing exactly when price rises for carton-board would occur
in each member state and by how much.
These private notes were made in spite of a general understanding among the
cartel members that no incriminating evidence was to be kept. The
investigation thus uncovered a whole network of deception designed to ensure
that the cartel was never discovered. According to the Commission, at least
one company had confidently asked lawyers to carry out a 'dummy run' of a
Brussels investigation, after the initial complaint by the carton users
became known.
The key to the cartel's success lay in achieving a balance between the
supply of and demand for carton-board which enabled the concerted 'price
initiatives' to go through. The participants did this by agreeing a
carefully constructed market-sharing arrangement.
'They all realised that aggressive attempts to gain market share would
undermine their carefully orchestrated price initiatives,' said the
Commission. It also alleges that companies suspected of deviating from the
plan were required to explain themselves to the others, while laggards were
pressed into raising their prices to the agreed levels.
With the market-sharing arrangement in place, the cartel's members then
compared the state of their order books to judge when best to introduce a
price increase. Sometimes, the big producers agreed temporary plant
stoppages to keep production under control.
The 'price initiatives' which took place every six months were planned and
programmed in advance 'in the most explicit detail', says the Commission.
The increases were announced to customers and in the trade press with a
different company each time taking the lead, and the others following on
agreed dates.
The arrangement was not achieved overnight. According to the Commission, the
PG Paperboard, set up in 1981, had been attempting to regulate the market
for several years. It was only in 1986, following a reorganisation of its
structures, that the cartel began to operate more successfully.
At the top was a 'presidents' working group' of managing or commercial
directors who acted as the ringleaders and took the strategic decisions.
They were: Cascades of France, Finnboard of Finland, Mayr-Melnhof of
Austria, Thames Board (later part of the Swedish group MoDo), Sarrio (Spain
and Italy) and two Stora companies of Sweden.
The Commission's efforts to probe the cartel were boosted substantially by
Stora's decision to come clean. In August 1991, the Swedish management of
Stora informed Brussels that it accepted that several companies in the group
had been involved in a serious infringement of European competition laws.
Stora had recently taken over the German producer Feldmuhle, which had been
a ringleader.
The fines when they came were astronomical. Some of the companies involved -
those that still insist that the meetings of the producers were no more than
'social occasions' - are said to be considering an appeal. These companies -
Cascades, MoDo, Finland's Enso Gutzeit and Finnboard, Gruber &amp; Weber and
Laakmann of Germany, Mayr Melnhof of Austria, BPB De Eendracht of the
Netherlands and Sca Holdings of the UK  - faced bigger fines than the
others.
Perhaps wisely, the rest of the companies involved did not deny the
essential facts alleged against them.
