FT  15 DEC 94 / National Power plans fuel switch: Plant would burn
controversial Orimulsion
National Power, the electricity generation company, is to apply for
government permission to build equipment which will enable it to burn
Orimulsion, the controversial bitumen-based fuel, at its Pembroke plant in
west Wales.
The company's application, expected to be lodged within weeks, is a blow to
providers of other fuels including coal and gas. Burning Orimulsion at
Pembroke could displace up to 5m tonnes of coal a year.
National Power is already discussing with the pollution inspectorate its
plans to fit flue gas desulphurisation equipment at Pembroke to allow it to
generate electricity there.
The likely submission for section 36 (planning) approval by the government
to fit the equipment indicates the company is intent on going ahead.
'We are going ahead with the project because we believe it has the potential
to provide clean electricity at a significantly lower cost than competing
fuels for generation,' National Power said.
Before it could go ahead and burn Orimulsion, National Power would need
permission from both the pollution inspectorate and from the govern-ment.
National Power also believes there may be potential to burn Orimulsion at
other oil-fired power stations.
Orimulsion is the trade name of a natural bitumen dispersed in water. It is
produced in Venezuela from the Orinoco Belt by Bitor, a subsidiary of
Petroleos De Venezuela, a state-owned company.
Bitor Europe, which markets the fuel in Europe, hopes to sell Orimulsion
throughout the Continent - but believes the UK is among the strongest
potential markets.
The pollution inspectorate provoked a controversy last year when it gave
permission to PowerGen, another generator, to burn Orimulsion without
desulphurisation equipment at its power stations at Ince on Merseyside and
Richborough in Kent.
The use of Orimulsion is opposed by the coal lobby since it displaces
indigenous fuels, and by the environmental lobby which points to what it
says are high sulphur emissions from the fuel.
Bitor Europe says the fuel emits no more sulphur than some coals already
being used to generate electricity in the UK. In addition, it says
Orimulsion emits less carbon and nitrous oxide than coal.
Should National Power win regulatory and government approval to fit
desulphurisation equipment at Pembroke, the effect on coal would be
considerable. Coal burn for generation is forecast by some analysts to fall
below 30m tonnes in England and Wales by the end of the decade.
RJB Mining, the coal company taking over British Coal's English assets, has
however made generous provision for Orimulsion burn in its calculations. It
believes Orimulsion could displace 6.5m tonnes of coal in 1998-99 and 8.3m
tonnes in the following year.
PowerGen burns about 1m tonnes a year of Orimulsion at Ince and Richborough
and has no plans to increase this amount.
