FT  10 NOV 94 / OFT hits at rights offer commissions
UK companies have paid out about Pounds 240m in 'excess returns' to
institutional investors who help underwrite offerings of new shares,
according to a study commissioned by the Office of Fair Trading.
The study, which examined more than 600 rights offerings since 1986,
concludes that the fixed commission that companies pay advisers, brokers and
sub-underwriters, which totals 2 per cent, is too great for the risks taken
on. The overpayment includes the effects of hefty losses on sub-underwriting
incurred just after the 1987 stock market crash.
The study says: 'Underwriters and sub-underwriters perform a useful service
for companies by assuming the risks of a failed issue. Historically,
however, at least for equity rights issues, the evidence indicates that the
fees they charge for the assumption of this risk significantly exceed the
value of the insurance they provide.'
It also found that big companies overpay to a greater extent than smaller
companies.
The study was prepared by Professor Paul Marsh of the London Business School
and has not been released. Merchant banks and institutional investors have
been urging the OFT not to release the report, saying that its research
methods are so seriously flawed that to make it public would only confuse
the debate.
The OFT commissioned the report as part of its inquiry into whether a
'complex cartel' exists for commissions. The fees - 0.25 per cent to
brokers, 0.5 per cent to the lead underwriter and 1.25 per cent to
sub-underwriters - have not changed for years.
Yesterday the OFT said: 'We are likely to publish a report on this matter.
But what it will say has not yet been decided.'
The Institutional Fund Managers Association, the trade body for fund
managers, said yesterday that if there were any significant changes to the
rules on sub-underwriting its members may step back from the practice. It
said: 'It's not a profitable activity.'
The study based its conclusions on an analysis of the theoretical price of a
'put option', which its author says is similar to what occurs in a rights
offering. The company is effectively buying the right to 'put' new shares to
sub-underwriters 30 days after underwriting. The price of the shares is at a
discount to the prevailing market price on the day the rights offer is
announced.
The London Investment Bankers Association has said that the analysis is
misguided because companies cannot buy put options equal to the value of the
capital they raise in rights offerings.
