FT  05 JUL 94 / Russian investment 'to surge'
A vastly increased rate of foreign investment in the Russian economy for
this year was forecast yesterday by Mr Anatoly Chubais, the deputy prime
minister for privatisation - in a confident survey of a process which has
thrown state companies into private hands at a rate and in a volume
unmatched anywhere in the world.
His forecast was backed by a senior foreign banker in Moscow who - speaking
on conditions of anonymity - said that 'a lot of private and company
investors have been coming in and quietly investing in Russian
privatisation. My impression has been that there is a lot more than we have
thought because they have been doing it discreetly and don't want to draw
attention to themselves.'
Mr Chubais said that estimates of a Dollars 1bn-Dollars 1.5bn limit on
foreign investment in Russia in the course of this year had to be sharply
revised upwards to between Dollars 6bn-Dollars 10bn, according to forecasts
made by the state property committee, which he chairs.
He said that Russian capital flight - estimated at more than Dollars 25bn -
was now returning because 'it is more profitable to keep money here in
rouble accounts than abroad in hard currency accounts'. The real interest
rate in Russia, though falling, is one of the highest in the world.
Strongly defending bankruptcy for hopeless companies - a process yet to get
under way - Mr Chubais said that 'we must do it not because we want to but
because the country needs it'.
However, Mr Chubais admitted that he had washed his hands of the
privatisation process in Moscow - where only 20 per cent of large industries
have been privatised.
The mayor of Moscow, Mr Yuri Luzhkov, has managed to get presidential
backing to greatly slow down the process and to prolong the use of
privatisation cheques to the end of the year - though they lost value in the
rest of he country at the end of June.
'In Moscow we see so many breaches of the law, so many breaches of the
constitution, so much corruption that I can have nothing to do with it,' he
said.
