FT  15 AUG 94 / Equity Markets: Wall St braced for another tightening - New
York
All eyes this week will be on the Federal Reserve as Wall Street braces
itself for another possible increase in interest rates.
Ever since the Fed first raised interest rates in early February, the market
has suffered attacks of nerves before each meeting of the central bank's
policy-making open market committee (FOMC).
Tomorrow, the FOMC meets to decide whether there is a need for a further
tightening of monetary policy to slow the economy and restrain inflation.
Wall Street's nerves will be on edge once again, primarily because interest
rates have been increased four times this year, and few believe that more
increases are not around the corner.
The stock market, now firmly entrenched in the midsummer doldrums, will be
waiting with baited breath for the FOMC's pronouncements.
Judging by the most recent economic data, the majority of analysts believe
the FOMC will signal an increase in interest rates this week.
If there is a broad consensus on Wall Street about the likelihood of a rate
increase, there is still considerable debate over which interest rate it
will put up, and by how much.
Some analysts, believing that the Fed remains cautious about stepping too
hard on the brakes, predict that the FOMC will tighten policy by raising its
target for the Federal funds rate by just 25 basis points, which would take
it to 4.5 per cent.
Others, however, feel differently. In light of recent comments by the Fed's
chairman, Mr Alan Greenspan, the pessimists say the central bank is
increasingly concerned about the outlook for inflation, and predict that it
will not only raise the Fed funds target by 50 basis points, to 4.75 per
cent, but will also raise the discount rate, from 3.5 per cent to 4 per
cent.
The size and nature of any tightening is critical because it will determine
whether the financial markets, and the stock market in particular, will be
able to ride out a rate increase without incurring losses.
Because expectations of a rate increase have been building up on Wall Street
for weeks, a 25 basis point upward move in the Fed funds rate is already
priced into bonds and stocks. So, if the Fed does nudge rates higher, stock
and bond prices should hold their ground.
A 50 basis point increase, however, could unsettle shares, which have
slavishly followed the lead set by bond prices for the past few months. If
an unexpectedly large rate increase inflicts enough damage to investor
sentiment, the Dow Jones Industrial Average - which has climbed erratically
from around 3,650 in early July to over 3,770 - faces the prospect of
slipping back below the 3,700 level.
