FT  21 JUN 94 / Mediobanca is forced to delay its rights issue
Mediobanca, the merchant bank at the heart of Italian finance and industry,
was last night forced to postpone its L1,500bn (Pounds 620m) rights issue
after a further sharp decline in the Milan stock market cut its share price
by nearly 5 per cent in a day.
The postponement is particularly embarrassing for the merchant bank, which
has an unrivalled reputation in the Italian market. Mediobanca is adviser to
most of the country's biggest companies, and a shareholder in many of them.
Mediobanca's shares dropped L748 to L14,411 yesterday, closing for the first
time below the L15,000-a-share floor which the bank set for the rights issue
when it was announced in April.
After the market closed, the bank said it would 'define a new timetable for
the operation in the light of market developments'. The bank added that it
had received strong interest from abroad in the international issue, which
was intended to broaden its shareholder base and raise funds for investment,
particularly in Italian privatisations.
The bank seems likely to wait at least 10 days before considering a
relaunch. But a delay of more than three or four weeks would take it into
the slack holiday period, when an operation of this scale would be
impossible to carry out.
Its share price has declined nearly 24 per cent since the end of April.
Investors were unsettled by news last month that four top executives of the
bank were under investigation for alleged conspiracy to file false accounts
on behalf of Ferruzzi-Montedison, the industrial group which came close to
collapse last year. That inquiry is continuing, although Mediobanca has
denied that there is any substance in the allegations.
In the last two weeks, Italian markets have come under pressure as
international investors have begun to act on growing doubts about the new
right-wing government's handling of the economy. Milan's Comit index fell 4
per cent yesterday, wiping out the last trace of equity gains achieved since
Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the media magnate, won the March election.
Mediobanca's rights issue is one of the biggest of a shoal of bond and
equity issues which will hit the Italian market over the next month. In
total, the issues are expected to raise more than L10,000bn. Analysts are
already afraid that future trading will be affected if underwriters are left
with much stock.
Cariplo float, Page 24
