FT  15 JAN 94 / Major denies significant role in guidelines on arms to Iraq
Mr John Major has told the Scott inquiry into the arms to Iraq affair that
he had no significant role in the setting or the adjustment of guidelines
regulating sales of defence-related equipment to the Baghdad regime.
In written evidence to the inquiry ahead of his appearance before Lord
Justice Scott on Monday, Mr Major emphasised that during his spells at the
Treasury and foreign office he was not party to the controversial relaxation
of the guidelines.
But with his political authority battered by the recent storms over his
'back to basics' policy and by the spate of political scandals, Mr Major
remains under intense pressure to give a confident and fluent performance at
the inquiry.
His appearance will coincide with the start of a Commons investigation on
the same day into an entirely separate but potentially equally embarrassing
deal under which Britain sold arms to Malaysia in the 1980s.
Amid signs of alarm among ministers about the investigation, the Public
Accounts Committee will cross-examine officials on evidence that a
large-scale weapons deal with Malaysia in 1989 was tied illegally by the
Thatcher government to a British aid package.
Officials said that the prime minister was 'entirely convinced' that the
mass of Whitehall documents covering the period when the Iraq exports
guidelines were in place confirmed his complete innocence of any misconduct.
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, yesterday joined Mr
Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, in pledging to resign if he was found guilty
of misconduct by the Scott inquiry.
Both men signed certificates seeking to prevent secret government documents
being made available to the defence in the failed trial of directors of
Matrix Churchill over the sale of machine tools to Iraq. But both are
confident that the decision was entirely legitimate.
Mr Major is expected to tell the inquiry the only important decision with
which he was directly involved was when, as foreign secretary, he vetoed the
sale of military aircraft to Iraq in 1989.
The Labour party is determined to exploit his appearance to reinforce its
attack on the alleged 'sleaze' and 'hypocrisy' of government
decision-making. It claims that after he replaced Lady Thatcher in 1990 Mr
Major consistently misled MPs on the implementation of the guidelines.
Lord Justice Scott has indicated Mr Major will be cross-examined on Monday
on the background to those parliamentary answers. The prime minister may
face pressure to spell out whether his government had any role in
Wednesday's attack on the inquiry's procedures by former foreign secretary
Lord Howe.
Editorial Comment, Page 6
