FT  16 DEC 94 / Government may face rebellion over pensions
Mr John Major's government could face another rebellion from its
backbenchers early in the new year amid signs that Conservative MPs are
demanding better treatment for more than 400,000 British pensioners who live
overseas.
Little more than a week after a Commons rebellion forced the government to
abandon an increase in value added tax on domestic fuel, ministers are
coming under pressure to grant substantial improvements in payments to
pensioners living outside the European Union.
The pressure on the government is being orchestrated by Mr Winston
Churchill, the conservative MP for Davyhulme, who yesterday tabled an early
day motion demanding that the pensions of overseas residents should be
raised in line with those of domestic recipients.
About 150 MPs from all parties have put their names to the motion, which
calls for an 'end to discrimination against the hero generation who saved
the world from Hitler'. More than half of the signatories are Tory MPs.
Last night one of the Conservatives sponsoring the motion said MPs were
ready to introduce an amendment on the issue in the debate on the
government's pension bill, which is due to be published today. The MP said
there was 'some talk' about the government making concessions to the MPs to
ensure that a rebellion did not take place.
However, the Department of Social Security made clear last night that an
upgrading could cost the state an additional Pounds 230m a year in social
security spending.
The department said: 'The idea that we will make concessions is pure
speculation and we have made no announcement.'
Sir Andrew Bowden, the Conservative MP for Brighton Kemptown who is one of
the signatories, said yesterday that it was 'a gross injustice' that
pensioners had no increase in benefits while they were living abroad.
'I don't think it is reasonable to expect the government to make the
concessions all at once, but they should acknowledge the principle that it
was wrong not to upgrade.'
