FT  19 NOV 94 / Markets Report: Dollar steady
The dollar yesterday had a steady day on the foreign exchanges, helped by
some fairly friendly trade figures, writes Philip Gawith.
Although the September US trade deficit rose to Dollars 10.13bn, from
Dollars 9.68bn in August, this news was offset by the bilateral deficit with
Japan narrowing to Dollars 5.73bn from Dollars 5.8bn. Trade frictions
between the US and Japan have contributed significantly to dollar weakness
this year.
The dollar closed in London at DM1.5539, from DM1.548, and at Y98.525 from
Y98.145.
In Europe, the Swiss franc came under pressure following market rumours,
which were denied, that the Swiss National Bank might lower interest rates.
It closed at SFr0.847 against the D-Mark, from SFr0.840.
Sterling gained little help from strong third quarter GDP figures, showing
the UK economy had grown, year-on-year, by 4.2 per cent (revised up from 3.6
per cent). It finished at DM2.4379, from DM2.4368, and at Dollars 1.569 from
Dollars 1.5742.
Renewed debate about Britain's relationship with Europe has contributed to
recent sterling weakness.
Analysts said the market was probably slightly long of dollars at the
moment, and this accounted for the currency's grudging upward progress,
despite a combination of supportive events.
Mr David Cocker, economist at Chemical Bank in London, predicted a 'slow,
upward grind' for the dollar. But he added that 'the bottom for the dollar
may now be in place.'
He cautioned, though, that a lot of dollar bears remained in the market.
Those banks which remain bearish of the dollar - Swiss Bank Corporation and
Chase Manhattan are two - tend to base their view on long term structural
problems, concerning the balance of payments and fiscal policy, remaining
unresolved.
Bears believe that Republican gains in Congress, if anything, are a cause
for further fiscal alarm, while Japanese institutions are understood still
to be nervous about recycling their current account surplus into US assets.
Mr Cocker said the market probably wanted further data about the US economy,
confirming the Fed's success in slowing US growth and inflation, before
pushing the dollar higher.
Trade was fairly quiet, with traders happy to take profits ahead of next
week's Thanksgiving holiday. Only Monday and Tuesday will be uninterrupted
trading days.
In Europe analysts reported some attention returning to the Italian market.
Mr Peter Stoneham, analyst at Technical Data in London, said the lira looked
to appreciate as the 1995 budget neared completion.
'The only fly in the ointment, as far as Berlusconi is concerned, is that
his coalition party falls just short of an overall majority in the Senate
and it's possible that he will see some further budget delays.'
'Overall, the picture looks brighter, and if the Berlusconi administration
can reach agreement with the labour unions over pension reforms, expect to
see the lira appreciate to below the key L1020.50 level by the end of the
year.'
The fortnightly foreign exchange survey, conducted by IDEA, found currency
investors and corporates in overwhelming agreement that the lira was the
currency in which they were most underweight.
The Bank of England cleared a Pounds 350m shortage in UK money markets at
established rates. Three month money traded at 6 1/32 per cent.
