FT  19 DEC 94 / Survey of the Czech Republic (14): Where obscurity seems
bearable - The people of Moravia
The people of Moravia, who inhabit the eastern part of the ancient lands of
the Czech crown, share some of the frustrations long felt by the Slovaks
when they formed the tail of the now defunct federal country called the
Czech and Slovak republic.
There was no hint in the old name that Moravians also lived in
Czechoslovakia, and there is still no hint of their presence in the name of
the Czech Republic. They appear resigned to being overlooked. Following a
brief, half-hearted flirtation with separatism after 1989, when new states
were cropping up all over eastern Europe, Moravians seem to have accepted
the inevitability of living in Bohemia's shadow within the Czech Republic.
The movement that kept alive the idea of Moravian separatism splintered into
four factions after the demise of the federation two years ago, when Prague
stamped out any lingering hopes that Moravia would follow Slovakia into
independence. As the Czech Republic's most heavily industrialised region,
contributing more to the national gross domestic product than larger and
more populated Bohemia, Moravia's independence was anathema to the
government.
Yet Moravians quietly insist on their separate identity. Mr Jaroslav Kupka,
vice-president of the Czech-Moravian Centre party, which wants 'to renew the
historical autonomy of Moravia within the framework of the Czech Republic,'
cites a 1991 poll which he says showed that most Moravians identify first
with their province and second with the state.
His party is pushing for the creation of a regionalised state with elected
administrations having cultural and educational autonomy and a budget,
financed either by subsidy or through local taxes, to pay for it.
Mr Klaus, who is a strong opponent of what he calls the 'cantonisation' of
the unitary Czech state, is suspicious of any form of local government
organisation that would raise the spending power and political autonomy of
local authorities and regions. The only concessions to federalism by Prague
so far have been the siting of the Constitutional Court and the
anti-monopoly ministry in Brno.
Faced with such an uncompromising line, Moravians are keeping their heads
down, and the attachment to their province's historical legacy now appears
to be mainly sentimental. In local elections in November Moravians voted
overwhelmingly for national parties.
In the city of Brno, the province's capital and the country's second city,
candidates representing the Civic Democratic party (ODS) of Mr Klaus swept
into City Hall, routing the four successor parties to the Moravian
separatist movement, whose combined seats fell from 20 to just five. The
city's new mayor, Ms Dagmar Lastovecka, is a member of ODS, and many of the
city's leading business people are supporters of Mr Klaus.
Only half the population of southern Moravia is truly Moravian, with
Bohemians a close second. 'We are not a nation,' Mr Kupka admits. 'Our
demands for autonomy are not based on nationalism, but on history.'
So Moravia soldiers on in relative obscurity. Asked to name 10 famous
Moravians, Mr Kupka is momentarily stumped for an answer. After offering
Charles the Elder, an ancient monarch, he eventually comes up with the
composer Leos Janacek, Tomas G Masaryk, founder and first president of the
interwar state of Czechoslovakia, and the philosopher Jan Komenius. The list
may be small, but it is impressive.
A little reluctantly, Mr Kupka ventures the name of the emigre writer Milan
Kundera, a Brno native whose penetrating and often deeply funny analysis of
Soviet-imposed 'normalisation' in Czechoslovakia after the 1968 Prague
spring, and musings on the 'unbearable lightness of being', have made him a
cult figure in the west.
In the west, of course, Kundera is considered a Czech (and possibly a
bohemian with a small 'b'), not a Moravian.
