FT  17 MAY 94 / Survey of Power Generation Equipment (2): Hong Kong groups
lead the charge - China's huge electrification plans will ensure
opportunities for many years
China is currently astride the world's most ambitious power development
programme, having set itself a target of 300,000MW of installed capacity by
the turn of the century.
The programme, according to China's Ministry of Electric Power, calls for a
further 12,000MW of capacity to be added this year, boosting levels from the
end-1993 figure of 176,000MW. The pace of new power additions will be
accelerated on a year-by year basis and will reach a remarkable rate of
20,000MW per year in new power plant additions by 1996 at least.
The programme is breathtaking by global standards and exceeds by a wide
margin expansion programmes being planned by other developing nations. Even
if the target is not achieved, the gains still will be substantial enough to
provide exceptional business opportunities for western equipment suppliers,
consultants, banks and companies seeking partnerships in the power sector.
Not surprisingly, the front runners in Chinese joint ventures are such Hong
Kong-based groups as the private sector utility China Light &amp; Power (CLP);
Gordon Wu's CEPA, a division of Hopewell Holdings; New World Development,
Hutchison Whampoa and Cheung Kong Holdings.
An increasing number of outside groups is joining the long queue. Among
these are the US Wing Group, as well as equipment manufacturers General
Electric and Westinghouse Electric; PowerGen and BICC of the UK and numerous
other companies from Europe, Japan and North America.
According to the Ministry, a total of 35,000MW of capacity will be up for
grabs by foreign independent power developers between now and 2000. Without
such foreign help, its ambitious targets will fall far short of target. It
has identified a total of 34 projects, both large and small, which it wants
to see developed on a build-own-operate or build-operate-transfer (BOO-BOT)
basis.
Most of its proposed foreign partner programmes are coal-fired, and some
small hydroelectric schemes are also being considered for the private
sector. However, the government wants to diversify its energy sources for
foreign joint ventures, particularly along coastal sites where coal is not
easily available owing to rail transport problems, away from coal and hydro
and into other fuels, notably piped gas, LNG and nuclear.
This will be a big challenge in that the two power sources comprise
virtually all China's electricity supply. A natural gas pipeline will supply
the first 2,400MW phases of Hong Kong's Black Point power station starting
in 1996. The complex is owned by CLP of Hong Kong. Preliminary discussions
suggest that some of the gas, taken from Hainan Island, could be used for
other power stations, but that will depend on the Hainan reserves. At
present, the gas is the only such supply being used for power generation in
China.
Several foreign ventures are bidding to establish LNG terminals along the
China coast, notably the Wing Group, which is examining terminal sites in
the Shanghai region. The LNG would have to be imported but would alleviate
coal pollution and transport problems.
The World Bank recently announced a Dollars 255m development loan to boost
natural gas potential in Sichuan Province to underpin a Dollars 945m scheme.
The aim of the scheme is to cut down reliance on coal, particularly for home
heating, and to create a base of gas for power station use isn the region.
A major development is China's nuclear programme. The first 950MW unit of
the Anglo-French-built two-unit complex at Daya Bay, 50 km northeast of Hong
Kong, went on line over the winter and is now delivering electricity to
China Light &amp; Power. The second unit is now completed and is being prepared
for commercial operation. A further complex is planned nearby, also to be
foreign built. A further complex of similar size is being planned for
Yangjiang, near Macau, west of Hong Kong.
China is also operating a separate 300MW domestically- engineered reactor in
the northeast and is planning new home-built units of 600MW each, with
consultancy help from Electricite de France. In all, it hopes to see some
7,500MW of nuclear capacity operating or near completion by 2005.
A major reason for the reliance on foreign help is the fact that China's own
power equipment manufacturers are operating at full tilt and producing only
mid-range technology. For manufacturers, the willingness to transfer
technology and form joint ventures with Chinese counterparts will be the key
to success.
According to Nomura Research Institute in Hong Kong, China's manufacturers
are capable of producing up to 400MW hydroelectric power generators and
thermal electric power generators with a maximum 600MW capacity. China's big
three equipment makers are China Harbin Power Plant Equipment Group;
Shanghai United Electric Corp.; and Dongfang Electrical Machinery Works, the
last of which is in the process of trading shares on the Hong Kong stock
exchange. All are understood to be seeking major equity shareholdings from
their foreign counterparts.
It is their output shortfall that has helped open the doors to western
hardware supplies, analysts say. These imports, which generally cost about
50 per cent more than locally-manufactured goods, are now estimated to
contribute about 20 per cent of China's annual installed capacity.
Indeed, so serious is the domestic equipment supply problem that China's
giant Three Gorges hydroelectric project, which is projected in the early
part of the next century to reach 22,000MW, will require at least 12 of its
26 hydraulic turbines to be foreign supplied, say Beijing officials.
Frank Gray is editor of Power in Asia, a FT energy publication
