FT  18 JUL 94 / Paris warns Rwanda rebels as exodus sparks aid crisis
France issued a strong warning to troops of the rebel Rwanda Patriotic Front
(RPF) last night, as international concern mounted over the refugee crisis
in Rwanda and neighbouring Zaire, writes Our Foreign Staff.
Up to 55 panic-stricken refugees died in a stampede at the border, where
hundreds of thousands of Rwandans have crossed in the last five days. Mortar
fire spread turmoil and disrupted aid efforts in the Zairean border town of
Goma.
After an emergency meeting in Paris, French officials warned the RPF to
cease armed incursions into the 'safe zone' which French troops have set up
in south-western Rwanda. There have been several of clashes between French
troops and RPF militiamen in the safe zone. Officials indicated that if the
RPF ignored the warning, France might resort to use of fighter-bombers
deployed at bases in Zaire.
The warning came after the RPF said its militia would move in unless the
French handed over Hutu ringleaders of the slaughter of people of the
minority Tutsi tribe in recent months. The safe zone is harbouring large
numbers of the majority Hutu tribe, including ministers who fled the
capital, Kigali, to escape Tutsi rebels.
Fighting spilled over into Zaire as mortar shells fell across the border
during clashes between advancing rebels and retreating government troops.
One shell landed about 100 metres inside Zaire, killing 20-25 refugees, a
French photographer said. At least four other mortar shells hit the Zairean
town of Goma. A French TV crew said 10 Zairean civilians were killed when
shells fell near Goma airport.
One round landed close to the airport runway where relief flights had been
landing a few hours earlier. The United Nations was reported later to have
suspended its emergency airlift of supplies because of the danger.
The flood of Rwandan refugees fleeing into Zaire over the past five days has
reached between 800,000 and a million, according to aid workers, giving rise
to a humanitarian catastrophe. The French estimate 500,000 refugees have
crossed.
As a vast throng of refugees crossed the border yesterday, a stampede
developed and witnesses said up to 55 people died. A French photographer
said he saw bodies trampled in the dust, many of them children. One child
was screaming as people tore him away from the body of his mother.
Germany announced it would send an air force Boeing 707 loaded with aid
supplies to Goma today after a request from the UN for German help.
The UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Mrs Sadako Ogata, appealed for a
ceasefire in Rwanda to avert disaster.
'The situation is out of control. We feel defeated and exhausted,' a UNHCR
official said. The mass flight was the biggest ever in such a short time -
'the exodus of a nation'.
