FT  08 NOV 94 / Nato jets swoop on Sarajevo fighting
Nato jets flew over the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo, for the third evening in
a row yesterday to halt fighting between Moslems and Serbs that is
threatening the fragile truce in the city.
Heavy mortar and artillery exchanges broke out in the west of the city, near
the airport. A United Nations spokeswoman said, however, that the two sides
had heeded requests to stop firing soon after the fighters flew over.
The fighting came as the conflict threatens to engulf all of Bosnia. The
newly confident Bosnian government army yesterday continued its
two-week-long offensive against Serb forces, which are trying to mount a
counter-attack.
UN political and military officials earlier yesterday expressed differing
views in talks about the fighting. Mr Yasushi Akashi, the Japanese diplomat
who heads the UN's 40,000-strong mission in former Yugoslavia, said the
Serbs would probably respond with a counter-attack, but then a military
balance would be reached.
However, British officials said they were unsure whether the increased
fighting would lead to a positive result. They urged all parties to abandon
the idea of a military solution to the Bosnian conflict.
In a further sign of international disunity, British officials disclosed
that they and their French counterparts had launched a discreet diplomatic
campaign to dissuade other members of the UN Security Council from voting
with the US to authorise arms supplies to Bosnia.
In Bosnia, a Serb commander threatened to seize back heavy weapons his army
has placed under UN supervision and deploy them against the Moslem-led
government army if attacks around Sarajevo continue. UN ground forces are
too lightly armed to prevent the Serbs from retaking the equipment. However,
such violations of the total exclusion zone around Sarajevo might prompt
Nato air strikes.
Bosnian Moslem and Croat forces continued their offensive, pouring artillery
fire on to Serb positions near Donji Vakuf, a strategic town in central
Bosnia, yesterday. Bosnian government forces are also trying to take Trnovo,
which could provide a link between Sarajevo and the Moslem enclaves in
eastern Bonsia.
Mr Akashi was speaking in Geneva, where he conferred with Mr Boutros Boutros
Ghali, UN secretary-general, and UN commanders in former Yugoslavia about
the peacekeeping effort. Ronald van de Krol adds from Amsterdam: An
international war crimes tribunal covering the former Yugoslavia opens
formally in The Hague today with a request for the extradition from Germany
of a Bosnian Serb, Mr Dusan Tadic, arrested in Germany last year, who is
alleged to have murdered three Moslem prisoners at the Omarska concentration
camp in Serb-held northwestern Bosnia in 1992.
