FT  12 DEC 94 / Leading Article: The danger for Russia
Today is the first anniversary of the adoption of Russia's post-Soviet
constitution. It has been marked by the introduction of troops into
Chechnya, the break-away region in Russia's Caucasus.
The intervention is uniformly seen by Russian liberals as heralding disaster
for the country's wobbly democratic structures. Their evidence for this is
strong.
First, they see in President Boris Yeltsin's recent actions a man
increasingly inclined to lean towards those of his administration who are
counselling a crackdown: on crime (epidemic by any standards); on corruption
(universal throughout the bureaucracy); and on business. The incident 10
days ago, when the bodyguards of Mr Vladimir Gusinsky, chairman of the Most
financial group, were assaulted by members of President Yeltsin's own guard,
has raised fears that the crackdown will take the form of identifying and
persecuting high-profile capitalists.
Second, liberals are more and more depressed by the evidence in recent
regional elections that the Russian people have retreated from political
life in disgust, either refusing to produce the required 25 per cent turnout
or, when they do, electing communists and extreme nationalists. Of all of
the liberal parties, only that of Mr Yegor Gaidar has remained in rather
desperate support of Mr Yeltsin.
Economic reform
Third, liberals see a government and a president openly inclined to postpone
elections indefinitely. They are at best sceptical of the Kremlin's will, or
its ability, to push through serious economic reform, believing it is
bidding for western aid with no real intention to use it to stabilise the
economy.
The playing of the military card in Chechnya is seen as confirmation that
the men of force and suppression are in the ascendant, and that the
flickering flame of pluralism is guttering out. Russian liberals believe
that the Russian Federation cannot be held together by force. They fear that
tiny but fiercely anti-Russian Chechnya could prove as formidable and
humiliating an opponent as Afghanistan. They are concerned that a bloody war
in Chechnya would make Russia a pariah abroad and authoritarian at home.
Educated people
Much of this is incontrovertible. However, Chechnya is not Afghanistan, but
a part of Russia: it chose to express its aspirations to independence
unilaterally, without any attempt to negotiate a split. No state leadership
can merely acquiesce in such moves. The first word from the Kremlin is that
the troops and armour will ring, not attack, the Chechen capital, and that
negotiations should then start. It is possible that a deal might be struck.
The verdict on Russia is not yet in. The private economy is chaotic and
criminalised, but it is growing and providing, for some Russians, a standard
of living undreamt of in communist days. Extremist parties are popular, but
they are not yet in charge, and Russia today is a freer country than ever
before.
Russian democracy is too easily pronounced a corpse. It is not: it is a
living organism, sick of many ailments and unsteady on its legs, but still
sustained by an educated, sceptical if wearied people and by politicians who
are often corrupt but in crucial instances animated by a desire to recreate
their country as a 'normal' one. Chechnya is dangerous for Russia, but it is
not yet the harbinger of totalitarianism revisited.
