FT  13 OCT 94 / Government Bonds: Gilts welcome RPI data and outperform
Treasuries
The UK government bond market yesterday welcomed statistics which revealed
benign inflationary pressures in the economy by rising half a point, and
outperforming US Treasuries.
The retail price index rose 2.2 per cent, which was less than the 2.4 per
cent expected. Labour market figures were interpreted as being good for
gilts.
'Nobody could claim that these numbers are anything but very excellent. They
have taken away all the negative feelings which last month's numbers had
given gilts,' said one dealer.
'It feels like a change in sentiment but it might be premature to say that.
But with numbers and interest rates as they are there is clearly a good case
for the market to get itself on a firmer footing,' he added.
One securities house reported good demand for gilts from US buyers, and the
spread of gilts over US Treasury bonds narrowed to around 94 basis points,
from around 102 the day before. Some dealers said the Bank of England was
taking advantage of the strong market to supply
stock.
Mr Simon Briscoe of S. G. Warburg said: 'Every day this month there has been
a trickle of investors moving round to the bullish view.'
He pointed out that the lower-than-expected RPI figure and fall in total
unemployment would save the government a total of Pounds 2bn a year in
social security benefits. He said: 'Funding is less of a pressure than in
other countries.'
The reaction of the gilt market was subdued, said Mr Chris Dillow of Nomura.
'I think that is justified,' he said. 'It will be difficult to see RPI
inflation staying this
low.'
The December gilt future on Liffe lifted  1/2 a point on the day to 100 9/32
in late trading. The yield spread over bunds narrowed to around 124 in late
trading.
German government bonds were hardly changed yesterday, as investors stood on
the sidelines ahead of today's meeting of the Bundesbank council and the
elections on Sunday.
Mr Karl Haeling at Deutsche Bank in Frankfurt said: 'We have rallied for
almost two days. The market is a little overbought and needs a breather. It
has been a consolidation day.'
The December bund future was around 89.51 in late trading, up 0.04 of a
point on the day.
US Treasury bonds drifted lower yesterday as the market awaited a barrage of
economic data to be released today and tomorrow.
Late in the session, the benchmark 30-year government bond was  9/32 lower
at 95 1/2 , with the yield rising to 7.887 per cent. On the short end, the
two-year note was down  1/16 at 99, to yield 6.653 per cent.
After two sessions of sharp gains, bonds gave back some ground in lacklustre
trad-ing.
In spite of the retrenchment, the underlying tone was positive. Traders were
generally of the opinion that the Federal Reserve would delay its next
credit tightening until November, providing some room to manoeuvre going
into the important economic data due out at the end of the week.
Most economists were expecting the news to be benign. Forecasts centre on a
slight 0.1 per cent gain in September producer prices, and a 0.4 per cent
increase when the volatile energy and food sectors are excluded. Such
readings would present no obstacle for the inflation-sensitive Treasury
market.
News of inflation on the consumer level and crucial data on industrial
production will follow on Friday.
Yesterday, bonds crept a little closer to their starting marks after release
of the Atlanta Federal Reserve's monthly survey. The report was favourable
for fixed-rate securities, showing a general slowdown in manufacturing
activity and an easing of price pressures.
