FT  13 APR 94 / Rwandan cabinet flees rebel push
Rwanda's five-day-old government fled the embattled capital Kigali yesterday
as rebels fought their way into the city in an attempt to seize power.
'We are converging on Kigali from all fronts. Government soldiers are
surrendering, but there is still heavy fighting in the city,' said Ms
Christine Umotoni, one of the leaders of the rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front
(RPF).
Six days of ethnic bloodletting have left an estimated 20,000 people dead.
There were fears that the conflict between Hutus and Tutsis, sparked by the
death of President Juvenal Habyarimana, a Hutu, in an air crash last
Wednesday, would engulf the entire densely-populated country in central
Africa.
Most of the 2,000 foreigners living in Rwanda have been evacuated. The last
French convoy left with about 100 French paratroopers and 80 refugees of
various nationalities, including 20 Rwandan nuns. Belgium and France closed
their embassies in Kigali yesterday.
The RPF said it would assist the evacuation by allowing the transit of road
convoys through rebel-held territory. It ordered a temporary halt to the
fighting along evacuation routes. The rebels, however, have rejected United
Nations attempts to mediate a ceasefire in the capital. Rwanda's entire
19-member cabinet, appointed after Gen Habyarimana's death, were seen
leaving the Hotel des Diplomates in downtown Kigali as the rebels moved into
the capital. The government convoy headed south with a heavy escort of armed
guards.
'It is our duty to stop the butchery in Kigali,' Ms Umotoni said. But she
could not predict how long the battle for the capital would last. 'It
depends on what kind of resistance we meet.' It is the RPF's first attempt
to take Kigali since the war began in 1990. The rebels, who are led by the
minority Tutsis, are trying to broaden their appeal by calling on the Hutu
majority to join them in government.
It is not yet clear whether this appeal will calm the fears of a distrustful
Hutu community. But the rebels point out that the first victims of the
bloodbath that followed President Habyarimana's death were members of his
Hutu government. It is believed that Ms Agathe Uliwingiyimana, the prime
minister who was a Hutu, and many of her cabinet colleagues were murdered by
renegade members of the presidential guard because they backed a peace
agreement with the Tutsi-led RPF.
'The peace accord is dead,' Ms Umotoni said. 'All the key government players
in the peace negotiations have been systematically eliminated by the
presidential guard.'
Anarchy and civil war have filled its place. The 2,500 UN military
observers, sent to Rwanda last October, have not intervened to halt the
killing spree in Kigali. The UN says it does not have the mandate to protect
Rwandan civilians.
