FT  29 JUN 94 / Regulatory grip that has cost Tokyo dear / A look at why
Japan's financial markets have lost out to other world centres
The Japanese government's package includes measures designed to open up
financial markets, which are among the most highly regulated in the world.
In recent months, several big foreign companies have scaled down their Tokyo
operations, blaming the restrictive regulatory environment.
For the first time the government will permit trading in a key form of
derivative instrument. Forward rate agreements and forward exchange
agreements are contracts arranged between two parties, outside the formal
futures exchanges, allowing the contractors to determine their own agreed
rate on interest and currency swaps.
In the past such contracts have been forbidden in Tokyo since the government
maintains they represent a form of gambling. The Ministry of Finance is to
issue guidelines on the use of the instruments. Traders gave a cautious
welcome to the move as a small first step towards liberalisation of the
almost non-existent Japanese derivatives market.
Other measures make it easier for less creditworthy companies to issue
corporate bonds. Previously only companies with a good credit rating and a
large minimum asset base could issue certain types of bonds in the main
markets. In addition, some interest rates are being deregulated.
The government is also considering lifting a ban on the issue of commercial
paper by foreign securities houses operating in Japan with a parent company
guarantee. But the overall impact of the proposals is not likely to lead to
a big opening of Japan's markets.
Earlier this month an influential group echoed a warning that financial
institutions have been uttering for some time. The Committee on Foreign
Exchange, the Ministry of Finance's own advisory body, said that, unless the
bureaucracy eases its grip on financial controls, Tokyo risks losing its
status as a leading financial centre. Most analysts believe the authorities
will need to go much further if Tokyo is to retain that position.
The Japanese capital used to see itself as challenging New York and London
for global financial supremacy, but that battle already appears to have been
lost. Instead Tokyo is now itself under threat as the leading financial
market in Asia. The fast growing Asian economies are developing increasingly
sophisticated capital markets, and in Singapore and Hong Kong, banks and
brokers are finding much lighter regulatory regimes.
In the last year many of the main international investment banks have cut
Tokyo staff numbers. Many more are said to be considering doing the same.
The number of foreign companies listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange is
declining sharply. Three years ago, the total was 127, now it is down to
just over 100 and expected to fall into double figures within the year.
Companies cite exorbitantly high listing costs and a plethora of rules.
Foreign currency trading, once a key financial business in Tokyo, has
declined rapidly in significance. The explosion of derivatives trading in
the rest of the world has passed by almost unnoticed in Tokyo in the last
few years, as rigid rules keep it restricted.
The authorities have been pursuing a gradual policy of deregulation at their
own pace. But it is now clear that that pace is not enough. The process
began more than a decade ago with the liberalisation of interest rates. The
limited nature of the deregulation was masked by the boom years in the late
1980s. Following the markets' collapse, the uncomfortable climate for
trading has inhibited recovery.
Tokyo has been disadvantaged by:
The cost of a listing on the Tokyo Stock Exchange. It currently costs
between Y15m and Y20m (Pounds 96,000 and Pounds 128,000) a year simply to
maintain a listing - three to four times as much as at exchanges outside
Japan.
Rules that inhibit bond issuance and trading. Tough restrictions limit the
number of companies able to issue bonds, and the secondary market is
hampered by an arcane settlements system, described by one senior executive
at a US investment house as 'men on bicycles carrying mountains of paper
securities'.
Tight control of derivatives.
Opaque disclosure standards. Japanese accounting principles are widely
criticised for failing to present a true picture of companies' performance.
Voluminous paperwork. One banker claims he has to file 38 documents a week,
in Japanese and English, to various government ministries.
Japan continues to enjoy one great advantage - its huge savings pool and
current account surplus provide an unrivalled supply of funds for
investment. Proximity to that money is the principal reason for being in
Tokyo. Furthermore the rapid economic development taking place in Asia
provides a ready home for much of that money.
But, as a senior American investment banker put it: 'Very soon, Japan will
have to confront the reality of moving from an industrial to a
post-industrial economy. If it does not create the efficient, competitive
financial sector it needs for that economy, it risks being completely
eclipsed by its Asian neighbours.'
