FT  26 MAY 94 / Compromise brings whale sanctuary nearer
The International Whaling Commission moved closer to agreement on a
comprehensive whale sanctuary for the Antarctic Ocean yesterday, after a
compromise plan backed by a solid majority of member nations had emerged.
'If you take everybody together, we have enough votes,' said a member of the
UK delegation. 'I am optimistic.' The sanctuary, opposed by Japan and
Norway, needs to be supported by three-quarters of the commission's member
nations to take effect.
The optimism was based on a draft amendment that the UK delegation expected
to be formally tabled last night. The proposed sanctuary sought to meet the
objection of Chile and its supporters by excluding the waters of southern
South America.
The UK delegation said last night that the Chileans were ready to back the
compromise sanctuary. Chile had offered a proposal which, unlike the
compromise plan, would not have protected the feeding grounds of sei and fin
whales in the Atlantic and the western Pacific.
The UK delegation said the proposed amendment brought together countries,
such as Ireland, which opposed the Chilean plan, and the backers of Chile,
such as Mexico.
Japan has proposed a sanctuary that would not protect minke whales, the only
whales of commercial interest in the Antarctic. Japan argues that minke are
in abundance and so do not need blanket protection. It describes the
proposal for a comprehensive sanctuary as 'unscientific'.
Whale hunting is prohibited by a moratorium that has been in place for eight
years. However, the International Whaling Commission is slowly moving
towards replacing the moratorium with hunting quotas for whales in plentiful
supply.
Under the proposed quotas, Japan would have been able to hunt about 2,000
minke whales a year in the Antarctic, the main reason it has objected so
strongly to the blanket sanctuary.
Environmentalists are concerned that the information on which quotas are
calculated may be faulty. This year, it was reported that the former Soviet
Union had under-reported the number of whales it used to kill.
Environmentalists reckon that the sanctuary will in effect kill Japanese
interest in whaling, since the Southern Ocean is the only sea where Japan's
fishermen could hunt minke whales on a large scale.
Some Japanese whalers say their government will object to the sanctuary  -
such an objection would enable them to ignore it legally - although in
practice this would be difficult politically.
