FT  11 FEB 94 / Technology: Stomach ulcer upset
How can a bacterium with the decidedly inelegant name of Helicobacter pylori
disrupt the money machine of the stomach ulcer drug business?
By being unmasked as a guilty party in triggering peptic ulcers - as a
bacterium, H pylori can be killed by antibiotics, which are much cheaper
than existing ulcer treatments.
This week, the US National Institutes of Health, a federal body based near
Washington DC, decided the evidence that H pylori at least partly caused
ulcers was so strong that doctors should alter their prescribing habits.
This is a radical change from the traditional view that excess stomach acid,
produced by a variety of disorders including stress and smoking, causes
ulcers. The traditional treatment is a class of drugs called H antagonists
which interfere with the acid-producing mechanisms of the body.
Since about 25m people in the US alone will suffer from ulcers at some time
in their lives, ulcer treatment is a multi-billion dollar industry. Zantac,
made by Glaxo of the UK, has been the world's best-selling drug since the
mid-1980s and now has sales of more than Pounds 2bn a year. Tagamet, from
Anglo-US company SmithKline Beecham, was formerly the world leader but sales
are declining rapidly as its patents run out.
All is far from lost for H antagonist makers in the wake of the NIH
recommendations. H pylori is not present in all ulcer sufferers and is found
in some healthy people. So doctors will test for it only in patients who
already have ulcers and will administer both the traditional treatment (to
cure the ulcer) and an antibiotic (to get rid of the cause).
Once the cause has gone, there is a sharply reduced risk of relapse, and
therein lies the rub for the drug companies: some 25 per cent of Zantac
sales are in 'maintenance therapy' designed to prevent a relapse, according
to analysts at Lehman Brothers.
If the result of the NIH report is that doctors increasingly abandon
maintenance therapy, Glaxo is facing the stressful prospect of losing up to
Pounds 500m a year in sales.
