FT  20 OCT 94 / Modest recovery forecast for house prices
House prices are poised to stage a modest recovery, increasing by 6 per cent
by the end of next year and rising by almost 50 per cent by the end of the
decade, according to a forecast published yesterday by UBS, the broking
group.
It said the increases would still 'represent the weakest housing recovery
since the second world war'.
Even so, UBS expects prices to outpace income growth, forecasting an average
rise of 8 per cent a year in house prices to the end of the decade, when the
average price of a home would be Pounds 92,000.
This would appear to point to a bigger rise in general inflation than that
expected by many building societies and banks. UBS is forecasting relatively
high rates of growth and inflation in the next few years compared with other
financial institutions.
Mr Rob Thomas, who has replaced Mr John Wriglesworth as UBS housing analyst,
said talk of a structural change in the housing market had been exaggerated.
Mr Thomas said: 'Nothing in our recent experience suggests that the
traditional relationship between the economic cycle and the housing market
has fundamentally altered.'
He added that rising incomes and job growth would underpin the price rise,
which would continue until the end of the decade.
UBS said house prices in relation to earnings remained the cheapest they had
been for many years while lenders were likely to ease restrictions on
borrowing as the general economic recovery gathered pace.
Purchasers who had held back from buying during the recession would
eventually be encouraged to buy, with sales in England and Wales likely to
increase to 1.4m next year from an expected 1.2m this year.
Property transactions were forecast to rise 40 per cent in the next three
years, peaking at an annual rate of 1.8m in 1997 and 1998. Negative equity
and the high mortgage in-debtedness of existing borrowings would, however,
continue to act as a drag on the market and prevent a faster rate of
recovery, UBS said.
It said a rise in household formation would be offset by a reduction in the
number of young people in the first time home-buying age group.
Numbers in this age group were expected to decline between now and the end
of the century, due to demographic factors.
Price movements this year have been sluggish with Halifax, Britain's biggest
mortgage lender, reporting a 0.7 per cent fall in average prices in the 12
months to the end of September.
