FT  14 FEB 94 / Business Travel: Oases for athletes - Joggers' Guide / Cairo
It is possible to jog in Cairo - just. But there are healthier and more
pleasant ways of staying fit during a trip to the Egyptian capital than
inhaling the clouds of car fumes and tackling its assault-course pavements.
If you are brave enough to do business in Cairo - several tourists have been
killed by fundamentalist terrorists, who are also threatening to target
foreign investment - then hotel health centres are perhaps the most suitable
places to keep in trim.
Among the best of these is the Nile Hilton, Cairo's oldest five-star hotel,
on the banks of the Nile. It offers a centre with jogging machines, weights,
a steam bath and sauna, all of which can be used by non-residents for
EPounds 31 (roughly Pounds 6) a throw. The Nile Hilton also has a
decent-sized pool, a pair of squash courts and clay tennis courts.
The jogging machines and other fitness equipment in the Marriott Hotel on
Zamalek island in the Nile are also well maintained and open to
non-residents. There is an adjacent pool and its artificial-surface tennis
courts offer about the truest bounce in Cairo.
But if nothing less than a long, outdoor jog will do, there are ways and
means, despite the busy chaos of Cairo's streets and lack of parks. An
extended run south along the banks of the Nile from the main riverside
hotels in central Cairo might offer the fewest hurdles or interruptions, but
the route - as with most runs in town - is alongside a busy main road.
This way you will encounter perhaps the most serious deterrent: pollution in
Cairo's streets is terrible. According to UN figures, Cairo's 1m cars emit
more than 1m tonnes of lead into the streets a year - not surprising given
the poor state of most vehicles. Cars are not required to meet any
officially tested level of main-tenance, and more than 60 per cent are over
10 years old.
The heat and the nature of Cairo's streets mean that the resulting heavy
fumes are seldom cleared away by winds. The truly determined athlete might
consider wearing a mask.
There are a few oases where a more pollution-free run is just about
possible. Probably the best is the Gezeira Club on Zamalek island, opposite
the main strip of five-star hotels in central Cairo. An EPounds 10 entrance
fee wins access to the biggest green space in central Cairo, which has a
battered but serviceable running track and several football fields.
There is even a horse-racing track around the outside, which would offer a
good workout - but be ready for a sprint along its southern fringe, which is
prowled by packs of mangy wild dogs.
Social runners could join up with the Hash House harriers, who meet two
hours before sunset every Friday for runs by the pyramids or in the desert.
You can find out where they are meeting by phoning numbers in the back of
the widely available Egypt Today magazine. After each run, the Cairo Hash
works hard at replacing lost fluids with beer.
