FT  15 NOV 94 / MPs want code to ensure impartial civil service
An influential cross-party committee of MPs is set to call for a statutory
code of conduct to guarantee the political independence of the civil
service.
In a report critical of the stance adopted by Sir Robin Butler, the cabinet
secretary, the committee is expected also to insist that ministers remain
directly responsible to parliament for semi-independent executive agencies.
The report by the Treasury and civil service committee is understood to
reject Sir Robin's view that existing rules and procedures provide
sufficient protection for the impartiality of the civil service.
The report's publication next week will echo disquiet among Sir Robin's
colleagues in Whitehall about his high-profile role in a number of political
controversies. These include his investigation of ministers in the
'cash-for-questions' row and his exoneration of Mr Jonathan Aitken, the
Treasury chief secretary, in the dispute over payment of a bill for a
weekend stay at the Ritz Hotel in Paris.
Some members of the committee, which has been carrying out its investigation
for more than 18 months, have been irritated by Sir Robin's response. He
refused to allow the MPs survey civil service opinion. Subsequently it was
reported to the committee that Sir Robin had remarked casually during a
Whitehall social function that he did not expect it to 'come up with much'.
The committee, which has already questioned Sir Robin, may ask him to appear
again to justify the present arrangement, which combines the job of cabinet
secretary and head of the home civil service.
The report, to be published on November 24, has been drawn up by a
subcommittee chaired by Mr Giles Radice, a Labour MP. But its conclusions
have been endorsed by the full committee, which has a Conservative majority.
The proposal for a code of conduct with statutory backing to replace the
dozen separate sets of rules under which civil servants now operate, falls
short of the more prescriptive Civil Service Act favoured by some MPs.
But the new code would set out in simple terms the obligation of civil
servants to be impartial and objective and would highlight the duty of
ministers to respect their officials' political neutrality.
It would also end the present system in which the cabinet secretary is the
final arbiter in cases where civil servants claim they are being pressured
to act improperly.
They recommend an independent appeals system.
Major attacks MPs, Page 20
