FT  19 SEP 94 / Media Futures: PA invents a freer press
In the last century, Reuters used pigeons to be first with the news. And in
past decades one of the first tasks of a journalist away from the office was
to make sure there was a phone box nearby, so that he or she could file a
story to copytakers. All that changed with the advent of the mobile
telephone. And now the Press Association, the UK domestic news agency, has
taken the process a step further. It has put together the laptop computer
with mobile radio communications to produce Journalist 2000 - a system that
frees journalists from the need for telephone systems of any kind when
filing their stories.
PA news reporters used the system in their coverage of the D-Day
commemorations, filing from the Normandy beaches and on-board ships. Defence
correspondent Charles Miller filed his piece on the ceremony in the Bayeux
cemetery direct from a laptop resting on a gravestone. Brendan Berry was
aboard the Canberra and filed copy from the middle of the English channel.
Journalist 2000 combines a Hewlett Packard Omnibook with a mobile modem,
linking the 2.8lb portable computer to the RAM, mobile data network. Once a
story is tapped into the laptop there is little to do but key in the
password and press the return key. The story is then transmitted in seconds
to the PA database in the news agency's Fleet Street, London headquarters.
Because of the success of the system, PA is now experimenting with
Journalist 2000 operations from other countries in Europe and the US -
particularly for sports coverage. The system - PA believes it is the first
of its kind - also allows two-way communications. Journalists can use it to
go into their own computer data baskets at headquarters. Thus they can pick
up messages, ensure their articles have arrived safely or keep in touch with
breaking stories in the PA news file.
PA has already equipped more than 50 of its journalists with Journalist 2000
and is now trying to market it to other regional and national news
organisations.
The hardware costs around Pounds 3,000, most of which is accounted for by
the powerful notebook. But the subscription charge, for unlimited use of the
network, is Pounds 45 a month.
This almost certainly makes the PA system cheaper to use than the obvious
alternative - a laptop with a modem connected to a cellular telephone.
