FT  26 MAY 94 / Beijing success may impress Chernomyrdin: Tony Walker
previews the Russian prime minister's four-day visit to China
When Mr Victor Chernomyrdin arrives in Beijing today his view of life in the
Chinese capital through the tinted windows of his official limousine may be
of greater interest than the issues to be discussed in four days of talks
with officials.
Russia's prime minister could not help but be struck by evidence that
China's embrace of the market has carried it farther and faster than his
country's fumbling efforts to reform its socialist era economy.
Chinese leaders are known to draw unfavourable comparisons with economic
progress in Russia to urge swifter reform, lest China's ruling Communist
party meets the same fate as its counterpart in the former Soviet Union.
While it is most unlikely that any Chinese official would be so undiplomatic
as to make crude reference to the yawning gap between the performances of
the respective economies - China recorded growth rates in each of the past
two years of about 13 per cent compared with decline in Russia - it would be
hard for Mr Chernomyrdin to ignore China's success.
He might seek to draw lessons from his exposure to China's economic
progress: at the very least he will be trying to engage his country's
economy more closely with that of its booming southern neighbour.
Mr Chernomyrdin's visit will be concerned primarily with trade, including
vexed questions of payment - both counties are seeking a bigger proportion
of payments in cash rather than barter goods. These and other trade-related
issues, such as strengthening management of border trade, are being
discussed in Beijing this week at the second session of the Sino-Russian
Joint Commission on Economic, Trade and Technical Co-operation.
Mr Alexander Shokhin, Russia's deputy prime minister has been in Beijing
since early this week for the joint trade commission. He will also have been
preparing for the Chernomyrdin visit which will encompass a broad range of
topics, including co-operation in aerospace - such as a joint fighter
project - chemicals, pharmaceuticals, and machinery. They are also working
on improving sea, road and rail transport routes.
Two-way trade reached Dollars 7.68bn last year, an increase of 30 per cent
over the year before, making Russia China's seventh-largest trade partner.
Chinese imports reached Dollars 4.99bn and exports Dollars 2.69bn.
In the first three months of this year two-way trade fell sharply, however,
to Dollars 991m. This was largely due to a dramatic slide in border trade
which, according to some estimates, was down by more than 50 per cent to the
end of March compared with the corresponding period last year.
Stricter customs and immigration regulations on the Russian side have
slashed the number of Chinese pedlars crossing the frontier. Payments
problems are also bedevilling cross-border trade.
In Beijing, Mr Geng Xuncai, a senior ministry of trade official, called for
a greater percentage of business to be conducted in cash. This call partly
reflects growing Chinese impatience with the practical difficulties of
barter trade, which accounts for 70 per cent of business, now that the
state-controlled trading system is breaking down.
The Russians are also pressing for cash payments for supplies of military
equipment, according to the representative of a western arms supplier in
Beijing.
China purchased 26 Su27 fighters from Russia in 1992 and is anxious to add
another squadron but payments problems appear to be holding up the deal.
On-going negotiations on military purchases and exchanges in the technical
field are being underpinned by a new military co-operation agreement.
The agreement, signed last November by Mr Pavel Grachev, the Russian defence
minister, provides for an annual review of military co-operation and
includes reference to the possibility of joint training exercises and access
to each other's airfields.
Russian and Chinese officials have been stressing the complementary nature
of the two economies. In Beijing, Mr Igor Rogachev, the Russian ambassador,
described as 'great' the potential for economic co-operation. He proposed
the establishment of more joint ventures to marry Russia's 'natural
resources with China's rich agricultural and labour resources'.
Russia itself is anxious to exploit China's enormous demand for
infrastructure assistance. It has proposed that it become involved in big
capital works projects such as the Dollars 10bn Three Gorges dam on the
Yangtze river.
Among the more delicate issues of Mr Chernomyrdin's visit are those
concerned with foreign relations. Moscow will have viewed with misgivings a
recent 12-day tour of central Asia by China's premier Li Peng which was
aimed at increasing Beijing's influence in those former Soviet republics,
including resource-rich Kazakhstan.
Russia fears a greater Chinese presence in these areas and with it increased
competition for the region's oil and minerals resources. China traditionally
has regarded the countries on its western frontier as part of its sphere of
influence.
Meanwhile Moscow has indicated that it is anxious to calm the tension on the
Korean peninsula and that it would like to work more closely with China on
this. But Russian influence is much diminished in Pyongyang these days.
Beijing may not wish to complicate its dealings with the North Koreans by
involving Moscow too closely in attempts to persuade them to agree to
international demands to open their nuclear sites to inspection.
