FT  12 NOV 94 / Kohl coalition completes talks
Germany's centre-right coalition partners yesterday completed talks on a new
government programme in record time, clearing the way for Chancellor Helmut
Kohl's re-election by parliament on Tuesday.
The parties have agreed on trimming bureaucracy and encouraging
privatisation at state and municipal level, and attempting to cut the tax
burden.
A final sticking point - measures to make it easier for foreigners to obtain
German nationality - has been agreed in outline.
The parties were due to finalise details of the foreigners question over the
weekend before presenting the coalition's programme on Monday.
The issue has pitted the liberal Free Democratic party (FDP) against the
Christian Social Union (CSU), the conservative sister party of Mr Kohl's
Christian Democratic Union (CDU), which had vowed to fight the changes to
the last.
The partners began negotiating the new programme for the next four years
soon after the October 16 general election, in which their majority fell
from 134 seats to 10. The negotiations were completed in just under three
weeks, the fastest set of coalition talks since the second world war.
There were no details yesterday about the composition of the new cabinet.
Given his slim majority, Mr Kohl is eager to avoid upsetting his partners
before Tuesday's vote.
The narrow majority and the strength of the opposition Social Democratic
party (SPD) in the Bundesrat, the upper chamber which must approve
legislation, mean that the coalition parties have been unwilling to pinpoint
detailed policies.
Efforts will be made to cut the tax burden, although the FDP was unable to
insist on a date for the removal of the so-called solidarity surcharge, a
7.5 per cent income tax to fund investments in eastern Germany.
The parties agreed that they would decide whether or not to scrap the tax
after seeing a review of key economic data.
Bringing down unemployment from its present level of 3.5m is another
priority, although the government has not spelt out how it will do this.
Laws to combat crime will be reviewed and further measures undertaken to
improve co-ordination against crime across Europe.
