FT  24 SEP 94 / D-Mark, D-Mark, uber alles?: When Germany was reunified,
Europe trembled. David Marsh investigates whether those fears are being
borne out
Visions of a united and aggressive Germany, economically far stronger than
the Third Reich, have worried many others besides Lady Thatcher, the former
British prime minister.
After the collapse of the Berlin Wall in November 1989, such fears were
voiced throughout Europe. They were a strong motive behind the plan
sponsored by the French government and the European Commission to create a
single European currency under international control, and so limit the new
Germany's economic independence.
But monetary union appears increasingly uncertain, not least because of
doubts in Germany; meanwhile the German economic machine is moving once
again steadily forward. . .
So how long will it take for the eastern and western parts of the nation to
grow together? Will the Germans rediscover a sense of national identity
after 40 years of division? And then, most important, and potentially
alarming: will the Germans again dominate Europe?
Four years after the two Germanys were united, the answers are starting to
crystallise. First, although economic growth has resumed after the early
shock of unification, eastern Germany will not catch up with the west until
2010 at the earliest - far later than the optimists (including Chancellor
Helmut Kohl) forecast in 1990.
Second, national solidarity seems to have diminished rather than
strengthened since 1989. Mass unemployment in the east, and the heavy cost
to west German taxpayers of DM150bn in subsidies paid annually to the east,
have caused resentment on both sides of the Elbe.
A recent opinion poll indicated that only 28 per cent of Germans in the
east, and 47 per cent of those in the west, regarded the German nation as
'one people' - many fewer than four years ago. The poll also showed a strong
consensus that the D-Mark should not be abandoned in favour of a single
Euro-currency.
Third, united Germany is not in a dominant mood - nor does it look likely to
be. Although larger than the old Federal Republic, it is weaker in political
balance, in economic structure, in ability to govern itself, in capacity to
exert patient influence on its neighbours. Indeed, a wish to preserve the
D-Mark seems to symbolise a desire for national continuity rather than the
dominance of others.
Some of the anxieties of Germany's neighbours were allayed by the greater
than expected problems which it faced after unification. The country is
neither flourishing, as Kohl forecast, nor dominant, as Thatcher feared.
This summer, Douglas Hurd, the British foreign secretary told the German
magazine Der Spiegel that his former boss's fears were 'her chief foreign
policy mistake after the fall of the Berlin Wall.'
Indeed, Germany's energies will be largely absorbed by its domestic
challenges at least until the end of the century. During four decades of
division, the Federal Republic, closely integrated with the West, grew
wealthy, comfortable and indecisive. It became a country of efficiency and
self-effacement: its speciality was no longer motorised war but motorised
holidays. As the events of 1989-90 showed, it was not a country that could
carry out the radical reordering of national priorities made necessary by
the huge task of unification.
Although Kohl's stature gained greatly from the triumph of unity, it was
weakened by the difficulties which followed. If the chancellor's position is
further undermined in the October 16 general election opportunities for
vigorous government leadership could diminish further.
Those still anxious about Germany might consider the following statistics:
In 1970, West Germany accounted for 29 per cent of the total income of the
12 countries now in the European Union. In 1993 united Germany's share of
the EU's income was slightly lower at 28 per cent. United Germany's share of
world output last year was about 7.5 per cent compared with 9 per cent in
1970 for West Germany alone. (The US's share last year was 27 per cent,
Japan's 16 per cent)
The takeover of moribund East Germany has made the Federal Republic - for
the time being - a poorer country.
A good place to see how Germany has been transformed is the town of Jena, in
Thuringia, in eastern Germany, the home of Carl Zeiss, the world-famous
optical group. This was one of the successes among the German Democratic
Republic's battered industrial enterprises. Tower cranes soar over
rubble-strewn building sites, while excavators and sparkling new glass
offices glint against the still-drab background of pre-war apartment blocks.
Zeiss has benefited from DM3bn in public sector grants, yet - as the result
of mass layoffs since unification - unemployment in the town has risen to
nearly 30 per cent.
Jena's future is unquestionably brighter than five years ago. But people
shopping in the sunshine last week made no secret of their disillusionment.
A middle-aged dental assistant spoke of the 'misery' of her unemployed
friends, while a young pram-pushing mother said east Germans had been
unprepared for the hardships that followed unification.
Lothar Spath, the chairman of Jenoptik, the company set up by the Thuringian
state government to run part of the old Zeiss activities, admits that the
Bonn government underestimated the size of the task. Three years ago, Spath,
a one-time ally of Helmut Kohl and former premier of the prosperous west
German state of Baden-Wurttemberg, took on the job of trying to attract
hi-tech investment to Thuringia.
In a coolly-furnished office high in Jenoptik's renovated headquarters in
central Jena, Spath says west Germans must accept the need to subsidise the
east for 10 to 15 years, although at a declining rate.
Spath says, with a Swabian chuckle, that west Germans' reluctance to take
decisive action to help overcome east Germany's difficulties may have added
DM100bn to the reunification bill. However, this has brought some
advantages. 'Our neighbours would have been far more nervous if, with
typical German thoroughness, we had all been ready to make big sacrifices. I
am not unhappy that there was no great national enthusiasm. It is good that
we can point out to foreigners that the west Germans are speaking badly
about the east Germans, and vice versa.'
As for the worry that Germany will flex its economic muscles on its
neighbours, Spath says: 'We will be the leading economy in Europe, but we
will not be dominant. The big international corporations are taking ever
less consideration of national boundaries. In future, a lorry driver in
Australia will never know that the axle comes from Brazil, the coachwork
from Indonesia, the motor from Hungary and the know-how, perhaps from
Germany. This globalisation means that we will no longer be able to talk of
countries running dominant economic policies - which will be for the good of
Europe.'
Jochen Bergmann, the head of the Jena Chamber of Industry and Commerce,
takes a similarly internationalist line: 'I don't understand all this talk
of domination. We need a strong Germany, a strong France and a strong
Britain to stand up to the competition from China.'
The German economy now looks a great deal more healthy following the sharp
1992-93 recession in the west and the shattering 40 per cent economic
contraction in east Germany in 1990 and 1991. Germany is now on course for
2.5 per cent expansion this year, while east Germany - where per capita
income is still only 40 per cent of levels in the west  - is growing at an
annual 8 per cent to 10 per cent.
However, earlier reluctance to reduce the high costs of Germany's
manufacturing base has stored up pain for the future, according to Roland
Berger, who heads the Munich-based firm of management consultants bearing
his name.
Berger, whose company is owned by the Deutsche Bank, says high wage rises in
the early period after unification have further reduced Germany's
international competitiveness. He says west Germans need to cut their living
standards further during the next few years. And he forecasts that
manufacturing industry will become relatively less important in the economy,
as employment is switched to low-cost manufacturing sites abroad. Although
Berger forecasts an increase in employment in the under-developed service
sector, he believes that 2m jobs may be lost in the vulnerable sectors
during the next three or four years.
Herbert Henzler, chairman of the German operations of the McKinsey
management consultants, also takes a gloomy view. In spite of this year's
much better than expected German export performance, he says, 'A 30 to 40
per cent gap in production costs (compared with competitors in Asia and the
US) cannot be made up in a few months.'
Germany's economic problems reflect insufficient innovation and dynamism, he
says. 'Not enough is coming out of our research centres. For an average
young German business studies graduate, the idea of rolling up his sleeves,
starting a business with his wife and possibly working himself to death is
much too abstruse even to be considered.'
Ludolf von Wartenberg, general manager of the Federation of German Industry
(BDI), is less pessimistic - but admits that German industry's drive to
become more competitive is taking its toll on employment.
'In two or three years' time, German industry will have recovered
brilliantly. The share of manufacturing will be lower, but we will be fully
competitive. We will preserve the heart of our economic system. But the
concept of 'Made in Germany' will be replaced by 'Designed in Germany'.'
Back in 1990, Europe's leading statesmen were so anxious about renascent
Germany's economic strength that they agreed in Maastricht that European
economic and monetary union should begin as early as 1997 or 1999. As
France's former president, Valery Giscard d'Estaing put it earlier this
year: 'We need an organised Europe to escape German domination.'
In spite of the domestic unpopularity of the plan, Kohl agreed to monetary
union. He wanted to show that united Germany would remain a firm supporter
of western European integration. Now, however, scepticism about a common
currency in the business community and among ordinary Germans, makes that
timetable highly questionble.
Karl Lamers, a Christian Democrat Bundestag deputy and foreign policy
specialist, is one of those who suggested a controversial plan earlier this
month that a common currency should apply at first to a 'core group'
excluding Italy. Even an enthusiast for monetary union like Lamers says that
prospects for a single currency will recede unless Europe's leaders make
progress towards the idea of political union and a 'federal' Europe when
they meet to review the Maastricht treaty in 1996. However, polls show that
a large majority of Germans agree with Euro-sceptics in Britain and
elsewhere that they do not want a 'United States of Europe'.
Holger Schmieding, an economist from Kiel university, now senior strategist
at Merrill Lynch's Frankfurt office, believes the original rationale for
monetary union is now outdated. There is no longer a need, he says to 'bind'
Germany to western Europe to stop it turning eastwards. 'The idea of Europe
being divided into east and west is outdated. Poland and the Czech Republic
will soon become normal countries.'
Germany might, indeed, suggest that monetary union should be postponed to
allow as many countries as possible - including those from central and
eastern Europe - eventually to join a single currency area. Under such an
outcome, in view of Germany's large and growing economic influence over the
former communist countries, the single European currency would become little
more than an enlarged D-Mark.
Would the outcome of 'D-Mark uber alles' confirm the worst nightmares of
Thatcher and Giscard d'Estaing? Or could a strong and stable D-Mark,
extended to other countries under the guiding hand of the German Bundesbank,
prove the most solid basis for expanding Europe's prosperity? German
financial and economic power will unquestionably grow rapidly during the
next two decades. Germany's task, in concert with its neighbours, will be to
ensure that, for the first time in history, the power of united Germany is
deployed benignly rather than for ill - and that the nightmares never
return.
David Marsh's book Germany and Europe: The Crisis of Unity is published by
William Heinemann on September 26. It appears in German as Der zaudernde
Riese: Deutschland in Europa (C. Bertelsmann).
