FT  27 OCT 94 / US groups join cable TV bids
Competition is intensifying in the battle for the UK's largest cable
franchise to be advertised so far - the 530,000 homes of Northern Ireland.
TeleWest, the largest UK cable company, which intends to float on the London
Stock Exchange before Christmas, is already planning a bid for the Northern
Ireland 'local delivery licence', as cable franchises are now called.
A consortium is being put together by TeleWest - a joint venture between TCI
of Denver, the largest cable operator in the US, and US West, the regional
telephone company. It is likely to include both Mr Tony O'Reilly's
Independent Newspapers of Ireland and RTE, the Irish national broadcaster.
The Irish Independent is already involved with a consortium, Princes
Holdings, which operates cable networks in Cork and Limerick and a microwave
broadcast service in the west of Ireland. The other shareholders are TCI and
United International Holdings, a US cable operator. UIH is also likely to be
involved in the Northern Ireland bid.
The TeleWest consortium will be challenged by a consortium that includes
Ulster Television, which is determined to be part of a bid although under
broadcasting legislation it can have no more than 20 per cent.
Ulster TV is believed to be talking to Comcast, the quoted US cable operator
which is the eighth-largest cable group in the UK with wholly owned
franchises in Teesside and Darlington and large stakes in franchises in
London, Birmingham and East Anglia. Comcast and Ulster hope to bring in
another local Northern Ireland investor before bids have to be in on January
23 next year.
Applicants for the licence have to specify which parts of Northern Ireland
they plan to cable and on what timetable.
At least one of the other large cable operators in Britain is understood to
be looking at the Northern Ireland licence.
Normally the licence will go to the the highest bidder.
Although the licence is for the whole of Ulster only cities and larger towns
are likely to be cabled. Rural areas could be serviced by microwave
broadcasting, but little equipment is yet available for the frequencies
specified.
