FT  30 SEP 94 / Survey of World Economy and Finance - Industry (28): A
powerhouse of revenue - Tourism / Developing countries are cottoning on
At a recent tourism conference, held on a Thames river boat in London,
Stephen Dorrell, the UK heritage secretary, told a group of tourism leaders
that Britain needs to regain its declining share of the growing global
tourism market. At that moment, a London red bus, emblazoned with a sign
inviting Londoners to 'Visit Korea in 1994', thundered overhead on Vauxhall
Bridge.
The problem for Britain, and other traditional tourist destinations, is that
the rest of the world has cottoned on to tourism. As the biggest growth
industry, employer and source of revenue around the world, many developing
countries have realised a quicker way to buy into first world affluence is
by boosting their tourism potential rather then by selling tractors, bananas
and rice.
Global tourism, according to the World Travel &amp; Tourism Council, will double
in size between 1990 and 2005. The market has been growing by 5 per cent a
year in real terms since 1970. In 1993, the global tourism industry
generated USDollars 3,400bn in gross output, produced 10.1 per cent of GDP,
and accounted for 10.5 per cent of all jobs.
The Council says governments cannot afford to ignore the industry's role as
an economic powerhouse and should make it a strategic development priority.
The sheer size of the global industry has awakened many multinational
companies to the possibilities of global brands and market dominance. As
airlines form international networks and alliances, so, too, travel agents,
hotel brands and car hire firms are banding together.
Several companies have already made the first moves towards serving the
global tourism marketplace. The US travel agent Carlson, together with its
European counterpart Wagonlit, is now the world's largest travel agent, with
4,000 units. Carlson also wants to be the world's largest hotel brand using
its Radisson name. American Express is about to buy a large chunk of Thomas
Cook's travel agency business in North America, the largest tourism market
The only areas not targeted by the global brands are the Middle East and
Asia, where international arrivals in East Asia and the Pacific grew four
times faster than the world average in 1993, reaching a record of 69m
visitors. While arrivals were up by 12.6 per cent, revenue grew by 15.2 per
cent to USDollars 52.6bn. The World Tourism Organisation forecasts 101m
arrivals in East Asia and the Pacific by 2000, and 190m by 2010.
However, this growth may be constrained by a shortage of human resources,
the health and safety of tourists, environmental concerns, under-developed
infrastructure and local residents' unease over the number of tourists.
But global tourism growth makes it clear why the UK annual tourism revenue
growth of 5.7 per cent has caused a great deal of hand wringing within
certain UK tourism industry circles.
Robert Peel, chairman and chief executive of UK hotel company Mount
Charlotte Investments, says the world tourism market is all about value for
money.
'There is a distinct relationship between prices and volume in world
tourism. To get more tourists to the UK we have to make it worth their while
to come here. The foreign exchange rate is a big factor in the equation. The
UK is now 20 per cent better value for foreign tourists than two years ago.'
But the UK is facing tough competition in the international marketplace. For
example, Mexico, Australia and the Caribbean island of Aruba each spend more
on tourism promotion in the US than the UK does. The biggest expense of any
tourism destination is advertising and promotion. In 1993, national
governments spent USDollars 1.4bn selling themselves to the tourists.
Apart from advertising, other factors such as investment in tourism
infrastructure, new airline routes and political stability influence the
international tourists' holiday decision.
One of the most important issues impacting the MIddle East is the present
peace negotiations between Israel, the PLO, Jordan and Syria. The lack of
peace in the region has been a principal reason for the limited number of
tourist arrivals. As a whole, the Middle East in its best year of 1992
attracted only 2 per cent of the world's tourist arrivals or 9m visitors,
compared to Greece which also attracted 9m.
Israel stands to benefit the most in terms of tourism from the recent peace
process. Tourist arrivals in Israel reached a record level of 1.65m last
year. Lasting peace in the region would create a vast influx of business and
leisure tourists in Israel. Jordan, Lebanon, and Syria could also expect to
see a sizeable increase in tourism.
Vietnam is the latest fashionable destination for tourists. There has been
huge growth in tourism to Vietnam, but the figures are relatively small.
Most visitors are business people as tourist visas are hard to obtain.
Foreign investment in Vietnam in the first quarter of this year jumped by 58
per cent compared to the same period last year. Between 1988 and 1990, most
projects involving foreign money were in the hotel and oil sectors. The
total amount of foreign investment in 1994 is expected to reach USDollars
3.5bn, of which 70 per cent is in joint ventures.
The emergence and acceptability of Vietnam was confirmed recently when
British Airways announced that it is negotiating to operate two flights per
week from London to Ho Chi Minh City.
Robert Burns, chairman of the World Travel &amp; Tourism Council, believes
Shanghai will emerge in 10 years as the most important Asian city. A new
airport, which could handle 150 landings an hour, is being built. Hotels in
Shanghai are operating at near capacity and room rates are rocketing.
As Mr Burns pointed out, Japan now has a policy, the result of a balance of
trade problem, that 20 per cent of its population should travel abroad by
2010. If China ever had just two 2 per cent of its population travelling
overseas, the rest of the world would be inundated with Chinese tourists.
