FT  26 OCT 94 / Survey of Aluminium (1): Prices bounce back after global
deal - Kenneth Gooding describes how the industry took steps to overcome the
problems caused by the huge increase in aluminium exports from Russia
Road signs are disappearing again. Thieves know that the signs are probably
made of aluminium, one of the few widely-used materials worth stealing.
There is hardly a better indicator that aluminium prices are going up and
the industry's state of health is improving than this disreputable practice.
If prices go on rising as they have in the past few months, it won't be long
before the thieves become more daring: in the 1989 price boom one night in
Hull, in the north of England, an entire canal footbridge disappeared.
The rise in aluminium prices - by more than 50 per cent since last November
 -was prompted by production cuts, rising demand and investment fund
interest.
Less than a year ago, prices were at an all-time low in real terms, and the
industry was suffering. Producers worldwide were experiencing heavy
financial losses. More than half the west's aluminium smelters were not even
covering their day-to-day operating costs.
'It seemed that, if the end of the world wasn't going to happen tomorrow, it
would certainly come next week,' said Mr Lloyd O'Carroll, economist at
Reynolds Metals, the world's third largest aluminium group.
The industry's woes were not caused by the global recession. Demand for
aluminium continued to reach record levels, as it has every year since 1983.
In any case, the industry had prepared itself to cope with the inevitable
ups and downs that a cyclical commodity has to expect. What took it - and
everybody else - by surprise was a massive rise in aluminium exports from
Russia, following the collapse of the former Soviet Union in 1991. Russian
aluminium exports to the west tripled in 1991 to 1m tonnes, and rose to an
estimated 2m tonnes in both 1992 and 1993. This was equivalent to about 13
per cent being added to western world supply at incredible speed - usually
the industry gets a three-year warning of new capacity, because it takes
that long for a new smelter to be built and started up.
In January 1989, before the Russian aluminium invasion, stocks in London
Metal Exchange warehouses totalled only 136,000 tonnes, and the LME
aluminium price was Dollars 1 a lb (Dollars 2,204 a tonne). Last November,
as LME stocks climbed towards a record 2.5m tonnes, the price had dropped to
47 cents (Dollars 1,036 a tonne). Yet in recent weeks it has been above 77
cents a lb (Dollars 1,700 a tonne).
The industry itself helped to create this remarkable recovery. Since last
November, it has announced plans to cut 1.25m tonnes of capacity, either
permanently or temporarily - 900,000 tonnes of this in the west.
These cuts were prompted by an unprecedented trade agreement between the
European Union and five of the largest aluminium producing countries -
Australia, Canada, Norway, Russia and the US.
A memorandum of understanding, signed in Brussels in February, identified a
global oversupply of between 1.5m and 2m tonnes a year, and suggested cuts
of that size should be made for between 18 months and two years, to restore
the balance of supply and demand. Russia agreed that if cuts were made in
the west, it would cut output, by 500,000 tonnes a year.
Although Russia and western producers are unlikely to deliver all the cuts
that were hoped for, the deal laid the groundwork for a recovery in the
market.
This attracted help from an unexpected quarter - the investment funds which
were casting round for something new to invest in at a time of falling bond
prices and weak stock markets. They decided to put some of their cash into
base-metals markets.
'The funds' intervention was unprecedented, incredible in its size and
volume. It was beautifully timed and their analysis that the aluminium
market was due for a swift recovery was spot on,' says Mr Roger
Scott-Taggart, director of research at Alcan, the world's second-largest
aluminium group. 'People in the industry, peering over the rim of the
trenches, didn't believe there would be a serious recovery this year. But
the funds created that recovery on the back of a much better fundamental
market balance.'
The market's underlying strength was clear for anyone to see. Annual growth
in demand did not go into reverse, it merely slowed from 3 per cent to 1.5
per cent.
Partly this was because aluminium has a wide variety of uses. Packaging is
one of its best markets - the metal is easy to sterilise for food and
medical applications; it is an excellent barrier against liquids, vapours
and light; it is non-toxic and imparts no taste or odour. There has also
been good growth in the use of aluminium in electrical wiring, construction
and in the transport sector (aeroplanes, trains and automobiles.)
Global growth in demand for aluminium this year has set a cracking pace, led
by the US where shipments of primary metal rose by a remarkable 11 per cent
in the first half. Reynolds' economist, Mr O'Carroll, suggests western world
consumption will probably rise by 7 per cent this year to 16.7m tonnes. He
adds: 'We are probably at the begining of a three- to five-year up-cycle for
aluminium.' He sees global annual demand rising at between 3 and 5 per cent.
This growth will come from beverage cans and cars in particular.
Nearly every beer and fizzy drink can in the US is made from aluminium,
where once they were tin plated-steel, so any growth there will have to come
from winning business away from glass and plastic containers. However, other
parts of the world offer tremendous opportunities for the aluminium can.
Mr Richard Holder, Reynolds Metals' chairman, is predicting that the global
aluminium can market will grow by 65 per cent by the year 2000.
As if that were not enough, aluminium has another 'avalanche' market
developing after many years of careful preparation - the use of more
aluminium in cars. The amount of aluminium in the average car has doubled
from 32kgs (70 lbs) in the late 1970s to 68kgs (150 lbs), and even the most
conservative industry forecasts see it doubling again by 2010.
In the US, this trend is being driven by ever-tightening fuel economy
targets set by the government. Aluminium's light weight enables car makers
to meet these targets without reducing the size of vehicles. Consequently,
the US Aluminium Association is predicting that aluminium in the average
American car will rise from 210 lbs at present to 350 lbs by 2000.
Reynolds' Mr Holder suggests that next year shipments of aluminium in the US
to the transport industry will reach 5.16bn lbs (2.4m tonnes), and for the
first time will top those to the packaging industry - forecast to be 5.04bn
lbs (2.28m tonnes).
Some analysts suggest that there might even be a shortage of primary
smelting capacity in the late 1990s, because nearly every planned smelter
project was shelved during the recession. Mr O'Carroll at Reynolds says it
would not surprise him if there were one or two years of too little
capacity. But aluminium prices would not stay at extraordinarily high levels
for very long. Most commentators say that prices of between 75 and 65 cents
a lb (Dollars 1,653 and Dollars 1,873 a tonne) would be enough to encourage
banks to put up some of the USDollars 1bn a time needed for new aluminium
smelters.
Mr Paul O'Neill, chairman of the Aluminium Company of America (Alcoa),
dismisses the idea that shortages of aluminium and exceptionally high prices
will appear. However, he says that by late in 1995 it will be necessary to
re-start all the smelting capacity recently shut down.
Alcoa drew up forecasts for 13 big aluminium-consuming countries - by no
means a world-embracing list - and this showed potential demand for another
8.9bn lbs (3.8m tonnes) of aluminium by 2004, equivalent to 25 per cent of
last year's primary aluminium. 'And,' insists Mr O'Neill, 'that does not
take into account the potentially large increase of aluminium usage in
automobiles.'
