FT  28 MAY 94 / Motoring: A safe ride in the ultimate boy racer
The sad thing about Ford's Escort RS Cosworth is that most of the young who
lust after it cannot afford to buy one. Even if they could fund its purchase
 -Pounds 25,175, or less than half the price of an equally unattainable
Porsche 911 - it is unlikely they could insure it.
Picture the scene. A 21-year-old, with a couple of expensive accident claims
under his belt, walks into an insurance company.
As soon as he mentions he is seeking cover on a fat-tyred vehicle of 227
horsepower, with a monstrous rear spoiler and a top speed of 140mph
(225kph), what happens? The motor policies manager either gives a hollow
laugh, tries to hide under the desk, or runs screaming from the office.
Thus, very few examples of the Escort RS Cosworth are likely to end up in
the hands of those who would relish most the thought of driving them.
Does this mean, then, that it is an inherently difficult, even dangerous,
car? The answer is: absolutely not. Used responsibly, there can be few safer
for all kinds of journeys on motorways, main and minor roads.
The Escort RS Cosworth is the latest version of a vehicle that was created
to win motor sport honours for Ford. In essence, it consists of the
mechanicals of a Sierra RS Cosworth 4 x 4 tucked away in an Escort body
shell. Like all previous Escorts, it has done well in international
rallying; it won this year's Monte Carlo.
The road-going model I drove in Luxembourg and Germany last week, although
much tamer than the rally car, is a formidable performer. It will catapault
from 0-60mph (96kph) in 5.7 seconds and, more meaningfully, accelerate in
fourth gear from 30-60mph (48-96kph) in 9.4 seconds. In practice, this
spells safe, swift overtaking on wet or dry roads.
It also spells temptation. I really disapprove of people who drive fast and
grippy cars on country roads at speeds more appropriate to a rally special
stage. And what did I do in the almost traffic-free lanes criss-crossing
Luxembourg's woods and fields? You have guessed. I yielded to temptation,
although only where sight lines on bends made it safe to do so.
I discovered that the Escort RS Cosworth 4x4, on its specially developed
Pirelli P Zero Corsa tyres, has extraordinary cornering powers. It is easier
to drive fast on slippery roads than any other car I can think of. And,
however much you exploit its turbo-charged muscle, the sophisticated
transmission defeats wheel spin.
What is it like to drive at more sensible speeds? The ultra-low profile
tyres are less than half as high in cross-section as they are wide.
Inevitably, they tend to 'tram-line' - that is, follow ridges in the road -
and rough surfaces are heard as well as felt.
Both the engine and power-assisted steering respond instantly; the anti-lock
brakes are powerful; and the five-speed transmission smooth without being
exactly silky. Conversation became difficult on the autobahn at close to
maximum speed, but at 80-85 mph (128-137kph) the engine sang sweetly and not
at all noisily.
Changes to the power plant include using a smaller turbo-charger. Peak power
and maximum torque (pulling power at a given speed) are the same as before,
but are developed at lower revolutions. This makes the Escort RS Cosworth as
driveable as a family car in town traffic.
The luxury-trim version I tried sets you back Pounds 24,775. With optional
extra leather seats, air-conditioning and passenger air-bag, it would cost
Pounds 27,005 - still very reasonable. The spoiler might come in useful as a
table for plates of food at race meetings but, otherwise, seems pointless.
It is part of the package, but Ford makes no charge for leaving it off.
