FT  27 SEP 94 / Survey of Business Locations in Europe (13): Compromise is
inevitable - The company's moving. . . Michael Cassell discusses factors
which count
Quality of life may be close to the top of the list of priorities for
employees, when asked to nominate their ideal business location, but it
barely merits a mention when management draws up its own league table of
location requirements.
The corporate decision on where to make an investment, whether in
manufacturing plant, distribution facilities or headquarters operations,
involves a great deal more than a search for fresh air or an active artistic
community.
The primary factors involving location decisions inevitably centre on
hard-nosed business considerations. Research among US companies, which at
times have to appraise locations within their own, vast domestic marketplace
in much the same way they do those overseas, suggests availability of
skilled labour, 'pro-business' government, low corporate taxes and good
communications are among the most critical issues.
After talking to nearly 130 of America's largest companies, with sales of
over Dollars 800bn and 4m employees, the Bureau of Business Research at the
American International College in Springfield, Massachusetts, concluded:
'Rational, rather than emotional factors carry most weight.'
All of which may seem rather obvious. But the commercial facts of life
dictate that, whatever the list of ideals, the 'perfect' commercial location
hardly ever exists; the final decision involves reconciling a long list of
requirements in which compromise plays a big part.
Other issues taken into account by companies of all nationalities include:
proximity to markets and suppliers, efficient infrastructure, personal
income taxes, a flexible regulatory environment and relaxed employment laws.
But with the volume of greenfield development activity declining, given the
finite number of new operations required by international companies, the
plethora of development agencies now spread across the EU is changing
strategy.
Following widespread criticism from companies that they were wined and dined
and then left to their own devices once their investment had been made, more
attention is being paid to after-care help, to help ensure that new
businesses successfully integrate into the community.
The availability of incentives, though rarely among the most important
factors, can still prove decisive if competing locations are, in most other
respects, broadly comparable. But there is some concern that the intense
competition to win investors is pushing EU rules and regulations to the
limits and possibly beyond.
Dr Wilfried Vossen, managing director of Plant Location International, the
Brussels-Based consultancy, alleges that the rules governing the
disbursement of aid designed to encourage new investment are being
increasingly abused. 'The danger is that companies who take advantage of
what should not be on offer could end up having to pay back the very funds
which were decisive in reaching their decision.'
Mr Nick Cowley, of Cowley Research and Publications, harbours doubts about
the use of subsidies to influence location. 'The Commission's strategy of
persuading people with the use of public money to locate to the fringes does
not provide long-term solutions. If you continue to subsidise, you do not
overcome the problems but disguise them and fail to address the real
structural issues.'
However, the majority of companies starting up new operations around Europe
do so without the aid of locally provided incentives. Headquarters location
decisions, while possibly influenced by the availability of generous
personal tax regimes, are based primarily on a logistical assessment of the
subsidiaries to be served and by ease of communications.
Inevitably, many companies reach the same location decisions. The result is
that more than 330 of Europe's 500 largest companies have headquarters in
just 10 cities.
Belgium and Holland continue to attract a significant share of European
headquarters operations, given that both offer special tax deals for
expatriates and a business community well used to conversing in English.
London also remains a preferred location, accounting for 108 of the
headquarters operated by the top 500 European companies. According to
independent research conducted by the Harris Research Centre, the UK capital
is still the most favoured business location of all within Europe; fears
that well-publicised terrorist attacks in the Square Mile might have led to
an evacuation of companies, or at least prevented new ones from arriving,
does not appear to have been borne out by events.
A Harris survey involving more than 500 companies, based in nine EU
countries, put London top in eight out of 11 key categories when measured
against 29 other European cities.
London's attractions include the English language, value for money in office
space, cost and availability of staff and access to markers. The completion
of the Channel tunnel is being seen as another valuable asset which London
can exploit to further advance its claims to good communications.
The UK capital's competitiveness has arguably been further boosted by
provisions in the 1993 Finance Act, which introduced a privileged tax regime
for international headquarters, enabling them to pay dividends on income
received from abroad without liability for advance corporation tax.
The Harris Research survey carried some warnings, however. It suggested
that, while London is expected to retain its position as the most important
financial centre in Europe over the next five years, it is being challenged
more strongly by Frankfurt.
Mr David Rees, head of Ernst &amp; Young's location and advisory service,
believes that Britain's political relationship with its EU partners has not
helped the UK's proven ability to attract headquarters operations:
'There is a perception of the UK which is not always helpful in portraying
it as the most suitable location from which to control European operations.
We sometimes appear too Anglo-Saxon and not European enough.'
In a trend widely expected to accelerate over the medium term, the survey
also identified former eastern European centres such as Prague, Budapest and
Warsaw as centres enjoying increasing levels of inward corporate
representation. It also cited those three cities, together with Moscow and
Berlin, as the centres earmarked for the most vigorous expansion over the
next five years.
According to Mr Rees: 'Some of the former eastern bloc countries still
involve significant risks, but they also offer worthwhile cost advantages
and the opportunity for investment strategically placed in an increasingly
central, rather than peripheral, location.'
