FT  07 FEB 94 / Markets divided on Fed's next move: Why Wall Street
investors' rushed to sell on Friday
The increase in US short-term interest rates on Friday marks the first
change of direction in US monetary policy in five years.
In itself, a quarter point increase in short-term rates, to 3 1/4 per cent,
should have a negligible impact on the economy. It is not enough to restrain
loan demand or to depress investment significantly. Given banks' fat
margins, it does not warrant an increase in prime lending rates, currently 6
per cent. And it is likely to have only a marginal impact on mortgage rates.
But because policy has changed direction, a strong market reaction - Friday
saw the biggest single-day fall in the Dow Jones Industrial Average in more
than two years - was not surprising. The impact was all the greater because
the tightening of policy occurred just after a sharp run-up in share prices,
when many investors were bracing themselves for a correction.
In Washington, Mr Alan Greenspan, Federal Reserve chairman, won plaudits for
personally announcing the change of policy. He was aiming to counter
criticism on Capitol Hill of Fed secrecy and lack of accountability. A Fed
spokesman, however, was at pains to stress that Mr Greenspan's statement was
not a precedent and would not necessarily be repeated.
The Fed normally makes a statement only when it moves the discount rate,
which remains at 3 per cent. Financial markets are usually left to figure
out whether it has altered its target for the federal funds rate - the cost
of overnight money for banks - which rose a quarter point on Friday.
By speaking out, Mr Greenspan got 'more bang for his buck'. He enhanced the
impact of what was a very mild tightening of policy. But the downside of
candour was the stock market's negative reaction.
Since a single tightening move would be highly unusual, investors now have
to decide how rapidly and to what level the Fed will raise rates. Mr
Greenspan has a reputation for 'gradualism'. He believes monetary policy is
best conducted in small, measured steps. Since the risk of inflation surging
this year or next is slight, most economists believe rates will rise slowly
 -at most by about a quarter percentage point every three months.
'There will probably be no further action for several months,' said Mr
Leonard Santow, of the Wall Street firm, Griggs and Santow. He expects
another two tightening moves before the end of the year, taking the fed
funds rate to about 3 3/4 per cent.
But some forecasters fear the economy is gathering momentum so rapidly the
Fed will be forced to act more aggressively. Payroll employment figures
released on Friday were weaker than expected, but this reflected very cold
weather and the Los Angeles earthquake.
Other recent figures point unequivocally to rapid growth, perhaps at an
annual rate of 4 per cent this quarter and next. Buoyant data for factory
orders, for example, indicate further strong advances in business
investment. Residential housing soared in December. And there are early
signs of nascent inflationary pressure: the purchasing managers' price index
shot up last month.
Taking such data into account, Mr John Lipsky, chief economist at Salomon
Brothers, predicts the Fed will push up short-term rates to 4 per cent as
soon as mid-year. 'There will be plenty more moves this year and next:
markets are under-estimating the Fed's willingness to act,' he warns.
Action this aggressive would not please the White House. Ms Laura Tyson, who
chairs the Council of Economic Advisers, has indicated the administration's
budget forecast, due today, will allow for a half-point increase in short
rates this year. Senior administration officials believe anything more would
choke off the recovery.
As short-term rates rise, analysts expect a less-than-proportionate increase
in longer-term rates, resulting in a flattening of the yield curve. This was
already evident last week when bond yields rose, but by less than short
rates. But if the Fed signals further tightening moves in coming months, it
could crush inflation expectations, causing yields on long bonds to decline
slightly.
Since most analysts expect only a modest rise in short rates, the US stock
market should be fairly resilient. Investors will still have a strong
incentive to hold stock and bond mutual funds, or other financial market
instruments, rather than low-yielding bank deposits. But investment is
driven by sentiment and since many analysts believed share prices were
overvalued before the Fed moved, a bigger correction than justified on
fundamentals cannot be ruled out.
The fact that the US has begun to raise rates while most other industrial
countries are still cutting theirs should boost the dollar in coming months.
Mr Lipsky at Salomon Brothers predicts that the dollar will climb nearly to
DM1.90 this year against DM1.76 on Friday. But this is at the top end of
Wall Street projections; many analysts fear the Fed's action will make the
Bundesbank even more reluctant to cut its rates, muting its impact on the
dollar.
Prowse on America, Page 16
Editorial comment, Page 17
Markets, Page 22, 23
