FT  04 JUN 94 / Man in the News: Mythic hero's princely sum - Prince
al-Waleed bin Talal bin Abdulaziz / The Saudi royal who has come to the
rescue of Euro Disney
It takes a prince, of course, to conjure up princely sums. But it takes a
very modern prince to invest them profitably in global banking and leading
US department stores, turn around a debt-laden Saudi Arabian bank and manage
a panoply of contracting, retail and property businesses.
Enter Prince al-Waleed bin Talal bin Abdulaziz, 39-year-old nephew of King
Fahd of Saudi Arabia, grandson both of Saudi Arabia's founding monarch and
Lebanon's first prime minister, billionaire businessman and, this week,
financial saviour of Euro Disney.
Prince al-Waleed announced that he would buy up to 24 per cent of Euro
Disney, owner of the troubled EuroDisneyland outside Paris. He thus became,
to the joy of headline writers, the prince from the mysterious, silent
kingdom of flowing robes and mythical private wealth who swooped to rescue
the failing European outpost of the 20th-century's most potent purveyor of
fairy-tales.
But who is this latest Disney hero? And what is his mission? Prince
al-Waleed will not reveal this before autumn, when Image Sept, his French
public relations company, says it will 'launch' a series of interviews aimed
at presenting him as a businessman to be taken seriously in his own right,
not just for his royal connections. But this has been clear for some time.
It became apparent in 1991, when Prince al-Waleed snapped up Dollars
590m-worth of convertible stock in Citicorp in one of the biggest placements
with a private investor in US banking history. Early last year it emerged
that the prince had also snaffled an 11 per cent stake in Saks Fifth Avenue,
the US department store group. This year he teamed up with Accor, the French
hotel group, in a pending FFr1.6bn bid for Air France's Meridien chain. Then
came Euro Disney.
But his business reputation was established in Saudi Arabia before these
forays into the western business world. By the end of the 1980s Prince
al-Waleed had turned Dollars 15,000 granted in 1980 by his father, Prince
Talal bin Abdulaziz, into a figure he claimed surpassed Dollars 1bn. His
vehicle was Kingdom Establishment, a construction contractor, with which he
cashed in on Saudi Arabia's modernising spree during the early 1980s oil
boom.
Some in the kingdom wonder privately how, even given the dizzy spending of
those years, Prince al-Waleed managed to reap so fabulous a fortune from so
modest a start-up. But none among his friends or colleagues doubts for an
instant Prince al-Waleed's business acumen, or that he is quickly becoming
the consummate product of his generation of young, western-educated Saudis.
He appears as comfortable in a sharp suit and a New York boardroom as in a
white dishdasha robe and the hush of his 130-room Riyadh palace.
Like most Saudis his private life remains just that. He enjoys squash and
reads voraciously. A francophile, he intends to base his European operations
in France, home of his mother and aunt. He summers with his wife and two
children on the Cote d'Azur, where his yacht, Acajou - previous owners Mr
Donald Trump and Mr Adnan Kashoggi - is moored at St Tropez.
But work dominates his life. 'The first three things he will talk about are
business, business and business,' says one friend. And his work ethic is
fabled in Riyadh, where he spends most working days managing United Saudi
Commercial Bank. Although it is one of the kingdom's smallest banks, it is
becoming one of its most profitable under the prince's ownership (earnings
were up 25 per cent in 1993). 'He sets himself a very precise agenda for
each day,' says an associate. 'And you can set your watch by his arrival at
the office.'
His business meetings are notoriously crisp and shorn of customary Saudi
ceremonial: 'No coffee, no tea, no time for chat. Just business, and fast,'
says a colleague. He is notably solicitous to his staff: he reached into his
own pocket for the severance pay of employees he sacked while streamlining
USCB.
And, say colleagues, his business strategies are straightforward. In his
international investments - Citicorp, Saks and now Euro Disney - he looks
for big deals at bargain prices. The Citicorp investment was a 'classic
bottom-fishing expedition', says one banker. 'He took a good look, reckoned
the bank was undervalued, and pounced.' When he cut his stake last year to
9.9 per cent from 14 per cent, he netted Dollars 268m on the shares - two
and a half times what he paid for them.
His associates put the Euro Disney deal in this bracket. But they say the
venture's high profile will also have appealed to the prince. 'He's a
showman,' says a banker involved with the Disney talks. 'Look at the deals
he's done - Saks, Accor and now Disney. This guy likes to be in the
limelight.'
His Saudi concerns also have a simple pattern: he is attracted to
underperforming businesses in growth sectors, where he believes application
of US management principles will produce a turnround. 'He uses his bank,'
says one banker, 'as a sort of super-graduate training ground for these
ideas,' relying on his good name to attract high-calibre managers. Last year
Prince al-Waleed bought a majority share in Panda, an ailing retail chain in
the kingdom, for his next corporate resuscitation attempt.
The prince has made no secret of his ambition to become one of the world's
richest men, and a revered deal-maker. But it is his status within the Saudi
royal circle which, many colleagues suggest, provides a better explanation
of his motives - and also probably of his ability to summon vast amounts of
cash apparently at will.
He has won a considerable reputation within Saudi Arabia, and great
confidence within the royal family. One result of this, say associates, is
that the bottom of Prince al-Waleed's pockets need not prove the limit to
his available resources. Bankers and businessmen in Riyadh say there are
other wealthy royals, shy of publicity, who are happy to back a project with
the prince's name on it. 'There's nothing they like more than backing a
winner,' says one businessman. 'He's therefore got virtually unlimited
access to funds.'
It is this high-profile position as a trusted business figurehead for the
kingdom which the prince relishes above all, for family reasons. His father,
Prince Talal, was one of the heretical 'Free Princes' in the 1960s, who
embraced socialism, criticised the ruling family as undemocratic and called
for a constitutional monarchy. He was, for years, exiled and ostracised.
Prince Talal has since been fully rehabilitated into the al-Saud fold. But
many see the son's ambitions in the light of the father's past, and wonder
whether Prince al-Waleed's greatest desire is to establish his branch of the
family beyond any question at the heart of the kingdom.
'He wants above all,' says a businessman close to him, 'to be a prince
acting as a prince should - he's showing leadership qualities, and
generosity. He's quicker, richer, faster-thinking than others, and he
aspires to grow more.' In short, he aspires to be the quintessential modern
prince. Walt himself would probably have approved.
Additional reporting by Michael Skapinker and Alice Rawsthorn
