FT  09 NOV 94 / Survey of Bolivia (16): Transfer is seen as critical - Ende
electricity company
Electricity company Ende will be be the first of Bolivia's state-owned
assets to undergo the novel capitalisation process. Transfer of 50 per cent
of Ende to a private operator-investor - optimistically scheduled for
February 1995 - is seen as critical for the capitalisation programme.
'Ende has to be a great success,' says Mr Edgar Saravia, capitalisation
secretary. 'It'll be used as a concrete example to convince Bolivians that
capitalisation equals a new society. We're choosing a strategic partner for
the Bolivian people, not just selling a company.'
Schroders, the UK-based merchant bank, has been selected to help identify
the right bridegroom for Ende in what one state official cosily calls this
'electric marriage'. Thirty-one foreign companies, meanwhile, have
pre-qualified to bid, led by cash-rich and expansionist Chilean operators.
Best guesstimates put the bride price at between Dollars 250m and Dollars
300m.
Mr Ramiro Rollano, general manager of ICE, Bolivia's largest construction
company which might hook up with a foreign company to bid, considers Ende
technically well-managed and, with just 500 employees, lean and potentially
profitable. Electricity consumption has been growing steadily at about 6 per
cent a year for several years.
By late October, the energy ministry was into the fifteenth draft of a new
law designed to end the effective duopoly on electric power generation
shared between Ende and Cobee, the La Paz-based private company. Cobee is 70
per cent controlled by the North American holding company Leucadia; small
shareholders have the remainder.
Ende produces half of Bolivia's electricity; Cobee a third. Of the total
750MW, some 300MW is hydroelectrically generated, the rest coming from
largely environmentally-friendly, natural gas-fuelled thermal plants.
Distribution is in the hands of three principal local companies, with Cobee
handling 37 per cent.
Capitalisation is designed to meet classic World Bank privatisation
parameters for creation of competition. Generation, transmission and
distribution will be managed by separate companies.
Initially, the government will retain control over the transmission system
while Ende's generation plants are grouped in three regional packages for
capitalisation.
After some grousing, Cobee is expected to accept the division of its
generation and distribution arms in the pursuit of competition. The three
regional generation companies will have a three-year option on developing
strategic energy export markets.
'Growing electricity demand in the border zones of Brazil, Peru and northern
Chile make that prospect look very attractive,' says Mr Claude Besse, a
former Ende general manager and some-time World Bank consultant.
According to Mr Saravia, changes in the law will ensure that no consumer has
to pay a service connection charge in advance. The Santa Cruz co-operative,
for example, presently charges Dollars 500 to put the first power outlet in
a home.
While this may help overcome regional consumer resistance to the central
government's radical capitalisation plans, the co-operatives themselves may
not be so enthusiastic. Some, such as that of Santa Cruz, have ambitions to
expand into generation - prohibited under the new law.
Other criticisms concern the World Bank-designed plan to dismember an
already tiny generation system into three. 'The boys from Washington are
applying the Argentinian model but forgetting that Bolivia's entire system
generates 750MW against Argentina's 18,000MW,' says Mr Julio Leon Prado of
ICE, the company that built most of the Bolivian transmission and
distribution grid. 'The packages are too small for a foreign investor.'
At 320kWh a year, Bolivia's per capita energy consumption is one of the
lowest in the continent: 44 per cent of Bolivians, mainly in rural areas,
have no access to electricity. Government and World Bank advisers believe
capitalisation is the surest way to improve those statistics.
