FT  18 JUL 94 / Letters to the Editor: Criticisms ignore key elements of US
growth and trading pattern
Sir, Robert Solomon (Letters, July 9) asserts that the improvement in the US
balance of payments between 1986 and 1992 disproves our statement (Personal
View, July 6) that the 'underlying' US trade deficit has been deteriorating,
claiming that we ignore the effect of relative growth rates. But Mr Solomon
is himself ignoring the fact that, between 1986 and 1992, the balance was
improved because US growth was exceptionally slow relative to that in the
rest of the world and because the trade-weighted dollar fell by 37 per cent
between 1985 and 1991. Mr Solomon is thus guilty of the error he attributes
to us.
Our article was based on an analysis of the US balance which treated oil,
agriculture, transfers and property income separately, and adjusted
everything else for relative growth rates and the large fluctuations in the
dollar which occurred in the 1980s. Our conclusions are thus grounded in a
'structural' analysis of just the kind Mr Solomon aspires to.
Mr Avinash Persaud (Letters, July 12) suggests that recent increases in US
exports, particularly to South America and Asia, call our disquieting
conclusions into question. Mr Persaud only concerns himself with exports,
ignoring imports, for which the US has a mighty dynamic potential; total US
imports of goods and services have risen in volume by 30 per cent in the
last three years.
He should be worried (for instance) by the fact that US imports from China
doubled between 1990 and 1993, rising by Dollars 16bn, while exports to
China only rose Dollars 4bn. And imports from Japan are still looking
dynamic, causing an Dollars 18bn deterioration in the (bilateral) trade
balance. Even US success in exporting to Asia as a whole, to which Mr
Persaud attaches such importance, has not been enough to prevent the trade
balance (with Asia) from deteriorating.
Dollar weakness may indeed threaten the 'fragile economic recoveries in
Europe and Japan'. But the conclusion we draw is that, if Europe and Japan
really want sustained recovery, they should do something about it for
themselves, by adopting more expansionary policies. Why should the US
continue to act as an engine for export-led growth in the rest of the world,
at the cost of building up foreign indebtedness on a scale which, if
unchecked, will have extremely damaging consequences, not just for the US
but indirectly for the rest of the world as well?
Wynne Godley,
William Milberg,
The Jerome Levy Institute,
New York, NY 12504, US
