FT  17 AUG 94 / Management: The price police - The sleuthing skills of the
EC's competition division
It was more than 200 years ago that Adam Smith, the classical economist,
penned his famous dictum that 'people of the same trade seldom meet
together, even for merriment and diversion, but the conversation ends in a
conspiracy against the public, or in some contrivance to raise prices'.
Several examples during the past decade suggest that his comment is as valid
now as then. Last month a group of carton-board producers were fined record
sums after forming what the EC described as Europe's 'most pernicious'
price-fixing cartel.
The meetings of the 'massive' 19-strong cartel were disguised as social
events of an ostensibly legitimate association known as the Product Group
Paperboard. These meetings usually took place in Swiss hotels, and
occasionally in Nice or Barcelona, to lend credence to the idea of a social
gathering.
In 1987 a group of North Sea supply boat operators were accused of running a
price-fixing cartel, known as the Coffee Club because its alleged meetings
took place in the guise of coffee mornings.
At about the same time, a group of Manchester glass merchants were meeting
in private rooms in airport hotels to agree prices. A few years earlier a
pub in Newbury, Berkshire was the meeting point for managers employed by
some of Britain's biggest concrete companies who used to discuss how to
carve up markets in neighbouring Oxfordshire.
As well as proving Smith's point, these cases illustrate a central problem
facing the competition authorities. Although there may be ample grounds for
suspicion, how can they prove that companies have agreed to rig the market?
If people from the same industry discuss illicit agreements at, say, a trade
association meeting or an industry conference, what proof is there that the
law has been infringed?
Interviewing staff or examining documents seized after unannounced
inspections of companies may yield incriminating evidence. In some
instances, carelessness may play into the officials' hands - for example,
documents about a PVC cartel were left on an office window sill by an
employee of ICI, the UK chemicals group.
Frequently, however, it requires the skills of a sleuth to prove that
illegal price-fixing has actually taken place. Many cartels cover their
tracks effectively. The carton-board producers, for example, concealed their
activities by drawing up bogus minutes of meetings.
'It is extremely difficult to get evidence of any collusion,' says one
observer. He likens the problems faced by the European Commission's
competition division to those of the US agents who managed to bring down Al
Capone, the Chicago gangster, on tax evasion.
Not surprisingly, trade associations can be a focus of suspicion for
competition authorities. In many cases the origins of trade associations lie
in the enforcement of price-setting agreements, in the years when they were
legal. To a suspicious eye, the associations still provide a convenient
cover to discuss pricing.
'It is clear that the Commission has a jaundiced view of trade
associations,' says one association official. 'They believe that an
organisation which exists to promote that industry has the capacity to
orchestrate the things that go on.'
He adds, however, that in many ways trade associations are unlikely media
for cartels. 'The last thing that companies want is a trade association
official being there. If they were going to do anything they would do it on
the telephone.'
The subject of pricing is particularly likely to crop up in commodity-type
industries. Ian Blakey of the British Iron &amp; Steel Producers Association
says it is sometimes necessary to stop conversation drifting towards the
subject of price. 'You have to be strict with the members. You can talk
about market conditions but discussion of prices is not on. People know the
rules.'
Frequently, however, it is not flagrant discussion of prices that causes the
problems. Trade associations can run into difficulties by exchanging
statistics, selling products overseas collectively and establishing industry
standards.
The exchange of statistics has proved a thorny issue for the Agricultural
Engineers Association. In 1989 the European Commission took exception to its
system of collating and supplying information on UK tractor registrations.
An appeal concerning the Commission's decision is due to be concluded next
month.
The Commission said that the system revealed too much detailed competitive
information. However, some tractor makers believe that the Commission's real
concern about associations' statistical systems is that they are a way for
an industry to police the workings of a cartel. If the Commission wins the
appeal case, it is thought possible that it will take action against the
statistical systems run by some 22 other trade associations.
The wide scope of the competition authorities' interests demonstrated by
this example shows that it may be possible to get unwittingly into
difficulties. That raises problems for associations and companies alike.
There are pitfalls for the unwary. Senior executives may be unaware of what
their subordinates are doing. 'It can be middle management who unbeknownst
to the board get the firm into difficulty,' says Sue Hankey of lawyers
Cameron Markby &amp; Hewitt.
The excuse is sometimes ignorance. Not everyone realises, for example, that
the exchange of information between competitors is illegal. 'A problem with
sales people is they don't always realise they are infringing any
legislation,' says Richard Spiller of lawyers D. J. Freeman.
But the competition authorities are not impressed by pleadings of innocence.
Companies need to show they have done everything possible to comply with
competition law. Smiths Concrete, accused of taking part in a concrete
cartel, appealed successfully against a fine on the grounds that it had
taken all reasonable steps to prevent staff from taking part in unlawful
agreements.
The heavy fines imposed by the Commission, which has the power to fine
offenders up to 10 per cent of their worldwide annual turnover, has
concentrated the minds of senior management on these issues. Organisations
increasingly feel the need to be seen to comply with both the letter and the
spirit of competition law.
