FT  16 SEP 94 / Arts: Insurrection at the Bolshoi - The world's greatest
ballet company is in crisis
The news from the Bolshoi Ballet in Moscow has an oddly second-hand air, as
confrontation and argument wing round the handsome head of Yury Grigorovich,
director of the Ballet. Allegations and counter-allegations have been
exchanged during the summer between Grigorovich and the theatre's general
director, Vladimir Kokonin, with dancers adding their two-kopek's worth.
These are the high-lights of a very real crisis, the worst for many years in
the Moscow ballet's history.
They are, though, par for the course when considering Grigorovich's 30 year
tenure as absolute master of the ballet-troupe. There have been in the past
equally tense confrontations, equally vehement allegations of autocracy,
favouritism, and almost any other artistic crime that came conveniently to
hand. Maya Plisetskaya, for decades the troupe's most illustrious ballerina,
has long inveighed against Grigorovich, as has Vladimir Vasiliev, one of the
greatest of Bolshoi stars. Seven years ago, an insurrection was started by
Bolshoi dancers dissatisfied with Grigorovich's policies and the dominance
of his ballets in the repertory, with much coverage of the struggle in the
newspapers. I was in Moscow at the time, and one of the ballerinas told me
of the alignments of forces, pro and anti, adding 'I am one of Yury
Grigorovich's soldiers'. Her career depended on this fact.
Yury Grigorovich has been autocratic in his direction of the company. He
said to me once: 'I have 250 dancers, and that is 250 temperaments]' His
view, and in the context of the Soviet society in which he worked it is
wholly understandable, was that his decisions must be firm and unchallenged.
The pre-Grigorovich Bolshoi, which we saw on its first London visit in 1956,
was a marvel, brimming with great dancers, but it was stylistically dated
and looked ponderous. Grigorovich, who took command in 1964 at the age of
37, had already produced a series of successful ballets in his native
Leningrad. (The first Kirov Ballet season in London in 1961 had shown his
stripped-down, innovative Stone Flower). As director and chief choreographer
at the Bolshoi, such ballets as Spartacus, Ivan the Terrible, The Golden Age
and his re-stagings of the 19th century classics, gave the company a leaner,
more modern look.
For three decades Grigorovich's Bolshoi triumphed wherever it played, the
flag-ship of Soviet culture. And through the Brezhnev years of 'stagnation'
and artistic inertia, Grigorovich kept the blood pulsing through the veins
of this monolithic organisation. His services to the company, his
achievements in the context of Soviet policies towards the arts, cannot be
denied - though his detractors (in the West as well as in Russia) have had a
merry and mindless time trying to do so.
But with the crumbling of the old order, with the arrival of market forces
and the intoxications of free speech and free travel, Grigorovich's
absolutism has seemed more like a relic of bad old days. His company
haemorrhaged stars: such wonderful artists as Maximova and Vasiliev,
Semenyaka and Mukhamedov, Ananiashvili, Posokhov, Fedotov, Liepa, have left,
and return to their mother stage rarely if at all.
The desperate need to earn foreign currency has sent the troupe on more and
more tours, expensive to undertake and prohibitive to watch - and brought
the alarming failure of a proposed British visit this summer.
The Bolshoi Ballet, which has just gone into rehearsal for the new season in
Moscow, is still Russia's pride, and an example of the highest aspirations
of classic dancing, but it is undeniably shaken by events that it seems
barely able to comprehend let alone master.
In an intriguing parallel with the dramas now playing at the Opera Bastille
in Paris, Vladimir Kokonin, the Bolshoi's general director, is seeking to
establish control of the theatre's activities through a contractual system
which will engage both administrative and performing personnel on a yearly
basis. And so serious and urgent is the situation that President Yeltsin is
issuing decrees concerning the future running of the theatre, its opera and
ballet troupes. The old autocracy is under threat, and with it Grigorovich's
power.
What has not gone, and it forms a tragic parallel with so much else in the
new Russia, is the other huge problem for the Bolshoi: the lamentable state
of the theatre's fabric.
Reports have spoken for years of the subsidence of the building. (There was
talk in the mid-80s that the theatre was to be closed for a long period of
reconstruction.) The electric wiring is known to be antique and fallible. A
Moscow friend tells me that it is now thought unwise to go under the stage.
Last summer Yevgeny Rodionov, Russian vice-minister for culture, and
Vladimir Kokonin went to Paris to discuss with Unesco the best means of
saving the theatre. Thus far we have heard of no immediate remedies for the
situation.
The picture for those who love the Bolshoi Theatre and everything it means
in ballet and opera, and in Russia's artistic life, is distressing. It seems
symbolic of the state of Russia as it sets about rebuilding itself. And,
ironically, what the ballet company needs now is the Grigorovich of 1964:
gifted, passionately committed to his art, and able to shape the company for
the future.
