FT  22 NOV 94 / Schools' League Tables: Town with a remarkable double - A
look at two of Chelmsford's high achievers
Mr Anthony Tuckwell, headmaster of King Edward VI grammar school in
Chelmsford, Essex, 'honestly can't remember' where his school was placed
last year in the government's school league table.
He sets little store by KEGS' ranking - seventh among all secondary schools
in England at A-level in the tables published today. 'By and large the
league tables tell you mostly what you know already,' he said.
KEGS was part of a remarkable double - 400 yards down the road the
Chelmsford County High School for Girls was placed 10th, giving the small
Essex town two of the top 10 places, and the only two taken by state
schools.
Both are highly selective, grant-maintained schools in a Conservative
heartland. Chelmsford, 35 minutes from London by train, is solidly
middle-class with one of the highest commuter populations in the county.
KEGS, a school mainly for boys which admits girls in the sixth form, draws
45 per cent of its 710 pupils from the Chelmsford district, with others from
nearby Billericay and Brentwood.
Mrs Jean Patterson said the school's selectivity and staff, rather than its
ranking in the league tables, persuaded her to enrol her two sons at the
school. 'I am very sceptical about this type of ranking. The data is so
raw.'
Mr Tuckwell said most pupils come from families with professional or
managerial backgrounds.
He said: 'We have a very able intake, so one would expect to be well placed
whatever we did. All the things the school provides have nothing to do with
league tables.
'Things like music, drama and sport are not reflected in the exam results.
Neither are the relationships between the staff and the pupils.
'Exam results are a one dimensional picture, whereas the schools are three
dimensional institutions.'
Mrs Bernice McCabe, his counterpart at the Chelmsford County High School for
Girls, is more sympathetic to the tables. She said: 'They have opened up the
whole debate about standards in education. They make us feel more
accountable. Parents have the right to know how schools are doing compared
with each other.'
But both Mrs McCabe and Mr Tuckwell see the present form of the tables as
flawed. She said: 'In their current format they do not tell us much.'.
Chelmsford County High School is already implementing a mechanism to measure
the value the school adds.
Mr Tuckwell believes tables which reflect added value are essential, but is
uncertain how well such things can be measured. 'The crucial point is how we
managed to add value to our children's education. With very able children,
many of whom might get grade A anyway, what value we add cannot necessarily
be measured merely through exam results,' he said.
Mrs Sandra Edgar, head of science at CCHS and director of the value-added
project, said the school was trying to introduce value added measurements at
earlier stages.
Maya Currell, a 13-year-old second year pupil at CCHS, said the league
tables could give outsiders the impression that 'all we do is work'. But the
school offered many activities such as sports, music, drama, dance and
photo-graphy.
Nicola Irvine, another CCHS pupil, said: 'Some people outside the school,
who do not have much to do with it other than the fact that they live here,
say the school is an exam factory, but that is not true.'
