FT  30 MAY 94 / Arts: Peace and percentages - Rival bids to hold 25th
anniversary celebrations of the Woodstock Aquarian Exposition
It was an event which defined an entire generation. For three days in New
York State, half a million students, anti-war protesters and all-purpose
hippies congregated in a field for three days of music, mind-altering
substances and muddy mayhem.
The 1969 Woodstock Aquarian Exposition, born of the chaotic, shoe-string
idealism of a small group of friends, became synonymous with the slogan of
late 1960s libertarianism: peace and love. But today, as two rival companies
vie to stage the definitive 25th anniversary celebration of the Woodstock
festival, these two qualities are little in evidence.
Where there was once just a group of friends behind the festival, there are
now corporate backers and slick professional promoters. Where there was a
Dollars 500,000 budget and an entry charge of Dollars 18 (that hardly anyone
paid), there is now a joint budget of Dollars 26.5m and a likely entrance
charge of Dollars 120.
Where there was a modest record and film contract, there are now substantial
record, film, television, and merchandising contracts. Instead of a few
patrolling Hell's Angels, the occasional food vendor and endless traffic
jams, there will be an eight-foot high fence and an army of security guards,
concessions stands, cash machines, portaloos and park-and-ride.
In one camp, Woodstock '94 is being put together by the three men who
organised the original event, Michael Lang, John Roberts and Joel Rosenman.
Although the trio went their different ways after 1969, Lang remained in the
music business, promoting acts like Joe Cocker and Rickie Lee Jones, while
Roberts and Rosenman evolved, like numerous former hippies, into Wall Street
investment bankers.
Through their Woodstock Ventures partnership, the trio are organising a
two-day rock festival on August 13 and 14 in Saugerties, about seven miles
from Woodstock town, and expecting an audience of 250,000. The partnership
is backed by the financial muscle of PolyGram Records (which is supplying
the Dollars 19.5m budget), top rock promoter John Scher, concert promotion
firm Metropolitan Entertainment, and a slick public relations campaign.
The suggested line up of musicians - Aerosmith, Metallica, Soundgarden and
Guns N' Roses - reflected a festival appealing not to the 40-plus
participants at the original Woodstock festival but to the current 17-25
year old generation of pop music fans. While John Scher says the choice of
bands is timely, 'because today's music and culture, energy and excitement
recall the mood of 1969', some veterans of the first Woodstock are not
entirely convinced that inviting the nihilistic - and sometimes downright
nasty - bands of the Nineties to a rock festival is the best way to
celebrate the spirit of the Sixties.
Sid Bernstein's anniversary celebration, however, is an unashamedly
nostalgic attempt to recreate the mood of the first Woodstock for an older,
more affluent generation. His event will occupy the original site of the
festival, Max Yasgur's farm in Bethel (actually 50 miles from Woodstock town
proper). The veteran US music promoter who brought the Beatles to America,
Bernstein ironically has no connection with the Woodstock of 1969.
Although he was in the music business at the time, he was some way removed
from the hippie culture, booking acts like Tony Bennett and Sarah Vaughan at
Carnegie Hall. A likeable, avuncular figure who schmoozes like a Broadway
talent agent in a Woody Allen movie, Bernstein runs the Bethel '94
organisation from his Upper East Side apartment. Eight years ago he had a
Damascene conversion when, as he tells it, he visited the site with his
family and was so moved by the powerful memories of Woodstock shadowing Max
Yasgur's farm that he became determined to put together a show to mark the
event's quarter century anniversary. He describes it as a 'mystical, magical
place - almost like the Holy Grail'.
Bernstein's plan for Bethel '94 (the Woodstock name is owned by the Lang
triumvirate) is to present many of the acts who performed at Woodstock. He
has already booked several surviving Woodstock artists including Richie
Havens, John Sebastian and Melanie (other key players like Jimi Hendrix,
Janis Joplin and Keith Moon subsequently died of drug overdoses). Bernstein
also plans to book non-Woodstock acts like Fleetwood Mac, James Brown and
Ray Charles: all reflecting Sixties nostalgia and appealing to the older
generation of the CD buying public.
Bernstein has yet to receive final permission from the town of Bethel to
hold his concert, and there is some doubt as to whether he has the money to
stage a festival for 80,000 people. The Dollars 7m budget, he says, is being
provided by a 'group of doctors and professional men in the Philadelphia
area' and an anonymous group of Wall Street investors.
Bernstein hopes those attending his event will bring clothes and
non-perishable foods that will be given away to charity. When the concert
ends, he plans to give everyone a seed to plant in their gardens or
neighbourhoods as a symbol of hope and new life. 'This is the tone we're
setting for our concert. The Woodstock generation was about peace and love,
but we haven't had much peace and love in this last generation.'
So far, the sympathies of Woodstock veterans seem, if anything, to be with
Bernstein's less ambitious Bethel '94. 'For people who were at Woodstock,
part of the charm of going again is to see how a lot of the old bands have
fared,' says Mark Newman, a musician with the New York rock band Tao Jones,
who has fond memories of losing all his clothes at the first Woodstock. 'If
they're going to have a lot of new bands and cater to a new audience, it's
not really a 25th anniversary.'
Scott Wein, a hippy-turned-mortgage broker who attended the original
festival, has similar doubts. 'I think if they're going to do it, and call
it Woodstock, I would have liked to have seen more of an attempt at a
recreation of Woodstock. How can you call it Woodstock and have Guns N'
Roses?'
The organisers of Woodstock '94 appear sensitive to these criticisms. Having
originally said that the festival would feature Guns N' Roses - a heavy rock
band whose ethos is about as far removed from 'peace and love' of the
Sixties as is possible - it now seems unlikely that the band will appear.
Perhaps Scott Wein best sums up the frustrations many Woodstock veterans
feel about this summer's celebrations. 'I don't resent people trying to make
money - this is America. But if you're going to exploit Woodstock, I feel it
will only be fair if you try to remember Woodstock for what it was. I don't
want my kid going, then coming back and saying: 'Shit, that was Woodstock?
What was the big deal?''
