FT  09 AUG 94 / Minefield offers route to Jordan
Israel and Jordan changed the road map of the Middle East yesterday, opening
a border crossing on a former minefield and inaugurating what Jordan's Crown
Prince Hassan described as 'a commonwealth of shared human interests' that
would do away with regional poverty and injustice, Julian Ozanne reports
from the Israel-Jordan border.
The crown prince, with Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israeli prime minister, and US
secretary of state Warren Christopher all emphasised the border opening
would pave the way to a tourism boom, business and commercial contacts and
economic co-operation and development. Mr Rabin later crossed into Jordan
for an unprecedented summit with King Hussein at his winter palace in Aqaba,
the first time an Israeli prime minister has publicly set foot on Jordanian
soil since the creation of the Jewish state in 1948.
The king then took Mr Rabin for an afternoon cruise on the royal yacht
across the Red Sea dividing their countries.
'Three weeks ago the dream of peace was far away,' Mr Rabin said shortly
before he and Prince Hassan cut the white ribbon opening the new border 3km
north of the Red Sea ports of Aqaba in Jordan and Eilat in Israel. 'Today it
is materialising: telephone lines, tourism. Soon it will seem as though this
is the way it has always been.' The prince said the border was the beginning
of regional transport networks and a token of Israel's and Jordan's desire
for material economic links. 'Let the opening of this border gate in this
particular location mark the foundation stone on which we intend to build
our common future,' he said. Mr Christopher said the two nations were
'weaving together the fabric of human contact and mutual interest that are
the foundations of genuine peace.'
'Through open borders and open phones, road links and air links, economic
co-operation and security co-ordination Jordan and Israel will, step by
step, transform their relations as well as their region.' Mr Christopher
said later the Rabin-Hussein summit had discussed trilateral
Israel-Jordan-US plans for regional development and October's Middle East
economic conference in Casablanca, sponsored by King Hassan of Morocco, US
president Bill Clinton and Russian president Boris Yeltsin.
Mr Christopher said the conference, expected to bring together more than
1,000 companies with governments to finance Middle East development, would
be 'a great opportunity to unlock resources' for the regional projects.
Mr Christopher also promised continued US political and economic support to
both Israel and Jordan and said the US had written to the Paris Club of
creditors to seek debt relief for Jordan and was speeding through Congress
legislation to write off US loans to Jordan, worth about Dollars 1bn.
Israel and Jordan have drawn up a far-reaching joint economic agenda but
only a few of these plans can be implemented until a formal peace treaty is
signed. Israeli and Jordanian negotiators resume bilateral talks today on
the Israeli side of the Dead Sea to resolve border demarcation and water
disputes - the obstacles that stand in the way of a peace treaty.
The new border, on a minefield Mr Rabin said had formerly sown 'death and
destruction', comes only two weeks after Israel and Jordan signed an interim
peace accord in Washington.
Construction workers from both Israel and Jordan yesterday were still
putting the finishing touches to the roads, signposts, border terminals and
barriers minutes before the ceremony began.
Although only foreign nationals will be able to cross initially, the border
opening is a psychological breakthrough for Israelis who have felt isolated
and surrounded by hostile Arab neighbours for decades.
