FT  06 MAY 94 / Survey of The Channel Tunnel (22): For now, a bridge too far
 -UK regions / Wales and the west
Travellers emerging in England from the Channel tunnel will be greeted by a
billboard extolling, in three languages, the virtues of holidays in Wales.
'We are seeing the tunnel as an opportunity,' says Wales Tourist Board,
which has booked the billboard for three years.
The board's direct response to the tunnel's opening is unusual in Wales and
south-west England, where in general there is a 'wait and see' attitude. As
with tourism, it is hard to quantify in advance whether business will gain
from the tunnel or lose because other regions have better links.
For its part, West Country Tourist Board believes its greatest risk is the
potential loss of short-break holidays by people in south-east England for
whom the tunnel will have novelty value.
'We hope they realise that they will arrive in a particularly unattractive
part of northern France,' says the board, optimistically. It has stepped up
its own promotion in northern European markets.
Despite concern that inadequacies in the transport infrastructure could put
the regions at a disadvantage, the tunnel is expected to have little
immediate impact on commercial activity. Mr Pat Lee, vice-chairman of the
south-west Confederation of British Industry and a director of Wincanton
Distribution Services in Wiltshire, says: 'I believe most truck companies
here will continue to use the ferries, although it could be attractive to
time-critical freight such as food.'
Mr John Savage, chief executive of Bristol Chamber of Commerce and
Initiative, says: 'I believe the potential for the tunnel to greatly affect
local business is very limited.' And Mr Graham Hall, director of Wales
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, comments: 'We're waiting and watching - no
one is intending to leap into contractual arrangements simply because the
tunnel is open. If and when there are straight through rail services, it may
make a difference.'
British Rail's only European intermodal terminal in the two regions will be
at Cardiff, one of nine in the UK which will be able to transfer containers
and swap bodies between road and rail. But freight services will be demand
driven.
The south-west believes the lack of its own freight terminal places it at a
disadvantage, although rail only accounts for 3 per cent of freight
movements in the region. There is little incentive to use the Cardiff
terminal: apart from the long distances to it from much of the south-west,
hauliers face high bridge tolls to cross the Severn.
For these hauliers, a better location would be Avonmouth near Bristol, next
to a thriving port, the M4 and M5 motorways and the new Severn crossing
under construction. RTZ, the mining group, has made a planning application
for a private intermodal rail terminal on its land there and is forming a
consortium with potential users. For passenger rail services, Cardiff will
be linked from October via Bristol Parkway to London's Waterloo station to
connect with the tunnel. A new regional service will run from Carmarthen in
west Wales via Bristol Temple Meads and Bath to Waterloo.
The tunnel has increased the pressure for the main lines to south Wales and
the south-west to be electrified, although there is little prospect of this
for many years. 'Business believes the electrification of at least one route
to the far south-west must be a priority, if full value is to be obtained
from the Channel tunnel and in particular if the region is to attract inward
investment,' the south-west CBI said in response to the Department of the
Environment's draft planning guidance for the region.
The South West Regional Planning Conference is also pressing for the
electrification of the main routes, and for investment in the road network.
Like the CBI, it wants an upgraded south coast road to provide a choice of
routes for the south-west. The CBI consider this 'essential' to west country
business in view of the likely additional traffic generated by the tunnel on
the M4 and M5.
The Road Haulage Association in Bristol agrees on the need to upgrade roads
 -'our problems are getting out of the district, rather than to the Channel
tunnel.' In particular, better north-south roads are wanted to the expanding
port of Poole in Dorset, although plans are meeting environmental
objections.
From Poole, Brittany Ferries starts a new service to St Malo on May 13 - 'we
think our west channel routes offer the only real alternative to the
tunnel,' says the company, which is carrying annually 2.8m passengers,
746,000 cars and 177,000 trucks on its routes from Poole, Portsmouth and
Plymouth.
