FT  22 SEP 94 / World Trade News: Mexican investors to help restart Cuban
refinery - Joint venture to operate Soviet-built facility
A group of Mexican state and private investors has formed a joint venture
with Cuba that will spend Dollars 200m to restart and operate a Cuban oil
refinery built by the former Soviet Union. Since the 1990 collapse of Cuba's
trade and aid ties with the former Soviet bloc, the Cuban government had
been seeking a foreign partner to help run the refinery at the south-central
port of Cienfuegos.
The installation, completed at the end of the last decade, was practically
unused and is currently idle.
Announcing the deal in Havana yesterday, Mexico's secretary for foreign
relations (foreign minister), Mr Manuel Tello, said the Mexpetrol group
would have a 49 per cent stake in the refining joint venture. The group is
formed by state institutions Petroleos Mexicanos (Pemex), Banco Nacional de
Comercio Exterior (Bancomex), and Mexico's Instituto de Petroleo, and by
four private companies, Ingenieros Civiles Asociados, Bufete Industrial,
Protexa and Empresa de Transportaciones Maritimas Mexicanas. Cuba's state
oil company, Cubapetroleo, will control 51 per cent of the venture.
Mr Tello said the latest investment by Mexican entrepreneurs in Cuba
completed the liquidation of Cuba's remaining Dollars 340m debt with Mexico.
Cuba, seeking foreign capital to revitalise its recession-hit economy, has
already opened up offshore and onshore exploration blocks to oil companies
from Canada, France and Britain.
Once operating fully again, the Cienfuegos refinery, which has a capacity of
75,000 barrels a day, will refine crude oil from both Mexico and other
countries. The resulting oil products could be sold in Cuba, Mexico or to
third-party buyers on a commercial basis, Mr Tello said. Besides earning
hard currency, the refining deal is also expected to help Cuba alleviate the
chronic shortages of oil and oil products since oil supplies from the former
Soviet Union fell precipitously.
Mr Tello said Mexican investments in Cuba to date totalled more than Dollars
1bn and included joint ventures in tourism, textiles and cement. Another
joint production agreement in glass manufacture will be finalised in two or
three weeks, Mr Tello said.
Mexico, a member of the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta), is one
of Cuba's biggest trading partners in Latin America and has maintained
strong diplomatic and trade links with the island despite continuing US
sanctions against the Cuban government.
