FT  29 SEP 94 / Inquiry begins into alleged Tutsi massacres: Reports of
revenge killings which have exposed the failure of the UN in Rwanda
United Nations experts flew into Rwanda yesterday to investigate whether the
victorious Tutsi army has been involved in reported massacres of returning
Hutu refugees.
The allegations of systematic revenge killings were first made by the UN
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) at the weekend. They have been denied
by the army-installed government in Kigali and have seriously embarrassed
other UN agencies working with Rwanda's new authorities.
Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN secretary-general, has ordered a news
blackout on reports of the revenge killings, which have exposed the failure
of the UN assistance mission in Rwanda to protect the lives of Hutu
civilians.
More than 2m Hutus fled Rwanda in July, when the Rwandan Patriotic Front, a
Tutsi-led guerrilla army, defeated a Hutu government guilty of directing
massacres against the country's minority Tutsi population. Human rights
groups estimate up to 1m Tutsis were killed in the final three months of
Rwanda's civil war.
The new government says it wants Hutu exiles to return. Without them, it
cannot rebuild Rwanda's war-shattered economy or create stable political
structures. The government fears the teeming refugee camps in Zaire and
Tanzania could prove fertile recruiting grounds for the remnants of a
defeated Hutu army intent on revenge.
But UNHCR officials suspended the repatriation of Hutus this week after a
team of investigators uncovered evidence of recent mass graves and heard
witness accounts of atrocities allegedly committed by soldiers of the
Rwandan Patriotic Front. 'As an agency which protects refugees we cannot in
all conscience send Hutus back,' a UNHCR official said yesterday in Geneva.
While the new team of UN investigators investigates further the conduct of
the Rwandan Patriotic Front, several human rights groups have begun to
criticise the failure of the UN to deploy security troops inside Rwanda and
to start international legal proceedings against those who masterminded the
genocide of Rwanda's Tutsi community.
Only 26 human rights monitors have been deployed inside Rwanda, despite Mr
Boutros Ghali's pledge to send 147 in August. UN-appointed human rights
officials , briefed to gather evidence of war crimes, have been denied the
personnel and financial resources they need to proceed with investigations.
The Paris-based International Federation of Human Rights, in a letter to Mr
Boutros Ghali, asks: 'Do these inadmissible delays by the international
community mean Africa should be considered a second-class continent and that
genocide against Africans is less serious than genocide in Europe?'
Another report*, published today by African Rights, a London human rights
group, argues that the UN is 'squandering a golden opportunity to stop the
cycle of impunity in Rwanda'. The 442-page document includes dozens of
testimonies of Tutsi survivors, and argues that enough evidence has been
amassed to extradite those guilty of genocide from Zaire and other
countries.
It reminds the UN of its legal obligation under the Genocide Convention to
bring prosecutions for crimes against humanity. Ms Rakiya Omaar, a
co-director of African Rights, says she hopes the report will shame the UN
into action. '
*Death, Despair and Defiance, by African Rights, 11 Marshalsea Road, London
SE1 1EP, tel: London (71) 717-1224
