FT  26 JAN 94 / De Leon awaits verdict of Guatemalan people: Sunday's
referendum is a political litmus test
Guatemala's President Ramiro de Leon Carpio is hoping to get his presidency
back on track with a crucial referendum on Sunday on constitutional reform.
A defeat would further undermine his weak government.
The vote has become increasingly a gauge of confidence in the president
rather than a judgment on the substance of the reforms, which are a mystery
to most citizens.
'What he stands to win is not very much,' says Mr Gabriel Aguilera, a
political analyst. 'But what he could lose is considerable.'
When Mr de Leon was unexpectedly named president in June last year,
Guatemalans hoped the former human rights ombudsman would break the mould of
a society dominated by the army and ill-served by political institutions.
He took over amid high expectations - and with no party or programme - after
being elected by Congress following President Jorge Serrano's failure to
grab powers in a coup attempt in May.
As human rights ombudsman he was a strong opponent of the army and a vocal
critic of civilian militias known as civil defence patrols, which the armed
forces forcibly recruit as part of their counter-insurgency strategy. Since
becoming president, however, he has repeated the military's view that the
500,000 patrol members will not be disbanded until the country's 33-year-old
civil war has ended.
'The supposed great executioner of the army has turned out to be the best
administrator of its policies,' says Mr Jose Luis Chea, leader of the
centrist Democratic Union party, not represented in Congress. Human rights
abuses, particularly death threats and kidnappings, have increased since he
took office, says Mr Fernando Lopez, director of the human rights office of
the archbishop of Guatemala City. 'But for there to be a real decrease in
abuses, first there must be an end to the armed conflict.'
After several false starts, the government and the left-wing guerrillas of
the National Guatemalan Revolutionary Unity held preliminary talks this
month aimed at ending the war, the first official contact since May.
But there is little evidence that the two sides will avoid the same obstacle
 -on apportioning blame for human rights abuses during the conflict - which
resulted in deadlock when they met last year.
On the political front, many of Mr de Leon's problems arise from his failure
to force the resignation of supreme court judges, and a divided and
discredited Congress.
'By wrapping himself in the banner of the purge (of Congress), he became the
principal focus of Congress's attack, and succeeded in unifying it against
him,' says Mr Eduardo Mazariegos, a political analyst at Asies, a local
think-tank.
The result was a compromise constitutional reform package in November, on
which Guatemalans vote on Sunday. It includes greater accountability and
decentralisation of government spending, de-politicisation of the supreme
court, and a pledge that deputies will resign by mid-1994.
But while the agreement probably averted another political crisis, critics
have condemned it as a fudge, cooked up by the political elite. Mr Miguel
Angel Albizurez, who advises civil organisations which he says played no
part in formulating the proposed changes, describes the agreement as 'an
insult to the people, which Ramiro will pay for politically'.
On the economic front the government may also be heading for problems.
Guatemala last month signed an agreement with the IMF which will require
tighter fiscal policies and pressure to remove subsidies for state
utilities.
And while Mr de Leon seems to be keeping his promise to focus on poverty
reduction, even this may prove politically costly. Several social funds
directed at improving conditions in rural areas have started operating
recently, and will be the focus of much state investment this year.
However, senior officials admit that diverting resources to more needy rural
areas has a price. Opposition to government is organised in the cities;
exactly the reason why the countryside has been neglected for so long.
