FT  11 JAN 94 / Trade statistics defended as deficit declines
Recent trade figures may be more accurate than had previously been thought,
the Central Statistical Office said yesterday. It reported a visible trade
deficit of Pounds 578m for October last year, down from Pounds 1.1bn in
September.
Trade with European Union countries has been recorded under the new
Intrastat system since the single market was introduced at the beginning of
1993. Doubts about the accuracy of the new system have been widespread.
During the period October 1992 to October 1993, the volume of UK imports
from non-EU countries showed an 11 per cent rise while imports from the EU
were recorded as falling by 8 per cent.
This led many to believe that the Intrastat system might be under-recording
EU imports.
However, the CSO believes that, before the introduction of the Intrastat
system, some imports were mis-recorded as coming from the EU.
This probably occurred when ships docked at main ports such as Rotterdam
before transferring goods to the UK. The 'point of origin' of such goods was
then described as being European instead of being from, say, the Far East.
Under the Intrastat system, which is linked to the collection of value added
tax, such imports are now correctly being recorded as from the rest of the
world.
As evidence for this theory, the CSO points to the pattern of trade with the
Benelux countries (figures for in-dividual EU countries are reported for the
first time this month).
In the 10 months to October 1992, the UK recorded a visible trade deficit
with the Benelux group of Pounds 1bn; in the 10 months to October 1993,
there was a surplus of Pounds 300m. This, the CSO believes, may help explain
the apparently aberrant trade patterns of recent months.
Figures for the UK's trade with the EU are now reported later than those for
the rest of the world. The visible trade deficit with non-EU countries in
October, at Pounds 372m, had already been announced; yesterday's figures
revealed that the deficit with the EU was Pounds 206m.
Recent trade figures have been fairly erratic with a sharp improvement in
August, a deterioration in September and a pick-up again in October. The
non-EU balance worsened once more in November, with a deficit of Pounds
767m. If the three months to October are aggregated, however, the combined
deficit at Pounds 2.1bn is substantially lower than the May-July
three-monthly figure of Pounds 3bn.
Exports in October were a new record, at just over Pounds 10.5bn, while
imports were Pounds 11.1bn. The September figures were Pounds 10.3bn and
Pounds 11.4bn respectively.
However, the October figures were helped by a Pounds 536m surplus on oil and
erratic items, such as aircraft and precious stones.
If oil and erratics are excluded, the October deficit was Pounds 1.1bn
compared with Pounds 1.4bn in September. In volume terms, exports were up
3.8 per cent on September, while imports rose 0.4 per cent.
Meanwhile, the DHL Quarterly Export Indicator, based on interviews with
directors of 501 UK companies, found that UK manufacturers were more
confident about long-term export sales than at any time in the past two
years.
