FT  05 JUL 94 / Mitterrand promises French assistance to South Africa
French president Francois Mitterrand yesterday told South Africa's
parliament that the country's transition to democracy was an example for
Africa to emulate and promised French assistance as its new government
sought to translate ideals into reality.
Speaking on the first day of a two-day visit to South Africa, Mr Mitterrand
paid tribute to South Africans for their successful democratic elections and
said he hoped the occasion would mark the building of closer ties between
the two countries. He is the first foreign head of state to address
parliament since the then Mr Harold Macmillan, British prime minister of the
time, delivered his famous 'winds of change' speech in 1961.
Although some critics have suggested that Mr Mitterrand's visit is merely an
attempt to boost his international image, the speech is seen as an attempt
by France, which has long maintained involvement in its former colonies in
West and central Africa, to stake out its position as the pre-eminent
western power in Africa. It hopes to secure South Africa's support for its
involvement in Rwanda and on economic development policies in Africa.
On South Africa's side the visit represents an opportunity to build up
support from an important member of the European Union, particularly in
light of current trade talks between the EU and South Africa. In addition,
both countries will be seeking to expand bilateral trade and investment
links.
Mr Mitterrand called on French industrialists, several of whom are
accompanying him on his visit, to 'do the right thing' and invest, but
announced no specific aid or investment package. However, he said that he
expected conventions to be signed during his visit in the electrification,
water and rural development sectors.
In addition, several French companies are expected to announce partnership
deals with local black businesses over the next few days, and an agreement
on some aid from the French Development Bank is also expected to be
concluded before Mr Mitterrand leaves tomorrow night.
Introducing him to parliament, South Africa's President Nelson Mandela paid
tribute to his French counterpart for his anti-apartheid support and cited
the French revolution as inspiration for the South African struggle. In a
ceremony earlier, Mr Mandela awarded Mr Mitterrand its highest award for
non-South African citizens for his services to South Africa.
