FT  14 APR 94 / Technology: The message is loud and clear - Nikki Tait kicks
off a worldwide series on collaborative research between industry and
academia by looking at Australia's bionic ear
In the midst of an industrial estate on Sydney's North Shore, a roomful of
technicians hunch over their workbenches. With painstaking delicacy, and
shielded in a 'clean' environment, they are hand-building the parts which
make up a bionic ear.
This is a system which can return sound to a profoundly deaf person. It
works by surgically implanting a small electronic device in bone behind the
patient's ear. Sounds are then picked up by a small microphone worn over the
ear and digitalised by an attached speech processor. The result is
transmitted to the implant, which converts the codes into electronic signals
and stimulates the hearing nerve fibres. These, in turn, send impulses to
the brain.
Cochlear, which commercialised this system, is the sort of company which
Australian politicians exult over. On the one hand, it dominates its global
market and earns most of its money overseas. On the other, it is proof that
collaborative research can pay dividends. Graeme Clark, a professor at the
University of Melbourne, supplied the initial research. The federal
government, through two commitments totalling almost ADollars 4m (Pounds
1.9m), funded the development cost up to clinical trials. Private industry
in the shape of Nucleus, Cochlear's parent (now part of Pacific Dunlop), did
the rest. Today, Mike Hirshorn, Cochlear's chief executive for
manufacturing, says royalties have more than repaid the public investment.
More than 8,000 systems have been sold.
While some countries debate the merits of collaborative research, Australia
has actively encouraged it for a decade at least. The reason is simple.
Politicians can see the attractions of building future growth on
high-technology, value-added exports, but know that Australia fares poorly
in the international research and development stakes. On average, OECD
countries spend 1.87 per cent of gross domestic product on R&amp;D. In
Australia, the figure is 1.35 per cent.
This R&amp;D weakness, however, is centred in the private sector. If amounts of
public expenditure on R&amp;D are isolated, Australia easily surpasses the OECD
average - and, in proportional terms, beats the US. A single statistic makes
the point more bluntly: as recently as 1987, only 5 per cent of Australian
manufacturing companies spent any money at all on R&amp;D.
So the need to maximise the commercial opportunities thrown up by
public-sector research is paramount. 'To a great degree, there have been
three major ideas behind the government's science and technology policy in
recent years,' remarked Senator Chris Schacht, former federal minister for
science, in last year's budget statement. One of these was 'to look for ways
which would give a better commercial return on publicly funded research'.
This commitment has led to a range of government initiatives, of which the
creation of more than 50 'co-operative research centres' is probably the
most high-profile. CRCs are formal research programmes, drawn up between
educational establishments and industry but federally funded. In most cases,
government research organisations also have an input.
An example would be the 'Cochlear CRC', which handles ongoing research
related to the implant system. Other CRC areas vary widely, from viticulture
to maritime engineering. Funding for the CRCs is targeted to reach ADollars
130m in 1996-97, when Schacht anticipates more than 60 centres.
A second initiative was the formation of the Australian Technology Group in
1992. This was designed to play an 'early stage' investment-style role
similar to that of the UK's British Technology Group. Government provided an
initial ADollars 30m budget, but expects ATG to raise future cash from the
private sector.
Simultaneously, the authorities have attempted to wring a more commercial
approach from existing public research organisations. Inevitably, the main
focus of this policy has been the country's biggest scientific research
organisation, the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organisation, which has more than 7,000 employees spread around some 100
sites.
Back in the 1980s, CSIRO was given a 30 per cent external funding target - a
figure which it now meets, although not uniformly across all divisions.
That, in turn, has forced the organisation to take a more proactive,
'service' role towards industry.
Partly as a result of this, CSIRO has also shifted its internal priorities.
Research in the mineral resources, manufacturing and communication fields,
for example, is given more weight when the organisation considers funding
allocations, while the influence of areas like animal production and primary
products, defence and community services has declined.
These changes have not come easily, and there has been debate - both inside
and outside CSIRO - over their merits. As John Stocker, CSIRO's chief
executive, admits: 'We went out, sometimes rather naively, and touted for
and found business. In the early days, there was a real risk of
short-termism, of accepting everything that came our way, because the main
performance indicator was not the outcome (of the research), but the
achievement of the input of 30 per cent external earnings.'
But he claims that the organisation is now more 'hard-headed' about the work
it takes on. 'I guess it's gratifying that in the recent review of the
consequences of the external earnings target, it's been concluded that the
mixture of strategic research, basic research and applied research is back
to levels we had before the target was set.'
Manufacturing industry, at any rate, seems appreciative - although some
scientists do mourn the loss of informality which, they say, used to
permeate CSIRO, and the time taken up in negotiating contracts. 'In the past
few years, we've found that they're much more able to identify with industry
needs . . . and become far more open and receptive,' says ICI Australia.
Even so, no one pretends that collaborative research in Australia works
perfectly. One basic problem is the size of the domestic economy and the
small number of big corporations. Because of the home market's limitations,
many high-technology products must be exported from the outset. Finding an
Australian enterprise which has the expertise to do this is not easy.
In Cochlear's case, the authorities were successful. Nucleus drew on the
management expertise which had developed its cardiac pacemaker business,
Telelectronics, and the Cochlear team targeted the US market from the
outset. The first US implant took place in 1983, only a year after the
initial Australian trials. A Denver-based subsidiary was formed in the
following year. By 1986, US Food and Drug Administration approval for the
implant system had been secured.
By contrast, when it came to the marketing of Australia's gene shears
technology - the result of molecular biology work by CSIRO scientists, and
essentially a means of manipulating or neutralising genes - the authorities
were unable to find appropriate local partners. In the end, it was decided
to commercialise the technology in conjunction with Johnson &amp; Johnson, the
US pharmaceuticals group, and France's Groupe Limagrain.
Aware of these problems, CSIRO called in McKinsey, the management
consultants, to review its relationship with small and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs) last year. McKinsey found that the country's largest
research organisation interacted with only 10 per cent of SMEs, and that
even in these instances the results were mixed.
Almost 90 per cent of SMEs who had used CSIRO would recommend the research
organisation, but with qualifications. These ranged from complaints about
'intellectual aloofness' to the need for more timely responses. Some of the
comments from CSIRO employees were equally blunt. 'Lack of stability', 'too
few senior people with technical skills', and 'they want fast answers to
ill-posed problems' were some of the scientists' whinges.
