FT  20 JUN 94 / Socialist leader Rocard gambles and loses
Mr Michel Rocard and, to some extent, logic lost yesterday.
He gambled that, however controversial his year leading France's Socialist
party and however sore the party felt over its poor showing in last week's
Euro-elections, it would not topple him until it had coalesced behind an
alternative leader.
But a majority of the 300 members of the party's national council threw
caution to the wind, voting him out. His replacement, Mr Henri Emmanuelli, a
former parliamentary whip, is a provisional head. His task is to help guide
the party as it attempts to tackle the problems which underpinned its meagre
14.5 per cent support in France's European polls and as it searches for a
credible presidential candidate.
Mr Rocard yesterday staked his position on his own plans to tackle the
party's deep-rooted problems. But his proposals to rejuvenate the party's
national executive to include possible rivals such as Mr Jack Lang, the
former education minister, and popular younger figures such as Mrs Elizabeth
Guigou and Mrs Martine Aubry (the latter having the extra merit of being
European Commission president Jacques Delors' daughter) and his plan to
eliminate the courants, or clans that compose the party, evidently seemed to
most to be treating the symptoms of the party's malaise but not its cause.
Equally important was the failure of Mr Rocard to appeal to the young voters
and his failure to capitalise on the problems facing the RPR-UDF coalition
headed by prime minister Edouard Balladur.
'We have unemployment of 12.3 per cent, the highest level in living memory,'
said one party member. 'We should be winning more support.'
Part of the failure to win the youth vote is explained by the extraordinary
appeal of Mr Bernard Tapie, the controversial businessman who strikes a
charismatic figure compared with the rest of France's establishment
politicians. Mr Tapie's Mouvement des Radicaux de Gauche won 12.3 per cent
of votes in the European election, compounding the poor showing of the
Socialists.
The immediate priority facing the party is to overcome the factionalism
which has bedevilled its organisation and helped oust Mr Rocard. Originally
the democratic hallmark of the Socialist party, the courants have frequently
been the bane of the party. The threat of the factions was clear even when
Mr Rocard was elected general secretary in October last year. At the party
congress which voted him into office, there were more than 100 blank ballots
and 51 abstentions.
The factions and the decline in popularity of the traditional left are,
however, not amenable to a rapid resolution. The most plausible unifier
could be Mr Delors, who last held office in France as a Socialist finance
minister in the early 1980s. The entreaties coming from Paris for him to
leave Brussels before the end of his term in December are fast multiplying.
He appeals to the remaining supporters of Mr Rocard, because the two men
share the same brand of Social Democratic pragmatism. He has had a
complicated relationship with President Francois Mitterrand who did not
initially propose him for the Commission presidency, but the two men have
made up their differences.
Nor is there a generational problem. Two years ago a group of Socialists in
their 40s set up a political fan club in France to promote the cause and
ideas of the 67-year-old Commission president. Nor is there any question
that Mr Delors is 'presidential', in the sense that he has more or less
incarnated Europe, not just France, over the past decade.
Current opinion polls show he would lose a presidential election to Mr
Balladur by several points, but he would run Mr Jacques Chirac very close
and would defeat other conservative candidates.
There is however the question of whether after 10 tiring years in Brussels
Mr Delors would want seven more in the Elysee. If he succumbed to the
entreaties of a desperate party, he would be in a strong position to dictate
the terms on which he would carry its colours.
One of these is likely to be that if elected he would only serve a single
five-year term. That would involve a constitutional change from the present
seven-year term, but the change after 14 years of Mitterrandism might prove
popular.
