FT  08 APR 94 / Survey of Switzerland (3): Pundits are wary - The economy
Slowly, cautiously and without flamboyance - rather like the Swiss
themselves - the economy is recovering from a recession which has pushed
unemployment up to levels not seen since the second world war.
Switzerland's recession has lasted for around three years and only in the
last quarter of 1993 did the economy start to move back into growth.
Although a Swiss recession may be unrecognisable as such to anyone from
Britain, the US, or currently even Germany it has caused considerable
strains in a small country so dependent on foreign markets and investors for
its prosperity.
Even now, economists are wary of promising too much for 1994. 'We've
probably passed the trough of the economic cycle, but we are still in the
very early stages of recovery,' says Mr Alois Bischofberger, head of
economic research at Credit Suisse. 'Most people haven't realised this
incipient recovery (is taking place) yet, as the labour market is relatively
weak.'
It is likely to stay weak for a while. At just over 5 per cent, or nearly
200,000 people, the jobless level will continue to be a dampener on the
economy, holding back private consumption, which is expected to show little
growth this year.
Mr Georg Rich, chief economist at the Swiss National Bank, says a stronger
economic improvement than currently expected would be necessary to bring
down unemployment significantly. 'I don't see a turnround (in the jobless
figure) this year, but if the revival accelerates next year, then it will
decline further.'
The general expectation seems to be for real economic growth of between 1
and 1.5 per cent in 1994 after a dip in 1993 - hardly enough to put much of
a dent in the jobless total. But the high unemployment level also reflects
the fact that fewer foreign workers are returning home, now that immigration
rules have been relaxed.
Also, improved benefits have encouraged more people to register as jobless.
More women are tending to join the unemployment statistics when they lose
work rather than drop out of the labour market.
In addition, as part of the worldwide industrial restructuring process, many
companies - especially the larger ones - have shed labour to become more
efficient and competitive.
It will not be until 1995 that both jobs and capital investment start to
benefit to any real degree from economic growth. Next year's economic growth
rate is likely to exceed 2 per cent, with exports up by around 4 per cent
(against less than 3 per cent this year and a marginal decline in 1993) and
capital investment rising by some 3.5 per cent after 2 per cent this year
and a 4 per cent drop last year.
Exports held up relatively well in the latest recession; in 1992, they
gained more than 3 per cent. This is partly because Switzerland went into
the recession earlier than some countries and partly because of sharp growth
in demand from countries in south America and Asia, though these account for
a relatively small part of total sales abroad.
This year's export growth will, despite the strength of the Swiss franc,
benefit from recovery in the US, continued buoyancy in south-east Asia and
an improved economic situation in Europe, notably in neighbouring Germany.
But with industry operating at little more than 80 per cent capacity,
compared with more than 90 per cent in the late 1980s, there is still plenty
of slack to be taken up before the employment situation benefits.
Productivity growth is now between 1.5 and 1.8 per cent a year, says Mr
Bernd Schips of the economic research centre at the Federal Institute of
Technology in Zurich. 'So we need overall growth of more than 2 per cent,
otherwise unemployment will stay high this year and next.'
To understand the significance of a 5 per cent jobless rate - Mr Schips
calls this 'unbelievably high' by Swiss standards - it is necessary to
remember that unemployment was unknown in the 1960s and did not exceed 1 per
cent until the mid-1980s. In its report on the Swiss economy last year, the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) said
unemployment was one of the problems that could undermine some of the
country's long-enjoyed advantages.
It also highlighted the need for a structural shake-up in the economy. The
government has already embarked on a 'revitalisation' programme, spurred by
the need to act after the Swiss people turned down membership of the
European Economic Area (EEA). The programme covers competition policy, the
liberalisation of immigration rules, education and research, and trade, both
international and internal.
Cartels need to be eliminated. 'Cartels are widespread in the economy,' Mr
Bischofberger says. 'The domestic economy is one of the most cartelised in
Europe.' Stronger action on this would help bring down prices, one obvious
example being in the car business where importers have a monopoly.
Another area which needs to be tackled effectively is local protectionism in
procurement policies. 'In some cantons,' Mr Bischofberger points out,
'administrations and schools are not allowed to buy products and services
outside the canton or even their municipality.' The idea is to benefit local
producers, but the effect is to keep prices high.
If Switzerland's revitalisation process is successful, its traditional
strengths deriving from a skilled workforce, harmonious industrial
relations, first-rate infrastructure and corporate innovation will be
enhanced. With inflation falling towards 1 per cent - even though the move
in 1995 to a value-added tax (VAT) system will give it a one-off boost -
economic stability is being newly consolidated.
That still leaves the problem of the budget deficit. At nearly SFr14bn, it
totals some 4 per cent of gross domestic product. The ending of recession
will help reduce this, but the government also has to act. Mr Rich cites the
case of a young economist who would probably earn at least SFr5,000 a year
more if he joined the federal government than if he went to a bank paying
market rates.
