FT  08 AUG 94 / Companies queue to appear at Labour's show
Twenty-seven companies ranging from Sega, the Japanese electronic games
manufacturer, to Securicor Group have joined a waiting list of potential
exhibitors at the coming Labour party conference in Blackpool.
Ms Jackie Bate, the party's conference and exhibition manager, said it was
attracting 'the biggest commercial interest of any political party in
Europe'. She added: 'In the last few weeks we have had an increasing number
of calls from companies wanting to book for this conference and next year's.
We've got more people wanting to exhibit than we have room for.'
The party has acquired more floor space to accommodate 163 exhibition
stands. Of these some 150 are from the private sector and large public
organisations, paying an estimated total of Pounds 600,000 in rent.
J. Sainsbury and DHL are among the companies exhibiting for the first time.
The waiting list also includes the UK subsidiary of Norsk Hydro, the
Norwegian chemicals and metals group, and BSkyB, the satellite TV company in
which Pearson, owner of the Financial Times, has a stake.
'It really feels as if we are pushing an open door,' said Ms Nikki Lewis,
the party's corporate relations manager. She has a specific brief to 'open a
dialogue' between the party and what she calls 'corporate UK'.
'Corporate UK has become quite clearly disillusioned with the Tories,' she
said. 'I think that in the fullness of time that positive feedback will turn
into money.'
So far there is no evidence in the form of large corporate contributions to
Labour party funds. Sainsbury is denying reports that its chairman Mr David
Sainsbury backed financially Mr Tony Blair's successful campaign for the
party leadership.
The company said it was continuing to maintain an 'apolitical stance'. The
decision to exhibit at the Labour conference was because the event was
viewed as an 'opportunity to talk to influential legislators about important
issues'.
Meanwhile, the Institute of Public Policy Research, the left of centre
think-tank, says it is receiving 'an increasing amount of money from major
companies' for research projects. Its clients now include News
International, Glaxo and Shell. The precise monies involved are not
disclosed, but IPPR's chief economist Mr Dan Corry says the unit's research
projects command figures of between Pounds 20,000 and Pounds 90,000.
Mr Corry said: 'Our clients want to know what a Labour party is going to do
because it is quite obvious to some of them that a Labour government is what
they are going to end up with.'
