FT  18 JAN 94 / It is a moral issue
Mr Douglas Hurd would do us all a service if he could overcome his natural
shyness and get to know Mr Michael Portillo. The foreign secretary and the
chief secretary to the Treasury meet one another in cabinet, and presumably
elsewhere, but they are not close friends. Perhaps they should be. They are,
after all, both Conservatives.
They are not alike. There is no meeting of minds. In a continental European
country they would belong to different parties, the senior of the pair
perhaps a Christian Democrat, the junior more probably a liberal
nationalist. One difference is of particular importance. Mr Hurd will be 64
in March. Mr Portillo is nearly a quarter of a century younger. The former
has had one shot at the prime ministership; the latter is still preparing,
ever more assiduously, for his own climb up the greasy pole.
They do, however, have one thing in common. Unlike the general run of their
colleagues, both are men of substance. Few would disagree with this
characterisation of the foreign secretary. Many remain to be convinced that
Mr Portillo deserves his reputation as a class act. He is, it will be
objected, untested. He has not yet been put in charge of a large spending
department. True, but he stands out as more able, more coherent, than many
who have.
This is of some importance. Where there is so much dross, every glister of
true metal, however dim, is valuable. Britain's cabinet is exceptionally
undistinguished. You do not need all the fingers of one hand to number the
ministers who deserve to be taken seriously. Ask senior officials and
players of the political game to suggest who does and you will find that Mr
Portillo and Mr Hurd very nearly complete the list. That is one good reason
to promote a discourse between them, but there is another.
Politics everywhere has become debased. Many of its practitioners are
adrift, cut off from intellectual, ideological, religious or ethical
moorings. Parties of the left are floundering just as much as those on the
right. Like the Conservatives, Labour exists only to seek office. This is
most obviously a consequence of the collapse of communism, but the roots of
the problem go deeper. The discipline of what was once called political
economy, and is now described as economics, has become amoral, a series of
algebraic abstractions designed by the most expensive witch-doctors in
history. The more abstruse their equations, the less they tell us.
This would have horrified Adam Smith, who was a professor of moral
philosophy, or John Maynard Keynes, whose principal purpose, like that of
Karl Marx, was to improve the condition of society. It might have troubled
F. A. Hayek, whose morally driven deconstruction of collectivist modes of
thought laid the foundations of late 20th century anarchic individualism.
All would doubtless have felt obliged to agree that while cash flow is fine
on paper, we carry something more in our hearts. If there is public disquiet
at the political process it may be because economics has failed us. The cult
of the customer has begun to be seen as imperfect.
Neither Mr Hurd nor Mr Portillo would pretend to be qualified to make up for
deficiencies in the theory of contemporary capitalism, but both have the
merit that they appear to be aware that something is missing. 'Right across
the democratic world,' said Mr Hurd on Friday, 'there is a feeling that
politicians have lost touch with those whom they serve.' He instanced Italy,
France, Germany, Japan, Canada the US and even Britain as countries in which
this mood could be detected. 'Tories are not simply interested in piling up
wealth in individual pockets,' he asserted at another point in his speech.
'Our policies aim to improve the well-being of individuals and families, but
also of the community as a whole.' The Labour party could promise no less.
Mr Portillo seeks to fill in the blanks by proclamation. 'Our mission must
be to rebuild national confidence and self-belief,' he said on Friday. 'We
need to assert the value and the quality of the British way of life and of
British institutions.' A cynical poison had been spread by pessimists. Too
many politicians, academics, churchmen, authors, commentators and
journalists exhibited the symptoms of what the young pretender called a 'new
British disease' - the 'self-destructive sickness of national cynicism'. The
result was loss of respect for the crown, the Church, Parliament. If these
were not respected neither would be 'law, judges or policemen, nor
professors nor teachers nor social workers, nor bosses, managers or
foremen'.
The standard-bearer of the Tory right was not at his most prudent when he
penned those words. It was his heroine, Lady Thatcher, who aimed the
fiercest arrows at the bishops; she, it seemed at the time, who controlled
royal tours; the erstwhile prime minister herself whose rule by overwhelming
majority diminished the House of Commons.
During the 1980s Thatcherites de-professionalised the professors, destroyed
the sense of vocation of teachers and nurses, and poured scorn on social
workers. The civic infrastructure was systematically destroyed; anything
with a tradition was regarded as a vested interest to be 'taken on' and,
ultimately, 'privatised'. The gods in the Tory right's political pantheon
infected the decade with the false belief that everything good is bought and
sold, while nothing that does not have a price is of value.
Now that same rightwing faction is panicking. What has happened to the
nuclear family? To responsibility? To reverence for authority? 'Social
disorder follows when respect breaks down,' said Mr Portillo. He might more
accurately have said that, if for 14 years you preach disrespect for
everything save the profit and loss account, the result is the 1990s. Mr
Hurd knows better. Why he hangs in there as foreign secretary is a mystery.
Doubtless he is motivated by an old-fashioned sense of duty. He should try
to convey the wisdom of his years to Mr Portillo. They could arrange a quiet
dinner, and a long talk into the night. They will not invent a new form of
capitalism that is less nihilistic in its effect than the extreme
Anglo-American smash-everything model, but, together, they might begin,
however dimly, to comprehend the problem. We could then start moving again,
in the only direction available to us: forwards.
