FT  25 JUN 94 / Books: Versailles to Savile Row - Brian Sewell takes the
suit to task
THE ENGLISHMAN'S SUIT by Hardy Amies Quartet Pounds 12, 120 pages
This genteel history of the suit, modelled on the limp volumes of belles
lettres and collected aphorisms that in the 1920s littered the lavatories
and lesser bedrooms of the country house, ends on a 'Naughty-naughty,
tut-tut' note - 'it is,' avers the writer, 'rude to be ill-dressed. It is
particularly rude to dress squalidly at the opera . . .' A
three-button-coated dark suit from Marks and Spencer is strongly
recommended.
As one who weeps at almost every opera, I should look and feel twice as
foolish in a suit as I do in the crumpled sweater that engages Master Amies'
despite. A suit demands a stiff upper lip and a straight back, but Mimi
demands that I be reduced to a sobbing heap slumped in my stall, and for
that a suit is far from suitable.
The Master traces the history of coat, trousers and vest from the Versailles
of the Sun King to Savile Row; he touches it with great events and famous
men as taste swings this way and that across the Channel, with fops and
clowns and macaroni, with Brummell and the Comte d'Orsay, and with assorted
asses playing Prince of Wales. In 1934, within these pages, the history of
the suit becomes the history of Hardy Amies, and Burton, Hepworth, Tommy
Nutter and the flashy Mr Fish swim into view.
The thread breaks from time to time, giving way to disconnected jottings and
asides on class, tradition, the National Trust, Country Life, daffodils and
daisies - 'Latin should be taught intelligently and interestingly in every
school;' the high-toned English too breaks down, gentlemen become gents,
their suits gear, and we 'get back to basics' with strictures on the shirt
and tie and coy diversions into underpants.
The repeated justification for this book and the life and work of the Master
is the snobbish refrain that the suit is the dress of the gentleman - but it
is also, the doubter must observe, the dress of the politician who wishes to
be mistaken for a gentleman, too easily camouflaged by expert tailors,
manicurists and the hairdresser (Mrs Thatcher's cabinets were full of them),
and for the businessman it is a uniform.
Politics, business and the London club secure the future of the suit well
into the next millennium, prophesies the Master; as one for whom it seems
the most grotesque and impractical of garments, quite hopeless for walking
dogs, listening to opera, eating in cool comfort, driving a car, painting
pictures or enduring travel in an aeroplane, I wish that he would turn his
attention to other forms of formal dress and I commend the cassock that I
wore as altar boy, a thing of tailored dove grey silk, a thousand buttons
from throat to ankle, a touch of lawn about the neck - no puzzle-bugger
jacketed suit could ever match its easy elegance.
