FT  19 FEB 94 / Minding Your Own Business: Superconductors hot up - The
Nature of Things / How trains will fly and computers read your mind
Here are some predictions for the year 2020. We will be travelling on
magnetically levitated trains at 300mph. Power will be transmitted across
continents without the smallest loss. Giant electric 'batteries' will store
enough emergency power to run a city for a whole day. Electronic sensors
will be sensitive enough to follow your brainwaves as you think.
These innovations will all result from research into superconductivity, the
abolition of any resistance to electric current - a kind of frictionless
electric wire. The world's physicists have been working frenziedly on the
phenomenon since 1986, when two Swiss scientists at International Business
Machines' Zurich research centre discovered the first 'high temperature
superconductors'.
In the excited aftermath of the discovery, commentators aroused inflated
expectations about the speed with which the phenomenon could be put to
practical use - and within three years they were expressing disappointment
about the lack of progress.
In fact superconductivity research has moved pretty fast. All the
applications originally foreseen are still in prospect and the technology
stands on the brink of commercial exploitation.
Superconductivity has three important practical consequences:
Current can flow for ever round a superconducting circuit. This is the basis
of proposed power engineering applications, such as no-loss electricity
cables, and huge 'battery' coils to store energy for use at peak periods.
Superconductors can generate intense magnetic fields of their own and
strongly repel external magnetic fields. These forces are powerful enough to
lift a train off the track and propel it at 300mph.
On the micro-scale, electrons can jump instantaneously between two
superconducting components. This so-called Josephson effect could be used to
build portable *something in here (HP) *
supercomputers, millions of times faster than the present generation. It is
also the basis of the Squid (superconducting quantum interference device)
which detects tiny changes in external magnetic fields, such as those
produced in our brains when we think.
Scientists discovered superconductivity in 1911 in mercury cooled by liquid
helium to -269`C. That is just four degrees above the lowest temperature
conceivably possible (absolute zero) at which all molecular movement is
stilled. For 75 years scientists experimented with other metals and alloys
in an effort to achieve superconductivity at higher - and therefore
potentially more useful - temperatures. By 1986 the highest recorded
superconducting temperature had crept up to -250`C, which still required
expensive helium cooling.
Then Karl Muller and Johann Bednorz made the breakthrough for which they won
a Nobel prize in 1987. They created a ceramic material - quite different
from conventional metal superconductors - that lost its resistance at
 243`C. The 7`C improvement may not sound much but it excited the world's
physicists, who saw the scope for pushing superconductivity to much higher
temperatures by playing with the composition of these ceramics.
Confirmed superconducting temperatures leaped to -180`C in 1987 and -146`C
in 1988. The current record is -140`C in an oxide of mercury, barium,
calcium and copper, though there were unverified reports two months ago of
superconductivity at -23`C - tantalisingly close to the target of room
temperature superconductors.
Already, however, the proven materials are comfortably above -196`C, the
temperature of liquid nitrogen, an industrial coolant which costs less than
milk.
So why are they not in widespread use already? In the first place, the
ceramics are fragile materials - far more difficult to work with than the
metals and semiconductors so far used in electrical and electronic
engineering. A particular problem is to make sure the individual grains
within the ceramic are aligned in a way that does not interrupt the flow of
electricity.
A second difficulty is that the ceramics have maddeningly unpredictable
magnetic properties. They are apt to lose their superconductivity when
carrying large currents or in the presence of a strong external magnetic
field.
Even so, the current carrying capacity of superconducting ceramic wires is
increasing rapidly. American Superconductor - one of several companies
started in the US with venture capital to exploit the technology - recently
made a prototype cable carry 2,300 amps over a metre, enough to supply a
steel mill.
But the first commercial ceramic superconductors are at the other end of the
scale: electronic devices made from material laid down in microscopically
thin layers. Early models are being used for military purposes in the US,
but the civil telecommunications industry is expected to start buying them
later this year.
It took 10 to 15 years for two of the 20th century's other key physical
discoveries, the transistor and the laser, to find widespread application.
The real disappointment is at the theoretical rather than the practical
level. Scientists do not really understand how the materials can carry
current without resistance at such 'high' temperatures. The answer has
something to do with their banded structure. Another Nobel prize is waiting
for anyone who comes up with a comprehensive theory of superconductivity.
