FT  19 NOV 94 / Outdoors: And the winner is . . - Motoring
The European Car of the Year contest jury is out. Five self-congratulatory
advertising campaigns are being prepared. Four of them will have to be
binned when the result is announced early next month. This is a contest with
only one winner. The also-rans really do not count. There are just five
names in the frame this time. Last year there were 15. This is not due to a
dearth of new cars in 1994 but because the organisers of Car of the Year
have changed the rules.
Until now, the jury of nearly 60 motoring journalists (no, not me, which is
why I can say here who I think will win) has had to vote on every eligible
car. Some embarrassment has been caused when one or two of the less
desirable models failed to attract any votes at all. So, this year, the 19
original entries - or 22 if you count the Citroen, Fiat, Lancia and Peugeot
badged versions of the joinly developed Fiat / PSA multi-purpose vehicle -
have been whittled down to a short list of five. The 1995 Car of the Year
will be chosen from the Audi A8, Renault Laguna, Fiat Punto, VW Polo and
Vauxhall (Opel) Omega.
Among the exclusions are the BMW 7-Series, the first completely new Range
Rover in 24 years and, of course, the Fiat / PSA multi-purpose vehicle,
which I believe could turn out to be the most significant new model of 1994.
Which car will win? It depends on what impresses jury members most; large
cars with advanced technology, small ones with fuel economy or
medium-to-large ones offering top value for money.
If it is advanced technology, there can be no argument; it must be the Audi
A8. This large and shapely saloon is made almost entirely from aluminium
alloy and has either a 2.8-litre V6 with front wheel drive or a 4.2-litre V8
with quattro transmission and Tiptronic gear selection. (I have just spent a
couple of weeks with both A8s. They combine clever new thinking with
traditional luxury and are extraordinarily quiet).
The Punto and Polo are at the other extreme; small and inexpensive. Yet they
provide fuel-efficient personal transport with the refinement and comfort of
larger, dearer and thirstier cars. Punto is by far the best Fiat for years;
Polo is really a scaled-down Golf. VW's build quality is renowned but the
Punto is at least as well put together. Renault's front-wheel driven Laguna
has to be compared with the Ford Mondeo (last year's winner) whereas the
larger Vauxhall (Opel) Omega has rear wheel drive. It is similar in size and
layout to the Ford Scorpio.
In Britain, at any rate, the Laguna is priced below most of its rivals
though its equipment levels, comfort and performance are just as good. The
Omega looks much nicer than Ford's curiously fish-eyed Scorpio. It may well
pick up votes because the diesel version has BMW's superb six-cylinder
turbo-intercooled engine (with automatic transmission option) while the
diesel Scorpio is manual only and its engine is a beefy four-cylinder.
My money for Car of the Year 1995 would be on the Punto. It is a splendid
car - and also it is years since Fiat won the contest.
I think the Audi A8 will be runner-up, if only because of its advanced
aluminium technology. Not far behind will be the Renault Laguna, with the
Polo fourth and Omega fifth. The contest will be close. Any of the
short-listed cars is worthy of winning. In the end, it will depend what
turns on individual members of the jury.
