FT  31 MAY 94 / Business and the Law: Knowledge on the network - Electronic
highways can help lawyers improve the service they offer - and win new
clients
The international business world is buzzing in anticipation of electronic
information superhighways - but are business lawyers prepared for this
telecommunications revolution?
The daily lives of lawyers are dominated by the processing and transfer of
information - so information technology could help them improve the service
they offer and give their firm competitive advantage in the legal services
marketplace.
Much of a lawyer's job involves the transfer of information - on
legislation, case law, client information, accounting and management
information, and in-house know-how - to clients, barristers, other law firms
and the courts.
Any lawyer with a computer and a modem can exchange messages and documents
with similarly equipped colleagues and clients. Lawyers can also search
external legal databases and offer clients access to information held on
their own firms' systems.
If this is done with technical proficiency, appropriate procedures and
sensible security precautions, the business benefits for clients are clear -
a less costly, more responsive, better focused and more controllable legal
service.
Why then are many lawyers ignoring the potential of recent advances in
communications technology?
There is some justification for caution, even cynicism. There have been a
number of attempts over the years, in the UK and internationally, to deliver
general-purpose, electronic networks for lawyers, all of which have
foundered.
These networks or systems have tended to be opaque to non-specialists,
incapable of integration with working practices, and insufficiently useful
to merit persistence in overcoming these shortcomings.
Some law firms have not been deterred completely by the disappointments of
the various network projects, and have themselves explored less ambitious
avenues, such as internal electronic mail, direct communication links with
some clients and even collaboration among international groups of firms.
However, if the legal profession is to move towards a more generic network -
its own legal information highway - experience from other information
services markets suggests that there are three critical success factors:
availability of useful information; simple technology to deliver the
information; and, from the outset, a critical mass of committed users.
Two recent initiatives seem to have recognised these factors - Lexis Counsel
Connect (LCC) and Legal Information Network (Link).
LCC was created by American Lawyer Media, the US legal publisher, and is now
offered in collaboration with Mead Data Central, the provider of the legal
information service, Lexis. Launched in early 1993, it is described as an
electronic network through which law firms, for a monthly fee, can make
their memos, newsletters, case notes and other work available to in-house
company legal advisers.
These users can also access various directories - of lawyers, law firms and
expert witnesses - and they can use the system's message exchange, document
transfer and conferencing facilities.
While LCC seems primarily to be a tool for American attorneys and their
clients, Link is targeted at the UK market. Scheduled for release in
mid-1994, Link is being promoted as an online network for lawyers. It has
been developed by Legalease, the UK legal publisher.
Legalease plans to distribute 50,000 free copies of Link software to
solicitors, barristers, judges and lawyers working in commerce and industry.
The package offers access to current legal news, case reports, periodicals,
legal directories and forms, as well as messaging, document transfer and
conferencing facilities similar to those of LCC.
Link will also allow direct ordering of law books and access to some other
external information services.
The two systems have much in common. Neither is offered by conventional
legal publishers, specialising in traditional legal scholarship and source
materials. Rather, they are distributed by innovative, modern information
service providers, which recognise that lawyers have information needs
extending beyond traditional law books to less formal legal knowhow and to
data about law firms and lawyers.
Link is likely to prove more popular than LCC in the UK, largely because the
information it holds and the underlying approach to design is more
UK-oriented. Whether either service succeeds will depend largely on keeping
the information useful and easily accessible to non-technical users, and on
establishing a critical mass of satisfied and committed users.
For many lawyers the main motivation for using systems such as Link or LCC
will be the demands of clients who have become convinced of the benefits,
and who begin to insist on doing business this way (hence, LCC's and Link's
focus on in-house lawyers). In turn, this could result in radical change for
the legal profession.
Consider the challenge for a construction lawyer in this new era. Rather
than confining work on, say, collateral warranties to drafting them and
advising on their impact in given circumstances, a law firm might compile
guidance notes on this subject and make them available to all users roaming
the electronic legal highways.
A firm's expertise would be widely promoted in this way; potential clients
could learn about the subject without always instructing legal advisers; and
those who later want more focused counsel may turn to those lawyers whose
initial overview has proved useful and impressive.
A strong business imperative emerges for those firms hesitating today over
whether to contribute to such networks. Failure to participate in the
emerging electronic legal marketplace might mean lost opportunity -
spontaneous awareness of a law firm's specialities may soon be derived from
users' experiences while using the online services; and invitations to
tender and requests for proposals will inevitably be distributed through
this medium.
A glimmer can be seen here of a new legal marketplace, for which lawyers
will package their knowledge as information products, not immediately
discarded after use (as effectively happens with most current legal advice),
but as commodities capable of attracting new clients and being reused on
numerous occasions by different clients.
The author is special adviser in law and information technology at Masons,
the City solicitors, and visiting professor to the centre for law, computers
and technology at Strathclyde University
