FT  11 APR 94 / Letters to the Editor: Government should act on electronic
mail confidentiality
Sir, By chance I have been exposed to a furious debate in the US over the
use by private individuals of military-strength encryption. I simply want to
be able to send confidential information, some of it about personnel
matters, by electronic mail from my business in Kent to my home in
Shropshire. The most useful e-mail facilities are on the Internet, but such
facilities are far from confidential, which brings up the need for
encryption.
In addition to my humble use of it, I would argue encryption is essential
for several new commercial services to develop over the Internet which will
benefit us all in time by lowering transaction costs.
Applications in publishing and software distribution have already sprung up
which depend on encryption. Rather than give a long list of examples, I ask
you to imagine whether you would want your credit card details to be
broadcast en clair round the world. If, like me, you would not, you need
encryption to buy and sell over the network.
The debate, which has not started properly in the UK, is about whether the
government should either ban the use of encryption by private individuals,
or limit its use to some system, such as the American Clipper chip which can
be bugged by government. In the US, the Netherlands and, I believe, France,
such restrictions are already being debated by their legislatures. Their
concern is supposedly about law and order.
My concern is that restrictions should not be imposed in the UK without a
proper public debate. Strong encryption software, PGP for example, is now
widely available worldwide.
Those crooks who need it already have it. An opportunity for significant
economic development of the Internet could be lost if governments are able
to push through ill-conceived restrictions just because the subject seems
too obscure for most of us to take an interest.
P S Meier,
Cranbrook Engineering,
Stone Street,
Cranbrook,
Kent,
TN17 3HB
