FT  11 NOV 94 / Technology: Farmers turn to genetic control
The farming industry could be on the brink of an important development in
pest and disease control that would boost production levels to new heights.
Gene transfer technology may be on the market in the next few years, but its
success depends largely on public acceptance.
Scientists are using biotechnology methods to create insect and disease-free
versions of widely consumed crops such as maize and wheat. Species that are
resistant to specific insects and diseases have been developed by Micogen,
Pioneer Hi-Bred, Monsanto, Ciba, Hoechst, Schering and others. Applications
to get some of these products on the market are now before the US
Environmental Protection Agency.
The Food and Drug Administration in Washington said earlier this month that
it would not oppose the development of two pest-resistant crops, a
virus-resistant squash (marrow) developed by Asgrow and a beetle-resistant
potato from Monsanto. These still have to win approval from the EPA, but it
is a step towards the market place.
If all goes well, the market could be vast. US farmers alone spend about
Dollars 600m (Pounds 366m) a year to combat pests and diseases in plants.
Much of that money could in the future go to biotechnology.
But the industry is concerned that public opposition could slow the process.
Americans are believed to be open to the idea of transgenic crops, but
scientists say their acceptance is far from guaranteed. Many Americans
oppose the transgenic Calgene tomato which was approved by the FDA a few
months ago.
Ironically, the surge in opposition to genetically engineered food products
comes as the EPA is hoping to encourage use of transgenics in farming. The
agency believes biotechnology can cut the use of chemical pesticides, which
are of increasing concern. On the back of recent research illuminating the
profound health risks of pesticides, the EPA announced this month it would
consider outlawing a number of chemicals.
Transgenic disease-resistant crops are created by splicing a specific gene
into a plant. The gene causes the plant to produce enzymes which protect it
from predators. Proponents of the technology say it is more effective than
pesticides, since the entire plant is immunised.
The main environmental concern of the transgenic crops is that their
widespread use could cause insects and diseases to become rapidly resistant
themselves. Under normal circumstances, pests gradually build up immunities
to chemicals and other products. Because the transgenic crops are so
efficient, environmentalists say, this process may be accelerated.
Although this is a risk, Elizabeth Milewski, a special assistant for
biotechnology at the EPA believes the new technology should be pursued
enthusiastically. 'These transgenic plants fall into what we call the
low-risk category. They can be much safer than pesticide-treated crops.'
