FT  25 JUL 94 / An economic hero for Tony Blair: America
I suspect Mr Tony Blair, the new leader of the British Labour Party, is keen
to keep abreast of US economic ideas. His advisers regard the Clinton
administration, for all its failings, as a valuable role model. My advice is
to steer well clear of the US economic establishment: there is little or
nothing he can learn from the Harvard/MIT-types now in charge in Washington.
Intellectually, they have not progressed far from the naive interventionism
of the 1960s; and they are recycling old ideas under the unimaginative
rubric of 'new Keynesian economics'.
The kind of thinker from whom Mr Blair could gain important insights is
Professor James Buchanan, the 1986 Nobel economics laureate, now at George
Mason University near Washington DC. Mr Blair should not worry that Buchanan
cites Hayek as an important influence and considers himself 'fundamentally a
libertarian'. In the 1940s British Labour leaders had the courage to embrace
the ideas of Keynes, who was hardly a socialist. Half a century later,
Buchanan has much to teach social democrats who are struggling to come to
terms with the market.
The aspect of Buchanan's thought that is likely to have greatest appeal for
Mr Blair is his concept of 'constitutional economics'. Most economists
analyse economic decisions within a pre-existing institutional framework:
the subject is about 'choice within constraints'. Decades ahead of his
colleagues Buchanan began to emphasise the broader framework: the 'choice of
constraints' as he puts it. Rather than trying to micro-manage economic
decisions the government should focus on the rules under which the game is
played. Better rules can conceivably improve prospects for everybody.
The importance of institutions is now better understood. It has, for
example, become a cliche to argue that the Bretton Woods conference of 1944
helped promote global economic growth by creating a supportive framework of
rules and institutions; 50 years on, politicians are beginning to grasp that
a new institutional structure is required in today's quite different
financial landscape.
But the ideas of constitutional economics can be applied more broadly. Take
training. Rather than planning heavy-handed interventions, Mr Blair should
formulate a 'training constitution' - a stable set of rules and
institutions, tailored to the 1990s, designed to help young people help
themselves.
By Labour's undemanding standards, Mr Blair already seems sceptical of the
public sector's ability to work economic miracles. Reading Buchanan might
greatly enhance that scepticism. He is famous (or perhaps infamous) within
the economics profession for having turned the tables on interventionists by
arguing convincingly that 'government failure' is a more serious threat than
'market failure'.
When Buchanan reached economic maturity in the 1950s, most of his colleagues
were just discovering the concept of market failure. They thought they had
scientifically proved that free markets achieve optimal outcomes only if the
most demanding conditions are met, for example, that economic agents have
perfect information and can make transactions costlessly. Since such
conditions do not hold in the real world, markets necessarily 'failed'.
Government thus had carte blanche to intervene.
Although endorsed by the profession's great intellects, it was a nonsensical
argument. Markets fail only relative to idealised mathematical models that
themselves have no foundation in reality. The practical question is whether
there is a better alternative. Buchanan argued there usually is not, because
bureaucrats and politicians are more likely to err than markets.
In one of many direct hits, he exposed the inconsistency of mainstream
economists' assumptions about behaviour in the private and public domains.
The orthodox view was that individuals in the private sector strive to
maximise their 'utility' or satisfaction but, once they cross the public
sector's portals, instantly reinvent themselves as promoters of the public
good.
Without denying the possibility of selfless action in either the public or
private spheres, Buchanan deflated confidence in government by arguing that
it was more plausible to assume that politicians and civil servants are
typically self-serving. Like the rest of us, they care more about their own
careers than the nation's welfare.
Buchanan supported this argument with an even more fundamental observation.
Government is not a simple entity that can be entrusted to make rational
decisions. Modern democratic government is instead a messy conglomerate of
disparate interests. Building on work by Knut Wicksell, the great
19th-century Swedish economist, he argued that the appropriate boundaries of
the state depend in large measure on arcane details such as voting rules and
the structure of legislative assemblies.
Roughly speaking the nearer that voting rules approach unanimous consent,
the greater the number of functions that can safely be entrusted to
government. Under simple majority voting, the favoured approach today,
government's scope should be sharply restrained, lest it trample on the
rights of minorities.
Buchanan is not just a fountain of ideas; unlike many well-heeled
Keynesians, he also has the credentials of an authentic Labour hero. Since
his family could not afford an elite private college he attended Middle
Tennessee State Teachers' College in Murfreesboro, paying his way by milking
cows morning and night. The message for the less privileged: stop bleating,
start working and you too may win a Nobel prize.
