FT  02 APR 94 / Death is outwitted by gods reborn in spring: The many
celebrations of rebirth at Easter
Tomorrow, in thousands of Christian churches around the world, millions of
men and women will celebrate the resurrection of Jesus Christ. They will
rejoice - in the words of the Apostles' Creed - in the historical figure who
'was crucified, dead and buried. He descended into hell. The third day, He
rose again from the dead. He ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the right
hand of God the Father Almighty.'
Tomorrow, children will open their Easter eggs. Churches will be decked with
flowers and, in some parts of Europe, bonfires will blaze. But we might
choose to remember that, far more than 2,000 years ago - long before the
birth of Christ, and at almost precisely the same time of the year -
countless people celebrated the re-birth of their own particular god from
death.
They believed there was not just one god but many - or, rather, many
different names for the same one. In Bronze Age Sumeria, around 2,500 BC,
they called him Dumuzi; in Babylonia, Tammuz; in ancient Egypt, Osiris.
Later, in Phrygia, he was Attis; in Canaan, Baal; and, in Greece, Dionysos
and Adonis. All of these gods died and descended into the underworld.
It happened to 'goddesses' too: Inanna in Mesopotamia and Persephone in
Greece. Many stayed there for three days; some for three months. Then, they
were rescued. Death variously was outwitted, cheated, forced to barter, even
killed. Life won a respite, an exchange, a deferral, a victory. Like winter,
death's dominion was only temporary.
Can we be surprised if these celebrations of rebirth over the millennia of
human history always take place in spring? Yesterday, on the holy Friday
Christians call 'Good', millions mourned the death of the son of God,
crucified on a cross in Golgotha - 'the place of a skull'. The churches were
dim, the altars bare, the priests wore black, the hymns were melancholy and
despairing.
This is the wasteland, where death is the end and even God dies, slain by
human ignorance. At this darkest point in the ceremony, the cross becomes
the focus, for this instrument of death now appears as the Tree of Life.
In early Christian iconography, the cross is often depicted as a tree, both
cut and budding, with lopped-off branches and green shoots, as in the 13th
century Evesham Psalter Cross. In Byzantine art, crosses twist into branches
and curl over into sprays of flowers. Rarely are they the distilled
abstractions of later Protestant meditation.
In the third century, Helena, mother of the Roman emperor Constantine,
travelled many lands in search of the true cross. In legend, this was made
from the Tree of Life which stood in the centre of the Garden of Eden, at
the source of four rivers, and granted immortality.
Standing in counterpoise to the Tree of Knowledge, the cross, as the Tree of
Life, thus redeems the fate of Adam whose skull became the skull at
Golgotha, burying Death. In the magnificent 16th century mosaic at the
Church of San Clemente in Rome, death and resurrection are portrayed in one
image. Christ stands against the cross as the trunk and branch of the Tree
of Life, its joyously-spiralling leaves extending into the universe. The
cross is the Cosmic Tree at the centre of the world. For Christian doctrine,
the symbol of the cross as the Tree of Life is entirely intelligible within
its own tradition.
Yet, these are universal symbols, far more ancient than Christianity, and
their recurrence in the myths and folklore of the world is arresting and
fascinating. Osiris of Egypt was imprisoned by his wicked brother, Seth, in
a coffin. It was thrown into the Nile but was washed ashore and came to rest
inside the trunk of a tamarisk tree. He was released from the tree, dying
again and then being re-born, and a pillar of wood with four crossed
branches - the Djed column - was raised upright as the sign of his life
everlasting.
Adonis (the name Adonai means the Lord) was born from the myrtle, and
anemones rose from his blood; Dionysos was dismembered as the grapes from
the vine, wreathed in the ivy that is ever-green. Phrygian Attis was tied to
a tree of pine. Even the Buddha attained his supreme awakening as he sat in
meditation beneath the Bodhi tree.
Originally, the symbolism of the cross was a not a solar but a lunar image,
inscribed on neolithic pots as the four quarters of the moon, our first
source of measurement - an image of change and changelessness, time and
eternity.
Transferred to the earth and the solar year, the four points of the lunar
circle become the four directions of the universe, the four cardinal points
of the zodiac (the equinoxes and solstices), the four seasons of the
temperate climates, even the four phases of the day. In other words, an
image of totality in time. Symbolically, the cyclical waxing and waning of
the moon's light offered an image of transformation, for in its perpetual
return to its own beginnings it unified what apparently had been
dismembered. The moon 'died' and yet rose again out of the dark.
All over the world, and throughout a host of cultures, gods, goddesses,
heroes and heroines 'died' during the three days when the moon vanishes.
They went down into the underworld (like Inanna of Sumeria), or into the
belly of the whale or of the dragon (like Jonah in the Old Testament, Jason
of the Greeks, Raven of the Eskimos), or were, like Joseph, thrown into the
well.
Then, they were reborn: Persephone returned to her Harvest Mother, Demeter;
Inanna, naked in death but sprinkled with water, put back her seven veils
and ascended to the upper world. And Jesus, of course, also descended into
hell for three days before his resurrection.
Many, if not most, of the world's religious calendars are lunar in origin
and, for Christians, the drama of the moon's cyclical phases remains
reflected in the timing of Easter to the first Sunday after the first full
moon following the spring equinox.
Significantly, the rites of Christ's incarnation are governed by the solar
calendar and fall on fixed dates, since they are connected with the birth of
the sun (Christmas at the winter solstice, for instance, where Jesus takes
over the role of Sol Invictus from the Roman god Mithras). By contrast, the
Easter rites of his death, resurrection and ascension are governed by the
lunar calendar, because of the images of death and rebirth in the waning and
waxing of the moon.
Easter was named in the middle ages after the Saxon goddess of the dawn,
Eostre, whose feast was held at the spring equinox. Her sacred animal was
the egg-laying moon-hare, which gives us our Easter eggs. So, the underlying
language directs us continually to images of rebirth - the birth of the sun
from the dark of the night, the ascendancy of the light of the new year over
the darkness of the old, and the full moon as the sign of the resurgence of
life over death. And, finally, the cross is transformed from the Tree of
Death into the Tree of Life at the time when all nature buds from an
invisible source.
Perhaps the drawing of parallels, in symbol and ritual, between Christianity
and other mythologies might not have to be greeted, so many centuries later,
with cries of outrage and apostasy from the literalists. Christian theology
is, understandably, committed to the premise that earlier rituals were only
anticipations of the coming of Christ who was their apotheosis. Inevitably
it interprets other traditions in this light.
But the Christian Mystery need not be reduced merely by virtue of its
resemblance to other Mystery religions. Why need its participation with
other traditions in a common store of wonder and worship diminish its own
unique reality? Could it not rather be met with delight - even awe - that so
many of the world's people, have experienced the divine in a similar way?
When, for instance, Mary Magdalene first saw the risen Jesus, she took him
for the gardener - an image that would have been familiar to Mesopotamians,
for whom Dumuzi-Tammuz was known as the gardener in the garden of life.
When Mary, the mother, and Mary Magdalene are shown sorrowing on either side
of the cross, they can be compared with the sisters mourning Osiris. And, as
the Djed column was raised in ancient Egypt after the Nile's life-giving
inundation, the people cried 'Osiris is risen' just as, tomorrow, we
proclaim: 'Christ is risen.'
Why, though, should either festival be lessened by comparison with the
other? And, more than this, might not our own celebration - with our
advantage of the knowledge of both - be enlarged by an awareness of the
other? Not least on the ground that one way of loving our neighbours is to
include their humanity within our own?
