FT  25 JUL 94 / FT Guide to the Week
MONDAY 25
Israel-Jordan summit
Israel's prime minister, Yitzhak Rabin, and King Hussein of Jordan hold a
summit in Washington, marking the rapid pace of the unfolding Middle East
peace process.
The meeting will be a public affirmation that the Israeli-Jordanian peace
process is irreversible and that Israel is on the way to its second peace
treaty with an Arab neighbour since the Egyptian-Israeli accord of 1979.
A formal treaty, still several months away, will be preceded by joint
projects in tourism, trade, environment and regional development. Borders,
commercial flights and telephone lines may be opened in a first step towards
a regionally integrated market which has been the dream of Shimon Peres,
Israel's foreign minister.
The US will encourage and underwrite many of the projects and has
demonstrated its support by promising to present to Congress a bill to write
off Dollars 950m of Jordanian debt. Both Mr Rabin and King Hussein will
address Congress on Tuesday.
The Asean Regional Forum, bringing together 18 countries to discuss
political and security issues in Asia, meets for the first time in Bangkok.
In addition to the six members of the Association of South East Asian
Nations, among those attending are the US, China and Russia. The crisis over
North Korea's nuclear programme and the civil war in Cambodia are among the
likely topics for discussion, but the meeting may focus on defining ARF's
future role. The forum was established in response to the uncertainty in the
region after the end of the cold war.
Ecowas, the Economic Community of West African States, begins its annual
meeting in Abuja, leading to the heads of states' meeting on Thursday and
Friday. Ecowas has made little progress towards its target of economic and
monetary union by the year 2000, and the main issue will be its joint
peacekeeping force in Liberia, dominated by Nigerian troops.
Finance ministers will discuss the effects of January's sharp devaluation of
the Francophone states' common currency, the CFA franc.
UK tank delivery: Sir Colin Chandler, chief executive of the Vickers
engineering company, hands over the first completed Challenger 2 tank to the
British Army in a ceremony at the company's Barnbow factory in Leeds. It is
the first of 146 tanks in the first production run which was supplemented by
a follow-on order for 259 more two weeks ago. When final deliveries are
complete around the year 2000, the British Army will have an entirely
Challenger 2 tank fleet.
Bayreuth and Salzburg begin their music festivals.
Holidays: Costa Rica, Fiji (Constitution Day), Spain (Madrid only),
Thailand, Tunisia.
TUESDAY 26
Whitewater hearing begins
The US House of Representatives banking committee holds the first
congressional hearings into any aspect of the Whitewater affair, which
concerns Arkansas property deals, loans, and President Clinton and his wife
Hillary. The session will focus on contacts between the White House and
other government regulatory agencies.
Among those due to testify are 'Mack' McLarty, former White House chief of
staff and now senior counsellor, Margaret Ann Williams, chief of staff to
Hillary Rodham Clinton, and Lloyd Cutler, White House legal counsel.
The Senate banking committee is due to hold parallel hearings beginning
either Wednesday or Thursday.
Taiwan courts Gatt: Negotiations resume in Geneva on Taiwan's bid to join
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. Taiwan hopes to be a member by
the year-end, but Beijing insists on being admitted first (see Friday).
UK economy: The Confederation of British Industry quarterly industrial
trends survey will be watched for signs that the UK economic recovery is
triggering more investment. Previous surveys have a bearish attitude to
investment, in spite of the gradual growth in manufacturing.
Companies' pricing expectations during the next four months are also likely
to be another key topic of interest, in light of the recent rise in the cost
of raw materials and components.
Spanish strike: Workers at Spanish car-maker Seat, a subsidiary of Germany's
Volkswagen, have called a 24-hour strike. They object to a proposed 10 per
cent pay-cut and the failure of management to offer any job guarantees in
return.
UK rail strikes: Signalworkers for Railtrack, owner of most of the
infrastructure of Britain's rail network, step up their pay dispute with
their first 48-hour stoppage, beginning at noon.
Travellers have experienced 24-hour stoppages on the past six Wednesdays.
UK politics: The House of Lords, the unelected upper chamber of parliament,
rises for its summer recess, returning on October 10.
Glorious Goodwood: One of the premier meetings of the English horse racing
calendar begins today (to July 30).
Holidays: Cuba (National Rebellion Day).
WEDNESDAY 27
Thai confidence vote
Thai opposition parties are due to launch a no-confidence debate in
parliament against four ministers in the governing coalition, including
Prasong Soonsiri, the foreign minister who is simultaneously hosting a
series of meetings for the Association of South-East Asian Nations (Asean).
Political commentators predict that the government will survive the debate,
but some members of the coalition's Palang Dharma (Moral Force) party have
threatened to vote against their own cabinet ministers because of
disagreements within the party.
Wheat heat:
US and Canadian trade ministers Mickey Kantor (left) and Roy Maclaren sit
down to try to negotiate a deal which would avoid US curbs on Canadian durum
wheat exports and possibly other commodities. The US International Trade
Commission has already found Canada guilty of dumping its wheat in the US.
EU social policy: The European Commission is due to approve social affairs
commissioner Padraig Flynn's white paper on social policy at a meeting in
Brussels.
Bangladesh's main opposition party, the Awami League, plans a big rally to
press its demand for an early election under an interim administration.
John Major, UK prime minister, gives European Policy Forum lecture in London
on The Role and Limits of the State.
Bank of England tercentenary:
A distinguished Old Lady celebrates her birthday. The Queen, leading
politicians and top City figures attend a service of thanksgiving in St
Paul's Cathedral to mark the 300th anniversary of the date the Bank of
England's charter was sealed. Unlike most of us, the Bank is gaining
strength as it grows older. Eddie George, its governor, now exercises a more
powerful influence over monetary policy than any of his recent predecessors.
FT Surveys: Bank of England's 300th Anniversary and Tunisia.
Holidays: Belarus (Independence Day), Bosnia and Hercegovina.
THURSDAY 28
Talks on Yemen begin
United Nations-sponsored talks
to help forge a reconciliation between North and South Yemen are due to
start in Paris after their two-month civil war.
Abiola trial: Moshood Abiola is to be tried for treason by Nigeria's
military regime today in a specially convened high court in Abuja. Mr Abiola
was arrested last month when he declared himself president on the
anniversary of his victory in the annulled presidential election.
General Sani Abacha has promised to start a new transition to civilian rule
some time next year, but is facing mounting opposition and a national strike
in the vital oil industry.
Japanese economy: Industrial production figures out today should give
further evidence that the Japanese recession is bottoming out. Analysts
expect the growth rate to pick up in June, after a year-on-year fall of 1.2
per cent in May.
UK water pricing: The water industry regulator, Ian Byatt, publishes his
long-awaited price controls for UK water companies at a time when
fast-rising water charges have been widely criticised. The controls will
dictate how much companies can increase prices during the next 10 years,
taking account of inflation and their obligations to modernise the water
system.
Holidays: Peru (Independence Day).
FRIDAY 29
China discusses Gatt terms
Members of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade meet in Geneva to
discuss the terms on which China will be re-admitted to the world trade
body.
Beijing, exasperated by the delay in concluding the seven-year-old
negotiations, says it will submit one last trade liberalisation offer but is
not prepared to join Gatt at any cost.
The hard bargaining is expected in September, as China tries to beat the
deadline for Gatt membership by year-end, enabling it to become a founder
member of Gatt's successor, the World Trade Organisation.
Islamic fundamentalists in Bangladesh plan a march to the capital Dhaka as
part of their campaign against Taslima Nasreen, 32, a feminist writer
accused of insulting Islam. Ms Nasreen came to prominence last year with a
novel, 'Lajja' (Shame), portraying the sufferings of Bangladesh's Hindu
minority.
Lloyds kicks off the UK clearing banks' interim results season. Its
prospects are affected by uncertainty over its proposed Pounds 1.8bn
(Dollars 2.8bn) acquisition of Cheltenham &amp; Gloucester building society.
Pre-tax profits of about Pounds 850m are expected.
Real deadline: Today is the last chance for Brazilians to exchange their old
currency, the cruzeiro, for the real, which was introduced on July 1.
WEEKEND 30-31
Ministers meet on Bosnia
Foreign ministers from the five-nation contact group on Bosnia meet in
Geneva on Saturday to decide what to do after the failure of the latest,
supposedly final, peace plan. Options include tighter sanctions on Serbia,
more rigorous enforcement of 'no-fly' and exclusion zones, and lifting the
arms embargo for the Bosnian government.
Taiwanese and mainland Chinese negotiators start talks on Saturday in
Taipei.
On the agenda are fishing disputes, the return of illegal immigrants to the
island and the repatriation of airline hijackers. The last round of talks
was held in March. Five previous rounds have been unsuccessful.
Sailing: Cowes Week begins on Saturday (to August 6).
South Pacific Forum: The 25th annual meeting begins in Brisbane on Sunday
(to August 2). Delegates will consider how the Forum's structure and
procedures are adapting to economic changes in the region, and its
relationship with other institutions, especially the Association of South
East Asian Nations and the Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation forum.
Motor racing: The German Grand Prix takes place at Hockenheim, near
Heidelberg, on Sunday.
Compiled by Patrick Stiles.
Fax: (+44) (0)71 873 3194.
