FT  08 MAR 94 / Councils in Wales divide over reform
While the reform of local government in England is in disarray, the bill to
reorganise councils in Wales is proceeding through its parliamentary stages.
The principle of unitary authorities to replace the existing two-tier
structure has been broadly accepted in Wales, but the means of creation is
arousing fierce disagreement.
'A fundamentally flawed reorganisation,' says the Assembly of Welsh
Counties, echoing demands that first there should be an elected all-Wales
assembly.
Unlike the Scottish reform bill, now at its Commons committee stage, the
local government (Wales) bill was introduced in the Lords, which gave it its
third reading yesterday.
The government hopes it will have its first Commons reading this month and
become law before the summer recess. If so, the eight county councils in
Wales and 37 districts will be replaced by 21 unitary authorities in April
1996.
This is a year later than proposed a year ago by a white paper - like
Scotland, but unlike England, no commission roved the principality to
ascertain local views. But the bill has survived the Lords almost unscathed;
the most exciting moment was when the Lords defeated the government by
voting to keep the name Powys, rather than Mid Wales.
The financial benefits of the reform are highly uncertain. Estimates of the
transitional costs by consultants for the government range from Pounds 65m
to Pounds 150m over 15 years. Whereas district councils believe there could
be eventual savings of Pounds 17m a year, the counties estimate additional
annual costs of Pounds 6m.
The initial costs, and potential savings, will depend largely on
redundancies. Welsh councils have nearly 100,000 full-time and 60,000
part-time staff, and predictions of between 10,000 and 30,000 job losses
have been made. The Welsh Office white paper made no redundancy estimates,
although Mr John Redwood, Welsh secretary, has said the 'vast majority' of
staff will transfer to the new authorities.
The county councils are predictably pressing for fewer than 21 authorities
and the districts for more. A more neutral note is struck by Mr Graham Hall,
chief executive of Wales Chamber of Commerce &amp; Industry: 'Business people
are happy to have unitary authorities, but the general view is there should
be no more than 15 to provide a strategic view for economic development.'
The Confederation of British Industry in Wales shares the view that
authorities need to be large enough to carry clout, and supports a campaign
for a greater Cardiff, rather than splitting South Glamorgan into separate
authorities for the city and Vale of Glamorgan.
In spite of the arguments about size and boundaries, accusations of
gerrymandering have been limited, mainly because no reorganisation could do
much to improve the Conservatives' mandate in the principality. An analysis
of last year's county elections by the Cardiff Institute of Higher Education
showed Labour would control or be the main party in 16 of the new
authorities, and the Tories in none.
The bill's main effect has been to rally support for a Wales assembly to
counter further centralisation of power in the Welsh Office and the quangos.
Mr Redwood opposes an assembly as another tier of government, but a Labour
move to create one was only narrowly defeated in the Lords.
'We take the view it is a bad bill - a prerequisite is that there should be
an elected tier at regional level,' says Mr Hugh Thomas, secretary of the
Assembly of Welsh Counties. Plaid Cymru, the nationalist party also pressing
for an assembly, says: 'The powers of the local authorities are to be
drastically reduced in all sorts of ways - reduced to being an agent rather
than an executive authority.'
The government has made a concession over the reserve powers of the Welsh
secretary to appoint members to a joint authority. The members would now
come from the authorities concerned. Mr Redwood also conceded there could be
about 1,250 councillors, 150 more than first mooted (compared with 1,900
today).
In geographically large authorities, he proposes the management of local
services could be delegated to area committees although this has been
described by the Council of Welsh Districts as 'a recipe for confusion'.
Opponents of the bill are taking a pragmatic view to seek more concessions.
Mr David Jenkins, general secretary of Wales Trades Union Council, says: 'We
remain strongly critical of the proposals. We think they are seriously
flawed with no provision for an all-Wales tier, but also because the
councils will become enabling authorities as opposed to providing
authorities.
'However, we equally recognise that the reform of local government was
necessary.'
