FT  12 FEB 94 / Truth of the Matter: Not all roads lead to Rome
It was 50 years ago. A young widow and her four boys came to live in a
village on the edge of some beechwoods.
On the far side of the woods there was an active and expanding Roman
Catholic monastery. Shortly after her arrival two elderly sisters from the
village paid a formal call with the parish magazine. They welcomed her,
admired the furnishings, helped her identify the plants in the garden and
were introduced to her sons.
As they were leaving they turned for a last confidential word. 'We think you
would be well advised not to let the dear boys play in the woods alone. It's
crawling with Romans.'
The prospect of encountering some long lost legion manoeuvres was
intriguing. More intriguing was the lowered voice. I met exactly the same
tone when I once asked my grandmother in the middle of a tea party why Oscar
Wilde was put in prison. 'My dear,' she whispered, 'we do not speak of Oscar
Wilde.'
Times have changed, but 'Rome' and 'going over to Rome' still produce a
frisson in many Church of England parishes, at least in those not devoutly
Anglo-Catholic. It is also a continuing matter of fascination to the secular
press and its readers.
This is not the paranoid hatred and fear of Ulster; nor the bigotry of a Wee
Free Kirk which can excommunicate a Lord Chancellor for attending a requiem
mass. Nevertheless, 400 years after the Reformation there still remains an
underlying mistrust of the Roman Catholic church in the hearts of many
English people, even the unchurched.
So, when a duchess, or an MP, or an Anglican Bishop 'converts' it makes
headline news. The media start taking the pulse of the Church of England and
pronouncing the old dear moribund. The fact that numerically more people are
moving in the opposite direction goes unrecorded. No fanfares for the 300
former Roman Catholic priests admitted to the Episcopal Church in the US.
What is the attraction of Rome? For different people it has a different
pull, but anyone who has not felt that gravitational attraction has not
really understood the spell of catholicism, with all its mystique of
priestcraft, ancient rituals and certainty. Many upper class women whose
marriages are emotionally barren, have found in the sensitive and safe
celibate priest a warm attention to their spiritual needs to which they can
respond with equally safe devotion.
Roman Catholic religious orders hold on behalf of Christendom a depth of
sacramental spirituality which makes many of us feel shallow and
superficial. I count among my dearest friends faithful, intelligent and
loving members of that church.
So why don't we all sign up?
Some will. Those who cannot stomach the ordination of women to the
priesthood may go that way, although probably fewer than the obituary
writers of the C of E would love to believe.
But there will always be a trickle of people who simply find themselves
spiritually more at home on one side of the wall than the other.
In the US the trickle from the Roman church into the Episcopal one is
already a steady stream. But priests brought up in the corner of
Anglo-Catholicism, and some of their devoted laity, will find a warm welcome
in Rome. For that everyone is thankful.
The great majority of Anglicans will resist the gravitational pull of Rome
for equally diverse reasons and prejudices but many for conscience and
intellectual integrity.
God knows the spirituality and discipline of the Church of England are often
shaky, but that may be the price that has to be paid for resisting the claim
of an authority which seeks to dictate the truth of doctrine and morals
regardless of conscience and the evidence.
The Papal ban on contraception is an outrage against conscience and reason,
and is known to be by the majority of Roman Catholic laypeople and priests.
Its consequences for couples are often tragic and for the globe potentially
catastrophic.
The problem with absolute authority is that it can never admit that it was
wrong in the past for fear of undermining its credibility in the present.
The autocratic ideology of the Roman magisterium has had dire consequences
in the realm of science, morals and politics. The claim to irrefutable
certainty may be immensely reassuring to people feeling lost in a welter of
claims for their souls, but it has a devastating effect on scholarship and
open debate.
Against its absolutism the Church of England continues to oppose a reformed
catholicism which holds that the process of establishing truths of faith and
morals is an ongoing task offering - usually - provisional answers. There is
only a continuing dialogue between scripture, tradition, reason and
contemporary knowledge. Absolutes are not on offer.
Between the biblical fundamentalism of the southern Baptist and the papal
fundamentalism of Rome there is not a lot to choose. It is equally
oppressive to be told that the bodily assumption of the Virgin Mary into
heaven is a belief necessary for salvation as to be told that the Genesis
story of creation is literally true. Both fundamentalisms are associated
with attitudes to women which are hostile to equal rights. Both intervene
into personal and family life in ways which are intrusive and oppressive.
The fault lines in the Christian world pass right through the churches, not
between them. In European and North American catholicism there is a
significant and growing segment of the church which is distrustful of the
Vatican and the hierarchy, and deplores the retrogressive influence of the
present Pope.
Liberal Anglicans, Lutherans and catholics find they have far more in common
with one another than with the conservative wings of their own denomination.
At the grass roots, lay people are taking matters into their own hands and
voting with their feet on an eclectic ticket.
When on holiday in France many Anglicans are welcomed enthusiastically as
communicants in Roman catholic churches; every Sunday there will be a dozen
Roman catholics communicating in our cathedral. The language of the
liturgies of the churches has now converged to such an extent that
worshippers are often unaware which church they are in.
In spite of all these welcome convergences there remains one insuperable
obstacle for members of the Church of England to any personal or
institutional rapprochement with Rome: the absolutism of papal authority. It
is not just doctrinally or morally uncongenial. However guarded or moderated
in its expression it endangers the freedom of the human spirit. For any
converts looking for a refuge from life's uncertainties it offers a haven of
peace. But until the leopard changes its spots those of a different metal
will not allow it to eat them up.
Hugh Dickinson is Dean of Salisbury.
