FT  05 MAY 94 / London Stock Exchange: Footsie at year's low on renewed rate
worries - Market Report
UK securities markets crumbled yesterday as the round of support for the US
dollar brought fears that the Federal Reserve might add its own touch by
raising its interest rates, a prospect calculated to increase worries over
the near term outlook for rates in the UK. The FT-SE 100 Index ended at a
new closing low for the year of 3,070.5 and sentiment was generally cool,
with Mr John Major's government widely believed to be heading for a setback
in today's local elections.
Equities closed only a touch above the day's lows, with an early fall of 15
points on the Dow Average and losses of 1 1/2 points in long-dated UK bonds
completing a picture of unrelieved gloom. Traders believed that institutions
were switching some investment cash to European markets.
The day started slowly as the pound steadied on the cut in repo rates in
Germany and a comment from the Bundesbank that further strength in the
D-Mark might not be good for the German economy. But share prices were soon
overwhelmed by renewed selling of stock index futures and the slide in
gilt-edged securities. Weakness in Hong Kong markets upset those London
quoted stocks with involvement there.
Rumours of an impending rise in Federal Reserve rates increased in the
second half of the session in the wake of the intervention by central banks
to support the dollar. Selling gathered pace, although the day's Seaq total
of 571.3m shares was only mildly better than Tuesday's figure, which had
been worth Pounds 1.25bn in retail worth.
At worst, the FT-SE 100 dipped to 3,067.6 before steadying to a show a loss
of 29.5 at the closing reading. The Footsie had traded as low as 3,047 in
April but had not finished below 3,086 this year.
The index is now nearly 13 per cent below the year's peak, which was reached
at the beginning of February when the stock market was taking a highly
optimistic view on domestic inflation and interest rate prospects.
Once again, the downwards push came from the stock index futures, where the
June contract on the Footsie fell to a discount of around 20 points after
the official close.
At Panmure Gordon, Mr Robin Aspinall described the breach of 3,090 on the
Footsie as 'ominous', pointing out that equities have done well compared
with gilts - 'an out-performance which will be corrected in the coming
months'.
The FT-SE Mid 250 Index lost 17.6 points at 3,757.7, spared from the
pressure exercised from the futures markets. On the speculative front,
shares in Lasmo, the oil exploration group, continued to hang fire as the
market confidently predicted that Enterprise Oil, the bidder, would change
its terms to offer cash, and that a rival offer was waiting in the wings.
Company results had a more mixed impact than in some recent sessions, with
BAT Industries firm at first on good first-quarter figures but later
overwhelmed by the weakness in the blue chip sector. Unpromising comments at
the annual shareholders meeting brought a fall in Unilever shares.
Analysts expressed disappointment at yesterday's steep falls in UK bonds,
which drew no benefit from the steadier trend in sterling. Many securities
trading houses are believed to have suffered a further round of losses on
bond trading over the past week and this may have caused some forced selling
of equities.
