FT  15 AUG 94 / Banks 'see value of private investors'
Extensive branch networks are contributing to retail banks' ability to
benefit from the increase in the number of private individuals with large
amounts of money to invest, says a study by Datamonitor, the market research
group.
In an increasingly competitive market, Barclays, National Westminster -
which owns Coutts - Midland and Lloyds between them accounted for more than
one-fifth of the Pounds 66bn of high net worth liquid assets managed last
year.
The report says that in a market where the types of product available are
beginning to polarise between high and low levels of client involvement, the
high-street banks are able to offer both options, where others, such as
merchant banks or stockbrokers, have narrower capacities.
The banks' extensive branch networks and traditional expertise mean that
they are suited to offering both 'deposit account' services and
'stockbroker' style facilities, the report says.
Although the number of 'high net worth individuals' - classified for this
report as people with more than Pounds 50,000 in liquid assets - is rising,
the main result of the growing number of products on offer has been that
competition has intensified.
Lloyds Bank has had a private banking arm since 1985, but other large banks
took longer to enter the market. Midland, the most recent arrival, joined
earlier this year.
The report says the number of high net worth individuals is estimated at
1.2m and is increasing by about 5.5 per cent each year.
It divides them into four main groups: expatriates and entrepreneurs, who
are more likely to want the cheaper services in which they have greater
involvement, and people who are elderly or who have inherited money, who are
likely to prefer the fuller but more expensive services.
The first two types are experiencing high rates of growth in total value,
while the group of older people is so large that it accounts for 45 per cent
of all the Pounds 136bn in liquid assets held by high net worth individuals
in the UK.
Datamonitor estimates that of the Pounds 136bn, Pounds 53bn was held by
individuals with liquid assets of Pounds 50,000 to Pounds 100,000.
Some of these would generally fall outside the criteria for private banking
facilities offered by some institutions, but the banks are increasingly
conscious of the benefits of generating fee income from wealthier clients.
Financial Services for High Net Worth Individuals. Datamonitor, 106 Baker
Street, London W1M 1LA. Pounds 995.
