FT  22 NOV 94 / IMF urged to forgo secrecy of programmes
Mr Larry Summers, US Treasury under secretary, yesterday called on the IMF
and member governments to forgo the traditional secrecy of Fund programmes
to build public support for difficult adjustments.
'Adjustment programmes are negotiated in secret,' he noted. 'The
governments' letters of intent are not made public. Background documentation
is never released. For the poorest countries, the medium-term economic
scenarios prepared by Fund analysts have not been given to the public
either.'
He spoke after addressing a one-day meeting of parliamentarians from 18
countries who have oversight responsibility of their governments'
contributions to the multilateral lending institutions. The meeting was
hosted by Congressman Barney Frank, chairman of the House banking
sub-committee.
Mr Frank, an advocate of greater openness by the multilateral development
banks, will lose his chairmanship when the new Congress convenes under
Republican control next year. However, numerous Republican members are
suspicious of the multilateral banks and will demand reforms.
Mr Summers said the IMF and World Bank remained the best tools available for
promoting collective prosperity. But more could be done to improve projects
by involving the participation of those people who would be affected and
therefore were most knowledgeable.
'A more open IMF, working with member governments, would help build support
for its programmes,' he said. 'If we have learned anything about the
adjustment process, it is that more local ownership is essential, if it is
to succeed.'
He said although there were reasons for the secretive central banking
culture, more could be done to share what the Funds knows with the world.
'An IMF that shared its assessments of economic performance could make a
greater contribution to global capital market stability,' he said. 'Things
have to be different in a world where private capital flows are the dominant
source of finance in emerging markets.'
In contrast to the Fund, the World Bank had made strides in efforts to open
up. Since the controversy over the Narmada dam project in India, the bank
had opened information centres in London, Paris and Washington, which are
supposed to provide assessment of projects two years before they come to a
vote.
Nearly 7,100 requests for information were received in the first seven
months after these centres were opened.
New evaluation procedures established by the Bank have raised questions
about the proposed Arun dam in Nepal, Mr Summers said. A new independent
inspection panel, created by the Bank in 1993, had been asked to investigate
the proposal.
The World Bank had committed itself to zero real growth and slashed expense
accounts, but still too much spending occurred that could be traced to its
'formerly bloated culture', he declared. He said it was 'an outrage' that
the secretary of the treasury had to fly business class while World Bank
research assistants flew first class.
