FT  07 OCT 94 / The Labour Party in Blackpool: The cheerleader with a
conscience
The last time Mr John Prescott gave a speech from Labour's conference
platform he made a virtuoso defence of John Smith's plans for a more
democratic party constitution.
Today he will speak from the rostrum in defence of Mr Tony Blair's plan to
rewrite the constitution's sacred Clause 4. Support for the leader from the
most important representative of the party's traditionalist wing is
critical.
Mr Prescott's election as Mr Blair's deputy in July was in part a reward for
his loyalty to Mr Smith. Since then he has shown the same loyalty to Mr
Blair.
He is not an enthusiast for the idea of tearing up Labour's historic
commitment to 'common ownership of the means of production, distribution and
exchange'. He feels uneasy about being separated from the wing of the party
he was elected to represent. But Mr Prescott understands that his support is
vital to ensure that Mr Blair wins. And he has no wish to see him lose.
So Mr Prescott will announce today that he will lead the consultation to
secure agreement on a replacement for Clause 4.
He helped Mr Blair craft the vital sections in this week's speech. And he
has been reassuring disquieted colleagues on on the left that the new
formula will include a commitment to a continuing role for public ownership.
He will be looking over Mr Blair's shoulder as the statement is drafted.
The two men are not natural political friends. They disagree over tax
policy. The Blair camp found it difficult to disguise its irritation at the
start of the week when the deputy made no secret of his belief that a Labour
government should tax the rich more heavily.
Mr Prescott is a more instinctive interventionist. He is suspicious of Mr
Blair's close relationship with Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor. He
sees himself as the guardian of the conscience of the traditionalist left.
He is not sure that Mr Blair understands fully the way the party in the
country works.
But the new leader has been careful to ensure that his deputy has been
closely involved in all the key decisions in the run-up to the conference.
Mr Brown warned Mr Blair not to go ahead with the idea of rewriting the
constitution unless he was certain of his deputy's support.
Mr Prescott has responded to his inclusion by making it clear that as long
as he remains in the inner circle he will press his case strongly in private
but will not seek publicly to undermine Mr Blair.
In today's speech he will also seek to carve out another niche - as head of
the party's campaigning drive in the run up to the general election. He will
announce a target of doubling the party membership and will promise an
overhaul of the lamentable machinery at Labour headquarters.
With a reputation as a speaker who can rouse the party's activists and a
politician who has a strongly positive image among the party's traditional
supporters, Mr Prescott intends to assume a role in the constituencies akin
to that of the Tory party chairman.
Mr Blair is said to be enthusiastic about the idea. Together the young
moderniser and the down-to-earth traditionalist make a powerful team. But
the Labour leader would be wrong to take his deputy for granted. Loyalty, Mr
Prescott has told friends, does not have to be blind.
