FT  19 MAY 94 / Book Review: Orderly shape of things to come
'THE WORLD IN 2020 - Power, Culture and Prosperity: a Vision for the Future'
By Hamish MacRae, Harper Collins, Pounds 20
With five years to go before the millennium, the futures industry is busy.
Books mixing wild predictions and crude extrapolations are appearing every
week. Within this slightly disreputable genre, Hamish MacRae's new book
stands out, bringing together a wealth of information, sound judgments and a
journalist's eye for the telling detail.
Most of the chapters offer a fairly familiar, but readable account of the
likely trends over the next 25 years. He shows, for example, how technology
creates not only new ways of doing things (such as derivatives markets) but
also problems such as the privacy issues raised by smart cards.
He explains why demographic shifts are likely to change political agendas in
rapidly ageing societies, such as Germany and Japan, towards tougher
policies on social order or inflation, and why global demographic pressures
are likely to create new lines of division. An example is access to water
supplies, where he anticipates battles over everything from dams on the
Danube to grandiose plans to divert the Yangtze.
But the book's central argument is about values and their role in promoting
economic success. Market economies, he argues, depend not only on production
but also on shared values: people's willingness to obey rules and behave
well. Such rules and values do not arise automatically, but are fostered
(and sometimes undermined). When they work well, policing can be light,
occasional and often internalised. When they work badly, penalties must be
harsh, and policing and regulation must be costly and pervasive.
In themselves these are not new arguments. Two hundred years ago many feared
that the values of an acquisitive, entrepreneurial capitalism would
undermine the moral foundations of good behaviour. More recently Daniel
Bell, the first theorist of post-industrial society, has argued that a
short-termist, hedonistic consumer culture is displacing the work ethic. But
it is the influence of east Asia that makes this type of argument more
pertinent in the 1990s. We may be shocked when Singapore canes a teenager,
but we deeply envy the rapid growth, the crime-free streets and empty
prisons which are its corollary.
Most in the west anticipate a steady accumulation of individual liberties.
But according to MacRae, associate editor of The Independent newspaper, the
pendulum may be swinging. Some governments are 'starting to become less
squeamish', with tougher measures on smoking, drinking and driving, and
abortion. The introduction of closed-circuit television in shopping centres
in the name of safety may be another telling sign. Behind this trend lies
greater public awareness of the trade-offs between liberties and social
goods, such as well-brought-up children or safe streets.
The argument becomes more ambiguous, however, when he links it to economic
success. A culture that is strongly committed to social order may be good
for 20th century industrial societies, but it may also mitigate against
creativity and individualism - the qualitative factors which MacRae sees as
increasingly essential to economic performance, particularly in service
industries.
This ambiguity makes it difficult to judge the prospects of different
regions. Despite the strengths of the US, including its prodigious
creativity, MacRae argues that if it is to retain world leadership it will
need to tackle not only low saving, social disruption and crime, but also
the bureaucracy and waste associated with having 760,000 lawyers
(three-quarters of the world's total), a vast political lobbying industry,
and overall regulatory costs estimated at Dollars 400bn each year. Each of
these is in part a symptom of lack of social cohesion. But whether the US
would really do better with a more conformist culture is impossible to
prove.
The same ambiguities arise in relation to education. Despite first-class
universities, most Americans perform worse than Europeans and far worse than
Japanese, Koreans, Chinese and Taiwanese. Interestingly the only factor
clearly correlating with performance (at least in maths and science) is the
number of hours spent in learning: the typical Chinese pupil spends 73 days
more in instruction each year than the typical American.
Although few would dispute the need to improve the lamentable performance of
most US (and British) pupils, MacRae suggests that the loose nature of UK
schooling may have something to do with British success in creative
industries such as advertising, financial services and television.
The converse applies to east Asia. Along with a strong work ethic,
industrial flexibility and high savings (38 per cent in Singapore compared
with 19 per cent in the UK), commitment to learning is one of its greatest
strengths. But if it remains predominantly learning by rote, it is hard to
see how east Asian societies will become world leaders, able to transcend
the weaknesses that result from a narrow product range, overdependence on
the north American market, and the underdevelopment of service industries.
In the past, wise minds have not been good at turning an understanding of
the present into accurate forecasts. Recent history is full of unexpected
events, such as the rise of personal computers and the fall of communism. In
the future, hard forecasts will be vulnerable to the unpredictable: new
diseases, a nuclear war or a severe earthquake in Tokyo.
This may explain the nagging doubt one has when reading this stimulating
book. In the era of chaos theory and non-linear systems, its tone of
Olympian optimism that most important trends can be predicted may be just a
bit too confident to convince.
The reviewer is director of Demos, the independent UK think-tank
