FT  05 DEC 94 / Burundi extremists refuse to heed example of Rwanda
Even with the horror of Rwanda at their doorstep, political extremists in
Burundi appear determined to speed up the disintegration of their country
and provoke another ethnic bloodbath.
After months of United Nations-mediated negotiations to forge a government
of national unity, the Tutsi-led opposition party threatened at the weekend
to break its alliance with the majority Front for Democracy in Burundi
(Frodebu) over the election of a Hutu as the speaker of parliament.
Diplomats in the capital Bujumbura believe the collapse of the power-sharing
agreement could make the country ungovernable.
Mr Anatole Kenyenkeko, prime minister, cut short a trip to Europe to deal
with the political deadlock in Burundi. He said on his return to Bujumbura
yesterday that he would try to convince his party, the Union for National
Progress (Uprona), not to leave the government.
Mr Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, the Mauritanian UN representative who has laboured
over the past 11 months to steady tempers in Burundi, believes the problem
lies with a few Tutsi hardliners who refuse to share power with the
country's Hutu majority.
'This time it is not the (Tutsi) army which is fuelling the crisis, it is
civilians,' Mr Abdallah said yesterday. 'If the Uprona hardliners continue
to destabilise the governance of this country through dictat and blackmail,
it is they who will be responsible for another catastrophe on the scale of
Rwanda.'
Burundi has the same ethnic make-up as Rwanda - 85 per cent Hutu, 14 per
cent Tutsi and a small Twa (pigmy) population. But whereas Hutus ruled in
Rwanda until their overthrow by Tutsi guerrillas earlier this year, Tutsis
in Burundi have never relinquished real power. They control the army, civil
service and judiciary, business and the press. Like Rwanda, Burundi is
overpopulated and desperately poor: factors which augment the hatred and
fear between Hutu and Tutsi communities.
Even before the current political crisis, Burundi was struggling to salvage
what remained of its short-lived experiment with democracy. Its first freely
elected president, Mr Melchior Ndadaye, a Hutu, was murdered by renegade
Tutsi army officers in October 1993 after less than 100 days in office. In
the turmoil that followed, 50,000 Burundians were killed. Mr Ndadaye's
successor died in the April air crash which also killed Gen Juvenal
Habyarimana, the Rwandan dictator.
Mr Sylvestre Ntibantunganya, Burundi's third Hutu president in a year, has
little power. He is the only surviving Frodebu leader in Burundi. His wife
and six of his colleagues were murdered in the 1993 putsch; another three
members of the party leadership fled into exile.
The president has lost much Hutu support for making too many concessions to
the Tutsi elite: Uprona has taken 40 per cent of the cabinet posts and seven
of the 16 provincial governorships. Disaffected Hutus say the power-sharing
agreement did not solve the fundamental issues for Hutus: who controls the
army and judiciary. They also believe the government of national unity is a
smoke-screen behind which Tutsis are preparing to eliminate Burundi's Hutu
political leadership.
Hutu extremists have allied themselves to the remnants of Rwanda's defeated
Hutu army and declared 'war' on Burundi's new government. Small guerrilla
bands have crossed into northern Burundi and attacked army convoys. The army
has retaliated by burning villages and massacring Hutu peasants.
