FT  17 DEC 94 / Books: Wild fancies and cultivated pleasures - From jungle
planting to potting sheds, Bridget Bloom enjoys the range of this year's
rich harvest of books about gardening
Few winter pleasures are more enjoyable than curling up with a good
gardening book, dreaming of summer. The pleasure is heightened, of course,
if the books are illustrated lavishly, a fire roars in the hearth, and the
curtains are closed against the desolate borders outside.
This year, British publishers have produced a bonanza of such books. Themes
are varied while photographs, plans and plantings seemingly are glossier and
more enticing than ever. The books come with prices to fit every pocket.
I make no apology for starting with four volumes - three new and one
re-issued - devoted to water in the garden: I started dreaming in the summer
of a wild-life pond in my cottage garden; now, thanks to the books, I am
almost at the point of cutting the first sod.
The best of the four is The Water Gardener by Anthony Archer Wills (Frances
Lincoln, Pounds 25, 192 pages) although The Water Garden by Peter Robinson,
in the Royal Horticultural Society Collection series (Conran Octopus Pounds
14.99, 128 pages), runs it a close second.
Both cover step-by-step construction of water features, from the smallest of
trickles to the grandest of formal pools, and both are illustrated with
splendid line drawings and photographs. But Archer Wills scores on the
comprehensiveness of his construction details - he has several pages on
making larger ponds in concrete, which Robinson ignores.
Ponds and Water Gardens by Bill Heritage is a revised second edition of an
already popular paperback and has the advantage of being compact and cheap
at Pounds 5.99 (Cassell, 170 pages).
Creating Water Gardens by Mary Moody, in Anaya's Pleasure of Gardening
series (Pounds 14.99, 128 pages), is perhaps not as comprehensive as the
others; on the other hand, it is the only one to offer good advice on how to
protect your fish from herons, which are serious predators for country
pond-owners (put some terracotta piping on the bottom so the fish can hide
in it).
The next clutch of books deals broadly with garden design - four of them,
coincidentally, by contemporary British designers. Great Gardens, Great
Designers by George Plumptre (Ward Lock Pounds 20, 160 pages) sets the
scene, following the work of the 20th century's mostly grand garden-makers.
Here, among others, are Gertrude Jekyll, Edwin Lutyens, Harold Peto,
Lawrence Johnston, Vita Sackville-West, Geoffrey Jellicoe, Russell Page and
Lanning Roper.
Plumptre - gardening correspondent of The Times - traces the beginnings of
modern garden design in the 19th century and then analyses the essential
tenets of each designer and their principal gardens. It is a handsome book.
John Brookes, one of Britain's top contemporary designers and the only one
to figure prominently in the Plumptre book, urges a 'gentler, natural
approach'. In Planting the Country Way (BBC Books Pounds 18.99, 192 pages),
he urges the gardener to be sensitive, not only to local climate and soil
but also to the local ecology and environment. He pleads for planting and
designs which, while not necessarily using all 'native' plants, avoid 'plots
of hybrid-hued mini-plants'.
Brookes takes a canter through garden history, covering some of the same
ground as Plumptre but in a more practical fashion. He provides plans and
plantings for different types of gardens: an enclosed herb garden or a
garden on exposed downland, in woodland, a valley or even an inhospitable
town.
If you are designing a garden, you might with advantage start with Plumptre
and Brookes and then progress to Rosemary Verey's Garden Plans and Penelope
Hobhouse's On Gardening, both published by Frances Lincoln (Pounds 18.99 and
Pounds 20, 144 and 216 pages respectively).
Both Verey and Hobhouse, grandes dames of the British gardening scene,
eschew 'multi-hued hybrids' in favour of older-established, gentler species.
Verey describes plantings she designed, primarily for classic gardens
(whether Longleat or a manor house in Gloucestershire), but the schemes
would adapt well to the naturalistic approach. There are many good ideas for
vegetable gardens, too.
Hobhouse's book opens with a brief but fascinating essay on her philosophy
of garden design, much influenced by the 'many rooms in one garden' of
Hidcote and Sissinghurst but with dense and exuberant 'jungle planting' to
soften the edges. On Gardening is really a valediction to Tintinhull, the
National Trust garden which Hobhouse revived before moving on recently to a
garden in Devon that sounds (from this book) like a green-field site. There
is much to dream over here.
All these books have excellent photographs and are produced most
attractively, but those qualities apply especially to the last 'designer'
book: Roy Strong's Successful Small Gardens, subtitled 'New designs for
time-conscious gardeners' (Conran Octopus Pounds 17.99, 144 pages).
Strong describes in detail nine gardens which, he reckons, can be maintained
on an hour or two a week plus an annual clear-up; another six needing an
afternoon a week in the growing season; and five specifically for the plant
enthusiast.
Strong's gardens rely heavily on structure: gravel paths, box hedges or
topiary, vases or statues, seats and the like. But he also illustrates a
wild garden in a courtyard to complement the angularity of a modern house;
and a pergola rampant with flowering climbers, with two tiny pools below,
for an awkward city back-yard.
All the gardens analysed are inspirational and all are capable of being
adjusted to suit different sites. And they are real gardens but, sadly,
Strong rarely identifies them or their designers.
Now for a group of smaller, cheaper volumes. Mirabel Osler is an acquired
taste, as she recognises. In her preface to In the Eye of the Garden (JM
Dent Pounds 12.99, 176 pages), she notes that her musings might infuriate
some readers. But I find attractive her mixture of practicalities, humour
and whimsy (marvelling at the throat of a penstemon through a magnifying
glass, or calling for old potting sheds to be listed as endangered species).
The line drawings are as delightful in their own way as are the glossy
photographs in the previous books.
In similar genre are two books from America. Henry Mitchell wrote a
gardening column for the Washington Post newspaper for more than 20 years,
and the Essential Earth Man (Houghton Mifflin, Boston Dollars 10.95, 244
pages) is a memorial anthology. The style is not to everyone's taste but, if
you were a devotee, you will certainly enjoy this one.
Green Thoughts by Eleanor Perenyi is subtitled 'A writer in the garden'
(Pimlico Pounds 9, 279 pages, in UK only). Perenyi, a journalist and
novelist, gardened in Hungary and on the Connecticut coast. With chapters in
alphabetical order, she ranges from annuals, ashes and autumn through
poppies, potatoes and pruning, toads, tomato and tools to a 10-page,
somewhat tongue-in-cheek essay on women in the garden.
If pruning is your bent, incidentally, the book you need is the Complete
Book of Pruning edited by Duncan Coombs (Ward Lock Pounds 12.99, 224 pages).
Everything seems to be covered, including an appendix on your legal right -
or not - to prune your neighbour's trees.
Last in this 'Christmas stocking' category is one book on compost and
another on companion planting. Magic Muck, the Complete Guide to Compost, is
by 'Lady Muck' (alias Jane Down, an enterprising farmer's daughter who could
not get a job and decided to process farm slurry into compost for gardeners;
she also bred worms).
All you need to know about both these subjects is covered in a book which is
written entertainingly and illustrated nicely with line drawings by Tim
Coath (Pavilion Pounds 9.99, 104 pages, in UK only).
The Companion Garden by Bob Flowerdew is (as television guru Alan Titchmarsh
says on the cover) 'packed with really good, down-to-earth advice on the
practicalities of planting one type of plant with another for mutual
benefit'. It is also illustrated prettily and priced competitively (Kyle
Cathie Pounds 5.99, 96 pages).
Meanwhile, if rock gardens are your thing, you have a choice of two volumes
from the latest lists. One by Mary Moody, in the Anaya Pleasure of Gardening
series, is called Rockeries and Alpine Gardens (Pounds 14.99, 127 pages).
The other, in the excellent RHS Collection by Christopher Grey-Wilson, is
titled The Alpine Garden (Pounds I5.99, 128 pages).
While the latter has a good introduction on alpines in the wild, both cover
a dozen or so different types of alpine garden with construction,
propagation and planting tips. Both are well-illustrated, as is The Dry
Garden (Pounds 15.99, 128 pages) by Mark Rumary. This is also in the RHS
Collection, a series of a dozen practical guides to planning and planting
which have been published over the past year or two.
Any one would be a good present; the whole lot would set up a gardener
almost for life.
