FT  30 MAR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Papua New Guinea plans to phase
out log exports
Papua New Guinea plans to phase out all log exports by the year 2000 in
order to achieve sustainable forestry, Mr Tim Neville, the forests minister,
said yesterday, reports Reuter from Sydney.
From 1995, log exports would be reduced by 10 per cent a year until 2000
when there would be no more export of round logs, Mr Neville told the 1994
Australian Forest and Timber Conference. 'This government is committed to a
phased reduction of log exports and would like to see an end to this by the
year 2000.'
He said all logging companies had until the end of July to conduct
feasibility studies for processing their timber within Papua New Guinea.
'Those that respond positively will be given priority for negotiation of new
or revised timber concessions. Those who do not comply. . . may be denied
further permission to export logs,' he said.
Mr Neville estimated that the country's forests were worth USDollars 50bn at
present and thought the figure could go as high as Dollars 190bn. Recent
studies indicated that the country had a sustainable harvest volume of more
than 3m cubic metres a year, he said, but the government-permitted cut was
8.5n cu m. The actual cut was only around 3m cu m in 1993 but this was an
increase from less than 1m in 1980 and nearly all timber was exported as
unprocessed logs.
'The reality is we have allowed a gross imbalance whereby permitted harvest
greatly exceeds the forest's capacity to replace itself,' said Mr Neville.
'This is a forestry sector which has not been controlled.'
The phasing out of log exports was one of a number of initiatives to develop
Papua New Guinea's forest resources as a renewable asset.
Others included measures to encourage the development of a domestic
processing industry involving foreign investment, a new forest revenue
system to provide greater benefits to landowners and the hiring of an
independent log export monitoring and border surveillance service.
