FT  13 MAY 94 / World Trade News: European crackdown on computer software
theft
Local police have raided companies and markets in Spain, Portugal, Italy and
Poland as part of a Europe-wide crackdown on illegally copied computer
software.
The raids, in the past month, were ordered by the local courts after
representations by the Business Software Alliance, an organisation of
principally US-based computer companies dedicated to eliminating software
theft.
The companies investigated included the Spanish airports authority, AENA,
and the Portuguese financial services company Uniao de Bancos Portugueses.
Special software was used to test software on personal computers at AENA
which led, the BSA says, to 'a strong suspicion of the unauthorised copying
of a wide variety of software'.
The software companies involved included, among others Aldus, Autodesk,
Computer Associates and Microsoft. AENA was investigated after an anonymous
telephone tip-off.
Mr Javier Ribas, a BSA counsel, said rates of software piracy in Spain were
among the highest in Europe. 'The software industry in Spain lost more than
Pounds 330m in 1993 as a result of piracy,' he said.
The search team sent in to Uniao de Bancos Portugueses found about 300
suspected illegal copies of computer programs published by Lotus Development
and Microsoft. Many of the disks carried identical serial numbers, a common
indication of illegality.
In Italy some 10,000 illegal floppy disks were seized in an operation which
resulted in complaints being filed against eight owners of shops and
companies in the Milan area. Software experts estimate illegal copying is
costing software houses some L400bn (Pounds 166.5m) a year in Italy.
The operation in Poland centred on a computer software exchange and market
in Warsaw. Diskettes were seized, some of them containing illegally copied
programs.
Mr Evan Cox, the BSA's European counsel, said that since the passage in 1992
of an EU software directive designed to outlaw software piracy, European
countries had been amending their copyright laws to comply with the
directive.
In Italy, for example, which used to one of Europe's black spots, the rate
of software piracy dropped to 50 per cent in 1993 from 86 per cent in 1992
after legislation was passed.
