FT  30 AUG 94 / Japanese run gauntlet of Russian bullets
When Russian coastguards fired on a Japanese fishing boat this month,
wounding a crew member in their move to impound the vessel, the incident
provided a reminder of a territorial issue unresolved for 49 years.
It also indicated recent problems tempting Japanese fishermen into waters
around the disputed Kurile islands, which they would otherwise avoid. Not
only has Japan's ocean catch been declining, but the stronger yen has made
seafood imports more competitive.
The ship belonged to the main fishing co-operative in Nemuro, north-eastern
Japan, from where the Kurile chain arcs towards Siberia. The four islands
nearest Japan were seized by the Soviet Union as the Pacific war ended.
Mr Yohei Kono and Mr Andrei Kozyrev, the countries' foreign ministers, are
expected to discuss the Kuriles when they meet at the UN in late September.
A lower-level Japanese delegation is due next week in Sakhalin, from where
the disputed islands are administered, amid suggestions of a proposed
interim solution to the fishing problem.
This would involve setting up an ostensibly private sector fund, the stated
purpose of which would be environmental: to preserve marine resources in the
region. In reality, it would channel revenue to Russia while allowing the
boats of Nemuro and nearby ports to fish more widely in Kurile waters
without making themselves a target for Russian bullets.
The Sakhalin administration is, however, conducting parallel negotiations
with South Korea which, if Seoul bids higher, could accord its ships
preferential access.
Imports of marine products into Japan have risen 36.2 per cent by volume in
the last five years. Although these include frozen and processed foods, they
were equivalent last year to nearly half the 7.2m tonne Japanese sea catch,
which has fallen 30.8 per cent over the same period.
The Nemuro fishermen's association says the problem centres not so much on
de-stocking of its waters but on cheaper imports, as well as the banning of
certain types of net, and an almost one-third cut over five years in its
salmon and trout quota under one of the few existing agreements with Russia.
Its overall revenues have been halved from their early-1980s peak.
The Nemuro co-op, which runs some 3,000 mostly small vessels, has sought to
compensate by going for higher-value seafood such as crab. As the
crustaceans are less prevalent near its own shores, this means entering
shallower waters around the islands.
While Russia tolerates deep-water fishing within 200 miles of its coastline,
it rigorously enforces a 12-mile territorial zone and made clear this spring
it would clamp down on poaching there.
An infringement of this zone ensnared a Nemuro ship a fortnight ago. One of
its half-dozen crew, who now face trial, had an operation on the bullet
wound. The shooting, which followed a similar incident late last year,
triggered a Japanese embassy protest to the foreign ministry in Moscow.
So far this year Russia has detained 49 Japanese fishermen, up from 43 in
the whole of 1993. Jail terms of a year or more are common.
