FT  12 JAN 94 / Concern over pay levels in E Europe
Russia's minimum wage, of about Dollars 7 a month, has fallen to just 20 per
cent of the income needed for 'physiological survival', and minimum wage
levels are little better throughout eastern Europe, according to a report
published today by the International Labour Organisation.
The ILO's eastern European team in Budapest argues that minimum wages have
fallen so far behind both average wages and subsistence levels that they
have ceased to function as a form of protection against poverty.
Mr Guy Standing, director of the ILO team, says that because minimum wages
are the basis for welfare benefits, governments have held them down as a
means of controlling expenditure.
In Ukraine the minimum wage is even lower than in Russia, in Bulgaria the
minimum wage is about 60 per cent of the subsistence level, in Albania it is
24 per cent, in Romania less than 50 per cent, in Estonia 61 per cent, in
Hungary 64 per cent, and Poland 70 per cent.
'When unemployment or disability benefits are held to less than Dollars 10 a
month because the authorities set those benefits at the minimum wage level,
they do not even give enough to pay for bread and milk,' says Mr Standing.
'The formal link between transfer payments (from governments to individuals)
and the minimum wage must be severed.'
The minimum wage has also fallen sharply in relation to average wages, which
have themselves been falling rapidly. In 1993, wages in Russia grew by 12
per cent, but after falls of 45 per cent, 38 per cent and 60 per cent in
1990, 1991 and 1992 respectively. Hungary has had the lowest fall, with
wages stable in 1990, falling 6 per cent in 1991, 3 per cent in 1992 and
another 3 per cent in 1993.
The decline in the minimum wage has also led to a large increase in
inequality. 'The most notable change has been the declining position of
those working in government organisations where wage scales have been
rigidly based on the minimum wage,' according to Mr Daniel
Vaughan-Whitehead, one of the co-authors.
He said that people are surviving because they have second jobs in the black
market, because they also receive payment in kind and because they have
independent sources of food.
