FT  18 JUN 94 / Sport: Kind route beckons Sampras - Tennis / John Barrett
discusses the Wimbledon seedings
Among the men at least, the 108th Championship meeting provides an
intriguing mixture of certainty and speculation. Defending champion and
world No 1, Pete Sampras, is certain to start an overwhelming favourite.
The 22-year-old American has lost only five of his 54 matches in 1994 and
has won seven tournaments, more than twice as many as anyone else. Yet the
weight of history is against him.
Only eight times since the arrival of open tennis in 1968 has the men's top
seed at Wimbledon won the title and in the last 13 years it has only
happened twice. Furthermore, defending a title successfully has proved
surprisingly difficult.
In the 48 years since the war the only men to have achieved that feat are
Lew Hoad (1956-7), Roy Emerson (1964-5), Rod Laver (1961-2, 1968-9), John
Newcombe (1970-1), Bjorn Borg(1976-80), John McEnroe (1983-4) and Boris
Becker (1985-6).
Sampras should win. He has proved himself to be the best player on fast
surfaces and since teaming up with coach Tim Gullikson two years ago he has
matured as a match player. Yet no-one is sure how he will be affected by his
two latest losses.
When Jim Courier beat him in Paris three weeks ago, to prevent him from
holding all four major titles at the same time, Sampras was strangely
inhibited. He never fully committed himself to all-out attack. This, just
two weeks after destroying the field in Rome.
It was the same last week at Queen's Club. Although fellow American Todd
Martin did serve particularly well, there was a worrying lack of urgency
about Sampras' performance. Perhaps, all along, the champion was simply
pacing himself, conscious of the need to preserve his best form for the
coming two weeks.
The draw has been kind. Sampras starts against his neighbour in Florida,
Jared Palmer, and has as his prospective third round opponent Yevgeny
Kafelnikov. The promising young Russian was within two points of beating
Sampras in Australia.
Sergi Bruguera, winner for the second year in Paris, is cast as his
quarter-final opponent but the Spaniard has not played at Wimbledon since
1990 when he lost in the second round and may not reach his appointed place.
The only reason Sergi has entered this time is to get some match play on
grass before Spain's Davis Cup tie against the Germans at the new grass
court centre in Halle on July 15-17.
There are three men who might face Sampras in the semi-finals, the two
former champions Stefan Edberg (1988, 1990) and Andre Agassi (1992), plus
Martin. Edberg (seeded 3), is going through another bout of double-faultitis
and has No 14 seed Marc Rosset, as well as dangerous floater Wayne Ferreira,
in his section. He may not survive.
Agassi is as enigmatic as ever and lacks match play. Yet that has been true
for the last three years during which period he has won the title once and
twice reached the last eight. It will be fascinating to see whether the
unpredictable Andre has retained Brad Gilbert as his coach. I believe
Gilbert's methodical approach denies Agassi the spontaneity on which he
thrives.
The lower half is equally interesting. After what Courier achieved last
year, who is to say he could not go one better this time? Petr Korda is one
who might, or rather should. But the Wimbledon form of this big-serving
Czech left-hander has been consistently disappointing. Last year's advance
to the fourth round is his best effort to date. Perhaps he will surprise us
this time.
Another left-hander with a lethal serve could be Courier's next opponent.
But Goran Ivanisevic, who so nearly won the title in that dramatic final
against Agassi, is nothing if not unpredictable. Do not bank on him.
In the lowest quarter the two former champions from Germany, Boris Becker
and Michael Stich, are cast as quarter-final opponents, as they were last
year when they produced a gem of a match, won in five marvellous sets by
Becker. Let us hope we are as lucky again.
However, Stich has the most dangerous floater of all in his section. The
tall Dutchman, Richard Krajicek, fully recovered from injury, has just won
on grass in Rosmalen and could beat anyone, as he has proved on a number of
occasions. Martin (6) is in a different category. A method player, he is a
delightfully normal, well-balanced individual who was a finalist in
Australia last January. He loves the grass courts and last year beat
Ivanisevic and Wheaton before going down to Courier.
He will be better this time and his potential meeting with Agassi in the
fourth round is a mouth-watering match indeed. Also defending a title is
Steffi Graf. Just 25, the German is at the peak of her considerable powers.
Steffi has won the title in five of the last six years and on a surface
where no-one else excels she should have something in hand. Yet, as we saw
in Paris, the unexpected does occur.
Mary Pierce is not likely to repeat that upset. For a start, in only her
second tournament on grass, she lost to a 15-year-old Czech, Ludmilla
Varmuzova, this week in the under-21 event at Eastbourne. Then her first
opponent is Julie Halard, of France, who has played well on grass.
In the lower half Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, the only other player who has
beaten Graf this year, has a difficult first match against the middle of the
three Maleeva sisters, Katerina. Then it should be plain sailing to the
semis and a meeting with nine-times champion Martina Navratilova. In her
last appearance, the 37-year-old Czech-born American will be given an
emotional farewell - whenever it occurs.
After seeing her loss to Meredith McGrath at Eastbourne this week, I fear it
might be someone other than Vicario who will end the era.
