FT  23 MAY 94 / World Bond Markets: Political uncertainty plagues Spain -
International
A spate of corruption scandals which cost several Spanish government
officials their jobs and sparked fears of early elections recently sent
Spanish government bonds plummeting, and while the bond market is expected
to stage a cautious recovery in coming months, it is likely to remain
plagued by continuing political uncertainty.
At the height of political turmoil, the yield on the Spanish 10-year
benchmark bond shot up to 9.8 per cent, its spread over Germany widening to
around 310 basis points. And although prices stabilised last week, with the
yield gap narrowing back to around 290 basis points, many analysts argue
that, in the light of the country's positive economic fundamentals, further
gains are likely.
Moreover, some of them say that Italian bonds, which rallied sharply after
Mr Silvio Berlusconi's victory in the recent elections, are now overvalued
in relation to Spain.
'The optimism in Italy has gone too far, just as the pessimism in Spain has
been overdone,' says Ms Phyllis Reed, European bond strategist at Barclays
de Zoete Wedd. Since Italy's elections, 'the political risk has shifted from
Italy to Spain, but some of it has got to shift back to Italy'.
Italy has an entirely new political system which has yet to be tested, she
says. 'There is still a lot of disagreement within the right wing coalition
and we would not rule out another general election within the next year,'
she cautions. While Spanish politics are a mess, 'the most we are talking
about is an early general election, not the overhaul of the entire system',
she adds.
However, it is precisely the uncertainty of a possible early election that
could cast a dark shadow over Spain's bond market, warns Mr Giorgio
Radaelli, senior economist at Lehman Brothers. Mr Felipe Gonzales'
government so far has survived the scandals, with the aid of its 17 Catalan
coalition partners. Their support would crumble if new revelations arose
that could cause cabinet embarrassment and ministerial resignations, he
says.
'Obviously, no one knows when and if that will be the case, but this very
uncertainty argues for investor caution until the government is seen to be
firmly back in the driving seat.' June 12 will be crunch-time for the
Spanish government, featuring regional elections in Andalucia -
traditionally a stronghold of Mr Gonzales' socialist PSOE party - and
European Parliament elections. While the PSOE is expected to win a majority
in Andalucia, 'a slim victory could be seen as a setback', says Mr Jose Luis
Alzola, southern Europe economist at Salomon Brothers. Also, recent opinion
polls have indicated a PSOE defeat in the European elections. All this could
increase the risk of early general elections later this year, even though
the current term expires only in 1997.
However, early elections could bolster market sentiment if the conservative
Popular Party (PP) won. A PP-led government would likely emphasise spending
restraint and privatisations, as well as fostering greater labour market
flexibility and liberalising key services sectors, Mr Alzola says.
Politics aside, Spain's fundamentals of slowing inflation, continued fiscal
consolidation and structural reforms warrant further gains in the bond
market, many say.
For the first four months of the year, the government's cumulative deficit
was Pta599bn - about 20 per cent below the figure for the same period last
year - boosted largely by a jump in tax revenues.
Meanwhile, inflation is at its lowest level in years. The core rate fell to
4.6 per cent in April from 4.9 per cent in March, and is expected to slow to
around 4 per cent by year-end. Last week's approval of the government's
labour market reforms will ease wage pressures permanently, further reducing
long-term inflation expectations, Mr Alzola says.
Political problems notwithstanding, fundamentals are expected to lend the
market longer-term support, and both Mr Alzola and Ms Reed at BZW expect the
10-year Bono spread over bunds to narrow towards 200 basis points by
year-end.
Mr Radaelli, however, says long-term exposure to Spanish bonds should be
avoided as long as political uncertainty prevails, warning that any more
scandals could send the spread over bunds widening back beyond 300 basis
points and the peseta tumbling.
The Kingdom of Spain on Friday issued FFr6bn of 6 1/2 per cent seven-year
eurobonds, priced to yield 24 basis points over the corresponding French
government bond. Lead manager was Credit Lyonnais.
