FT  07 OCT 94 / MMC cinema report welcomed by independents
Film buffs may be able to choose from a wider range of films at local
cinemas following publication of a Monopolies and Merger Commission report
on film distribution.
The report concludes that a 'complex monopoly situation' exists among a
small number of distributors and exhibitors, some of which are linked to
each other and to the Hollywood film studios, which makes it difficult for
independent cinema operators to secure popular films.
The MMC criticises the insistence by distributors that films be shown for a
'minimum exhibition period' of at least four weeks. It suggests that the
minimum period should be two weeks.
Ms Romaine Hart, management director of Mainline, which owns the three
Screen cinemas in London and two regional cinemas, said this was 'brilliant
news'.
She added: 'This should help us to be much more flexible in our
program-ming.'
Mr Robert Beeson, a director of Artificial Eye, which owns an independent
distribution company and cinema chain, said competition from big films with
long minimum runs had in the past posed problems for some of its films.
Robert Altman's Short Cuts, which came out last spring to favourable
reviews, received relatively poor distribution because cinemas were asked to
allocate long runs to Steven Spielberg's Oscar-winning Schindler's List.
The MMC criticises the practice of 'alignment' under which distributors give
first choice of their films to a particular cinema chain. Alignment was
condemned by the commission in a 1983 report, but it then concluded that the
industry was too weak for it to act.
Cinema audiences have since risen healthily and, in the new report, the MMC
recommends that alignment be abolished.
There is scepticism in the industry, however that the practice can be
stopped. Ms Hart said: 'It's all down to market forces. And there's nothing
the MMC or anyone else can do about that.'
The commission's suggestion that the industry establish a panel to consider
complaints from independent cinemas that have been refused the right to show
particular films also met a sceptical response.
Mr Beeson said: 'We're operating in a time-sensitive market. If we want to
show a film we need it immediately. There's no point in waiting for six
months for a panel to say 'Sorry. You should have had it.' By then no one
will want to see it.'
