FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (11): Ambitious renewal plans - Ice-free
ports and new ships / Important developments are under way at deep-water
ports of Tallinn, Muuga and Paldiski
Shortly after Peter the Great wrested control over the eastern Baltic from
the Swedes at the start of the 18th century, the Russian Czar singled out
three key sites for future port development - Paldiski and Tallinn in
Estonia, and St Petersburg itself.
For 50 years, Paldiski was a Soviet navy training base and, eventually, a
nuclear submarine port, off limits to Estonians and tucked away behind
sentries and double files of barbed wire. Now the doors and windows of
Paldiski's bleak, Soviet-era, prison camp hang agape, a clutch of trawlers
lies rusting at anchor, the barracks and buildings are gutted.
On a bleak January afternoon, the last trucks loaded with ripped-out cables
and anything else of value, were being loaded on to a grey naval
transporter, the Donetsk Miner, before heading off to the Russian enclave of
Kaliningrad, formerly Konigsburg.
By mid-1994, the last of the dismantled training reactors will have been
removed - and Paldiski, with its sheltered harbour and 9.5 metre draught,
will be both liberated and potentially ripe for development as a commercial
harbour or, given the area's natural beauty, a yacht basin and tourist
complex.
But the real focus of Estonia's maritime and entrepot enterprise are the
ice-free, deep-water ports of Tallinn and nearby Muuga. The dry bulk, oil
and container terminal now being extended and developed at Muuga, will cost
Dollars 600m. The 18-metre draught ensures that Muuga, like Tallinn City
Port with its 16.5-metre draught, is able to take every kind of vessels able
to sail in the shallow Baltic.
Neste, the Finnish oil company, has helped finance a 500,000-ton oil storage
facility at Muuga while Japan's Sumitomo bank, as well as the World bank,
the EBRD and other international financial institutions are involved in
plans to build a 300,000 unit capacity container terminal, a coal export
facility for the Russian trade and improved ro-ro and other facilities.
St Petersburg, by comparison, is poorly equipped and much shallower as well
as dangerously polluted and poorly guarded, Already a high proportion of
Russian trade including mineral shipments by rail from as far afield as
Kazakhstan, plus more than 70,000 Lada cars for export and other fragile, or
vulnerable cargoes, are shipped through Tallinn.
The harbours and the new Estonian shipping lines carved out of Morflot, the
former all-union Soviet shipping company, are the main source of hard
currency earnings. Taken together, the income from hard currency services -
shipping, port services of all kinds and tourism - help to keep the current
account in surplus.
These activities form the basis for future development of a largely
service-based economy for the capital city and its entrepot trade with the
former Soviet states and the rest of the world. To this important extent,
the real potential of Tallinn will only be reached when Russia itself is
more prosperous and linked to foreign trade.
Meanwhile, Tallinn is the home port for the Estonian Shipping Company
(ESCO), which took over maritime assets left at the time of the Soviet
dissolution. It has embarked on an ambitious renewal programme to update its
current fleet of 73 vessels of 517,000 dwt capacity. Its inherited stock of
general purpose ships, ro-ro vessels, timber carriers, bulk carriers and
river-sea going ships have an average age of nearly 18 years.
The company, due to be privatised by the end of 1996, carried 5.23m of the
just over 11m tonnes of cargo which passed through Tallinn port complex,
including the new port of Muuga, last year.
Trade with Scandinavia generally is rising strongly, although the fastest
rise in both passenger and freight traffic is on the short Tallinn-Helsinki
run of only 80 kms, essentially a link in the mooted Via Baltica
super-highway which will eventually connect Helsinki, and St Petersburg
through the Baltic States to markets in central, southern and western
Europe.
With well over 2.3m passengers now passing through Tallinn every year, a new
ferry terminal building will be ready for the start of the tourist season in
May.
Mr Peeter Palu, who was construction minister in the former communist-era
government, remembers how all key jobs in both the port and the connecting
transport services, as well as the bulk of manual grades, were effectively
reserved for Soviet (meaning non-Estonian) citizens.
'Under market conditions the port is already being run very differently,' he
says.
