FT  04 MAR 94 / Aid policy decried as recipe for corruption
Britain's aid-and-trade (ATP) policy, which supported the controversial
Malaysian Pergau dam project, was a breeding ground for financial
corruption, according to a memorandum circulated to the Commons foreign
affairs committee.
It was yesterday revealed that the memorandum was written by Professor John
Toye, an adviser to the Overseas Development Administration. He concluded
that ATP projects had been used to maximise profits for officials in local
agencies and British shareholders.
Baroness Chalker, minister for overseas development, told the committee that
she did not agree with the allegations and that she had had no forewarning
of the report when she met Professor Toye last week.
Earlier in her evidence to the committee she gave a strong defence of the
use of ATP.
Although some of the report's findings are based on studies in the early
80s, some members of the committee said the paper underlined their
opposition to government use of ATP because there has been little change to
the policy's structure.
The report says ATP projects were not 'primarily designed to promote the
welfare of those in the recipient country for whom the local agency is
responsible as clients or consumers, but to maximise the private interests
of local agency officers and the shareholders in the British firm'.
The report says: 'In one of these earlier cases, where corruption of this
kind occurred, the chief executive of the firm responsible (Willowbrook Ltd)
later made a large payment (Pounds 50,000) to a major British political
party.'
The report also points to the fact that ATP finance is concentrated on a
small number of companies. Between 1977 and 1985, 55 per cent of ATP
expenditure went to a group of five companies: Biwater, Balfour Beatty, GEC,
NEI and Davy McKee.
'This high concentration permitted the creation and financing of a political
lobby group, which actively sought the perpetuation and expansion of the ATP
scheme by means of press campaigns, the lobbying of ministers and officials
and the sponsoring of research aimed at demonstrating the benefits of ATP.'
The report adds: 'They are also regular and substantial contributors to the
funds of campaigning groups associated with a major British political
party.'
The Overseas Development Administration instigated a review of the lessons
to be learned from Pergau. Mr Hurd has said that the objective was to avoid
a repeat of the way in which key stages in the project approval process were
handled.
Mr Mike Gapes, a Labour member of the committee, said: 'It appears the ODA
had been given evidence of the serious problems with ATP in the early 80s
but regardless of this the government went ahead with the Pergau dam
project.'
