FT  05 MAY 94 / Gaza-Jericho Autonomy: Arafat opposed from two sides - Rival
factions unable to agree a common strategy / The Palestinians
When youths in the occupied Gaza Strip burnt Mr Yassir Arafat's effigy after
the Hebron mosque massacre in February it sent shock waves to the PLO
chairman's Tunis headquarters. The message from Gaza appeared to be that Mr
Arafat's personal popularity was disintegrating rapidly.
Palestinian opposition to the Gaza-Jericho self-rule accord has gathered
momentum during the months of negotiations with Israel. Mr Arafat will face
a formidable challenge in winning back discontented Palestinians and
creating a sustainable support base for the agreement. Much will depend on
how he manages the early days of the transition to self-rule and meets
Palestinian demands for democracy, economic improvement and transparency.
At every turn Mr Arafat will face opposition from people bent on undermining
the agreement, exploiting any mistake or proving that the PLO has failed to
achieve the fundamental aspirations of the Palestinian nation.
Two groups of opponents confront Mr Arafat in the territories:
First there is a broad opposition coalition between the two extremist
Islamic groups - the Hamas Islamic Resistance Movement and the Islamic Jihad
combined with the left-wing groups inside the PLO - the Democratic Front for
the Liberation of Palestine and the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine. Six other minor Palestinian factions are in this coalition called
the Palestine Forces Alliance.
Second, and potentially much more dangerous for Mr Arafat, is the growing
opposition within Mr Arafat's mainstream Fatah faction both inside and
outside the occupied territories and from powerful independent politicians
such as Mr Haidar Abdel-Shafi, the Gaza elder statesman and former chief PLO
negotiator.
Hamas is by far the most powerful faction in the Palestine Forces Alliance.
It is a highly organised, underground movement with a powerful ideological
Islamic appeal to frustrated youths. In the West Bank, Hamas has active
cells in Jenin, Nablus, Hebron and Ramallah and has a bedrock support base
of about a fifth of Gaza's 850,000 residents.
The PFLP is well represented among students and professional associations in
the West Bank and Gaza. Although the Red Eagles, its military wing, has been
relatively inactive recently it has considerable experience of armed
struggle against Israel.
Fortunately for Mr Arafat the Islamic groups and the secular PLO factions
have been unable so far to agree a common strategy to defeat the
Gaza-Jericho accord because of their incompatible ideologies. They have also
pledged not to engage in violent conflict with Mr Arafat's PLO camp. But
they are determined to continue the armed struggle against Israel. The
opposition believe that Mr Arafat will be unable to solve the huge problems
and that continued Israeli intervention and the presence of Jewish
settlements in self-rule areas will turn more and more people against Mr
Arafat.
The mainstream opposition to Mr Arafat will be more politically difficult,
particularly inside the Fatah faction and among those leaders inside the
occupied territories. Mr Hani al-Hassan and Mohammed Ghneim (Abu Maher),
Fatah co-founders, lead the opposition inside Mr Arafat's faction.
In the West Bank senior political figures in the West Bank such as Mr Faisal
Husseini, Mrs Hanan Ashrawi and Mr Saeb Erekat - the three key PLO
negotiators before the Gaza-Jericho agreement - have been warning Mr Arafat,
even up to the last minute, of the dangers of signing an agreement which
appears to fall so short of Palestinian demands.
In Gaza, Mr Abdel-Shafi, who until recently supported trying to make the
agreement work, last month circulated a petition signed by 22 other
Palestinian leaders which said an agreement which did not halt Jewish
settlement would lack all legitimacy 'and shall therefore not be binding on
the Palestinian people, its institutions, public figures and political
forces'.
Mr Arafat is counting that some opposition will fade when he makes his
historic return to Gaza-Jericho next month and begins to disburse some of
the Dollars 1.2bn (Pounds 820m) of foreign aid pledged by international
donors for the next three years. He also believes the withdrawal of the
Israeli soldiers and their replacement with a Palestinian police force will
be popular.
Mr Soufian Abu Zayda, an Arafat loyalist and senior Fatah official in Gaza,
warned of the dangers Mr Arafat will face if he fails to meet Palestinian
expectations. 'There cannot be a dictatorship in Palestine.
'If Arafat does not bring democracy there will be a revolution not only
against the dictatorship but against the peace process.'
