FT  20 MAY 94 / Survey of World Taxation (3): The dog that did not bark -
Tax issues are obscured by Bill Clinton's other political troubles
After a fierce battle in 1993 over the first budget of President Bill
Clinton's new administration, the US Congress this year has pushed taxes
much lower on its agenda.
The House of Representatives Ways and Means committee and the Senate Finance
committee, which handle taxation issues, have plenty to keep them busy with
the ramifications of health care reform, in which they play a central role.
But few major tax measures are likely to come up for legislation this year.
Indeed, taxation has to a considerable extent faded into the political
landscape, to the disgruntlement of Republicans who hoped that the top rate
increases in personal and corporate income tax passed last year in the
fiscal 1994 budget would come back to haunt Mr Clinton.
Pollsters for both the Republicans and the Democrats agree that most voters
put taxes well down their lists of problems. Although most people still
think their tax bill is going up, the Congressional Budget Office found that
80 per cent of the increase fell on roughly 1.4m families with incomes above
Dollars 200,000 a year; even the well-off, with incomes between Dollars
100,000 and Dollars 200,000, faced an average bill of only Dollars 649.
'On April 15th, the American people will discover the truth about what we
did last year on taxes. Only the top one - yeah - the top 1.2 per cent of
Americans, as I said all along, will face higher income tax rates,' Mr
Clinton exulted in his state of the union speech earlier this year.
Raising taxes remains, nevertheless, politically incendiary.
With strict budget rules still in place, every single revenue-losing measure
passed by the Congress must be offset either with spending cuts or tax
increases. That led to a fierce last-minute struggle a year ago to finance
the tariff cuts contained in the North American Free Trade Agreement, and is
causing heartburn this year as the administration finds ways to offset the
Dollars 13.9bn of tariff cuts it agreed to in the just completed Uruguay
Round of trade negotiations.
So politicians search hard for ways of justifying a tax increase by letting
the punishment fit the crime. User fees have become popular, while the
financial cornerstone of the Clinton health care reform plan is a hefty
increase in the tax on cigarettes - singled out because of their deleterious
effect on health. Other unhealthy products such as guns and alcohol were,
after much consideration, spared a tax increase to pay for health care
reform. Gambling, which had been targeted by some not wholly lucid thought
process as a suitable source of revenues to fund Mr Clinton's planned reform
of the welfare system, has now also been spared.
For tobacco, however, it is now open season. Although Mr Clinton proposed an
increase of only 75 cents a pack, taking the rate to 99 cents, in order to
avoid alienating members of Congress from tobacco-growing states,
congressional committees are already trying to push the rate up to Dollars
1.49 a pack.
The prospect of an increase in federal tobacco taxes, however, is spurring
the states to raise their own cigarette taxes, in anticipation that revenues
will drop in the face of higher prices - but also because tobacco is the
most convenient horse to flog.
New York had already raised its cigarette tax last year, and Michigan
slapped on an extra 50 cents a pack as part of a sweeping package in which
it replaced local property taxes with higher sales taxes as a way of
financing education in the state. At least five other states are proposing
to follow suit.
Overall, however, state finances are more stable than they have been for the
last five years, according to a recent survey by the National Council of
State Legislatures. The survey showed that 45 out of 50 states claimed to be
fiscally sound this year, twice as many as a year earlier.
Nevertheless, many of the most contentious issues now filtering up through
the tax courts involve states' efforts to push the outside of their fiscal
envelope: from the Barclays case against California's unitary tax assessment
system to the fallout from the Supreme Court's earlier decision in the Quill
case on whether a state may require out-of-state mail order companies to
levy taxes on sales to its inhabitants.
The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the Barclays case next month. The
immediate impact, however, is likely to be small, since California last year
changed its tax code to eliminate virtually everything that foreign
companies and governments find objectionable about unitary assessments,
which attempt to calculate a company's tax as a percentage of its worldwide
income, rather than only of income earned in the state.
But a ruling in California's favour could encourage the state, and many
others which find unitary assessments much simpler to administer than the
conventional arm's length standard, to revert to the controversial formula.
Senator Byron Dorgan of North Dakota, long an admirer of unitary
assessments, would also like to introduce the system at the federal level.
He is not expected to make immediate headway, since such a move would wreak
havoc in the entire worldwide taxation system, but pressure could build
unless the Internal Revenue Service improves its success rate in transfer
pricing cases brought under the arm's length standard.
In the Quill case, decided in 1992, the Supreme Court ruled that North
Dakota could not levy a use tax from Quill Inc., an Illinois office products
company - but only because it would interfere with interstate commerce, not
because it would violate Quill's constitutional right to due process.
The decision was seen as a virtual invitation to Congress to authorise tax
collections from out-of-state mail order companies, and Senator Dale Bumpers
of Arkansas has duly obliged with the 'Tax Fairness for Main Street
Business' bill.
The bill would allow a state to require an out-of-state company to collect
sales tax for them if its total US sales exceed Dollars 3m and its sales in
the state topped Dollars 100,000, and if it had 'personal jurisdiction,' a
relationship involving much less than the 'physical contact' now required to
establish tax collection responsibilities.
'This legislation is significant because it would change some fundamental
rules regarding when a state or local government may impose a tax,'
commented Mr Tom Grudichak, director of Coopers and Lybrand's multistate tax
services in Chicago.
Implementation could open a can of worms, but the measure could prove
popular in Congress, because states claim they now lose Dollars 2.2bn a year
because of their inability to collect sales taxes from the booming mail
order industry.
In any event, tax experts expects states to continue testing the limits of
their taxing power for years to come.
