FT  05 JUL 94 / Leading Article: The wages of inequality
Since the 1970s, there has been a large increase in the inequality of male
earnings in the UK. This experience has parallelled that of the US and, to
an extent, Canada, but not that of continental Europe. A big component of
the future political battle, both within and between the parties, concerns
how best to respond.
According to a report on wage inequality published last week by the
London-based Institute for Fiscal Studies, the ratio of the earnings of men
in the ninetieth percentile of the distribution to those in the tenth (a
percentile being a hundredth of the total number, ranked by earnings) in the
early 1970s was 2.48 to one. By the late 1980s, this ratio had risen to 3.39
to one. While much more unequal than in Sweden or Norway, this distribution
was still roughly the same as in France and far more equal than in the US,
where the ratio was 5.58 to one.
The increase in male earnings inequality is only part of the story. There
has also been a huge decline in the number of men in employment, from 14.1m
in 1970 to 10.9m at the end of last year. Meanwhile, female employment, much
of it part-time, has risen over the same period from 8.5m to 10.6m. This
shift in the sex-composition of the employed labour force is associated with
the inexorable decline in the number of those employed in manufacturing,
from 39 per cent of the workforce in 1969, to 23 per cent in 1990.
In the UK, therefore, the decline in the demand for relatively unskilled
male labour has shown itself in an increase in earnings inequality and a
decline in employment. But, as the Secretary of State for Social Security,
Mr Peter Lilley, has also noted, the increase in the number of single-parent
households, is not independent of the declining prospects for male workers.
It should not be too difficult to accept that this pattern - unattached
males, on the one hand, and lone-parent females with inadequate income, on
the other - is socially undesirable.
More training
What is to be done? The standard call is for more education and training.
But this is far from a panacea. According to the IFS, even though economic
returns from education have risen over time and across generations, much of
the rise in earnings inequality has been driven by increases in inequality
among those with apparently similar education and experience. Furthermore,
it takes a long time to make large changes in the distribution of skills
across a population.
This leaves a mixture of carrots and sticks. One essential measure is to
eliminate the taxation of low wage jobs. Changes in national insurance
contributions have gone some way towards this, but not yet far enough.
Similarly, raising thresholds for income tax is a better way to encourage
people into work than the 20 per cent tax band unfortunately introduced by
Mr Norman Lamont.
Improved incentives
The abolition of all benefits would, no doubt, reduce unemployment, but it
would also increase earnings inequality. What is needed, instead, is to make
the benefit system more job-promoting. Mr Kenneth Clarke has, in fact,
raised expectations that in the November budget tougher benefit rules for
the unemployed might be accompanied by improved incentives for people to
take low paid jobs. The probable route would be an extension of family
credit.
At present, that credit encourages some family arrangements over others and
provides no help to those without children. The social security system also
discourages the spouses of unemployed people from taking work. What is
needed is to provide an incentive to all adult individuals to seek work. To
do this, family credit should become a more generalised earned income
credit. In the context of such a policy, the Labour party's beloved minimum
wage might become defensible.
Any reform to promote employment and raise family incomes of the poor will
be costly to the Budget, though the more successful the attempt to encourage
people into work the less that cost will be. But a small proportion of the
large increases in income that have accrued to the better-off majority could
be usefully spent in this way. There are ways forward. What is needed now is
not more tinkering, but systematic development of a more job-promoting tax
and benefit system.
