FT  07 FEB 94 / New watchdog plans consumer panel to help protect investors
The Personal Investment Authority plans to set up a 'consumers' panel' to
advise it on proposals to strengthen investor protection and assess the
authority's effectiveness, according to a confidential draft of the body's
prospectus.
The PIA will also set up a committee to review the effect of regulation on
small financial services firms, in part to meet criticisms from independent
financial advisers that the PIA will introduce burdensome regulations. An
ombudsman scheme will help customers achieve redress in complaints against
PIA members.
The prospectus will determine whether the PIA obtains the support it needs
within the industry to become a credible self-regulatory organisation.
The creation of the PIA would mark the most significant development in
investor protection since the passage of the Financial Services Act in the
mid 1980s.
The Securities and Investments Board, the City's chief watchdog, is expected
to announce this month that it intends to recognise the PIA as the
self-regulatory organisation covering retail financial services.
But to meet its goal of becoming operational in July by taking over from the
existing regulators, the PIA must win acceptance from enough of the industry
to see off the campaign from some large life insurers for a system of
statutory regulation.
The 30-page prospectus and a more detailed document setting out the PIA's
approach to regulation are to be published soon after the SIB announcement.
The draft seeks a balance between introducing further measures to raise
standards and giving the industry stability after a period of regulatory
uncertainty.
The decision that people working in the industry should not be in a majority
on the 19-strong PIA board has been the most recent cause of controversy
within the sector.
It led to the resignation from the board of Mr Jim Stretton, deputy managing
director of Standard Life.
Independent financial advisers (IFAs), many of whom would be among the new
body's smaller members, have been among the PIA's most outspoken critics.
They may be reassured by the PIA's decision to put Mr Godfrey Jillings, the
chief executive of Fimbra, the self-regulatory organisation for IFAs, in
charge of managing the process of admitting firms to the new regulator.
The PIA will have a cap of Pounds 100m for its liabilities to recompense
customers who cannot obtain redress because the firms that advised them have
gone into default.
PIA seeks to reassure investors, Page 10
