FT  12 MAR 94 / Finance and the Family: Bad bets that threaten us all -
Diary of a Private Investor
Suppose you went into a clothing shop expecting to buy some garments but
found only people looking at computer screens. The manager says: 'We can't
sell you any clothes. Perhaps, though, you might like to gamble on the price
of jeans going up over the next month or so? Or maybe you would like a bet
on the direction of heating costs for garment manufacturers?'
You protest: 'I just want a designer silk waistcoat, small-sized. I believe
it will be a good investment and will serve me well for years.'
'Ah,' replies the manager. 'we cannot provide such things any more. But
perhaps you might like to give us some money and let our computerised
trading system invest in a wide range of waistcoats, including one or two
made of silk - although, to be honest, a few probably will fall to pieces.
You won't be able to handle any of the garments, either, as we keep them to
sell - some sight unseen - to other traders.'
If you asked the manager why he no longer sold clothes direct to the public,
he might tell you: 'Well, it's such a bother. People have got to actually
make the clothes, transport them to us, and then we have to hand them
physically to customers. By trading in all these other things instead, we
can do everything electronically, at the touch of a button, and it's much
more profitable for us.'
All this might seem rather ridiculous - but replace 'garment' and
'waistcoat' with 'direct shareholding in a small manufacturing company' and
the comparisons with today's financial markets become more obvious.
Recently, I tried to increase my shareholding in a small, well-managed
company. Only 10,000 shares were available, though, and it proved impossible
to buy any more even though I was willing to pay more than the supposed
market price for them.
It appears that I have become old-fashioned. Over the years, I have made
respectable profits by investing in small companies that actually made
something - companies that I saw as having particular strengths and likely
to grow. The thing is, I bought shares only after a certain amount of
personal research and investigation. Now, it is the fashion to let others
make the investment decisions and, increasingly, shares in companies are
being bought because they happen to be in a particular index.
The derivatives market, too, has increased dramatically its influence over
the share prices of many companies. Last year in the UK, more than Pounds
9bn was poured into unit trusts. There are now so many that choosing between
them is even more difficult than deciding on an individual company's shares.
Investment trusts also have multiplied. At one time, many seemed a 'bargain'
because their shares stood at a discount to their net asset value. But I
suspect that many investors who bought these just a few years ago will be
surprised if they turn to the FT's share price pages. It is amazing how many
of these trusts now have a premium rating, being valued at more than their
assets.
I have nothing against unit and investment trusts. A number have produced an
excellent performance, more than tripling their investors' money over five
years. Equally, some have performed very badly, turning Pounds 1,000 into
less than Pounds 900 after five years. It is examples like these that make
me want to continue making my own, direct investment decisions in individual
companies.
Even when I find a company which I think is undervalued, however, its share
price still can be clobbered by institutional investors switching out of it
 -not because they dislike its management or prospects but because a
short-term computer program made them do it. Or because it has been pushed
out of an index, perhaps by a 'bubble' company that has grown larger because
of hype and over-expectation.
Even more scary is the increasingly powerful influence on the market of
financial derivatives. Again, I have nothing against trading in options and
futures, particularly when it is used as a hedge to protect exposure to
foreign currencies and a variety of commodities. But it seems to me that too
many people are now treating these markets like casinos. For every bank that
announces huge profits on its dealings in derivatives, someone, somewhere,
must have made correspondingly large losses.
The amount of money 'trading' on foreign exchange markets world-wide each
day has been calculated to be considerably more than the value of world
trade. And, in a number of countries, exposure to dealings in derivatives
does not have to be revealed to regulatory authorities.
The next stock market crash could well be triggered by dealings in
derivatives: people making too many wrong bets that a share index will rise
or fall or that the price of a currency, commodity, bonds, or a combination
of financial instruments will perform in a particular way.
Surely the time is approaching fast when people ought to stand back from
these markets and re-evaluate where they - and their countries - are going.
What future is there for a nation's industry when it is easier for people to
bet on a possibility - something that cannot even be touched - than it is
for a private investor to buy shares in a small company that makes something
people want to buy?
