FT  08 SEP 94 / Cash-strapped Arafat seeks to hasten aid: His credibility is
linked with improving conditions for Palestinians
International aid donors meet Palestinians in Paris today to speed the
release of hundreds of millions of dollars of assistance vital to
consolidate fragile Middle East peace.
A new aid agreement, with considerably quicker mechanisms of disbursement,
has become the overwhelming priority of the cash-strapped Mr Yassir Arafat
in his struggle to build the foundations of a credible Palestinian state.
Tortuous negotiations with Israel over expanding limited self-rule, the slow
pace of international aid, the delicate internal political situation and the
overwhelming problems of poverty, unemployment and decayed infrastructure
all present formidable challenges to a sustainable peace.
On the positive side, the 9,000-strong Palestinian security forces appear to
have taken firm control. Mr Arafat is still enjoying the honeymoon of his
reunification with his people; the Palestinian National Authority is slowly
taking shape building its technical capacity; and the peace process is
moving forward with the extension of self-rule over the main services in the
still-occupied West Bank.
But economic expectations are high and the tangible achievements few. Some
economists believe the standard of living in Gaza has declined substantially
since Israel redeployed its forces out of the bulk of the Strip last May and
some prices have risen 50 per cent.
A large part of the responsibility for the deteriorating economic situation
rests with Israel, which continues to deny thousands of Palestinian migrant
workers permits to travel to their jobs in Israel.
But discontented Palestinians will blame Mr Arafat for their distress.
Running the decrepit Gaza Strip was never going to be easy but Mr Arafat has
been overwhelmed by the day-to-day difficulties.
First, he has had to learn some hard lessons about international economics
and the tortuous mechanisms of the aid community.
Mr Arafat believed that once he was back in Gaza, the millions of dollars of
aid pledged by donors would flow quickly. It has not and economics has
become both the buzzword and the major headache of his court.
Donors, reluctant to fund administration and policing costs from taxpayers'
money, and sceptical about the PLO chairman's financial dealings in the
past, have insisted on a complex system of accountability. Disbursements
from the Holst Peace fund, set up to finance the salaries and running costs
of the embryonic Palestinian National Authority and technically worth
Dollars 13m (Pounds 8.6m) a month, have been slow.
Donors have insisted on the presentation of audited accounts and receipts
before releasing tranches from the fund.
The Palestinian Finance Ministry took time establishing itself to meet the
requirements and is still constrained by a lack of technical expertise.
International aid for the security forces worth Dollars 11m has been
released but a regular system for funding has yet to be developed.
The United Nations is preparing to administer a 'cop fund' worth Dollars 7m
a month to pay salaries and running costs, but funds may be difficult to
gather. Donor-funded projects have also been slow in materialising.
Japan has agreed Dollars 15m for police housing and a general clean-up of
Gaza, the European Union signed a package contributing Dollars 1.5m to the
clean-up operation, and the World Bank yesterday signed a Dollars 30m loan
agreement for sewage, water, energy and transport projects.
Part of the problem is with Pecdar, the Palestinian agency responsible for
executing projects with donors over which Mr Arafat initially exercised firm
personal control. World Bank criticism forced him to cede some of this
control, . but Pedcar officials say international criticism encouraged
ministers to attack the agency and undermine its programme.
These issues will be discussed in Paris where it is hoped that the Holst
fund will be expanded by up to Dollars 6m-7m a month to help meet the
additional costs of taking over West Bank services and finance a revised
budget deficit of Dollars 25m a month. But continued failure to make quick
improvements in Gaza's living standards could have serious political
implications.
'We have to be patient but for how long?' asked Mr Nabil Abu Irdeineh, an
Arafat adviser.
'Expectations must be met and our people cannot wait for ever. Even Arafat
doesn't know what will happen. If things go on like this, it is giving good
material to the opposition.'
Although the Islamic Hamas group opposed to peace with Israel undermines the
Palestinian authority by providing better social services, the PLO, for the
moment, is still gaining from the popularity of its return and the removal
of the worse abuses of Israeli occupation in Gaza. But Mr Arafat must tread
carefully with Hamas, which ultimately is bent on destroying the PLO and
establishing an Islamic state from the Jordan River to the Mediterranean.
In the end, the strength of the opposition will depend on how successful Mr
Arafat is in removing the glaring economic conditions which breed discontent
and extremism. Pressing forward with democracy and winning more territorial
gains from negotiations with Israel will also be vital.
