FT  25 OCT 94 / Arts: Celebration gives food for thought - William Packer
visits Paris for two exhibitions with very different views on British
painting
D'outre-Manche, not quite 'Across', as we have it, but 'Beyond the Channel',
with its faint hint at a somewhat greater psychological barrier, is a
fascinating and even shocking exhibition.
Here is no full and scholarly study of its subject and period - British art
up to the time of Queen Victoria - drawn from the wealth of French public
taste and connoisseurship. But, rather, a parade of historic French
attitudes and assumptions upon the art of our fog-shrouded and barbarous
land, that amounts to a confession.
If that wealth is not drawn upon, it is because that wealth is not there.
The French have never bothered to acquire the art of the British school  -
the distinction between the English, the Irish and the Scots is seldom made,
and ecole Anglais usually stands for all - in any substantial or
comprehensive fashion, for they have never taken our visual culture
seriously. And what they do not take seriously, they do not choose to
understand.
The contrast between our own National Gallery and the Louvre in generosity
of interest and critical even-handedness, could hardly be greater.
In Trafalgar Square we find an account of the post-Renaissance European
tradition that gives each national school its due, the French along with the
Italian, the Spanish, the Dutch and, yes, the British. What gaps there are,
as in the German and northern schools, they are admitted and, as far as
limited resources allow, addressed.
Never so, it would seem, along the quai du Louvre. 'How did I find the
show?' asked my friend in the Louvre's service presse, a little anxiously,
and gave at once her own pre-emptive answer: 'il y a beaucoup des trous.'
The show does contain some lovely things, with the magnificent Gainsborough
full-length of Lady Alston, green silk and grey shawl against a darkly
romantic setting, the best of all.
There are some good Reynolds, a decent Stubbs of Lord Curzon and his horse,
the splendid 'Captain Hay of Spott' by Raeburn and any number of Lawrences -
Lawrence after all was the painter of Europe's grandees in the
post-Napoleonic dispensation and was for a generation the best-known English
painter of them all.
But we know, and at heart the French know, that there is more to the British
School than the brief flourish of the late-Georgian swagger portrait.
So where do we begin? Neither with Holbein nor yet with Van Dyck, for they
are foreigners, so a fine full-length of Edward VI by William Scrots, a
Dutchman, will do.
What then of the Elizabethan miniaturists, Hilliard perhaps? But there is,
it seems, no Hilliard in France, and a single, exquisite portrait of the
fated Earl of Essex by Isaac Oliver, a Frenchman, must do. Into the 17th
century we go, and to the Cavaliers and the Restoration, so with no Van
Dyck, what about Dobson? No Dobson, but a little later there is Lely. Wasn't
he a foreigner, too?
Never mind. The 18th century will sort things out. Philippe Mercier and
Heinrich Fussli (Fuseli to us) are in, I see. Odd that. But we shall really
get going with Hogarth, shan't we, surely the first great painter of the
truly English school. Shan't we?
But the French, we find, have this funny idea that Hogarth wasn't really a
painter at all, but an engraver - and indeed this show reveals the curious
fixed idea that it was in the general commercial development of print-making
that our peculiarly English talents were declared.
So there is not a single Hogarth painting in the show, but only the engraved
version of the 'Marriage a la Mode'. Thomas Girtin is represented by a
single acquatint of the 'Porte Saint Denis', Rowlandson by three satirical
etchings among a group by Gillray and Cruikshank. That group is at least
included, bitterly anti-French as its satires are.
What else? A few good water-colours by Bonington, Constable, Boys and Cox,
miscellaneous drawings, some good oils including a Bonington 'Doges'
Palace', Constable's 'Weymouth Bay' and 'Helmingham Dell', and a late
unfinished Turner landscape, vaporous and magical.
And that, of any substance, is it. This is, indeed, a show which gives us
rather more to think about than actually to see.
The smaller show at the Musee Carnavalet is a wonderful corrective, if only
because the prejudice is openly celebrated in terms that are often as hugely
enjoyable as they are grotesque.
A run of post-Napoleonic jokes about French girls finding any excuse to peer
up the kilts of Scottish soldiers gets us off to a good start and there is
no looking back, or down.
Randy rost-bifs and their prim, boot-faced wives on the one hand, seductive
girls and effete 'frogs' on the other, the ancient mutual stereotypes are
funny still.
But jokes apart, the show does make the serious point that the English love
affair with France had its cultural aspect, and bore real fruit in the work
of our tourist painters. Thus represented here are not only the better-known
figures of Turner, Cox, Bonington, Girtin and Boys, but also such
comparatively minor, but still accomplished, artists as Holland, Wyld,
Callow, Chalon . . . and we think on to Whistler, Sickert, Nicholson . . .
France to us, and Paris above all, has always been irresistible.
D'outre-Manche - British art in French public collections: Musee du Louvre,
Paris 1e, until December 19. Les Anglais a Paris au 19e siecle: Musee
Carnavalet, Paris 4e, until December 11.
