FT  27 OCT 94 / Government Ethics Row: Nolan known as tough liberal
Lord Nolan, the law lord appointed by the prime minister to head the review
of standards in public life, is a former leading tax lawyer who has quickly
built a reputation as an independent and liberal-minded judge.
In a series of high-profile cases since his appointment to the High Court
bench in 1982 he has shown he is not scared to stand up to the executive and
to break new ground.
In 1991, sitting with the former Master of the Rolls, Lord Donaldson, he
ruled that ministers and civil servants were 'accountable to the law and the
courts for their personal actions', in finding Mr Kenneth Baker, then home
secretary, guilty of contempt of court.
Mr Baker was the first minister of the Crown to be found in contempt while
carrying out official duties. The home secretary had failed to comply with a
court order requiring the return to Britain of a Zairean asylum-seeker who
had been unlawfully deported while legal proceedings were pending.
A month later Lord Nolan again publicly criticised Mr Baker for refusing to
set out parole terms for a convicted IRA terrorist.
His credentials as part of a liberal majority in the country's highest court
were underlined when he sat as part of the appeal courts which overturned
the convictions of the Birmingham Six and Ms Judith Ward.
Lord Nolan has also shown, however, that he is not afraid of public
criticism for judgments which he believes to be right, even if unpopular.
In 1992 he ruled that an anorexic girl could be forcibly treated against her
will. In 1991 he was part of an appeal court which rejected compensation
claims for nervous shock by relatives and friends of those who died in the
the 1989 Hillsborough football disaster.
In 1989 he gave Moslem leaders the right to challenge a magistrate's refusal
to issue blasphemy summonses against Mr Salman Rushdie, author of the
Satanic Verses.
Lord Nolan, 66, is a Roman Catholic of Irish descent, educated at Ampleforth
and Wadham College, Oxford. He was called to the Bar in 1953, where he
quickly built a reputation as a specialist tax lawyer.
During the long-running Rossminster affair, which led to a crackdown by the
Inland Revenue on tax avoidance schemes, he was asked to give his opinion on
an advance interest scheme devised by Mr Roy Tucker, one of Rossminster's
founders.
Lawyers said yesterday that his experience in dealing with highly complex
tax issues made him an ideal choice to head the review of standards in
public office.
Lord Nolan was promoted to the Court of Appeal in 1991 and became a law lord
in January.
