FT  15 AUG 94 / Letters to the Editor: Roles that World Bank and IMF must
give up
Sir, Coinciding with the recent 50th anniversary of the Bretton Woods
conference, some 70 citizens' organisations in the US launched the '50 years
is enough' campaign to hold the World Bank and International Monetary Fund
accountable to people whose lives they affect across the developing world.
The campaign is working with similar coalitions around the globe.
Unfortunately, both John Williamson ('Rules needed for a new age', July 8)
and Michael Prowse ('Private view of a public motivator', July 18) have
mischaracterised the US campaign and misrepresented its positions. We are
not calling for the abolition of the Bank, as they suggest. We do strongly
recommend cutting its resources and responsibilities so as to reduce its
power and the damage it causes. The campaign also agrees with many analysts
that the IMF should get out of determining development policy.
Furthermore, Williamson suggests that the members of our campaign are not
dedicated to 'helping poor countries catch up with rich ones and assisting
former centrally planned economies to make the transition to a market
economy', two supposed goals of the Bretton Woods institutions. Quite the
contrary.
It is World Bank and IMF adjustment programmes that have led to increased
poverty, widened the gap between the rich and the poor, gutted local
productive capacity and accelerated environmental degradation in most of the
some 75 countries in which they have been imposed. We say there must be a
better way. We believe that economic policy reforms must support the
productive activities of the poor (particularly women), stimulate greater
local self-reliance, increase workers' rights and wages, and enhance
broad-based sustainable food production. Our platform, which apparently
neither Williamson nor Prowse has read, also calls for a shift away from
large-scale infrastructure projects that displace millions of people in
favour of smaller, resource-conserving investments.
But, more importantly, the road of change must be paved by the people
themselves, who should be left to determine the direction and pace of their
own economic future. If these are 'strident' demands, as Prowse suggests, so
be it.
Doug Hellinger,
The Development GAP,
executive committee member,
US 50 Years is Enough Campaign,
1025 Vermont Avenue, NW 3rd Floor,
Washington, DC 20005,
US
