FT  20 JAN 94 / Book Review: A not inconsiderable similarity, oh yes
THE GLOBAL MARKETPLACE: CAPITALISM AND ITS FUTURE By John Redwood
HarperCollins, Pounds 18, 243 pages
John Redwood is reputed to be one of the 'bastards' in John Major's cabinet
whom the prime minister cannot dismiss because he might cause more trouble
outside than in. Here is a Redwood manifesto, written just before he entered
the cabinet as Welsh secretary last year.
Save on one subject, which could yet be lethal, the evidence is that Mr
Major has nothing to fear. Indeed it seems unlikely that a prime minister
who makes cabinet changes so seldom, and none of them sweeping, could
deliberately introduce a new face with whom he would be at loggerheads on
all issues: otherwise, it would look like carelessness. One of the striking
facts to emerge from the book is how, on most subjects, Redwood, the fellow
of All Soul's, and Major, the leader without any academic qualifications,
think alike.
Ignore the slightly pretentious title, The Global MarketPlace, and the much
more pretentious subtitle, Capitalism and its Future. This is not a book
about economics, but a way of life. Global capitalism comes into it only in
the sense that modern communications and a free-ish trade system make it
possible to operate successfully without great concentrations of labour. In
another decade the theme would have been 'small is beautiful', though
perhaps with an over-arching international framework.
On social policy, Redwood observes the conventional pieties. 'Popular
capitalism' - incidentally the title of his previous book - 'believes that
there is a role for the state. The state should be able to guarantee a basic
standard of pension and national insurance protection to all.'
He thinks that the divide between left and right over public expenditure and
taxation has become less than is sometimes assumed. 'Rightwing parties
accept the role of taxation in redistributing income and in financing public
services for those in need . . . The debate is over degree and the correct
mix.' Denis Healey used to say much the same thing as chancellor in the
1970s.
The phrase 'back to basics' is used only once. Here again the prime minister
has no need to worry. Redwood applies it to education, not personal
morality. Even then, he is strikingly liberal. While he favours a tilt back
towards better 'teaching, testing and measurement of results', he is
sympathetic to allowing children to work 'in a relaxed atmosphere at their
own pace'.
There is also a more conservative side to his thinking. Redwood has no
interest in constitutional reform of any kind. He thinks that the British
parliamentary system in its present form works better than any other. He
believes that, while there should be more local government, any introduction
of regional government would be a threat to the centre and must therefore be
opposed.
On the current state of London, he observes: 'The government has established
a cabinet committee to take those decisions that need a London-wide view
(transport, planning and development are just three areas which require such
a perspective). The private forum on London will promote the metropolis as
an international centre for business, trade and inward investment.' And
that, he says, is enough: no more Ken Livingstones, no elected mayor, for in
London central government knows best.
Redwood is also curiously sympathetic to the Labour party. This is not
because of its policies, though he admits that those have evolved. It is
because he believes so firmly in a two-party system. The Labour party must
be kept going, and occasionally even elected, if only to avoid the chaos of
a hung parliament and coalitions. Such chaos, he suggests, is manifest all
over the European continent.
At times, the Redwood doctrine can sound harsh. 'In advanced western
societies,' he writes, 'there will never be enough people on income support,
enough people from ethnic minorities, enough homeless, to forge a winning
coalition from policies that try to deal with their specific interests. A
winning coalition requires the vote of many who go to work on time, who pay
their taxes, who save for their old age, who do not wish the state to be too
intrusive.'
In all these statements, there is no reason to believe that the thoughts of
John Redwood are much different from the thoughts of John Major. They are,
after all, both youngish Conservatives and members of the same cabinet.
Where they may be wrong is in turning their backs completely on
constitutional reform. How about a smaller parliament, for example? And it
may begin to look like foolishness to ignore the rise of the Liberal
Democrats in the south of the country. The party is scarcely even mentioned
in the course of the book.
Where Major and Redwood differ fundamentally, however, is on Europe.
Redwood's chapter on the European Community is sneering, dismissive and
arrogantly ignorant of the forces that brought the continental countries
together. 'The United Kingdom in the early 1970s,' he claims, 'thought it
was entering a kind of free trade arrangement.' Nobody who had read the
Treaty of Rome could conceivably have thought any such thing. Since then,
Redwood argues, the Community has consistently got in the way of British
interests.
There are elections to the European parliament in June. The Conservative
party will have to publish a manifesto. Cabinet ministers will have to
campaign to try to prevent a significant loss of Tory seats. The previous
European elections were the first serious setback at the polls suffered by
Margaret Thatcher. For the present prime minister, it could be worse. What
is John Redwood going to say in the campaign, and John Major too, come to
that?
