FT  06 DEC 94 / Anger as Blair stands by monarchy reform
Labour's leadership last night stood by its plans to reform the monarchy in
the face of furious government claims that the opposition's constitutional
reform proposals would lead to the break-up of the UK.
Amid growing acrimony, Mr Tony Blair, the Labour leader, made clear that he
had approved comments by Mr Jack Straw, shadow home secretary, broadcast in
a BBC Television Panorama documentary last night.
But Mr Stephen Dorrell, heritage secretary, challenged Labour in the Commons
to make royal reform an election issue, and accused the party of seeking to
impose a 'straitjacket' of political correctness on the royal family.
Mr Straw, who suggested a reduction in the number of royals carrying out
official functions, said his comments were in line with existing party
policy.
Labour officials also suggested that his remarks reflected the views of the
Prince of Wales, who has made little secret of his belief that the monarchy
must change with the times.
However, ministers queued up to attack Mr Straw's comments, underlining
Conservative hopes that the issue will deflect attention from the
government's problems over Europe and value added tax.
Mr Michael Howard, home secretary, said Labour's proposals, which include
ending the royal prerogative, would lead to 'the break-up of Britain as we
know it'.
Mr David Hunt, the cabinet's chief political troubleshooter, claimed that Mr
Straw's comments were out of line with Labour policy and challenged Mr Tony
Blair to overrule him.
Mr Michael Portillo, employment secretary, said people would be disgusted by
a policy that threatened the monarchy's future. He told BBC Radio: 'What
most astounds me is that Labour throws around constitutional change without
any thought, with absolute gay abandon.'
Mr Dorrell, speaking during the resumed Budget debate, said Labour had begun
its attempt to change tradition in the summer when Ms Mo Mowlam, then shadow
heritage secretary, suggested the royal family should move from Buckingham
Palace into a 'designer palace'.
While Labour leaders had then sought to distance themselves from Ms Mowlam,
that defence had been 'blown to smithereens' over the weekend by the latest
proposals by Mr Straw. Mr Dorrell accepted that a debate on the future role
of the royal family was desirable, but fundamentally disagreed with Mr
Straw. To government cheers he forecast that if the debate went to the
'court of public opinion' the Conservatives would win hands down.
Mr Dennis Skinner, Labour MP for Bolsover, suggested that the majority of
the people probably wanted the monarchy to end when the Queen's reign
finished. He said it was not because of the growth of republicanism per se -
'I wish it was' - but because of the 'shenanigans' that had taken place at
Buckingham Palace.
Joe Rogaly, Page 18
