FT  27 JAN 94 / US defence missiles for S Korea: Patriot batteries to
protect against surprise attack from North
The US yesterday said it would send Patriot air defence missiles to South
Korea to protect the South against any surprise missile attack from North
Korea. The confirmation in Washington by US Defence Undersecretary Frank
Wisner followed strong indications from South Korean foreign ministry
officials that the deployment would go ahead.
The discussions between Washington and Seoul reflect increased concern about
military tensions on the Korean peninsula following North Korea's refusal to
allow international inspections of its nuclear facilities.
'The threat of North Korean missiles is very real,' said Mr Hong Soon-young,
South Korea's vice foreign minister. North Korea last year tested the
Rodong-I, an improved version of the Soviet Scud missile with an estimated
range of 1,000km.
The stationing of Patriot missiles would be the first publicly announced
strengthening of US forces in South Korea since North Korea blocked nuclear
inspections a year ago.
The South Korean defence ministry last week warned there was a risk of an
North Korean attack this year or next.
Mr Rhee Byoung-tae, the defence minister, said North Korea completed
preparations for war last year and has proclaimed 1995 as the year for
unification of the country.
If the nuclear issue remains unresolved or if the North Korean government is
threatened by internal disturbances because of food or fuel shortages, then
Pyongyang might attempt a military attack in a desperate bid to find a
solution to its problems, he added.
The deployment of the Patriot missiles, which were used against Iraqi Scud
missiles during the 1991 Gulf war, might begin if no progress is made soon
in North Korea's negotiations with the International Atomic Energy Agency
and the US on nuclear inspections.
The presidents of two South Korean commercial banks will be dismissed by the
government in response to a new financial scandal, the country's finance
minister said yesterday.
The action to sack the heads of the Bank of Seoul and Donghwa Bank follows
the arrest on Monday of Ms Chang Young-ja, a relative of former President
Chun Doo-hwan, on fraud charges.
She allegedly swindled at least Won10.7bn (Pounds 8.8m) using dishonoured
commercial bills, while withdrawing funds from anonymous accounts at the two
banks. Ms Chang was at the centre of one of South Korea's biggest financial
scandals in 1982 and served 10 years in prison before being released on
parole.
The government has great influence in appointing and dismissing the
presidents of the nation's commercial banks.
