FT  28 APR 94 / Country blows life into Windmill
London's Windmill Theatre, remembered for its wartime boast 'We Never
Closed', is to reopen this summer as a venue for live country and western
music after a Pounds 500,000 redevelopment.
The intimate theatre in Soho, which once showed motionless tableaux of
semi-nude Windmill Girls in deference to the law of the day, is being gutted
to hold 400 people with room to dance.
A 25-year leasehold for the Windmill has been bought from Mr Paul Raymond by
Mr Oscar Owide, who is to open the building in July as Big Country. It will
be billed as the UK's first permanent live music venue totally devoted to
country and western music.
'This will be a modern blues and country venue and I'm sure we've got it
right - this music is a very popular commodity today,' said Mr Owide.
'New Country' music, with stars such Garth Brooks who recently filled the
Wembley Arena, blends traditional country and western with more mainstream
rock and roll. It is already a big success in the US and Ireland.
'It has not really pushed over here yet,' said Mr Ross Fortune of Time Out
magazine. 'But they are pushing very hard. It's a different culture but its
definitely a musical style on the up.
'Now it is attracting people from the middle-of-the-road mainstream - people
who would go and see Bryan Adams or Paul McCartney.'
For the Windmill, New Country has arrived just in time. The theatre started
life as a small cinema, the Palais de Luxe, built in 1910 on the site of an
18th century windmill. It was converted into a theatre in 1931 and held an
audience of 326 on two levels.
Under its enterprising manager Mr Vivian Van Damm, and later his daughter
Sheila, the Windmill achieved success by adopting a French innovation of
non-stop variety which ran every day from 2.30pm to 11.00pm.
'Revuedeville', as it was called, lasted until 1964, during which time the
theatre launched the careers of a number of comedians, including Harry
Secombe, Jimmy Edwards and Tony Hancock.
It was the only London theatre to remain open throughout hostilities during
the second world war except for compulsory closure for 12 days in September
1939.
More recently the building has been a cinema, theatre, restaurant, and
television studio.
