FT  29 NOV 94 / Arts: Van Dam, Levine and the Philharmonia
Opportunities of hearing the great baritone Jose van Dam in London are so
rare that even the turgid account of Brahms's Ein Deutsches Requiem at the
Royal Festival Hall on Saturday was worth catching for his performance. Van
Dam - undervalued, it seems, by Covent Garden - ought to be a regular
visitor here, but at least he made a brief appearance with James Levine and
the Philharmonia Orchestra, bringing a few minutes of musical sanity to an
otherwise largely self-indulgent reading.
Van Dam is one of the most musicianly of singers around today, and he gave
Brahms's vocal lines sculpted nobility. His contribution, and that of
Barbara Bonney, the radiant soprano soloist, contrasted starkly with
Levine's bloated conception of the piece. Levine, chief of New York's
Metropolitan Opera, is the conductor who broke almost all records by adding
an hour onto the length of the Ring at Bayreuth this year, and here his
Brahms was similarly distorted.
The majestic funeral march of the second movement lacked muscular tautness,
and seemed more like a musical picture of the throbbing engines on a slowly
cruising ocean liner. The strong singing of the Philharmonia Chorus was
undermined at every turn by Levine's square conducting, the fugal passages
in particular emerging as ponderous exercises in counterpoint. Fortissimos
were all equally, unrelentingly heavy.
The concert was certainly a starry one: the soloist in Beethoven's Emperor
Concerto before interval had been the young Yevgeny Kissin, perhaps the
outstanding pianist of his generation and one already tipped to inherit the
mantle of the Russian keyboard giants before him.
His playing had all the stature - power and poetry in equal measure - that
suggests, but Levine drained the music of dramatic vigour. This was a
well-upholstered performance in the grand manner one had thought extinct,
and would have appealed only to those who hanker after Karajan at his most
portentous.
