FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (4): Protecting the kroon
The high priority given to the maintenance of a strong independent currency
is crucial to the success of Estonia's economic reforms, writes Anthony
Robinson.
'When inflationary financing is impossible and the exchange rate is not
flexible, other factors such as domestic prices and wages, must adjust.
Softening adjustment by inflation and money illusion is made impossible,'
commented Mr Siim Kallas, governor of the National bank of Estonia and
widely recognised as the key figure in monetary reform.
'Perhaps not surprisingly, currency board solutions have proven unacceptable
to large countries,' he added, in a recent paper.
The currency board undertakes to convert all kroons offered to it at the
fixed rate of EEK 8 to DM1 and ensures that the issuance of new currency is
umbilically linked to the size of the foreign exchange reserves.
Indicator of success
The monetary reform with its automatic link between reserves and currency
issuance was supported almost unanimously by the Estonian parliament and was
specifically designed to enhance the prestige of the new currency and
protect it from political interference.
One clear indicator of success is the level of gold and foreign currency
reserves. When the new central bank published its balance sheet for the
first time in July 1992, a month after the reform was introduced, reserves
amounted to EEK 1,165m (DM 145.65m).
The total included 11.3 tons of gold transferred abroad by the pre-war
government and returned to its legal successor after the restoration of
independence.
Thanks largely to sharply higher tourist and other invisible receipts from
the booming shipping and harbour sector, foreign reserves to back up the
kroon have been piling up in the Estonian National Bank.
By the start of 1994, reserves had quadrupled to EEK 5,237m (DM 655m),
demonstrating the solid basis for a non-inflationary increase in the money
supply needed to sustain the expected economic growth this year.
