FT  19 JUL 94 / Shake to the right beat
Whatever his shortcomings, Mr John Major is not politically stupid. Or is
he? The UK prime minister must know how dangerous it would be to allow his
Conservative coalition to be led by the hard right. He has recently been
urged to avoid this pitfall in speeches by Mr Douglas Hurd, Mr Kenneth
Clarke and Mr David Hunt, to name all three. Thanks to the first two, the
Tories' fragile concordat on Europe holds, but, as to domestic economic and
social policies, a reversion to the harsh theme music of the 1980s may seem
tempting. There is so much internal discord. Will this noise never cease?
Not while the government stays divided. If you cannot beat the Thatcherites,
Mr Major might reason, then for the party's sake allow them to win.
If he succumbs, we must ascribe his failing to weakness. He will not have
the excuse of ignorance. The Tories belted out the anthems of the narrow
right at their conference last October. Look where that got them. The
promotion this week of ministers who are at their merriest when singing
songs of purple patriotism and perverse parsimony would raise the spirits of
some, but dismay the gentle English soul. What the uncompromising right
tends to forget is, not that the party to which they have attached
themselves won the last four elections, but that in 1979, 1983, 1987 and
1992 Labour lost. It cannot be relied upon to do so a fifth time.
We voters are motivated by self-interest. But altruism, a sense of concern
for others, is also part of the general make-up. Many years ago, the late
professor Richard Titmuss wrote The Gift Relationship, in which he
demonstrated that the blood given for free by English donors was better,
less prone to infection, than the blood sold to hospital services by the
poor in the United States. This has not changed, much. The American
blood-buyers are doubtless more picky than they were, but in England a
brand-new quango, the National Blood Authority, headed by a gentleman
farmer, still collects the fluid from volunteers' arms. Cash does not come
into the equation.
It is possible that the electorate is shrinking from cash-ism. Not so far
that it wants a return to the 1970s, but that is not on offer from any
source. The potential appeal of the Labour party, tamed as it has been by 15
years of frustration, is that it will offer the voters reassurance as to
their self-interest, but add a dash of altruism - not too much, mind you -
to the for-mula. Middle England is uneasy about everything - unemployment,
house prices, crime and the steady, unceasing hammer of change, change in
schools, hospitals, local government, police authorities, the judicial
system, all the institutions that once seemed so familiar, so reliable. If
the Conservatives will not conserve, anxious voters will ask themselves, why
not dismiss them?
This is not to say that the government's market reforms are wrong. They are,
mostly, an improvement, or a promise of one. The process is, however, too
crude, too naked. The British polity is being reformulated by accountants
sitting in quangos managed by Tory puppets. The values of the bottom line
are undiluted. There is no provision for altruism in the cash-ist
revolution.
Here I sympathise with the Right Reverend Mark Santer, Bishop of Birmingham.
In his recent address to the British Medical Association, he acknowledged
that change in the management of the health service is inevitable, but spoke
also of practitioners 'fulfilling a vocation . . . offering a service of
love and duty to their fellow men and women'. This kind of declaration is
pointless if it denies the need for simple fiscal prudence. That is not,
however, at issue. Voters understand, if the brainless bean-counters do not,
that a sense of vocation has driven the NHS since 1948. Destroying that
willingness to serve could be costly. Subtle mar-ket reformers would
understand this.
The electorate may also dimly apprehend the relationship be-tween the
polarisation of our two nations and the increase in anti-social behaviour.
Two nations? Of course. In ours, you have a job, own a house, run a car,
keep in with your bank manager, take foreign holidays, and know, deep in
your heart, that you could, at a stretch, buy your family's way ahead in the
health queue, or change your children's school. In theirs, they have none of
these things. British society is becoming more divided every year. The
evidence is in 'Households Below Average Income', published last week by the
Government Statistical Service.
It shows the proportion of the population living on below-average income as
59 per cent in 1979, when this government first took office. In 1991-92, the
latest period for which numbers are available, the equivalent figure was 62
per cent. Some 9 per cent of our people scratched by on less than half
average income when the then Mrs Thatcher arrived; 13 years later the figure
had risen to 25 per cent. Yes that's right. A quarter of us. The sums look
much the same if you exclude housing costs. The worst off fared worst.
Average net income rose by 36 per cent in the period, but none of the extra
fat went to the lowest fifth of the population.
As to the lowest tenth, real median income actually fell by 17 per cent. The
poorest individuals in 1979 may have been replaced by others by 1992, but
that observation, among many other explanations in the accompanying
commentary, does not feed the children. Undeclared black economy income may
have helped some of the underclass get by, but the overall picture is likely
to have deteriorated since 1992. The family expenditure survey, on which the
government's figures are based, excludes people in institutions and those
living rough or in bed and breakfast accommodation.
The harsh truth is that nobody has a satisfactory answer to any of this. The
proponents of one-nation policies, be they Conservative or Labour, do at
least show some inclination to try. Whatever their protestations, however
generous their personal behaviour, the Tory right cannot easily persuade us
that kindness, the essence of charity, figures in its calculations. Clear
away those beggars] Deny those single parents] Forget the poor] Exclude]
Banish] Despise] Their slogans are depressingly easy to caricature. If Mr
Major allows those who purvey them to prevail, he, and his party, will
deserve to lose.
