FT  11 AUG 94 / Israel and PLO agree to speed talks
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organisation yesterday agreed on a
series of high-level meetings to speed negotiations after a tough and tense
summit at the Erez crossing point into Gaza.
The meetings will address the extension of Palestinian self rule from
Gaza-Jericho to the rest of the West Bank and Palestinian national
elections.
The summit between Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and PLO Chairman
Yassir Arafat followed recent attacks in which each side accused the other
of failing to live up to the pledges of their peace accords.
The PLO said Israel had reneged on promises to release Palestinian prisoners
and is delaying implementing extension of self-rule from Gaza-Jericho across
the rest of the Israeli-occupied West Bank.
Mr Arafat was furious when Israel signed an interim peace deal with Jordan
and recognised King Hussein's special role as guardian of Islamic sites in
future talks over Jerusalem. The PLO claims occupied Arab East Jerusalem as
its political capital.
Israel in turn accused the PLO of not containing violence against Israeli
soldiers who remain in Gaza.
Israeli officials said Mr Warren Christopher, US Secretary of State, who met
Mr Rabin and Mr Arafat during his regional shuttle earlier this week, had
been sympathetic to Palestinian frustrations and had encouraged Israel to
revive the momentum of peace talks with the PLO.
The tortuous negotiations between Israel and the PLO have been in marked
contrast to the smooth and speedy Israeli-Jordanian peace talks.
Jordan and Israel continued making swift progress in talks yesterday.
Israeli radio said the two sides agreed to joint promotion of regional
tourism and would produce a joint tourist brochure within 10 days. They also
agreed to begin connecting their electricity grids next week.
After the summit Mr Rabin said he had expressed concern about Palestinian
violence against Israelis and stressed Israel's abiding focus on security.
Mr Rabin strongly criticised remarks by Mr Farouk Kadoumi, PLO Foreign
minister, who called on Monday for the destruction of Israel.
'I hope that on the Israeli side and the Palestinian side tension and
violence will be reduced, and statements that undermine or are against what
we are committed to will not be heard,' he said.
A more confident Mr Arafat, who last week warned of an 'explosion' unless
Israel fulfilled its obligations.
US foreign aid, Page 4
