FT  02 JUN 94 / Signals strike threat to railways
Rail workers have voted for strike action in a pay dispute, it was announced
last night.
The industrial action by signalmen could bring Britain's rail services to a
standstill later this month.
The RMT main rail union last night said that signalmen employed by
Railtrack, the newly formed company responsible for rail infrastructure, had
voted in a secret ballot by four-to-one to support strike action.
RMT is demanding an 11 per cent increase in basic rates for signalmen in
recognition of their improved product-ivity and to restore their relative
wage position in the industry.
The union claims that the 4,700 signalmen are earning lower rates of pay
than the vast majority of railway workers and substantially lower rates than
signalmen working for London Underground. On average a Railtrack signalman
earns a pre-tax basic salary of Pounds 183 a week.
Mr Jimmy Knapp, general secretary of the RMT, said Railtrack needed to 'sit
up and take notice of the longstanding crisis of low pay within singnalling
grades. With a postal ballot turnout of 80 per cent the overwhelming
majority of our signalling members are saying they deserve the right rate
for the job. We will be seeking an urgent meeting with Railtrack.'
Railtrack last night said that it was disappointed by the outcome of the
ballot and added that talks with RMT would be held as soon as possible.
The union must by law give the company seven day's notice of any disruption.
The last dispute on the railways was in the spring of last year when RMT
called two one-day strikes over redundancies.
Industrial action planned for last night by BBC journalists and technicians
was called off as peace talks aimed at settling a pay and hours dispute
continued at Acas.
Leaders of the National Union of Journalists and the broadcasting union
Bectu were meeting BBC managers for a third round of talks at the
conciliation service Acas.
The unions had warned of further industrial action today but decided to call
off the threat because of the continuing discussions. 'It would be
impractical and improper to call another strike,' said one union official.
Journalists and technical staff have already staged a 24-hour strike and
have drawn up plans for further walkouts unless the dispute is settled.
