FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Singapore (8): Greater urgency injected -
Privatisation Programme
In most countries, the spread of privatisation has been driven by two
overriding motives: to shake up companies which have grown fat and lazy
under state ownership, and to fill the coffers of cash-strapped governments.
In Singapore, however, neither concern has come into play. By common
consent, most of the country's extensive state-owned sector is efficient and
well-managed. As for the exchequer, persistent budget surpluses means it has
money coming out of its ears.
According to Mr Richard Hu, finance minister, the main objectives of
privatisation have been to strengthen Singapore's stock market and financial
services industry by increasing the supply of tradeable equity, and to give
the country's citizens a more direct stake in its economy.
In addition, the government hopes that privatisation will further its
'second wing' strategy of encouraging business expansion in the rest of Asia
by making companies more adventurous and pioneering.
The programme was formally launched in the mid-1980s and has so far involved
about 60 sales, many of relatively small companies which have been sold to
corporate buyers. Recently, however, external events have injected greater
urgency into the programme.
The principal one is a plan by the Kuala Lumpur stock exchange to move to a
paperless electronic trading system. This spells the end of trading in
Malaysian companies' scrip certificates, which accounts for more than half
the equity traded, by value, on the Singapore exchange.
The prospect encouraged the government last year to press ahead with its
most ambitious privatisation to date, the flotation of about 11 per cent of
Singapore Telecom (ST), which raised more than SDollars 4bn. By most
measures, it has gone a good way to meet Dr Hu's goals. Lured by a range of
incentives, about 1.4m Singaporeans have acquired shares in the company,
more than tripling the number of shareholders in the country. ST's recent
market value of more than SDollars 30bn accounts for roughly a quarter of
the total capitalisation of Singapore's stock exchange.
Apart from its high profitability, stemming from its large international
call volumes, ST's appeal is underpinned by the fact that it is the only
privatised telephone company in Asia which faces no immediate threat of
competition. Its monopoly is guaranteed on mobile telephony until 1997 and
on basic services until 2007.
Nonetheless, at its recent share price, ST is worth almost half as much as
British Telecom, which has sales more than 10 times larger and pre-tax
profit four times as big. Some brokers see limited scope for further
appreciation. However, a sharp fall, which could jeopardise popular support
for further privatisations, seems even less likely.
Generous loyalty bonuses have given individual shareholders - who have seen
the value of their investment double after allowing for initial flotation
discounts - a strong incentive to retain their shares. Furthermore, it is
widely thought that state investment bodies, such as the Central Provident
Fund, would step in to prop up the price, if necessary.
Encouraged by the ST success, the government plans to privatise Pidemco
Land, a property company, later this year, followed about two years later by
the power supply businesses of the Public Utilities Board. Other likely
candidates include Singapore Broadcasting, the port authority, the
government printers and the mass transit railway.
Mr Hu hints that the scope of the programme may become more adventurous.
With hindsight, he says, the government 'grossly under-estimated' the demand
for ST shares, and there is no reason in principle why 100 per cent of many
state-owned companies should not be sold in one tranche in future.
He also favours a simplification of the three-tranche approach applied to
Singapore Telecom, under which shares were offered separately to small
shareholders, national financial institutions and all-comers.
There is no shortage of potential candidates. The government owns stakes,
directly and indirectly, in several hundred companies. By one estimate,
these account for more than two thirds of the stock market's total
capitalisation.
The government has used its influence as a shareholder selectively. Once top
managers are in place, it has tended to let them get on with the job,
intervening only in exceptional cases when national interests are at stake.
However, it monitors corporate performance rigorously and is quick to
discipline managers who fail to perform.
To judge from the comments of the managers themselves, this system is
unlikely to change radically even in companies which have been totally
privatised. In any case, the government has retained a degree of influence
over many bigger companies by holding 'golden shares' and setting a cap on
the proportion of their equity which may be held by foreign investors.
Furthermore, Mr Hu says the government intends to continue holding sizable
stakes in privatised companies in 'strategic' sectors, such as defence
manufacturing.
Provided their shares are realistically priced, the generally high quality
of Singaporean companies seems set to continue to ensure strong demand for
future privatisations.
Indeed, if the programme faces any problems, they are more likely to be on
the supply side. With so much of the country's economic and industrial
activity accounted for by foreign-based multinational companies, some fund
managers complain that it is difficult to find enough opportunities to buy
direct stakes in 'Singapore Inc.'
