FT  09 MAY 94 / Survey of Bangladesh (5): When the Ganges runs dry - Sheila
Jones examines a water dispute between India and Bangladesh
India's Farakka dam this year celebrates its 20th anniversary, but a
water-sharing dispute with Bangladesh that goes back even further is far
from settlement while tens of millions go hungry.
The dam, 11 miles inside India's eastern border with Bangladesh, slows the
Ganges as it turns south towards the Bay of Bengal.
India built the dam to flush out silt from the port of Calcutta. Millions of
tonnes of water are diverted daily from the Ganges into India's Hooghley
river and south to the coast.
But the diversion has dried out the south-western edge of Bangladesh, where
the Ganges and its tributaries feed the region's agricultural land.
Last year, for the first time since the dam was built in 1974, there was too
little water to power irrigation pumps at the mouth of the Gorai river, the
Ganges' main tributary in Bangladesh. The pumps have been idle again during
this year's dry season. The Ganges-Kobadak irrigation project, the country's
largest and until now its most successful, has ground to a halt.
Most of the south-west region's 193km of main irrigation canals are dry.
Where there is water, it is stagnant. Last year, Bangladesh received barely
a third of the Ganges flow. Farmers say they lost a third of their rice
crops last year, at a cost of Tk1bn. The soil was too hard for planting the
dry season crop. They expect this year's harvest to be little better.
There is hardly a current at Hardinge Bridge, 15 miles inside Bangladesh,
where the Gorai leaves the Ganges. Further downstream, there is no flow at
all, only sandbanks and stagnant pools. The Gorai has dried up.
At Kushtia, 25 miles downstream of the Gorai pump house, a few scruffy boys
kick a football across the river bed. The Gorai ferry stands idle as trucks
ease their way down the river banks onto rutted tracks heading east.
Monsoon rains will replenish the river in a few weeks, but even now, in the
dry season, it should flow strongly, feeding 350,000 acres of agricultural
land.
The Ganges is running so slowly that silt is building up in the Gorai mouth,
where sandbanks stand 8-10 feet high. The shallower river bed means the
river cannot contain seasonal flooding. The water spills over onto the land,
ruining the soil and spoiling crops. The uneven flow from Farakka is
battering the Ganges banks, causing it to shift and encroach on agricultural
land.
Mr Abdur Rahman Mondal, an adviser on the G-K project, fears that recent
advances in living standards are being lost because of the damage to fish
stocks and agriculture. The region is going backwards, he says.
'In years to come, this area will be a desert. The farmers will be back
where they started, when they were very poor indeed. Gradually, and with the
help of this irrigation programme, they have come up. They are better
dressed. They have pukka houses and food. In another few years they will
have nothing unless the Ganges flow is restored.'
Mr Mondal says the landless - about a fifth of the region's 50m population -
are suffering most. 'There is no compensation for their losses. Farmers are
only just surviving. They simply have to eat less.'
Farmers who normally sell a quarter of their crops produced only enough rice
last year for their own consumption. Farm labourers with nothing to do in
the dry season scramble for any work they can get, but there is little on
offer.
Alam, 36, says he might earn a few taka helping irrigation workers to shift
sand from the river bed. Last year, he had enough rice in stock to maintain
his income and feed his family. But it is much harder this year.
Mr Shaikh Abdul Momin, who is responsible for water management on the G-K
project, says that only the few farmers rich enough to have water pumped
from below ground have produced dry season rice. But this cannot solve the
problem for the whole region, he adds, because depletion of the water table
is threatening supplies of drinking water and will disrupt the ecological
balance.
Bangladesh has appealed to India over the past two decades for a greater
share of Ganges water. 'We have been talking about Farakka since the
inception of Bangladesh (in 1971),' says Mr Majid ul-Haq, agriculture and
water minister.
In 1977, India guaranteed a minimum of 80 per cent of the Ganges flow under
a five-year treaty. There has been no formal water-sharing agreement since
the treaty lapsed in 1982. Since then, the Ganges water level has dropped
dramatically.
Mrs Khaleda Zia, the prime minister, has raised the dispute with the United
Nations in the hope that it will put pressure on India to release more
water. She has told the UN it is a life-and-death crisis.
'India is a big country, and it has many resources so it should not harass a
small country like Bangladesh,' says Mrs Zia. 'We are not demanding any of
their share of the water. We are simply demanding our rightful share.'
Mr PV Narasimha Rao, India's prime minister, told Mrs Zia at a summit
meeting in 1992 that an agreement had to be made for sharing 'the flow in
the Ganges on an equitable basis'. But since the summit, and despite further
pledges from India, little has happened.
India has also suggested broadening the discussion to include the
Brahmaputra and other rivers in the region. But it rejects all moves by
Dhaka to bring in outside organisations, such as the UN, or other parties
like Nepal, whose rivers feed into the Ganges.
Bangladesh is in a weak position: India is upstream and it is a much larger
country.
The only pressure on Delhi is the illegal movement of about 10m Bangladeshis
across the Indo-Bangladeshi border in the past 20 years. They have moved to
try to escape poverty, partly induced by the drought.
Bangladesh dismisses India's suggestion that it should build a link canal
from the Ganges to the Brahmaputra to increase water supplies. 'It goes
completely against the grain of nature,' says Mr ul-Haq, adding that such a
link would destroy crop land and displace thousands of people.
Industry is suffering too, he says, because corrosive saline water has crept
inland from the south. Factories have to bring in fresh water, at great
cost, for cooling and processing.
Increased salinity is also threatening the regeneration of timber-bearing
trees in the region's mangrove forests.
Thousands of people employed in river transport are without work in the dry
season. Fish stocks have been depleted, causing losses estimated at Tk4bn in
recent years.
Workers on the G-K irrigation project say health problems will follow as
washing declines and drinking water from underground is depleted. 'The
health problems will come gradually,' says Mr R. C. Das, an irrigation
engineer at Chuadanga, the southernmost town of the G-K area.
'In the next 10 years, I am afraid people will die. Fifty or 60 farmers came
here last week demanding water. They were shouting for it. But what can I
tell them? I have none.'
