FT  04 AUG 94 / London Stock Exchange: Share gains consolidated in modest
turnover - Market report
The stock market consolidated its gains yesterday as closer reading of the
Bank of England's Quarterly Bulletin reinforced confidence that the
threatened rise in domestic base rates will not happen before next month, at
the earliest. Disappointment with a sluggish lead from Wall Street kept
London subdued in the second half of the session and share prices ended with
only narrow changes from the previous day.
The FT-SE 100 Index showed a gain of 2.9 at 3,160.4 at the close of trading,
but had moved through a range of 17 points during the day as traders tidied
up their books in the wake of Tuesday's strong advance. In early deals, the
Footsie was down 8.8 points and then up 8.7 points before the market settled
down. Dealers commented that many securities houses had been caught
wrong-footed, first by Friday's sudden base rate worries and then by
yesterday's strong rise in the equity market.
Trading opened to a burst of excitement in the supermarkets sector when
Tesco effectively captured William Low, the Scottish food retailer, with a
knockout cash bid of 360p a share, valuing the group at a total of Pounds
248m. Within half an hour, J. Sainsbury had ceded defeat, saying that it
would not increase its previous 305p a share offer for Low, and thereby
surprising many market specialists and investors who had convinced
themselves that Sainsbury would go much higher - as high as 450p a share,
according to some sources.
Market confidence also took on board without difficulty the rumour that
Commercial Union might this morning announce the big rights issue which has
been widely predicted as part of the financing for the acquisition of
Victoire, the insurance arm of Compagnie de Suez, of France. Traders said
that only the timing of such a move by Commercial Union could surprise the
stock market.
Trading volume was moderate, with 710.3m shares moving through the Seaq
electronic network, compared with 810.3m on Wednesday, when retail business
in equities rose to a worth of Pounds 1.51bn, reflecting the increasing
signs of economic recovery and the fading of market fears that a base rate
increase was imminent.
Stock index futures trading again played a role in leading the underlying
equity market yesterday. But there were clear signs that investors were
turning their attention to the second line stocks which had been left behind
when the blue chips raced ahead in the previous session.
The FT-SE Mid 250 Index advanced 16.2 yesterday to finish at 3,689.6,
although trading in these non-Footsie stocks made up only about 51 per cent
of the day's total volume - below average daily percentages.
US dollar stocks were generally firmer, but failed to extend early gains
when the Dow Industrial Average performed disappointingly in the new
session, showing a fall of 12 points as the London market closed. Oil shares
gave back a few pence of their recent gains as investors began to question
the longer term outlook for crude oil prices.
Once again, there were buyers for UK construction stocks with interests in
Europe, encouraged by the increase in industrial output in Germany announced
on the previous day.
With the exception of the excitement among the food retailers, consumer and
retail stocks had a fairly calm session. The uncertainty over near term base
rate prospects which began towards the end of last week when the Bank of
England accepted unexpectedly high bids for Treasury bills appeared to have
died away.
Some insurance stocks moved nervously after market hints that Commercial
Union planned to bring forward its interim statement from next week to
today, but trading volumes were modest.
