FT  02 AUG 94 / US index shows further rise in business activity
US purchasing managers reported a further increase in business activity in
July, but warned that rising materials prices continue to be a concern.
The National Association of Purchasing Managers said yesterday that its
monthly index of business activity rose slightly to 57.8 per cent in July,
its highest level for six years.
Buyers questioned by the association reported that production and new orders
continued to grow, and that their order backlogs were still lengthening.
Mr Ralph Kauffman, manager of procurement at Oryx Energy and chairman of the
NAPM's survey committee, said the index had averaged 57.4 in the first seven
months of 1994.
Past experience indicates that if this average were sustained for all of
1994, real gross domestic growth should exceed 4 per cent, Mr Kauffman said.
Most stock market economists had been predicting a modest drop in the
purchasing managers' index, which is one of the earliest indicators of
economic activity in July. The federal government is due to publish its own
forecasting gauge, the index of leading economic indicators for June,
tomorrow.
Although the NAPM price index dropped slightly to 73.1, compared with 73.5
in June, reports of higher prices for raw materials spread more widely
across different industrial sectors. Only the food industry reported
generally lower prices.
Among the purchasing executives questioned, 50 per cent reported they had to
pay higher prices in July, while 44 per cent said prices remained the same.
Only 6 per cent reported lower prices, mostly in agricultural products such
as beef, pork, orange juice, corn, corn syrup and soyabean oil.
The Commerce Department, meanwhile, reported that personal income rose by
0.1 per cent in June, after seasonal adjustments, a slower rate of increase
than in May or than predicted by most financial market economists.
Construction spending, Commerce said, rose by 0.2 per cent in June, also a
smaller rise than expected.
