FT  29 MAR 94 / Business and the Law: Schindler's lottery can be banned -
European Court
National legislation prohibiting the operation of lotteries within a member
state's own territory is lawful under EC law, even though such action
constitutes a barrier to the freedom to provide services, the European Court
of Justice ruled last week.
The case concerned the sale of German lottery tickets in the UK. The
Schindler brothers were agents for the lottery and sent 20,000 order forms
to individuals in the UK. The documents were confiscated by Customs under UK
laws that ban lotteries in the UK and prohibit the importation of any
publicity material about the running of lotteries.
In the High Court, the Schindlers claimed the UK law was incompatible with
the Rome treaty rules on free movement of goods and freedom to provide
services. The court referred the matter to the ECJ. Eight other member
states also intervened in the proceedings.
The ECJ first had to decide how lottery activities should be treated as a
matter of EC law. The Belgian, German, Irish, Luxembourg and Portuguese
governments argued that such activities were outside the scope of the
treaty, as they did not constitute economic activities.
The Spanish, French and UK governments, together with the European
Commission, argued that such activities were services rather than goods and
should be dealt with under the services rules. The Schindlers submitted the
activities were covered by the EC provisions on free movement of goods.
The Court ruled the activities were economic activities and fell within the
scope of the treaty. It also found that, although physical objects were
distributed, they were merely part and parcel of the organisation and
functioning of a lottery which could not be regarded as goods.
Such activities should be treated as services. The services concerned were
those supplied by the lottery organiser in causing individuals who had
bought tickets to participate in a game of chance and offering them the hope
of winning.
Despite the entertaining nature of lotteries, they were clearly
profit-making organisations. Even where certain member states' laws only
allowed the profits of lotteries to be used for purposes in the public
interest, such as support of the arts, this did not rob the activities of
their economic nature.
The Court then had to decide whether the UK rules were a barrier to the
freedom to provide services. Only the Belgian and Luxembourg governments
argued that the provisions did not constitute such a barrier, on the ground
they were applicable to both the providers of the services in the UK as well
as in other European Union countries.
The court reiterated its earlier position on the issue. National measures
which were indistinctly applicable were capable of falling within the scope
of the EC services rules, if the measures were such as to prohibit or
otherwise impede the activities of a provider of services established in
another member state where that person lawfully provided similar services.
As that was the position in the present case, the Court ruled that the
national provisions did constitute a barrier to the freedom to provide
services.
The final issue to be decided by the Court in the light of earlier findings
was whether such a restriction, which was found not to be discriminatory,
could be justified on public policy grounds.
All the member states agreed and argued that such restrictions were
compatible with the EC services rules on the grounds that they were
justified as being in the public interest. The Commission submitted that the
restrictions were unlawful because they were disproportionate.
The Court found that the aims of the UK measures were to protect the users
of the service as well as consumers generally and the social order. The
Court had already held in previous cases that such aims justified
restrictions on the freedom to provide services. Member states were thus
entitled to take measures such as those at issue, so long as they were not
discriminatory.
C-275/92: HM Customs and Excise v Gerhart and Jorg Schindler, ECJ FC, March
24 1994
BRICK COURT CHAMBERS, BRUSSELS
