FT  25 MAR 94 / Pressure grows on Lyell after clashes with Scott:
Attorney-general's immunity advice challenged
Sir Nicholas Lyell's position as attorney-general came under renewed
pressure yesterday when Lord Justice Scott challenged the government's
conduct of the Matrix Churchill case at the heart of the arms-for-Iraq
inquiry.
In his most sustained cross-examination since the inquiry began in May, the
judge repeatedly clashed with Sir Nicholas over his interpretation of the
law on the use of public interest immunity (PII), which the government used
to withhold documents which the defence considered vital.
In a nervous performance, Sir Nicholas at one point appeared suggest that
ministers had some discretion with regard to PII certificates and that he
had wrongly advised Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade and industry secretary,
who had been reluctant to sign a PII certificate.
However, he later issued a statement that his remarks had not been intended
as a com-ment on the Matrix Churchill case.
The case against the three businessmen accused of illegally exporting
machine tools to Iraq collapsed in November 1992 after a judge ordered that
documents covered by PII certificates should be handed to the defence.
Opening his evidence, Sir Nicholas read out a four-page statement in which
he defended his role as the government's legal adviser. He said suggestions
that ministers suppressed documents to save themselves while risking that
the defendants be sent to jail were 'utterly untrue.'
The exchanges with Lord Justice Scott focused on the advice given by Sir
Nicholas to the four ministers who signed PII certificates that they were
under a duty to do so and could not use their discretion in the matter.
This was repeatedly challenged by the judge. At one point he described the
attorney-general's argument that ministers could not disclose sensitive
documents without being advised to do so by counsel as a 'proposition which
has no legitimacy or auth-ority'.
Sir Nicholas's attempts to present a coherent defence appeared to weaken as
he was forced to qualify his opening statement.
He told the inquiry that a minister with 'an instinct for justice' who
disagreed with the advice he received could 'in conscience' refuse to sign
if he thought that the clear balance in the interest of justice lay with
disclosure of documents.
He also conceded that the judge's proposal that the PII system required
reform 'deserved very serious consideration'.
Mr John Major, prime minister, pressed by Labour to sack Sir Nicholas,
warned MPs not to be 'misled' by news reports of the attorney-general's
evidence.
However, the attorney-general did little to convince Conservative MPs that
he would survive the next ministerial reshuffle.
Judge aims to cure immunity system, Page 10
Few defend Lyell, Page 10
