FT  15 AUG 94 / Leading Article: Case for trials of Aids vaccines
As researchers, epidemiologists, and patients returned this weekend from the
10th international Aids conference in Yokohama, the mood could not have been
gloomier. The disease is spreading; none of the available drugs has proved
particularly effective; and prospects for a vaccine, uncertain at best, have
been put back by US unwillingness to initiate trials of those that have been
developed.
The most disheartening news is the epidemic's continuing rapid acceleration
in Africa, home to 60 per cent of all people infected with HIV, the virus
which causes Aids, as well as in Asia. Three million more people have been
infected over the last 12 months, making a conservative total of 17m. In
parts of Uganda, Aids-related diseases account for half of all deaths.
Infections have tripled in India since 1992 and risen tenfold in Thailand
since 1990.
Meanwhile, the ability of doctors to deal with the virus appears to be
deteriorating. At Yokohama, clinical data were put forward on treatments
that might help against the opportunistic infections that afflict Aids
patients. But the confirmation that the drug AZT is incapable of slowing
progress to death in non-symptomatic, HIV-positive patients means there is
no proven effective treatment for such people.
Little is in the pipeline to take AZT's place. Without new medicines to
test, patients are being urged to combine the existing ones. Whether these
will be effective or practical is open to doubt. In any case, most patients
in industrialised countries already have difficulties paying for treatments
which are individually expensive. Taken simultaneously, they would be
exorbitant.
Developing countries
If such drugs are too dear for patients in rich countries, they are well
beyond the means of most HIV-positive and Aids patients - those in
developing countries. A year's treatment with AZT costs about Dollars 2,500.
Many African countries spend less than Dollars 10 a head on health. Public
health campaigns involving greater use of condoms, clinics for
sexually-transmitted diseases, education and counselling are also beyond the
means of most African nations.
While efforts to boost condom use and public education must be stepped up
and given greater support by aid donors, they can only provide a partial
answer. The best solution in the long term will be a vaccine. Experimental
injectable versions are available. The only way of testing to see if they
work and are safe is through large-scale trials. Delegates, particularly
from Africa, pleaded last week for such studies to be started. Yet the
vaccines they want to test have just been rejected in the US. The American
authorities were unconvinced the vaccines could outwit HIV, and believed the
risks involved outweighed the benefits. These risks are considerable:
volunteers could adopt more risky behaviour in the mistaken belief they were
protected from HIV; they could even be infected by the vaccine itself.
Desperate dilemma
The American decision set back Aids vaccine development in the US, possibly
by three years. This poses a desperate dilemma for the World Health
Organisation, which had been planning to co-ordinate vaccine trials in
Brazil, Thailand and Uganda.
The simple case for proceeding with trials in developing countries is that
this would be in the best interests of their people. The cost and
impracticality of likely alternatives makes a vaccine the only realistic
solution. While it would be desirable if the US authorities overcame their
objections to the vaccines in question, there can be no denying that the
risk-reward equation is different in America. Not only is the incidence of
the disease lower than in many developing countries, but drugs companies
might come up with a way of controlling it through medicines that would
never be affordable in the poorest countries.
It would be out of the question to contemplate a standard sequence for
trials of new drugs that started with animals and moved on to Africans,
before finishing with Americans. But by virtue of its incidence, Aids is a
special case. Individual participants in any trials must be fully informed
of the risks. This said, the threat faced by the people of developing
countries makes those risks worth running.
