FT  17 MAY 94 / Survey of World Forest Products (7): A region well
positioned to cash in - Latin America's forest industry has continued to
expand
Latin America's forestry industry, dominated by Brazil and Chile which
account for 90 per cent of regional exports, has continued to expand in the
face of tough global conditions. Although some companies saw profit margins
squeezed last year - as new capacity came on stream just when the market hit
rock-bottom - most are well placed to take advantage of any sustained
upturn.
As profits in the northern hemisphere are sapped by tough environmental
requirements and high costs of labour, energy and transport, production of
pulp and other wood products is seeping south.
Latin America, which boasts 27 per cent of world forests, is well positioned
to cash in. Costs are generally low and environmental legislation, although
tightening, is more lax as governments drive for economic growth.
The continent's greatest asset is its climate. In Brazil trees grow all year
round, halving the normal cycle of eucalyptus plantations to five years.
Radiata pine, which accounts for 80 per cent of Chile's 1.6m hectares of
plantations, grows in a quarter of the time it takes in Canada.
Such natural advantages have led to huge investments in Brazil and Chile,
where an estimated Dollars 9bn was spent between 1987 and 1992, mainly in
the pulp sector. Such investment has transformed Latin America from a net
importer of wood products in 1987 into an important exporter, now accounting
for 15 per cent of world pulp supply. Analysts predict that, within 10
years, Latin America could be accounting for 30 per cent of global trade.
Although Chile faced tough conditions last year, Eladio Susaeta, of Chile's
Wood Corporation, predicts a 20 per cent rise in export volumes in 1994 and
earnings of Dollars 1.45bn. Mr Juan Moya of the National Forestry
Corporation (Conaf) sees industry confidence reflected in last year's
130,000 hectares of new forest, at 10ha per Chilean, one of the world's
highest planting rates.
The industry, entirely privately-owned, has advanced rapidly since the
mid-70s when it counted on only 300,000ha and exports of Dollars 125m.
Generous planting subsidies have quintupled the area of man-made forests,
which should double again to 3mha by 2005.
Planting is expected to continue apace, despite the end of state subsidies
next March, because of the commercial incentives to supply Chile's six pulp
mills which have a total annual capacity of 2m tonnes. Three mills came on
stream in 1992, all with substantial foreign participation, nearly doubling
potential output. One, the Santa Fe plant, fed by eucalyptus, marks a trend
towards faster-growing hardwoods for the production of short-fibre
cellulose. The Santa Fe mill, a Dollars 460m joint venture between Scott
Paper of the US, Royal Dutch/Shell and Citibank, has a 230,000-tonne annual
capacity.
Pulp makes up less than half of Chile's forestry exports, with sawn wood,
planks and chips also exported. Several Chilean companies are looking at
projects in Argentina's potentially rich, but underdeveloped, forestry
sector.
Unlike Chile, Brazil's industry has not had the advantage of a stable
macro-economic environment, but has managed to prosper despite regular
changes at the finance ministry and skyrocketing inflation. Some Dollars 6bn
has been invested in as many years, with billions more waiting for better
conditions at home and abroad.
The industry has exploded over the past two decades, trebling output of
paper and board and lifting pulp production from 1.1m tonnes in 1973 to 5m
tonnes currently. In 1992, Aracruz Celulose became the world's biggest
producer of short-fibre pulp, earning Dollars 460m from sales of 977,000
tonnes after a Dollars 1.2bn expansion of its Espirito Santo mill.
The potential for further increases in installed capacity are enormous.
Mining conglomerate Companhia Vale do Rio Doce - which has five big
reforestation and pulping projects, some involving Japanese investment -
could boost pulp output by 1.7m tonnes by 2000.
Brazil, in contrast to Chile, has a huge internal market of 150m people
which devours 75 per cent of domestically-produced paper and more than 60
per cent of pulp. But this still leaves about 1.3m tonnes of paper and 2m
tonnes of pulp for export which last year fetched Dollars 1.5bn.
In addition to pulp and paper, Brazil also earns more than Dollars 500m
annually from exports of logs, planks and wood manufactures. This year, pulp
and paper production are expected to rise by 8 and 6 per cent respectively,
according to Mr Horacio Cherkassky, president of industry association ANFPC.
Few doubt Brazil's potential to better its ranking as the world's eighth
biggest pulp producer.
Such expansion plans will need, however, to take account of Latin America's
growing environmental awareness. In Chile, for example, where a law on
native forests is working its way through parliament, much controversy has
been raised by the commercial exploitation of 100-year-old native lenga
trees to provide woodchips for Japan. Last year, Chile earned more than
Dollars 100m through exporting chips produced predominantly from native
forest species.
Forestry companies argue that native forests are exploited rationally in a
manner which protects by placing a commercial value on land that might
otherwise be cleared for agricultural use. Mr Moya of Conaf says the subject
has provoked 'much passion and little logic' and that Chile, a poor country,
must make adequate use of its resources. Conaf says that 90 per cent of
Chile's forestry industry uses man-made wood.
Mr Nicolo Gligo, a Santiago-based UN expert, says the industry could be
sustainable, but only if tougher regulations are enforced. He would like to
see a ban on all chips produced from native species. Of industry claims that
it plants more trees than are felled, he says: 'I am in favour of
plantations but in addition to, not as a replacement of, native forests.'
Whatever merits differing arguments may have, the fact remains that 200mha
of Latin America forest have been destroyed in the past 30 years, according
to the Food and Agriculture Organisation. If the forestry industry is to
enjoy a long, prosperous future in the continent it must reverse that trend.
