FT  18 JUN 94 / Food &amp; Drink: New lease of life for an old grape variety -
Jancis Robinson considers the merits of Malbec when it is grown east of the
Andes, in Argentina
If ever there were an argument that every grape variety has its perfect
place, then Mendoza Malbec is it. In the rest of the world Malbec is hardly
one of the great grapes. Once widely grown in Bordeaux, it is now
effectively known only in Cahors, where it is called Cot or Auxerrois, and
generally turns out rather tough, charmless, essentially country wines - in
spite of the millions of francs poured into Cahors by well-heeled Parisians
and New Yorkers pursuing a vineyard hobby.
In the higher temperatures and richer soils of Mendoza, however, Argentina's
main wine-making province just east of the Andes, Malbec seems to luxuriate.
The wines it produces are lush, rich, heavily spiced and yet the best of
them have enough acid and tannin to make them appetising bets for long term
ageing.
Not that Malbec is at all revered in Argentina. It is one of the cheapest
red grape varieties, commanding considerably less of a price than the more
glamorous Merlot and Cabernet Sauvignon - perhaps because it sounds less
obviously French, especially when spelt Malbeck, as it often is in
Argentina. And in the vast domestic wine market (about the same size as the
entire US), French names enjoy the greatest cachet, no matter how
irrelevant.
Carcassonne, for example, is the curious name of a popular blend of Cabernet
and Malbec, and its popular sister blend of Malbec, Merlot and Syrah is
called Pont l'Eveque, a particularly smelly French cheese.
Malbec's ubiquity in Mendoza doubtless militates against its glorification.
For long it was the most planted red wine grape (although a vine pull scheme
has led to its being overtaken by a grape called Bonarda, which may be the
same as California's Charbono).
Parts of Mendoza can be extremely hot, as witness the ancient plane trees
which flank so many of the main roads, but Lujan de Cuyo, to the south of
Mendoza city (with Vistalba the highest sub-district), seems to offer
perfect conditions for Malbec. At an altitude of about 900m (nearly as high
as Switzerland's highest vineyard, for example), it can offer suitably cool
nights even in late summer.
With unlimited sunshine and unlimited irrigation water from the Andes
Mendoza has been one of the world's most productive wine factories since
Spaniards and Italians settled here in the late 19th century.
Mendoza's major natural disadvantage is its minute annual rainfall of about
180mm (4 3/4 in) - 500mm is generally considered a viticultural minimum
without irrigation - of which about 150mm falls at harvest time, often in
the devastating form of hail. Growers just have to reckon on sacrificing
between 10 and 20 per cent of each year's crop.
Raul de la Motta of Weinert, 'the small winery producing big wines' from
carefully bought-in grapes, has made more than 50 vintages there and is one
of the few Argentines to recognise that Malbec might be the Argentine wine
industry's trump card.
'The whole world makes Cabernet, but with Malbec, our wines have
distinction. Malbec ages very well here.' He can demonstrate the gamey, wild
animal smells of young Malbec as well as the mellower, richer characters of
Malbec aged for more years than would be thought wise in France in the giant
old oak vats that characterise this wine industry ripe for renovation.
Weinert believes in blending Malbec, which with Cabernet forms about a third
of his delicious Cavas Weinert blend, exported to the UK and US, and most of
the bargain-priced Carrascal for the domestic market.
In neighbouring Agrelo, Moet &amp; Chandon has been experimenting with ageing
Malbec (and Cabernet, and of course Chardonnay) in small French oak
barriques, with aromatic, juicy, well structured results. They are launching
these new- fangled varietals in Argentina under the name of the winery's
first oenologist. Luckily, for marketing reasons, he was called Renaud
Poirier rather than Reg Pratt.
A new Anglo-Saxon name on the Argentine wine map, however, is Peter Bright,
the Portuguese-based Australian winemaker who has been cooking up some fine
blends on behalf of the British supermarket Sainsbury's at
Penaflor/Trapiche, Argentina's biggest producer, also based in Mendoza. For
long a champion of Portugal's rich heritage of native grape varieties, he
was quick to see the potential of Malbec, and Bright Brothers' Malbec 1992
Las Palmas, available at Pounds 5.45 in 60 Sainsbury's, is worth seeking
out.
Other forward-looking winemakers, who have discovered that Mendoza Malbec
has an affinity with small oak barrels, include Alberto Arizu at Luigi
Bosca, who is actively looking for importers for fine wines which include
his 1991 Malbec from 40 year-old vines; Nieto &amp; Senetiner/Valle de
Vistalba/Santa Isabel (exported to Switzerland); and Bodega Norton, into
which vast sums are being poured by the Swarovski family of Austria. But
that is another, extremely promising, story.
Sainsbury's Argentinian Malbec Cabernet is Pounds 3.49 and is even fuller
than the older blend it replaces next week (other Trapiche wines are
available from Grape Ideas of Oxford on 0865-791313). A few branches of
Sainsbury's also stock Cavas de Weinert 1985 at Pounds 6.95, but John Armit
Wines of London W11 (071-727 6846) has a wider range, including Carrascal
1985, at Pounds 94 a case. Berkmann Wine Cellars of London N17 (071-609
4711) imports Norton's fine wines, including a small quantity of an
extraordinary, recently-bottled Malbec 1982.
Booths supermarkets, Bute Wines of Scotland (0700-502730), Christopher James
of Exeter (0392-73894), La Vigneronne of London SW7 (071-589 6113) and Mayor
Sworder of London SE11 (071-735 0385) stock Argentine wines from Navarro
Correas of Maipu. Its Cabernet Sauvignon 1988 gives a great deal of
full-blooded pleasure for about Pounds 8.50. The importer feels that Malbec
is not a sufficiently well-known name to be worth importing.
