FT  22 APR 94 / International Company News: Everything that does not conform
must be sold off - Volvo's strategy
For the first time in months, the pressure on Volvo's senior executives is
off. After a period of large losses and the trauma of the collapsed merger
with Renault, the company has emerged into a period of strong recovery with
a firm strategy.
It is a strategy which has been generally welcomed by shareholders and the
market, even if some motor industry experts are not fully won over.
Everything which does not conform with the concept embodied in Volvo's name
 -latin for I roll - will be sold. That means the disposal of all activities
built up during the heydays of 1980s diversification, including consumer
products, pharmaceuticals, stockbroking and property.
By the time the programme is fully implemented at the end of 1996, the group
will have shed some SKr40bn (Dollars 5.1bn) worth of non-core assets,
including its holdings in two of Sweden's biggest companies: Pharmacia, the
pharmaceuticals group, and BCP, the consumer products concern. The company
will be a pure transport group for the first time since the mid-1970s.
Analysts say the group could generate as much as SKr20bn in capital gains
from the programme. If realised, this would reduce its SKr14.7bn net debt
and help to reach an equity-to-assets ratio of 50 per cent, double today's
level.
The calculation is that a strong balance sheet will give the group enough
muscle to sit out cyclical industry troughs. It will provide the resources
for the group to support its automotive operations without relying on the
economy-of-scale benefits that the Renault link-up would have brought.
'The key thing here is that after the disposals, Volvo will be strong enough
to develop a new car on its own,' says Mr Christian Diebitsch, Swedish
analyst with Kleinwort Benson in London. The top-range 900 series is in the
process of renewal. While a new 400 series is being developed in
collaboration with Mitsubishi through a Dutch-based joint venture called
NedCar
Volvo's aim is no longer to find a single partner; rather it is to strike
specific co-operative ventures with a number of different companies across
the range of its activities.
There is much talk of internal as well as external partnership. By this the
group aims to shorten lead times and increase co-ordination of operations
across different model ranges.
In the short term, the company has gained a respite thanks to the weak
krona, recovery in key markets, intense cost-cutting, and the success of its
850 model. Profitability will soar in 1994 and 1995, enhancing the benefits
it will derive from the disposals and further cost-cutting.
Question marks remain over the group's longer-term strategy. Many
commentators believe it will be forced to seek a deeper alliance with
another manufacturer, particularly to support its car operations.
'My worry is that Volvo has underestimated the costs and complications of
running joint venture collaborative agreements,' says Professor Garel Rhys,
director for the Centre of Automotive Industry Research at the Cardiff
Business School.
He believes that other car manufactures match Volvo's traditional selling
strengths in safety, quality and longevity. He says that without being able
to charge a premium for its product, the group will be forced to seek
economies of scale with another big automotive group to avoid having the
higher unit costs of the small-scale manufacturer.
The way ahead could include a deepening of Volvo's collaboration with
Mitsubishi, or even a partnership with Honda, following BMW's takeover of
the Rover Group.
Prof Rhys believes Volvo would be better advised to look to Japan for its
partners, rather than Europe. 'With a European partner, Volvo would become a
branch factory of a European operation. With a Japanese company, it could
become a bridgehead into Europe,' he says.
But Volvo has gained a breathing space to consider its options when it can
negotiate with a potential partner from a position of strength.
Mr Soren Gyll, chief executive, stressed at Wednesday's annual general
meeting in Gothenburg that he had not changed his views since last autumn
when the group was in the throes of its controversial merger with Renault.
However, he may find that Volvo's independence has to be compromised to a
greater extent than he seems to envisage.
