FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (10): Crucial political conundrum - Debate
on civil rights of ethnic minorities
Restoration of the rights and liberties of the inter-war Estonian republic
became the obsessive goal of all politically-aware Estonians - once
glasnost, the great achievement of the Gorbachev era, made it possible,
after nearly 50 years of silence - to debate the 1939 Molotov-Ribbentrop
pact which transferred independent Estonia into the Soviet sphere of
influence.
Local reformist communist party leaders - men like Edgar Savisaar and Arnold
Ruttel - took the lead and, in the summer of 1988, the Estonian Supreme
Soviet became the first of the 15 Soviet national parliaments to declare
national sovereignty. This was followed by the first free elections in March
1990 which brought openly pro-independence nationalists into the parliament
and swept Mr Savisaar into power as prime minister.
The government was always regarded as transitional but became even more so
after the failed August 1991 coup in Moscow which was immediately seized
upon as an occasion to declare full independence from Moscow and set up a
constitutional assembly to draw up a new constitution.
Communists and nationalists together started work on the new constitution in
November 1991 and the new document, which rejected the authoritarian
presidential model of the pre-war constitution in favour of parliamentary
government, was approved by referendum in June 1992.
The first elections under the new constitution took place in September 1992
and the pro patria, or Fatherland front, a loose alliance of conservative
and Christian democrat groups, led by Mr Mart Laar, a young former academic,
emerged as the largest single grouping with 23 seats in the 100-seat
Riigikogu (parliament).
Mr Laar became prime minister of the five-party conservative coalition
government formed after the elections. He used his party's swing vote to
break an inconclusive outcome to the presidential elections, which took
place at the same time, and ensure the election of Mr Lennart Meri as the
first president of the restored Estonian republic.
Mr Meri, a well-known film-maker and historian, is the son of the foreign
minister of the inter-war republic, and was among 100,000 prominent
Estonians deported to Siberia after the Soviet takeover in 1940. He lacks
the formal powers enjoyed by Konstantin Pats, the last pre-war president of
Estonia, but enjoys high prestige as a canny observer of Russian affairs and
elder statesman in a government whose ministers average age hovers around 30
years.
Last year, President Meri obliged the government to revise its nationality
laws to take into account objections of discrimination against Russians,
voiced by the Council of Europe, and caused a flurry early this year when he
protested against the January government re-shuffle which, he feared, would
distract attention from the worrying signs of resurgent Russian nationalism
and talk in Moscow of restoring Russian influence over the Baltic states.
Given Estonia's recent history, and the colonial nature of Soviet dominance
throughout the Baltic states, a crucial political conundrum concerns the
civil rights of ethnic minorities, mainly Russian speakers, who make up 35
per cent of the population.
All the current members of parliament are ethnic Estonians. Automatic
citizenship, and therefore full rights to vote and participate in politics,
is limited to those whose families were resident before the waves of
Soviet-inspired immigration after 1940. Non-citizens were able to vote in
local elections last year, but were not eligible to stand as candidates for
election.
More than half the population of Tallinn, and over 90 per cent of the
inhabitants of Narva, the eastern border city, are Russian speakers and over
10,000 former Soviet army and KGB officers have set up their retirement
homes in the republic. The latter in particular are openly viewed as a
potential fifth column by many Estonians, including ministers.
The government offers to help defray the removal expenses of non-Estonians
wishing to leave and an estimated 30,000, plus thousands of Soviet military
personnel and their families, have left over the last 18 months.
Most Russian-speakers, including an estimated 80-100,000 'old Russians' from
Czarist days, want to stay in what is expected to become a stable and
prosperous democracy. They have been granted residence permits for the next
five years and the offer of citizenship conditional on learning basic
language skills and demonstrating loyalty to the Estonian state. Dual
citizenship is not allowed.
Acute observers like Mrs Marju Lauristin, the minister of social affairs,
notes that 90 per cent of Russian speaking children, hitherto segregated
into Russian speaking schools, are now seriously studying the Estonian
language - 'for Estonians the issue is not blood, but the survival of their
language and culture,' she underlines.
Mrs Lauristin is a social democrat in a government whose overall
conservative philosophy is deeply influenced by Thatcherite notions of
self-reliance and the virtues of thrift and hard work. Taxation and other
policies are expressly aimed at encouraging the emergence of a large,
stable, property-owning middle class, concentrating social assistance on the
really poor and introducing self-financing health and pension schemes.
For many, Estonia's determination to achieve the prosperity of its
Scandinavian neighbours by the turn of the century is symbolised by the top
priority given to first establishing and then sustaining a convertible,
gold-backed, independent national currency.
Significantly, plans for the new independent Kroon were first drawn up in
1987 when Mr Siim Kallas, the president of the Bank of Estonia, was not a
banker but a member of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union working
closely with the Russian reformers whose star is now waning in Russia
itself.
He saw that Soviet reforms would falter without serious monetary reform,
doubted that Russia's reformers had the strength to push through what was
required, but was convinced that Estonia alone could succeed. Two years of
independence have proved him right.
