FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (25): Battle against black-outs - Foreign
groups join drive to electrification
For Mr R Vasudevan, power secretary in the Indian government, there are 'no
push-button solutions' to the country's electricity shortages. Achieving the
needed output, he says, will require 'a long gestation period'.
His vision is helping bring private operators, including foreign companies,
into an industry which until now has often been politically manipulated by
state and central governments.
A parliamentary and legal challenge held up agreement on the first flagship
project, a Dollars 2bn plant being built by Enron of the US to supply
Bombay. At issue was central government's right to grant guarantees that the
State Electricity Board (SEB) in Maharashtra, of which Bombay is the
capital, would pay for the power it received. Without these, Enron said it
could not raise financing for the facility.
The way the power ministry has conducted negotiations with prospective
entrants has won praise even from beyond their ranks.
The task ahead, though, is enormous. Growth in installed capacity for power
generation has averaged 6 per cent annually since independence and currently
stands at some 77,000MW. Mr Vasudevan told an energy summit convened in
Madras in August by the Confederation of Indian Industry that 'the capacity
addition as planned is short of the need-based requirements and, what is
more disturbing, even the achievement of this target is dogged by serious
resource constraints'.
In short, public sector suppliers are at best treading water - capacity
being added is enough only to keep pace with economic growth rather than
redress structural shortages, and many SEBs do not have the capital to meet
expansion commitments envisaged under the current five-year plan which runs
to March 1997.
Overall power shortages are around 10 per cent, with unmet demand at peak
times nearly double that. Private sector involvement, largely foreign, is
seen as the only escape from 'load shedding', the intermittent blackouts
experienced daily by virtually all businesses and households. Only key
government installations and export industries in some states are protected.
According to Mr Vasudevan, a programme to bring reliable electricity to all
India would mean additional capacity of 142,000MW by 2007, nearly trebling
the available total. He agrees with private sector estimates that making a
start on this will require at least Dollars 6bn a year worth of plants over
the next five years.
The largest project so far agreed is a Dollars 12.7bn plan by an offshoot of
Mr Gordon Wu's Hopewell Holdings of Hong Kong to provide an eventual
10,560MW of capacity through two coal-fired plants in a deal with Powergrid,
a central government agency. The first of these 16 units is to come on
stream by early 1999, with full operation scheduled for 2003.
Powergrid is a minority supplier to SEBs, and India does not yet have a
national grid, though one is intended to evolve as part of the restructuring
of the sector.
In the short term, three main ways in which the centre is seeking to improve
power availability by getting the most out of existing capacity are:
encouraging demand-side management, limiting transmission and distribution
losses, and increasing power station efficiency.
But each of these runs up against entrenched attitudes at the SEBs, which
currently provide three quarters of the country's power, and at the offices
of their political masters in state capitals.
First, the tariff structure does not sufficiently steer larger users into
making optimal use of off-peak periods, and many smaller commercial
customers, notably farmers, are supplied at a loss.
Second, some 23 per cent of generated electricity disappears before it
reaches the customer, commonly through illegal link-ups, and few governments
are prepared to arouse the ire of slum dwellers by severing their pirate
lines.
Third, headway has been made in improving use of installed capacity
(official figures show that average plant load factor, a measure of this,
rose from 57 per cent to 61 per cent last year) but such an improvement may
not be sustainable without spending on modernisation by the cash-strapped
SEBs.
That would have to form part of a programme for the longer run, one which
also offers opportunities to foreign suppliers. States are turning towards
schemes whereby they lease an uneconomic facility to a private operator
which upgrades it and, where required, eventually returns it to public
hands. Mr S Sangameswaran of Asea Brown Boveri, the Swiss-Swedish
engineering combine, estimates that the market for modernisation could
itself deliver 30,000MW in extra capacity.
He enumerates several areas of concern for developers entering the Indian
market. Prime among these are the tardiness in establishing a transparent
bidding and evaluation procedure for projects, together with a complex and
slow decision-making process. Under the Indian constitution, electricity is
the dual responsibility of the centre and the states. The two levels of
government are seldom of one mind on priorities or cost, and SEBs are not
conducting open tenders.
Furthermore, the sheer number of projects now being contemplated - 86 at
latest count - may lead to a dilution of efforts. Mr Vasudevan admits his
department has had problems even processing the proposals.
Duties on imported equipment stand at 20 per cent, although these have been
reduced sharply from a previous 85 per cent. ABB is in talks with Delhi to
take over a government boilermaking factory and is planning to build turbine
generators at a greenfield site, aiming to produce its first Indian-made
machinery by 1997-98.
A main plank in the government's efforts to improve supply is a greater
reliance on hydroelectric generation. Officials estimate that only a fifth
of a potential 84,000MW capacity is being exploited, and wish to increase
the contribution of hydropower to some 40 per cent of the total from a
current 28 per cent.
This will depend to some extent on the fate of the country's flagship
Narmada Dam project in central India, which has been reviled by aid agencies
because it would entail uprooting of thousands of rural communities.
Although the World Bank has withdrawn support, Narmada remains on the
drawing board.
On a different level, the World Bank in July cancelled Dollars 750m in power
loans to a small number of SEBs because of their poor financial performance.
There were little or no knock-on effects on other projects, and in the past
year half a dozen states have agreed to reform their power regimes with
World Bank help.
But Mr Heinz Vergin, head of the Bank's India department, was quoted as
describing some of the local remedies for the SEBs' ills as 'Band-Aids'.
No wonder central guarantees were sought, and are being granted, for the
first seven large, fast-track projects in which foreign companies are
involved.
While foreign operators fret about the remaining risks, such as construction
delays and cost overruns, nationalist politicians maintain that too much has
been given away.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
              ANNUAL ELECTRICITY OUTPUT 1950-93 (BN KWH)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Year        Hydro   Thermal    Nuclear     Non-utility     Total
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1950-51      2.5       2.6        -            1.5          6.6
1960-61      7.8       9.1        -            3.2         20.1
1970-71     25.2      28.2      2.4            5.4         61.2
1980-81     46.5      61.3      3.0            8.4        119.3
1990-91     71.7     186.8      6.1           24.1        288.7
1991-92     72.5     208.6      5.6           27.5        314.2
1992-93     69.8     224.4      6.7           30.0        330.9
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Asea Brown Boveri
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
