FT  22 OCT 94 / More heat than light in Nepal power wrangle: World Bank is
worried about effects of a campaign against a hydroelectric scheme
The World Bank's ability to continue backing large-scale power projects in
the developing world is facing a crucial test as a result of
environmentalists' opposition to a proposed Arun III hydroelectric scheme
for Nepal.
The government scheme is being strenuously opposed by such non-governmental
organisations (NGOs) as the US-based Environmental Defence Fund and the
International Rivers Network, as well as the Arun Concerned Group of Nepal.
The IRN and the ACG have announced plans to file a motion before the Bank's
newly created three-member inspection panel. The motion will call for the
project to be shelved on the basis that it is 'in violation of Bank policies
and procedures'.
The motion will be the first to be handled by the panel, which was set up in
the wake of controversy surrounding the Bank's backing for the Narmada Dam
multi-purpose hydro project in India.
Under intense criticism by such groups as the IRN and Britain's Overseas
Development Administration, the Bank last year took the unprecedented step
of suspending its support for the 1,450MW dam and irrigation complex in
north-west India, which involved the resettlement of at least 100,000
people. This meant the suspension of the remaining Dollars 175m (Pounds
107m) of a total of Dollars 450m in Bank commitments to the scheme.
The criticism of the Indian project centred on the way the resettlement was
being handled, including claims of cruelty to those being resettled,
inadequate compensation, lack of Indian government compliance with Bank
project guidelines and lack of Bank enforcement of the guidelines.
Mr Joseph Wood, the Bank's vice-president for south Asia, in a recent
interview said the Nepal and Indian projects could not be compared.
Arun III calls for initial construction of a 201MW run-of-river
hydroelectric scheme, which will involve the displacement of only 155 local
families and will not require construction of a reservoir.
The fall-out from Narmada and the criticism of Arun are causing worry within
the Bank about its future involvement in large-scale energy projects.
Long delays to Arun might prove fatal, senior Bank officials admitted. The
Bank had already delayed financing approval several times as a result of
outside pressure, and now was hoping to get its board approval by November
3, by which time all financing from partner agencies should have been
arranged.
Under the proposal, the Bank would provide a 30-year, Dollars 140.7m loan to
the Nepal Electricity Authority. A further Dollars 34.3m is also available
under an existing Bank facility. A total of Dollars 473m would be arranged
through various bilateral agencies from France, Sweden, Finland, Japan as
well as the Asian Development Bank. The Nepalese would contribute Dollars
443m, bringing the total cost to Dollars 1.09bn.
Japan's contribution to the fund is crucial for the project but it is moving
cautiously because of its embarrassment over its involvement in Narmada and
is therefore conducting an independent assessment of the scheme. .
The protest groups want to delay the project beyond November 13, the date of
Nepalese national elections, and hope to see it supplanted by a more
environmentally compatible complex of smaller dam schemes around the
country, some as small as 10MW.
Mr Gopal Siwakoti, ACG spokesman, says his group was not consulted
sufficiently, parliament did not properly debate the project, and Bank and
government authorities been have slow to provide project documents. He added
that even if parliament was to approve the project following an open debate,
the group would still oppose the scheme in favour of its alternative plan
for smaller dams.
Mr Siwakoti added that the project was 150 per cent more expensive than
comparable power schemes elsewhere and would lead to substantially higher
tariffs.
Mr Wood, in response, said that numerous talks had been held in Nepal and
abroad. He stressed that the Bank was supporting what was a Nepalese
government proposal, not a Bank proposal.
He said that the NGOs' alternative power strategy would produce less
electricity and would not be significantly cheaper. There had been much
debate, both in parliament and in public, and the issue had been well
reported in the local media. 'Even the Communist party is not opposed to the
scheme,' Mr Wood said.
There had been some disagreement within the project evaluation team and the
original road design had been changed.
He emphasised that the country was now in the grip of regular power cuts.
The capacity of Arun Dam, to be completed by 2001, would establish a healthy
domestic power source, nearly doubling capacity from the current 241MW.
'This will make a hell of an impact on tourism, on service industries, light
manufacturing such as carpet-making and on agriculture. . . We want to see
more done with social infrastructure. We say electricity will help.'
The opponents have made it clear they will work to delay the scheme in hopes
of making it uneconomical. The Bank says that a one-year delay has already
added Dollars 25m to the cost of the project.
Frank Gray is editor of Power in Asia, a Financial Times energy newsletter.
