FT  17 MAR 94 / Malaysian PM says 'die is cast' over trade ban
Hopes of an early end to the Malaysian government's ban on trade with the UK
receded last night, when Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the Malaysian prime minister,
said there would be 'no contracts in exchange for British Press freedom to
tell lies'.
In his most detailed explanation to date of the reasons for the ban, Dr
Mahathir says in a letter to the Financial Times that the 'die is cast'.
Malaysia decided three weeks ago to deny any future government contracts to
British companies because of its anger at British press reports of alleged
bribes offered to Malaysian politicians and disclosures of a link between a
Pounds 1bn defence contract won in 1988 and Pounds 234m of British aid for
the Pergau hydroelectric dam. The contracts freeze could cost UK companies
hundreds of millions of pounds in lost business.
Dr Mahathir says: 'If you have scruples, don't sell arms at all . . . When
arms are sold, long-term payments or offset programmes or special terms are
invariably offered by everyone.'
He adds: 'It has never been proven conclusively that it (the Pergau loan)
was for the arms purchase.'
He also says that the benefit for Malaysia of receiving the Pergau loan at a
subsidised interest rate, of 0.8 per cent, was 'marginal'. Malaysia could
have got similar terms from other countries such as Japan, he says.
If the subsidised loan had not been offered for Pergau, work on the dam
'could have gone to non-British companies'. The leading contractors on the
dam are the British construction groups Trafalgar House and BICC.
Dr Mahathir is convinced that the British media portrays Malaysians as
'corrupt' because 'they are not British and not white'. He continues: 'The
allegation against the Malaysian prime minister has turned out to be
baseless.'
He singles out The Sunday Times, which alleged that Malaysian politicians
had been offered bribes by the construction company Wimpey, for attack: 'The
Malaysian prime minister need not subscribe to that even as Andrew Neil
(editor of The Sunday Times) did not accept reports on his affair with
Pamella Bordes.'
Mr Neil said last night: 'The letter betrays a very confused mind.' He said
Dr Mahathir had not addressed the allegations made in last weekend's Sunday
Times that the Pergau loan had indirectly enriched Malaysians close to the
government, because it had been paid to an electricity company which was
privatised soon afterwards.
Letters, Page 20
