FT  20 JAN 94 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Monster challengefor
cut-price Kia / A look at a South Koreancarmaker's move into the US market
Kia Motors, the South Korean carmaker, is about to launch itself on the US
market. It is a daunting challenge. No one knows the brand. It is about to
become the 36th nameplate in an already very overcrowded marketplace.
In order to carve a foothold in what is reckoned to be the world's most
competitive car market, Greg Warner, executive vice-president of Kia Motors
America, has decided that the key will be 'disruption'.
Early Kia market research was hardly encouraging, he says. 'No one knows us.
Kia brand cars have not been sold in the US before. No one needs us. It's
not news that there is an over-supply of vehicles on the market right now.
No one wants to hear from us. There's billions of dollars spent every year
on automotive advertising. Who the heck wants to hear from yet another car
company?'
The disruption strategy will effectively mean that Kia will seek to
under-price its rivals by a significant margin, while supplying cars of
competitive quality with often superior levels of standard equipment.
A similar strategy has often been used in the past by Japanese carmakers,
but now it is the Japanese competition itself that Kia has in its sights.
Warner maintains that a space has opened up at the bottom of the US market,
thanks to substantial price increases by the Japanese carmakers, who have
been under heavy pressure from the appreciation of the yen.
Kia's first US television advertising campaign begins next week, prior to
the launch in February. It features clips from a 1960s science fiction film,
Gorgo, with a gigantic monster trampling across the buildings of a city
centre to the accompaniment of screams and dramatic music. Then the text
appears, 'There's only one thing more frightening to Japan.' There's another
shot of the angry monster, then the text 'A well-built car for under Dollars
8,500' (Pounds 5,743).
Kia's first vehicle to be launched in the US is the Sephia, a small,
four-door, family car with a 1.6 litre, 16 valve Mazda-designed engine.
'Our greatest impact will be on Japanese makes,' says Warner, who is
targeting the Sephia at rivals such as the Toyota Corolla, the Honda Civic
and the Mazda Protege. It will also compete with GM's Saturn range and the
recently launched Chrysler Neon.
He claims that the lowest list prices for a four-door Corolla or Civic are
now more than Dollars 12,000. The Sephia is being launched with a base price
of Dollars 8,495.
'The concept of providing compact sedans for an affordable price has been
discarded by the Japanese. I have a feeling we haven't seen the last of
price increase announcements from the Japanese.'
