FT  09 NOV 94 / International Company News: Visa plans separate western
European unit
Visa International, the international payments group, is to create a
subsidiary company, called Visa Europe, to deal with the developed market in
payment services across western Europe separately from the newer markets in
eastern Europe, the Middle East and Africa.
The move is intended to allow the group to be more competitive in the
developed markets and to focus on the different skills required for building
a market in the faster-growing areas.
Both types of markets are currently dealt with in a single region called
Visa EMEA.
At the same time there will be a shift in Visa International's arrangements
for funding investment in developing markets, putting it on to a global
basis.
Under the new system, instead of European members of Visa EMEA contributing
to development within the EMEA region, they will contribute to a fund held
by Visa International, which will pay for development in all regions.
Mr Edmund Jensen, Visa International president and chief executive, said the
splitting of Visa Europe from the rest of the region had been driven by the
member financial institutions, and was a further stage in the organisation's
evolution.
The Visa EMEA region is made up of 115 countries, of which just 24 provide
95 per cent of the volume of Visa card payments.
Mr Jensen emphasised that the restructuring would also give member banks
outside Visa Europe - in eastern Europe, the Middle East (apart from Turkey
and Israel) and Africa - a greater say in decisions affecting them, as they
would have a separate organisation. Currently only one director represents
these countries on the EMEA region board.
Visa also announced that the third of the three sets of common technical
specifications for 'chip' or integrated circuit cards on which it has been
working with two other international payments organisations - Mastercard and
Europay - had been agreed.
A common specification for a 'chip' card terminal is due to be agreed by
July next year. All three payments organisations are also working separately
on prototype cards, and will pool the results of their pilot studies.
