FT  30 JUN 94 / Gummer moots council housing change
Local authorities should not be expected automatically to provide permanent
accommodation for homeless people, Mr John Gummer, the environment
secretary, told the Commons yesterday.
After helping with an immediate crisis, he said, councils should be able to
take a 'considered view' about the proper allocation of available homes.
Mr Gummer again underlined the need for a single waiting list for
local-authority homes which ensured that real need and not 'technicalities'
determined priority. He said the results of the consultation on the
allocation of council accommodation would be published next month.
Mr Gummer accused Labour MPs of maintaining their 'deep-seated hatred'
against the private rented sector.
Mr Jack Straw, shadow environment secretary, attacked the 'failure' of the
government's housing policy, and highlighted the growth in the amount of
social security benefit which reached the pockets of private landlords. Much
of the rent rises in the private sector had been 'publicly subsidised'
through housing benefit.
Mr Straw said: 'We do not accept the role which the government has created
for the private rented sector.'
He also attacked the way in which the government had forced increases in the
rents charged by councils and housing associations, and warned that there
was a danger of 'welfare ghettos' being created.
Mr Straw renewed Labour's demand that local authorities should be able to
draw on the capital receipts obtained from the sale of council properties.
and which were being retained by the Treasury.
The money should be made available to finance a badly needed increase the
number of properties available to let and enable the unemployed in the
construction industry to return to work.
The government is to help people who bought council flats from their local
authority and cannot sell them, Sir George Young, the housing minister,
announced last night.
He told the Commons that a new scheme would enable councils to buy the
properties back as part of a deal to sell the owners another property.
Almost 165,000 public-sector flats have been sold under right-to-buy and
other sales schemes since 1979, with tenants becoming leaseholders of the
flats.
But some purchasers have found their properties difficult to sell,
particularly in large tower blacks where building societies have been
reluctant to offer mortgages.
