FT  12 JUL 94 / Business and the Law: The trouble with bananas - Anton van
Schijndel on the effect of Gatt rules on EC legal protection
Regulations on banana imports mean the European Community may be on the
point of scrapping the enforceability of rules drawn up under the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
In February last year, the EC Council adopted a regulation for the European
banana market as part of the EC internal market programme. It is designed to
protect banana cultivation in the EC and to maintain the existing level of
banana imports from former colonies of France, the UK and Italy. Otherwise,
imports of bananas from Central and South America are expected to gain an
increasing share of the EC market.
The move caused several Latin American countries, which are exporters of
bananas, to file complaints under the Gatt. A Gatt panel found that the
regulation violates the Gatt's prohibition of import quotas and its
prohibition of discrimination between Gatt members.
Shortly after the EC Council adopted the regulation, Germany challenged its
validity in the European Court of Justice (ECJ) in Luxembourg. The Germans
dislike the regulation's bureaucratic, Gosplan-like set-up and the higher
prices it entails. One of the grounds which Germany invokes to invalidate
the regulation is that it breaches Gatt rules.
Last month, however, in an opinion in the case, Claus Gulmann, advocate
general at the ECJ, concluded that the regulation had been lawfully enacted.
His opinion will be a concern to those who believe the Community should not
stray from its commitment to free trade. But more worrying is the way he
deals with the issue of legal protection against illegal Community acts. The
advocate general proposes to eliminate an entire class of EC legal rules as
grounds for review by the ECJ. In large part, the EC's obligations under the
Gatt are to be scrapped as grounds for review.
In the EC, the chances of legal action succeeding depend partly on the
grounds which may be invoked before the courts. In this respect the 'direct
effect' of many rules of Community law helps EC citizens, by allowing them
to rely on those rules in their own courts.
Moreover, the ECJ has ruled that international agreements entered into by
the Community may also contain provisions with direct effect. This is
because Article 228 of the Rome treaty provides that international
agreements are binding on the Community's institutions and on its member
states.
In EC law, the Gatt ranks on a par with such international agreements, even
though the Community never formally acceded to the 1947 Gatt accord. In the
1972 International Fruit Company case, however, the court denied direct
effect to the provisions of Gatt. It is therefore not possible to invoke the
Community's obligations under the Gatt in national courts.
Yet, five years ago, the ECJ confirmed that Gatt rules constitute grounds
for review in actions brought before it. As a result, EC secondary
legislation (such as the Council's banana regulation) will be annulled if
the Court finds it conflicts with Gatt obligations.
It is this rule of EC law which the advocate general wants to curtail.
His point of departure is the fact that the banana scheme is currently the
subject of negotiations with several Latin American countries. It could
therefore jeopardise the Community's chances to safeguard its interests if
the ECJ invalidated the Council's regulation.
He then points to the reasons given in the International Fruit Company case
for denying direct effect of Gatt rules. In the 1972 case, the ECJ referred
to the flexibility of the Gatt system and to its basic principle of
negotiations aimed at mutual exchange of advantages. In particular, the ECJ
pointed to the many possibilities for derogations to Gatt rules, the
provisions concerning unilateral safeguard measures and the Gatt's
consensus-based dispute settlement system as examples of the Gatt's
flexibility. The Court's assessment has been criticised as a misjudgment of
the binding nature of Gatt rules, but it did not reverse its case law.
The advocate general then says neither the Gatt's reciprocity principle nor
its dispute settlement mechanism precludes Gatt rules from having legal
effects under EC law. Moreover, he adds, notwithstanding the Gatt's
flexibility, its rules may be sufficiently clear and unconditional to be
applied by the European Court.
Then comes a change of direction. The advocate general says the reasons
which preclude national courts from applying the Gatt also apply in actions
brought before the ECJ, unless the disputed Community measure itself
expressly refers to the Gatt.
In support of this argument, he quotes the 1989 Fediol and 1991 Nakajima
cases. In these cases the ECJ recognised that Gatt rules constitute grounds
for judicial review. They both concerned Community legislation in which
explicit reference was made to particular Gatt rules - a fact the Court
mentioned in both judgments. This leads the advocate general to conclude
that only Community legislation which expressly refers to Gatt obligations
may be reviewed in the light of Gatt rules.
It is very clear, however, that the banana regulation does not refer to the
Gatt. In fact, it could never have done so, because it breaches pertinent
Gatt rules.
The advocate general's reasoning is unconvincing. First, international
agreements are part and parcel of the EC legal order, binding on all
Community institutions, including the ECJ. Such is the wording of Article
228 (7) EC. Second, rules contained in international agreements thus form
part of the law which the Court is charged to uphold. Third, both member
states and private parties are entitled to invoke these rules in actions
brought before the ECJ.
Yet Article 228 EC receives scant attention in the 16 pages of the opinion
which deal with the Gatt. Instead, a strange new category of EC legal rules
is introduced, namely those which can neither be enforced through the
national courts nor through the European Court. This is highly
unsatisfactory - especially when considering the existing imperfections in
the EC system for legal protection. A decline in the level of protection
would therefore be all the more undesirable.
The advocate general's reasoning seems to reflect a sense of unease about
the potential consequences under EC law of the Uruguay Round's new Gatt
rules. The new Gatt Codes provide for stringent disciplines in many areas,
and include dispute settlement procedures which no longer allow the
Community to block unwelcome Gatt dispute panel reports.
Yet some EC member states still believe that compliance with Gatt rules is a
matter to be dealt with at diplomatic conferences only. They feel the
Community would be 'defenceless' against its trading partners if Gatt rules
could be enforced through the ECJ. They therefore believe the internal
effect of the Gatt rules should be limited within Community law.
One wonders, however, how this view could be squared with the pertinent
provisions of the Rome treaty. Moreover, the trade diplomacy argument fails
to appreciate the Community's overriding interest in a free and orderly
trading system based on liberal principles.
Contrary to the advocate general's apparent belief, the enforceability of
Gatt rules within the EC is an asset and not a weakness. It allows the EC
institutions to withstand protectionist pressures, thereby strengthening the
Community's position in pushing for further liberalisation of world trade.
In this broader context, there are no reasons to ask the European Court to
abdicate its powers of review under the Treaty of Rome.
The author is a member of the Amsterdam Bar
