FT  15 DEC 94 / Construction body hits at Budget
A leading forecasting body in the construction industry has warned that the
government's private-finance initiative cannot meet the shortfall in
public-sector expenditure.
The National Council of Building Material Producers, which represents more
than 2,000 companies, yesterday forecast that the Budget had damaged
recovery prospects for the construction industry over the next two years.
Mr Peter Roberts, chairman of the forecasting panel, said the chancellor's
decision to cut the national road programme and support for local
authorities' road expenditure would reduce infrastructure work by 8 per cent
next year and by 5 per cent in 1996. Lower third-quarter orders, a hiatus in
water industry investment and budget cuts, together with delays in the
timetable for the Channel tunnel rail link, meant infrastructure output
could fall by 10 per cent this year.
Central government funding of the Housing Corporation will also fall and the
council predicted that housing starts would decline from 43,000 this year to
36,000 in both 1995 and 1996.
The government hopes the slack will be picked up by its private-finance
initiative. Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, announced in the Budget that
contracts for some Pounds 5bn of private-sector investment were expected to
be placed next year. He failed to give the immediate go-ahead for any new
projects, pointing to the long lead times which are necessary to get large
projects up and running.
Mr Roberts said that as a result, private initiative projects would not come
through fast enough.
The Building Employers Confederation, the biggest industry trade
association, said it continued to support efforts to raise private finance
for construction projects, but stressed this should not replace existing
planned public expenditure.
It said progress on the initiative would be closely monitored and strong
representations made to government if future public-sector capital
expenditure slipped below an acceptable level.
The council believed the private sector would provide growth in construction
over the next two years, saying the strong upturn in industrial and
commercial construction was encouraging.
Nevertheless, it expressed concern at the fragility of the recovery in the
private housing market and was disappointed that the sharp cuts in
infrastructure and social housing programmes would undermine growth in 1995
and 1996.
