FT  08 OCT 94 / Sport: Return of the missing links - Derek Lawrenson visits
two great courses which fell on hard times / Golf
Temporary greens and Astroturf are the sorts of things that municipal
golfers reluctantly accept as being part of the territory. The last place
one would expect to find either inconvenience would be at two of the UK's
great links courses. Yet the former has been part of life at Royal Birkdale
for the past three years, while members of Carnoustie have become acquainted
with the latter.
Both clubs have had to take such measures to overcome a loss of prestige. At
Birkdale, near Southport, on Merseyside, a problem with the greens came to a
head at the 1991 Open when millions of viewers watched the world's top
golfers putting on surfaces the colour of Ryvita. Several players thought
they were about as smooth as Ryvita too.
'If you want consistent greens you'll have to dig them up and start again,'
Payne Stewart said.
At Carnoustie, some 30 miles north of St Andrews, on a harsh and exposed
piece of land hard against the North Sea, the course, under the stewardship
of the local district council, had fallen into a sad state of neglect. It
used to be said that St Andrews, on the edge of the old university town, had
the setting and Carnoustie, bordered by a whiskey distillery and a large
council building, the golf course, but the great links at Carnoustie came to
match their run-down location.
Things have improved at both courses. Birkdale took Stewart's advice, which
is why the members have been putting on temporary greens for three years.
At Carnoustie, the council head-hunted the St Andrews greenkeeper, John
Philp, and gave him money to spend and a free hand to improve matters. The
result is that Carnoustie will host next year's Scottish Open and the Open,
for the first time in 24 years, in 1999. The course is in such good
condition that it puts a certain place down the road, the venue for this
week's Dunhill Cup, to shame.
The members have even grown used to carrying a piece of Astroturf round with
them from November to March. To protect the fairways, they place their ball
on the artificial turf.
'There is just no growth up here in the winter,' Earle Smith, the secretary,
said. 'A lot of members were unhappy at first but when they saw how good the
fairways looked in March they did not mind so much.'
Indeed the powers at St Andrews were sufficiently impressed to adopt a
similar policy this winter on the Old Course, where the fairways are in a
poor state.
The Open returns to Birkdale in 1998, when the players will find putting
surfaces quite different to those they experienced in 1991.
'The problem was caused by the residue of incorrect top dressing materials
used over a period of time,' said Norman Crewe, secretary. This had caused a
black layer to form under the surface which choked off the roots and
prevented any consistent growth. The club consulted many experts. Arnold
Palmer, the club's honorary president, even sent over his senior agronomist.
The cure involved peeling back the putting surface and digging out the black
layer. With the greens out of action anyway, the club took the opportunity
to change their character as well.
Crewe said: 'Some of them were really nothing more than tough pieces of land
at the end of the fairways. So now we've added some contours to some of the
flatter ones to make it more aesthetically pleasing and obviously harder on
which to hole putts.'
The difference is instantly obvious on greens such as the par-three seventh,
which used to be shaped like a saucer, so a player could invariably get away
with a poorly-struck shot. Now the green is more like an upturned saucer and
so sheds such a stroke rather than gathering it in.
The work on all 18 greens, at a cost of Pounds 270,000, was completed last
winter and after one growing season they are still not perfect. 'We're
quietly confident we've got it right,' Crewe said.
'All the work practically cleaned us out. Now we have to build up the
reserves again,' he said. There is little question the visitors who stayed
away while the root construction work was being carried out will return.
Green fees may be Pounds 50 but there are not many better places to play
golf.
The same, of course, can be said of Carnoustie, although it would be nice if
one of the many grand plans to do something about the setting finally came
to fruition. Will someone not rid us of the abominable council building that
stands where a clubhouse normally does and serves little purpose?
Unlike Birkdale, the club had no need of large-scale alterations. If
necessary Carnoustie can be stretched to 7,400 yards, although on a cold,
bleak October day last week, it was more than daunting at 500 yards short of
that.
At the turn of the last century the great players that a great links so
often produces left Carnoustie, headed west for America and played a part in
the development of the game there. Two brothers, Willie and Alex Smith, won
the US Open, while Stewart Maiden taught the game to Bobby Jones, who many
believed to be the greatest of all players.
As we approach the end of this century, it is the turn of the great players
to come back to Carnoustie. What a treat lies in store for those who,
because of its years of enforced absence, have not seen the course.
