FT  24 JAN 94 / A giant burnt by hot metal: Metallgesellschaft's ills
highlight the failings of Germany's system of corporate governance
On the evening of Saturday December 4, bankers and industrialists gathered
at the home of Mr Karl Otto Pohl, former president of the Bundesbank, in the
smart town of Kronberg just outside Frankfurt.
The party was to celebrate Mr Pohl's 64th birthday, but the mood turned
sombre when Mr Hilmar Kopper, the chief executive of Deutsche Bank,
mentioned to fellow guests that all was not well with Metallgesellschaft,
Germany's 14th-biggest industrial company.
The day before the party, Mr Heinz Schimmelbusch, the Austrian who was then
Metallgesellschaft's chief executive, had visited Deutsche Bank with an
urgent request for cash to stem mounting liquidity problems at MG Corp, the
company's US trading subsidiary.
That weekend, officials from Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank, the two
biggest banks in Germany and among the main shareholders in
Metallgesellschaft, put together DM1.5bn (Pounds 580m) of emergency funds to
cover mounting cash-calls triggered by MG Corp's speculative trading in oil
derivatives.
'A technical problem,' is how Mr Kopper described the liquidity crisis a few
days later.
This original assessment proved an understatement. Within weeks, Mr
Schimmelbusch had been sacked, together with his finance director, and four
other board members had left. Metallgesellschaft restated its losses for the
year to the end of September at DM1.8bn and said it may lose at least
DM1.5bn from its exposure in oil-futures markets. This brought the company
to the brink of collapse. Bank creditors recently agreed to fund a DM3.4bn
rescue package for the Frankfurt-based metals, mining and industrial
conglomerate.
A corporate implosion of this scale is rare in Germany. Not since the AEG
electricals group went bankrupt in 1982 has so large a German company come
so close to the edge. 'The whole thing came as a dreadful shock,' said one
banker last week. 'Everybody is asking how it could happen.'
The affair, afflicting a company with annual sales of DM27bn and 58,000
employees is not merely embarrassing. It has prompted an unusual degree of
soul-searching among senior German bankers and managers confronted with a
public demonstration of their own failings.
The story of the company's debacle is a complex tale of one man's
personality and the inadequacies of Germany's system of corporate
governance. At the centre is Mr Schimmelbusch, a Jesuit-educated businessman
who could deflect criticism from older bankers with the same success that he
could charm the foreign financial community. His command of English made him
a favourite with Anglo-American financiers, few of whom remained unpersuaded
by his rhetoric.
When he took the job of chief executive of Metallgesellschaft in 1988 after
15 years with the company, he was regarded as just the man to inject a new
lease of life into what had become a dull operation. 'He was seen as a
Messiah who could at last get things done,' said a senior Frankfurt fund
manager.
He quickly embarked on a bold diversification strategy which took the group
away from its old core businesses of mining and metals into areas such as
environmental technology. The strategy led to an explosion of sales until
1992. But his acquisition spree failed to deliver the immunity to recession
in the old cyclical businesses which it was designed to achieve.
Metals prices fell, triggered by cheap imports from the former Soviet bloc
after the end of the cold war. Losses of DM124m in 1991-92 at Kolbenschmidt,
the car components subsidiary, and of DM290m for the same period at Schiess,
the machine tools offshoot, compounded heavy losses from metals smelting and
mining. Substantial investment in modernising the group's smelting
facilities compounded the misguided strategy. As a result, profits tumbled,
debts mushroomed (the group owes more than DM9bn) and cashflow evaporated.
To generate revenues Mr Schimmelbusch aggressively promoted MG Corp's risky
oil-futures activities in the US. The volume of oil which MG Corp contracted
to deliver on a long-term basis is understood to have increased tenfold to
nearly 170m barrels during the course of last year.
It was a gamble which failed when the oil price turned down, leaving its
hedging strategy exposed as inadequate. 'He was like a juggler who had to
keep bringing more and more balls into the air to keep the public happy,'
said a banker.
Mr Schimmelbusch's ability to keep the act going almost until the last
minute - barely a month before his dismissal his contract as chief executive
was renewed for another five years - highlights at least two important
failures of control.
The first is that Metallgesellschaft's financial control systems failed to
avert MG Corp's adventures in the US oil-futures market, or to provide any
indications of problems until it was too late.
This is not solely an internal issue. As Mr Tyll Necker, president of the
BDI, the Federation of German Industry, remarked last week, increasing
numbers of German industrial companies engage in financial market dealings,
in part to counter weak demand for their traditional products. 'Those
companies which do this sort of thing must be certain that they introduce
tough internal rules, and ensure that they are adhered to,' he said.
The second failure of control is broader: it is that of the two-tier board
system. Under this system, responsibility for a company's affairs is divided
between the supervisory board, in charge of supervising management
performance, and the management board, responsible for the day-to-day
running of the business. In the case of Metallgesellschaft, the supervisory
board did not prevent Mr Schimmelbusch's risky ventures.
Some 35 per cent of the company's shares are owned by Deutsche and Dresdner
banks, Daimler-Benz and the insurer Allianz, all prestigious names in German
finance and industry. Their representatives sit on the supervisory board,
together with a crop of distinguished outsiders. The board is chaired by Mr
Ronaldo Schmitz, the Deutsche Bank head of corporate finance. He has yet to
make any public statement on the affair though a formal company statement
last month said that Mr Schimmelbusch was sacked for failing to keep his
supervisory board informed of developments at MG Corp.
Mr Schimmelbusch's ability to deliberately mislead when his back was against
the wall was demonstrated on Friday December 3, the day he visited Mr
Schmitz with an urgent request for money. Mr Schimmelbusch was asked by the
FT to comment on rumours that MG Corp was in difficulties and that it needed
extra funds. He denied the rumours, adding that the meeting that morning was
routine. He invited the FT to see documentary proof that all was well at the
US subsidiary, but when pressed the meeting never materialised.
Critics of the German twin-board system argue that supervisory board members
are often caught off guard because they enjoy such close relationships with
the managers they are supposed to supervise.
'The position of influence enjoyed by banks on supervisory boards is open to
question as never before,' Mr Otto Lambsdorff, a leading member of the Free
Democratic party and chairman of DSW, Germany's largest small shareholder
organisation, told the FT this week. 'They look after the company's capital
market issues, they advise on mergers and acquisitions, and in some cases
they own big share stakes as well. Is it not surprising that their judgment
as supervisory board members is clouded?'
These comments are pertinent in the Metallgesellschaft case as Deutsche and
Dresdner banks both backed Mr Schimmelbusch's acquisition spree, reaping
plump advisory fees and interest income on loans in the process.
Mr Lambsdorff argues that more supervisory board members should be
independent. To reduce the influence of banks, he would like to limit the
number of different supervisory board seats occupied by one individual from
10 to four, and to ban banks from owning more than 10 per cent of industrial
companies.
Other critics of the board system have suggested alternative reforms:
Professor Ekkekard Wenger, a noted shareholder activist, says that Mr
Schimmelbusch was able to shield the poor performance of the company behind
opaque accounts. Had the true state of operating performance been obvious in
1991-92, as it would under US accounting rules, it is unlikely that Mr
Schimmelbusch would have survived so long as chief executive, he said.
One banker who attended the rescue talks said he hoped that the affair would
act as a catalyst for greater openness in German corporate life. This may be
optimistic. The first reaction of German bankers has been to batten down the
hatches: few details have so far emerged from the boardrooms of Deutsche and
Dresdner banks of the postmortem currently under way.
The big banks' close and extensive links with industry are at the heart of
the German model of corporate capitalism and are unlikley to be relinquished
without a fight. For decades the world has admired this model. But the
Metallgesellschaft debacle has exposed the fault lines at the heart of the
system.
