FT  14 MAY 94 / Engine maker incensed by overdraft reduction
Emdair, a small company which has developed a potentially world-beating
lightweight diesel engine, is facing collapse because, it says, its bank has
reduced its over-draft.
The company, formed in 1984 from the former Weslake engine group, recently
completed the first trials of the diesel engine.
Mr Michael Daniel, Emdair's managing director, said the engine was being
developed as an alternative to conventional diesels in auxiliary power units
on tanks and other military equipment.
'We regard the engine as a major breakthrough in world diesel technology,'
Mr Daniel said.
Last month the company, based in Rye, East Sussex, received the final Pounds
45,000 instalment from Australian-based Collins Motor Corporation, on a
Pounds 50,000 order to supply the first engine.
The Pounds 45,000 was paid into Emdair's bank, the Croydon branch of
Clydesdale Bank. Mr Daniel said the bank promptly reduced the company's
overdraft limit from Pounds 125,000, which Emdair had been exceeding by
Pounds 5,000, to Pounds 85,000.
Mr Daniel was incensed at the decision. 'We wanted to use the Pounds 45,000
to pay the Inland Revenue and other creditors, and retain our facility at
Pounds 125,000 so that we could develop the company,' he said. The overdraft
has since risen to Pounds 100,000.
Mr Daniel said the company had an order book sufficient to maintain the
existing workforce of 19. But without the ability to buy critical raw
materials and specialised services its ability to continue trading was
threatened.
Mrs Jacqui Lait, Conservative MP for Hastings and Rye, has written to Lord
Nickson, Clydesdale's chairman, asking him to review the bank's position
urgently and help Emdair through its current difficulties. She has also
written to Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, about the case.
Glasgow-based Clydesdale Bank said last night it could not comment because
of customer confidentiality.
Emdair, which also produces conventional light-aircraft engines, is 40 per
cent owned by Collins. The latest four-cylinder 1.7-litre diesel engine
evolved from a petrol engine developed by Emdair for the Australian company.
It is based on the so-called 'scotch yoke' principle that involves two
exactly opposed horizontal cylinders to balance the engine forces. The
system was first used on steam-driven water pumps.
