FT  18 JAN 94 / Leading Article: Two-speed link
The British government's vacillation over building a fast rail link to the
Channel tunnel has given a new meaning to the term 'two-speed Europe'. When
the tunnel opens in May, trains from Paris to Calais will travel at 180mph
but complete the journey from Dover to London at about 47mph. Last year,
France's President Francois Mitterrand rightly poked fun at the UK's
slow-coach approach.
Now it appears ministers are finally prepared to commit whatever public
funds are needed to make the project financially viable for private
investment. A beauty contest to choose the private partner will start
shortly. Though the link will still not be ready until 2002, this
determination to form a genuine partnership with the private sector is
welcome.
The government's original error was to think the private sector could handle
the Pounds 3bn project on its own. Public sector funds are needed because
the link will have social benefits that cannot easily be turned into
profitable business. Active government involvement will also be vital to
overcome legislative and regulatory hurdles.
Nevertheless, the government's idea of using the private sector to build the
link was not wholly misconceived. Competitive private enterprise is better
suited to design, build and operate such projects than the public sector.
Involving private investors should also minimise the burden on the public
purse.
Ministers' current idea of a joint venture between public and private
sectors could provide the best of both worlds. But such a partnership will
not be easy to manage. For a start, government should smarten up its
negotiating act. Off-the-record suggestions that the public sector would put
up Pounds 1bn-Pounds 1.5bn are not helpful, as they could merely encourage
contractors to inflate their profit margins. The purpose of competitive
tendering should be to get the best value for money for taxpayers.
Even more tricky will be to allocate risk clearly between the public and
private sectors. Will government compensate the private partner if
legislation to authorise the link is delayed or safety regulations are
tightened? Ministers will need to answer such questions carefully if they
are to avoid destructive wrangles in the future.
Making a success of the fast rail link is not simply an important goal in
its own right. Given its status as a flagship project, it will have
repercussions for the government's wider initiative for attracting private
capital for public infrastructure. Success with the Channel link will
convince companies that they can do business with government.
