FT  26 JUL 94 / Rwandan refugees struggle home
Tens of thousands of Hutu refugees, in a thin ribbon stretching along the
160km from Gisenyi, in Rwanda, to Kigali, the capital, have returned home to
throw themselves on the mercy of the country's new Tutsi-led government.
The refugees, who fled Rwanda in panic, are returning rather than face death
from cholera and starvation in Zaire's refugee camps.
The exodus began after Zairean troops reopened the border crossing between
Goma, in Zaire, and Gisenyi on Sunday.
The returnees are barefoot, carrying their meagre belongings on their heads.
After surviving the horror of Goma, many are too weak to make the return
journey and several have died only a few kilometres outside Gisenyi.
There are no relief agencies to help them along the way and little food. The
Hutu exodus out of Rwanda swept the mountainous north-west of Rwanda like a
plague of locusts. Banana groves have been stripped of fruit. The bean
harvest has rotted. Hills have been denuded as swathes of trees were chopped
down for firewood.
US military officials arrived in Kigali this week to begin the planning of
their humanitarian relief operation.
Ms Alison Campbell, a spokeswoman for the relief agency Care said, said: 'If
the refugees understand they are receiving aid from Kigali, and news spreads
that the Rwandan Patriotic Front is co-operating with the international
relief effort, this could have an important psychological impact in helping
build trust between the refugees and the new government.'
Relief workers in Goma, however, said the return of refugees had not begun
to dent the magnitude of the humanitarian catastrophe in Zaire. Cholera is
killing refugees in their thousands. The 28 trucks assigned to collecting
the dead have been overwhelmed by the corpses that pile up.
Mr Peter Hansen, a special envoy of the United Nations secretary-general, Mr
Boutros Boutros Ghali, yesterday told reporters that the UN's emergency
funds were exhausted and that it had no money to continue the relief
operation. He said the UN would launch a new appeal for Dollars 440m (Pounds
283.8m) to deal with the crisis, but he was not optimistic about receiving
the funds swiftly enough.
'The situation is out of control,' he said. But relief agencies are not yet
advising refugees to return to Rwanda. A formal repatriation programme would
require the agreement of the governments of Rwanda and Zaire and the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees.
Rwanda plans to prosecute tens of thousands of people for genocide and
murder in trials that could begin within a month, AP adds from Kigali.
Prime Minister Faustin Twagiramungu said that, within the bureaucracy of the
former government alone, there were more than 22,000 people suspected of
complicity. UN officials estimate between 200,000 and 500,000 people were
murdered in three months.
