FT  11 MAY 94 / Mandela takes the reins of power: Ceremony ends 300 years of
white rule in South Africa
White South Africans handed over power to blacks, voluntarily and
peacefully, yesterday when Mr Nelson Mandela was sworn in as president in a
ceremony which formally ended more than three centuries of white rule.
The reality of the transfer of power struck home when jets from the most
powerful military machine on the continent paid homage to Africa's newest
head of state.
White South African generals joined black guerrilla leaders to escort their
new president to the podium to take the oath of office, signalling an
overnight shift in allegiance to the man they once hunted for terrorism.
As princes and kings, prime ministers and presidents from more than 140
countries listened, Mr Mandela (pictured above) pledged his own allegiance
to the South African state he once sought to overthrow.
'I do hereby swear to be faithful to the republic of South Africa and do
solemnly and sincerely promise to promote that which will advance and to
oppose all that may harm the republic . . . and to devote myself to the
well-being of the republic and all its people.'
As blacks struggled to sing Die Stem (The Voice), once the anthem of
apartheid, white South Africans haltingly sang the words of Nkosi sikele
i'Afrika (God bless Africa), the liberation hymn. Both are now official
anthems. Mr Mandela praised the man who opened the chapter which closed with
yesterday's ceremony - Mr FW de Klerk, the outgoing president and yesterday
installed as Mr Mandela's second deputy president.
'He has made for himself a niche in history. He has turned out to be one of
the greatest reformers, one of the greatest sons of our soil,' said Mr
Mandela, speaking from a giant bulletproof cage, where he stood flanked by
Mr de Klerk and first deputy president Mr Thabo Mbeki.
Prince Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh, shared the fourth row of the
impressive Union Buildings amphitheatre with US vice-president Al Gore, his
wife Tipper and Mrs Hillary Clinton. Cuban president Fidel Castro, Palestine
Liberation Organisation leader Yassir Arafat, Israeli president Ezer Weizman
and United Nations secretary-general Boutros Boutros Ghali were also in the
crowd.
Zulu king Goodwill Zwelithini was moved to a place directly in front of Mr
Mandela when ANC officials realised they had failed to accord the monarch a
central seat.
After the ceremony, President Mandela treated thousands of guests to lunch
before dropping in, by helicopter, to a celebratory soccer match between
South Africa and Zambia, home to the ANC in exile.
Back at the Union Buildings, even the policemen and soldiers began to relax
and join in; military policeman stuck new South African flags in their gun
holsters and a soldier read a comic book atop an armoured car. They were,
for one day at least, Mr Mandela's 'rainbow people'.
