FT  27 MAY 94 / Road costs 'overrun by 27%'
Final payments for many roadworks have cost the Department of Transport an
average of 27 per cent more than the amount agreed in the original
contracts, says a confidential study commissioned by the department.
The findings provide further evidence that the department is failing to gain
the full benefit from lower construction contract prices won during the
recession.
Higher-than-expected settlements could create problems for the road
programme if more money than planned has to be found from current budgets to
pay for previous projects.
Announcing spending cuts on roads in the November Budget, Mr Kenneth Clarke,
the chancellor, said that falling construction prices would enable the
programme to be sustained at lower cost to the taxpayer.
The study by EC Harris, construction cost consultants, found that 50 road
contracts, completed between the financial years 1989-90 and 1992-93 for
more than Pounds 1bn, had cost the department on average 27 per cent more
than had been agreed.
Settlements also were 27 per cent higher than original cost estimates made
by the department's own engineers.
If this average cost overrun had applied to the department's Pounds 2.1bn
budget in 1993-94, it would have cost an additional Pounds 570m, the report
says. It found that claims for extra payments from contractors, mainly to
cover unforeseen ground conditions, were the biggest cause of overruns.
The gap between engineers' estimates, contract prices and actual payments
has been a continuing cause of concern to the department.
A report published in November by the National Audit Office, the
public-spending watchdog, into the spiralling cost of motorway widening
found that the first 10 schemes completed by the department had cost more
than double their original esti-mates.
The transport department, which recently launched the Highways Agency to
mastermind and improve road construction, commissioned the study by EC
Harris as part of its effort to reduce cost overruns.
The consultants recommend that more thorough geological and site
investigation should take place during design.
Variations to programmes once work has started should be kept to a minimum
as these often provide grounds for claims for additional payments by
contractors.
The consultants suggest that there should also be sufficient flexibility in
contracts to cover unforeseen delays.
