FT  24 JUN 94 / Families by male order
Mr Peter Lilley is one of the government's thinkers. Some of his dark-er
thoughts should never have been uttered. They constitute xenophobia at
worst, demagoguery at best. We will not dwell on this today. His lecture on
Monday was free of the tiresome infelicities that sometimes mar his platform
oratory. The transcript I have is fit for decent discourse. That is just as
well. The secretary for social security was addressing a diocesan
conference. His topic was 'the importance of the family'. The sentiments he
expressed were moderate, if a trifle wistful. The family, he concluded,
'will survive even the social revolution of our time'.
Will it? In England and Wales, births outside marriage constituted 14.4 per
cent of all infants born in 1982. The proportion rose to 31.2 per cent in
1992, according to official statistics published on Wednesday. That is lower
than you or I might have guessed. Another wrinkle is that it is not
necessarily teenagers who are becoming parents, unmarried or otherwise.
Their fertility rate, expressed as the number of births per thousand women
under 20, is higher than in 1982, but lower than in 1990. The same is true
for women of all ages, but more so for the young. In 1992 the fertility rate
for women in their early 30s exceeded that for their sisters in their early
20s for the first time. Against that, the younger the mother the less likely
she is to be married when she gives birth.
The effect of this trend, plus the growth in divorce, is that some 2m
children are being brought up by a lone parent, nearly always the mother. Mr
Lilley would like these children to have fathers present in the home. So
would I. So would most of the mothers, we must suppose, although that is
less certain. The absent father has been the subject of much social
research. My desk is littered with reports on the subject. Some, though not
all, conclude that two parents are nearly always better than one. Some argue
that one good parent can be better than two bad ones. Poor parenting, it is
universally suggested, produces criminals and delinquents. Most of them, the
crime statistics indicate, are young men aged between 15 and 25. This is not
a fresh observation. When I was 19, I was arrested for trying to break into
a Hatton Garden jewellery shop with a crowbar. Fortunately I had a good
story, which convinced the court. That ended that particular phase of my
career.
Mr David Willetts, one of the pamphleteers, suggests that today's
15-to-25-year-olds 'are the ones who are getting the unmarried women
pregnant and whom the women - often understandably - have no desire to
marry'. In this he concurs, sort of, with Ms Sue Slipman, director of the
National Council for One Parent Families. She alludes to young men who roam
the streets being a public nuisance, condemned forever to be 'lads'. Those
who would reassert the authority of such men in the family, she said in a
recent speech, 'entirely fail to explain why any woman in her right mind
would take one home with her'.
Ms Slipman offers several reasons why more women are having children outside
a stable partnership. One is the increase in female ambition. Women want
careers as well as homes. Another is the disappearance of heavy industries
that formerly employed unskilled young men at wages that enabled them to
support a wife and family. Today's mothers are obliged to work because
fathers are unemployed or earning too little to pay the bills. This has
produced a 'crisis of identity and role for younger men'. The lads can no
longer exert the power of the pay packet over their mates and offspring.
'They appear to have gone to the other extreme of taking no responsibility
for parenting,' she says.
Mr Lilley wishes this was not so. He sees the family as the basic building
block of society, a bastion of freedom against the power of the state, the
principal channel through which culture, language, religion and values are
transmitted to succeeding generations. Yet he confesses that politicians
have very little power to strengthen the institution. 'The idea that
government could impose family values by edict or exhortation is impractical
and authoritarian,' he said on Monday. He wants the churches to try harder.
No wonder he is said to be in the ministerial firing line. He is talking
sense at last.
According to Mr Lilley, governments can contrive to ensure that their
actions do not discourage the maintenance of stable families. This should
not mean cutting social payments to single parents. Between 1979 and 1992,
he conceded, the real increase in benefits to lone mothers was 13 per cent,
against 18 per cent for couples and 40 per cent in average take-home pay. So
much for the myth that having a baby on your own pays better than marriage.
The government is reviewing the rules for providing housing to homeless
single parents, doubtless with adverse consequences for the latter. It is
also persevering with the Child Support Agency, bravely maintaining the
principle that fathers should accept financial responsibility for their
children. Quite right too.
Ms Slipman would like better sex education, something from which the
government shrinks. Its third-rate ministers pretend to find straight advice
distasteful and argue, absurdly, that information about contraception
encourages young people to sleep with one another. No. The advertising and
entertainment industries do that, in floods. Teachers can only add a drop.
She also wants benefits restructured, more childcare provision, and an
acknowledgement that single mothers who work part time are needed at home by
adolescents as much as toddlers.
Such ideas are the small change of today's politics, on both sides of the
Atlantic. Education and training, which the Conservatives say they are
providing and the opposition parties promise more of, may ease the pain, if
we can wait. Other proposals float about, including a return to national
service for school-leavers, and German-style apprenticeship schemes. Take
your pick. We must learn to adjust our ideas and economies to the entry of
most women into the workforce, and the simultaneous exit of so many young
men. Getting that huge social restructuring right is the only serious family
policy. The rest is wishful thinking, nervous tics as we conjure up fearful
pictures of rootless young thugs bearing down on us.
