FT  07 SEP 94 / Byte of the new bank managers: The rise of in-house
computers - rather than humans - as financial supervisors
They sit, gleaming and humming, on the trading floor of every large bank in
the world. They are consulted by traders before decisions are taken to buy
and sells bonds or shares. They trace curves plotting the price of options,
the financial contracts giving the right to buy and sell other securities.
They are 'black boxes', the high-powered computers that no large bank which
trades securities can now afford to be without.
Software 'models', run on these machines and used to analyse masses of data
to predict prices, now have a substantial impact on financial markets. By
telling banks which securities to buy and sell, at what price, they have
become the new masters of many trading floors. But they are now set for even
greater recognition. Central banks and other banking supervisors worldwide
are working on plans to allow banks to use their models to fix how much
capital they need to keep in reserve to support their trading.
The implications are large. By accepting the use of banks' own models in a
regulatory role, supervisors would be taking a big step towards a new form
of oversight. Instead of the traditional close, human, examination of
individual transactions, they would instead monitor the way in which banks
use computers to control risk. They would do so as part of new capital
requirements for trading activities.
The financial impact of these new rules could be enormous. Since 1988, when
the Basle Committee of international bank supervisors agreed the first
global standards on capital needed to back lending, banks have built up
stronger reserves. They have also cut the types of lending, such as loans to
companies, which are rated as requiring a lot of capital under the Basle
accord.
But the growth of banks' trading activities in the 1990s has been encouraged
by the fact that they are not yet required to allocate any capital to cover
the risks of trading in financial instruments. In practice the risk of
default on securities is low - so that under Basle rules only minimal
capital needs to be allocated. Yet banks risk losses from falls in the price
of securities - as they found to their cost this year when European interest
rates rose.
Supervisors have wanted to plug this gap since 1988. Their first effort to
do so came 18 months ago when the Basle group published its 'market risk'
proposals. Supervisors say that these could add up to 1 percentage point to
the average 8 per cent capital-to-assets ratio required for lending risks.
This would have required big UK banks alone to hold a total of Pounds 400m
more capital, and could lead to banks restricting some forms of trading.
The original Basle proposals provoked alarm among banks. Instead of using
what banks regarded as state of the art modelling methods, the Basle
supervisors proposed a set of pre-determined rules to calculate capital
requirements. Different products such as equities and bonds would be treated
separately. In the case of bonds - a complex area - banks would have to
allocate capital to cover their risk of loss in each of a set of 13
timeframes.
'The proposals came from an era when you added up positions on a piece of
paper,' says Mr Steven Hellinger, director of research at the State of New
York banking department. 'Banks had constructed ways (of using computers) to
measure risk at no small expense, and it seemed as if they would get no
recognition for that,' says Mr Mark Brickell, head of derivatives strategy
at US bank JP Morgan, which uses some of the most sophisticated computer
models.
Such models have developed through necessity. Because the pricing of
instruments such as financial derivatives - products that derive their value
from that of an underlying security or index - depends on mathematical
theory, banks have to use models to understand them.
Banks now use models to measure the total risk of loss in trading
portfolios. Mr Charles Taylor, executive director of the Group of 30, an
association of senior bankers, says that models can not only aggregate
different forms of risk but are 'much more analytically rigorous than the
old rules of thumb that bankers used to use'.
Such arguments lay behind the banks' objections to using the Basle formulae
instead of their computer models. They had two main complaints:
First, it would add to their costs. Although banks could rewrite software to
collect the data required by the Basle committee, it would not be simple.
Models add together the risks of different products, and give an immediate,
rounded picture of the total trading risk the bank is running. 'It is hard
to collect extra data that puts a portfolio into different boxes,' says one
supervisor.
Second, by treating all banks equally, it might discriminate against the
more sophisticated institutions. Banks argued that they would have to hold
less capital if they had better risk management methods. This argument was
received sympathetically by supervisors. 'Standards of sound practice are
moving forward all the time, and we want to encourage banks to be in the
front line,' says another bank supervisor.
These arguments persuaded the Basle committee to change its mind. At
meetings in March and June, it decided to examine whether banks could use
their own computer models as an alternative to the standard rules. The
difficulty for supervisors is to construct a framework for approving
computer models. If rival banks' models led to them allocating different
amounts of capital for the same trading activities, it would distort
competition. Banks might also be able to rig their models to ensure that
they needed less capital. A free-for-all of this kind would be very alarming
for supervisors.
Supervisors have now drawn up a draft set of rules with which models would
have to comply. This includes regulations on the number of years of past
market movements against which banks' portfolios would have to be tested.
Supervisors will shortly start testing models by running the same trading
pattern through each model, and seeing if they produce a similar capital
requirement. If they do not, the framework will be tightened.
There is no guarantee of success. The regulator which has come the closest
so far to allowing the use of models to measure risk is the Securities and
Futures Authority in the UK. But the SFA only allows models to translate
financial derivatives into bonds and equities with comparable risks. These
are then judged according to a set of rules similar to the original Basle
list. The latest Basle approach is more ambitious.
Allowing the comprehensive use of models envisaged by bank supervisors would
be tricky even if they were tried and tested. In practice, they are a recent
innovation, and are still being developed. It is not clear that they can
assess properly the risks of instruments such as options, the most complex
form of derivatives. Some supervisors say options will have to be treated
separately in new Basle proposals, which could undermine their coherence.
The supervisors are working against time. They would like to see common
capital standards not only for banks across the world, but for both banks
and securities firms. But capital requirements for European banks and
securities firms have been set in the European Union's capital adequacy
directive that will come into force in 1996. It could only be amended to fit
with the Basle framework before then.
But probably the greatest challenge for bank supervisors is to ensure that
they do not weaken management controls by allowing banks to use internal
models. 'It would be intolerable if a company started to market its models
as 'central bank approved',' says a supervisor. 'People get hooked on
mathematics, but the most important thing is that the management understands
what is going on.'
Mr Tommaso Padoa Schioppa, chairman of the Basle committee, admits there is
a danger that approval of banks' models will be misunderstood. 'If internal
models were accepted, it would not amount to a relaxation of supervisory
standards. If there is a misunderstanding about this, it will have to be
clarified,' he says. Black boxes already rule some bank trading floors;
supervisors will have to watch how their influence spreads.
