FT  12 SEP 94 / Labour plans bank to aid small businesses
The Labour party plans to create a business development bank for small and
medium-sized enterprises and to introduce a law entitling companies to a
temporary moratorium on debts to avoid unnecessary bankruptcy.
The proposals are contained in a consultation paper to be launched on
Thursday and form the first substantive recommendations to come from the
Industry Forum, a body set up last year to promote detailed dialogue with
the private sector in the formulation of party policy.
The forum has so far recruited about 40 companies and individual
businesspeople. Its activities reflect the party leadership's effort to
construct a consensus for an industrial policy.
In calling for an emphasis on measures to help the small company sector,
Labour says it intends to address the problem of long-term finance.
A development bank, formed by an incoming Labour government, would use
private finance to form an investment fund that would give priority to
small- and medium-sized businesses.
The bank, in which private-sector partners would share ownership, would
operate on a profit-making basis 'at arm's length' from the government. It
would act as an intermediary between the short-term demands of the financial
markets and companies' longer-term needs.
Labour also wants to introduce measures to prevent the collapse of viable
companies confronting temporary financial problems. It says there should be
a legal right for businesses in difficulty to invoke a debt moratorium for a
limited period during which it could develop a rescue package. The
initiative would be based on the US Chapter 11 insolvency provisions but it
would be restricted to small companies.
Among other proposals to be announced by Mr Derek Fatchett, Labour industry
spokesman, the party says it intends to tackle the rising problems of late
payment by introducing a statutory right to interest, a move already being
proposed by the European Commission.
The party also says there is considerable disquiet in the small-business
community over 'rogue directors' and says ministers have been slow to
disqualify executives found unfit to run companies. Labour intends to review
the procedures for the removal of unfit directors.
The document, Going for Growth, will not be formally adopted as policy at
this year's party conference but will be used as a basis for discussion over
the next year.
