FT  05 JUL 94 / Auditors hit at lending by Deutsche
Four senior executives of the Deutsche Bank resigned yesterday following the
publication of a critical auditors' report into the bank's lending to the
Jurgen Schneider group, the property empire which collapsed in April with
debts of more than DM5bn (Pounds 2bn).
The auditors concluded that Deutsche had been the victim of systematic
deception and that there was no evidence of dishonourable conduct at the
bank, the biggest creditor to Schneider, and owed DM1.2bn. But, they found,
Deutsche was lax in the way it dealt with its loans to Schneider and 'more
critical processing should . . . have brought the deception to light'.
Deutsche invested too much trust in Mr Jurgen Schneider, the entrepreneur
whose disappearance in April triggered the company's collapse, the auditors
said. 'Not least because of the level of trust invested in Mr Schneider, the
level of information and controls (at the bank) were not commensurate with
the risks entered into,' the Wollert-Elmendorff Deutsche Industrie-Treuhand
accountancy firm concluded.
Acknowledging the justice of the criticism, Deutsche said that it had
implemented changes in its internal processing and control systems to
prevent similar mistakes being made again. 'Throughout the group the rules
for real estate financing have been strengthened,' the bank said, 'in
particular concerning the criteria for valuation (of properties) and
disbursement (of loans).'
The executives leaving the banking group as a result of the affair are: Mr
Jurgen Huvendick and Mr Detlev Rode, both board directors of Deutsche
Centralbodenkredit, the Deutsche property lending subsidiary through which
the bulk of the group's DM1.2bn loan to the Schneider group was channelled.
Mr Klaus Peter Fischer, a senior official at Deutsche's Baden-Baden branch,
and Michael, Prince of Sachsen-Weimar, a senior official at the Mannheim
branch, were said to have resigned from the bank by mutual agreement.
The admission of mistakes and the resignations contrast with the bank's
reaction in the immediate aftermath of Schneider's disappearance when Mr
Georg Krupp, Deutsche Bank main board director and chairman of the
centralbodenkredit supervisory board, said the bank had not made any errors.
But as the scale of the alleged fraud mounted, the bank hinted that there
would be personnel consequences.
The report gave some comfort to Deutsche, which lent money to Schneider
based on property valuations and estimates of space to be let which turned
out to be dramatically optimistic. Schneider's properties - prestige
developments in historic city centres - were different from others and
therefore difficult to value, the auditors said.
The whereabouts of Mr Schneider remain unknown. Reports that he attempted to
make contact with Frankfurt-based prosecuting authorities via a Swiss lawyer
have not been confirmed.
