FT  17 MAR 94 / Technology: Acquiring a taste for genes - Genetic
engineering is sparking a food revolution / A report on its impact
Last month, international brewers sat down, put their feet up and enjoyed a
beer which had taken nearly 30 years to develop. The 150 bottles of the
premium-quality lager Nutfield Lyte were the first in the world to be brewed
using a genetically-altered yeast.
There was a real 'schoolboy element' among some of the thrilled imbibers on
receiving their bottle of the new beer, reports Bernard Atkinson, director
of BRF International, in Nutfield, Surrey, which carries out pre-competitive
research into brewing. BRF's members account for 25 per cent of the world's
brewing volume.
The eager public, however, will have to wait before being able to taste such
a novel drink. The aim of the exercise, says Atkinson, has been to
demonstrate the possibilities that genetic engineering opens up to the
brewing industry.
If brewers decide to use BRF's genetically-altered yeast, which was approved
for UK use by the Advisory Committee on Novel Foods and Processes last
month, they could have a beer on the market by the end of the year.
More likely, says Atkinson, is that they will use the genetic engineering
techniques to adapt their own favourite yeasts, which could take several
years. 'We have modified our yeast, not the brewers'. The sensible thing
would be for them to modify their own yeasts.'
Nevertheless, believes Atkinson, the breakthrough has demonstrated to both
brewers and the general public what can be achieved using
genetically-altered food processes. He thinks Nutfield Lyte will help fuel
the debate. 'Science doesn't actually leap into the marketplace. It takes
time for people to accept the developments,' he says. 'People's thought
processes are moving on. The reality is that until you have a hard case the
debate doesn't become focused. The beer is here now; people can drink it.'
The debate about genetic engineering's impact on foods is likely to
intensify this year as milk from cows treated with the manufactured hormone
bovine somatotrophin (BST), which greatly stimulates milk production, and
tomatoes, genetically altered to prevent them turning squashy, appear on
American supermarket shelves.
They could be the first of many such foods, says Robin Jenkins, of Genetics
Forum, the London-based group which argues for the responsible use of
genetic engineering technology. 'There isn't a single fruit, vegetable or
animal that isn't the subject of research of some kind.'
His main concern about genetic engineering is that 'the technology has moved
ahead of the science base'. He believes that until the individual genomes
are mapped out, there could be risks in moving genes from one organism to
another.
He also believes that most genetically-altered foods are produced to suit
food manufacturers, not consumers. 'There is no way the technology can be
market led. The marketing department can't go down to the research
department and ask them to produce spinach which tastes like chocolate,
which children would love to eat and which parents would love them to have
because it's good for them.'
Further, he believes that food companies have spent so much on developing
the products - Monsanto and other chemical companies have spent close on
Dollars 1bn (Pounds 600m) developing the BST hormone - that the technology
will be foisted on an unwilling public, whatever the cost.
Those lobbying against genetically-engineered foods believe they could make
dining a risky process, labelling them 'Frankenfoods'. The
genetically-altered tomatoes, being developed by the Californian
biotechnology company Calgene, and Zeneca, formerly part of Britain's ICI,
use an antibiotic-resistant marker to signal the successful transfer of the
added gene, which blocks the enzyme that makes tomatoes soften and
eventually go squashy. One fear in the long term is that if enough tomatoes
are eaten the consumer could inherit a resistance to that antibiotic.
Calgene responds by saying that the marker is de-activated once it enters
the human digestive system, and therefore cannot produce any unwanted
side-effects.
The tomato has yet to receive approval from the US Food and Drug
Administration, but a spokesperson for Calgene said that once the green
light was given it would take only three to six months to get the new tomato
on to US supermarket shelves.
Atkinson makes a straightforward distinction between the tomatoes and his
beer: in the former, the new gene is part of the food; in the latter it is
only part of the food production process, as is the use of BST in increasing
milk yields. The genetically-altered yeast used in the brewing process is
removed and under current regulations has to be destroyed. 'You're not
tasting genetically-altered beer, you're tasting beer produced by
genetically-altered yeast,' he adds.
The brewers altered a gene in order to produce a low-carbohydrate beer, with
fewer calories than traditional brews. Brewer's yeasts, unlike other strains
of yeast, lack the enzyme which converts the starch from the malt into
alcohol. By adding an enzyme-producing gene from another yeast the same
amount of alcohol can be produced from less starch.
Atkinson believes that genes with different properties could enable beer
makers to produce the required brew more easily. One potential application
he cites is in the production of a better-tasting beer. A particular 'off
flavour' produced by yeasts is a butterscotch taste. Today brewers need to
manipulate the fermentation process in order to eliminate the taste.
Eventually this could be done by altering the yeast.
It could also prove a simpler process to develop new ranges of beer. 'Now,
if you want a new flavour in your beer you have to find a new yeast. Now,
we're talking about taking a yeast you know about and tuning it. It's a very
elegant solution.'
While tomato and beer makers are pondering the potential of such gene
manipulation, some genetically-altered processes are already in widespread
use, in the production of cheese, for example.
Traditionally, the enzyme needed to clot milk and turn it into cheese, is
extracted as rennet from a calf's stomach. Researchers have now cloned the
gene for the clotting enzyme and transferred it to bacteria, which produce
large quantities of rennet in fermenters.
Only the enzyme itself is used in the cheese-making process. And, says Mike
Gasson, head of the genetics and microbiology department at the Institute of
Food Research in Norwich, the enzyme is 'nature identical' to the one
extracted from the stomachs of dead calves.
Gasson describes the laboratory production of the enzyme as 'squeaky clean'.
Jenkins, too, is supportive of this type of genetic engineering, and
believes many of the big food companies are doing innovative work in the
areas of food production.
However, the sale of these cheeses has highlighted the problem of whether
genetically-altered foods, or those produced using gene alteration
techniques, should be labelled. The issue has produced strong reactions in
the US, where milk produced using BST does not have to be labelled to that
effect. In Europe, too, it looks unlikely that such foods will be labelled.
In the UK, the Co-op food chain labels cheeses if they are produced using
the laboratory-created enzyme. But recent recommendations from the
Polkinghorne ethical committee say foods need only be labelled when they
contain a human gene, or if a non-vegetarian gene is inserted into a food
which vegetarians might eat - a fish gene into a tomato, say - or if the new
gene might offend on religious grounds.
As a result, says Jenkins, a beef product which contained a gene from a pig
would be labelled as such; a beef product which contained a gene from a
horse would not be labelled, although many people would find the latter more
distasteful. 'All they did,' he complains, 'was pander to those who
responded loudest.'
