FT  08 FEB 94 / World Trade News: Clinton seeks renewed hi-tech export curbs
The administration of President Bill Clinton this week is expected to ask
Congress for a broad reauthorisation of its power to impose unilateral
controls on the export of technology, equipment and products applicable for
military purposes.
This move comes in spite of long-term pressure by US business lobbyists
against unilateral controls, which they say fail to stop 'rogue nations'
from acquiring technology and equipment commonly available from other
countries.
The Clinton administration has acted swiftly to decrease the level of
computer technology requiring export licences. However, according to a new
report by the influential private-sector Council on Competitiveness, 'a
lingering cold war mentality' still produces export controls which cost the
US economy billions of dollars a year.
'If past practices continue, some analysts predict that the US could lose
Dollars 30bn (Pounds 20bn) and 600,000 jobs a year by the mid 1990s,' the
council says.
The council report, Economic Security: the DollarsDollars and Sense of US
Foreign Policy, also raises concerns about the imminent demise of the
Paris-based Co-ordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls and the
failure by the US and its allies to create a successor agency.
'Despite industry's concerns, State Department negotiators have indicated a
great deal of uncertainty as to the ability of the US to achieve a new
multilateral export regime, creating the spectre of a new entity that would
actually leave the US with additional unilateral controls,' the report says.
After failing to write new export control legislation last year, the
administration is likely to ask Congress for a bill which gives the US State
and Defence Departments review authority in export licensing provisions.
Business groups have been urging Congress to concentrate authority in the
Commerce Department, to limit the number of technologies and products to be
controls, and to publish the countries for which controls are deemed
necessary.
The council analysed the results of eight foreign policy decisions resulting
in controls, which cost the US more than Dollars 6bn in exports and 120,000
jobs. In one case, the US became the only country to impose controls of
exports of on-highway tractors to Iran, thus costing US business the sale of
up to 10,000 tractors for each of the next five years.
'The export restrictions are having little impact on Iran, because US
commercial on-highway tractors are readily replaceable, and are being
replaced by European and Japanese tractors,' it says.
