FT  05 MAY 94 / FT Exporter (9): Implications a matter for debate - Mushtak
Parker finds that, while the opening of the tunnel provides an important new
route to continental Europe, many question to what extent it will alter
cross-Channel freight patterns / The Channel Tunnel
Channel Tunnel presents exporters and freight hauliers with an imposing new
transport medium, but the extent to which cross-Channel freight patterns
will be altered in the short-to-medium term is subject to keen debate.
These patterns will be affected by a number of factors such as transit times
through the Channel Tunnel, relative freight rates, reliability of services
and the extent to which road hauliers switch from ferry services to the
Channel Tunnel's Le Shuttle HGV service.
A survey released in March by truck maker Scania suggests that most British
hauliers do not know how the Channel Tunnel works and have yet to be
convinced of its competitive advantages.
The delayed opening of freight services has helped the tunnel's competitors
such as the ferry operators, who are already restructuring and trying to
improve cost-effectiveness.
According to Brian Rees of Stena Freight Lines, if Eurotunnel, the tunnel
operator, offers 'a good product and comparable rates to haulage firms, I
think they will maybe take about a fifth of the freight market.
'But freight transport is a finely tuned operation and it will take the
tunnel a while to gain experience. It is going to be several years yet
before we can judge the effect of the Channel Tunnel because it will
progressively build up capacity.'
A concern of Colin Beaumont, divisional manager of the freight industry's
professional body, the British International Freight Association (Bifa), is
that Eurotunnel and the ferry operators may become embroiled in a price war
 -with no winners. 'As far as our members are concerned, it will be a
question of trying out the service - its novelty value - the question of
price and quality of service. Whether or not it is successful in freight
movement, only time will tell.'
But Eurotunnel and the ferry companies tend to talk down the prospect of a
freight price war. Eurotunnel's freight director, Christian Zbylut, is
adamant that Eurotunnel is not going to enter into a price war as the tunnel
is a unique transport system which cannot be compared with a ferry service.
'We are not aiming for 100 per cent market share. That would be damaging',
says Mr Zbylut.
He argues that competition needs to remain in the short-sea (specialised
freight crossing) sector, but he says there will be no space for all the
current cross-Channel operators, which include the ferry companies. 'Some
might have to redeploy on other routes or they might face serious financial
consequences.' Eurotunnel is, he says, aiming at 25 per cent of the total
cross-Channel ro-ro (roll-on roll-off) market and at 9m tonnes on its Le
Shuttle service for HGVs at the end of 1995.
The British Road Haulage Association (BRHA), however, remains sceptical
about the latter figure and says that 'it remains to be seen whether that
target is realised. We are not privy to the information on which it is
based.'
The total volume of freight moved in and out of mainland Britain by hauliers
in 1992, including movements between Scotland and Northern Ireland,
according to the Department of Transport (DoT) amounted to around 52m
tonnes. HGV and trailer movements are usually measured in units. In 1992,
according to the DoT, about 2.83m units were moved in cross-Channel haulage
traffic.
Stena says it is not worried about the Channel Tunnel, arguing that extra
freight capacity will increase overall market volume. The Channel Tunnel
could survive just by taking business from the airlines and ferry companies,
says Stena. It must create its own market as well.
As far as short-sea freight operators are concerned, Ipswich based Geest
North Sea Line sees the Channel Tunnel as a complementary transport medium
to its own shipping operations. 'Our intention is that we will use the
tunnel if the price is right,' says UK general manager Perry Glading.
Longer-term, some see the tunnel creating two distinct freight patterns
between the UK and continental Europe. While short-sea operators and ferry
companies are still expected to dominate north European routes into such
areas as Germany and Scandinavia - especially from Hull, where ferries in
particular are gearing up to faster transit times and improved loading and
unloading services - the tunnel is set to become the main conduit for
France, the Benelux countries, Italy and a range of southern European
locations.
Eurotunnel's Mr Zbylut, however, believes the tunnel will attract
pan-European traffic from a broader spectrum of countries and UK regions.
Geest's Mr Glading reiterates that speed of transport through the tunnel is
a vital for distance traffic.
'The Channel Tunnel will come into its own in three or four years time -
that is when manufacturers and buyers realise that the tunnel can cut their
stock levels and enforce quicker re-stocking, which means more money to
them.'
Ferry operators query whether speed will be essential. Stena's Mr Rees
argues that the 45 minutes or so that the tunnel saves in time is
'irrelevant' on the longer routes. But the tunnel has advantages over the
ferries. As Eurotunnel's Mr Zbylut points out, the ferries are sometimes
unable to run because of bad weather.
The tunnel is also seen by Mr Zbylut as a spur for intermodal (combined)
transport between road, rail, sea and canal transport media. Both the UK
government and the EU are committed to increasing the volume of intermodal
trade by encouraging the building of more intermodal terminals. At the
moment 90 per cent of freight traffic in the EU is still carried by road.
