FT  26 SEP 94 / Survey of Using Computers in Business (18): Building society
conundrum - Case study
The National &amp; Provincial Building Society, the UK's 12th largest, has been
undergoing a radical transformation since 1990 when Mr David O'Brien,
formerly managing director of Rank Xerox in the UK, joined as chief
executive.
Mr O'Brien describes what he has been doing at N&amp;P as process design rather
than process re-engineering. His starting point was the building society
conundrum: where should the balance be struck between a profit and meeting
the needs of the customers?
The decision was taken to focus on becoming a true bank assurer: the kind of
organisation a customer can approach easily for advice and guidance about
his or her unique financial circumstances.
Mr O'Brien, drawing on his experience with Rank Xerox and in particular with
its Japanese ally Fuji-Xerox, decided to start from scratch. The business of
process design involved new ways of thinking. Some 18 processes within the
bank were reduced to 10. New names reflect new approaches. There is no
longer a marketing department; instead, there is a customer requirement
process. There is no sales department. It has been replaced by a customer
engagement process.
'Our staff no longer have jobs, they have roles. They do not have job
descriptions, they have responsibilities', says Mr O'Brien .
Mr O'Brien believes that that process design encompasses a whole range of
activities which are often described as discrete activities. So empowerment,
de-layering and total quality management are all elements in his design
process rather than ends in themselves.
Note that the systems are the final part of the operation. They are mapped
onto the new structure rather than being used to automate existing
processes. The society is working with Unisys, the US computer manufacturer,
on hardware and software as it moves from mainframe-based systems to a
modern client-server approach.
The aim is to design the entire operation around object-orientated systems,
the rapidly evolving software technique where real life objects are modelled
in software. Such designs can be adapted more rapidly to changes in the
business environment than conventional mainframe or mini computer systems.
Mr O'Brien describes the organisation as consisting of three kinds of
objects: process objects, system objects and people objects.
Now four years into the programme, Mr O'Brien believes he is about
two-thirds of the way through the transformation.
He measures several parameters to test how successfully the new structure is
working. A key measure is the strength of the society's relationship with
its customers. Put simply, the society draws up a profile of the financial
services each customer could benefit from, and compares it with the services
they actually use.
Mr O'Brien says there are now no obsolete, low-interest accounts where
neither society nor customer benefits.
