FT  21 DEC 94 / Part-time workers win new rights: Government climbdown in
wake of law lords' judgment dismays employers
The UK's 6m part-time workers are to have most of the statutory employment
rights of those in full-time jobs, the government announced yesterday.
The decision, mainly affecting women, represents a climbdown for the
government, which two weeks ago vetoed a draft European Union directive on
part-time workers. It follows a judgment against the government by the law
lords earlier this year over the different legal rights of part-time and
full-time workers.
It will bring Britain in line with European Union equality laws. An
estimated 750,000 employees, working less than 16 hours a week and in
continuous service with their employer for over two years, will have new
rights covering unfair dismissal and redundancy payments, extended maternity
leave, a written statement of employment, time off for union activities and
notice of dismissal.
Under current legislation passed in 1975 they have had to wait five years to
qualify for equal treatment with full-time employees.
The decision was announced in a written Commons reply by Mr Michael
Portillo, employment secretary, who earlier this month vetoed the draft
directive because he said it would impose intolerable constraints on job
creation.
Yesterday he said the government was still convinced the removal from UK
employment protection legislation of all existing distinctions based on the
number of hours worked each week would make employers reluctant to create
new part-time jobs for women and threaten the security of existing
employees.
The effects of the changes would be 'carefully monitored to assess their
impact on business and on employment opportunities', he said. 'The
government will reconsider the position in due course if objective evidence
of adverse effects emerge.'
The government always 'honoured its legal obligations' and accepted it had
to comply with the law lords' judgment. But Mr Portillo claimed that the
ruling 'clearly gives the relevant European legislation a much wider
interpretation than was envisaged when it was originally adopted'.
The law lords case was brought by the Equal Opportunities Commission, which
claimed the laws discriminated against women workers; 87 per cent of
part-time workers are women.
Ms Kamlesh Bahl, EOC chairman, said last night she was 'delighted' at what
she called a 'a major victory' for women workers.
However, some employer organisations expressed dismay at the government's
decision. Dr Ann Robinson, head of the Institute of Directors' policy unit,
described it as 'another submission to a piece of nonsense legislation from
Europe'.
It was the 'thin end of the wedge' that would lead on to equal rights for
part-timers in holiday entitlement and pension provision.
The Federation of Small Businesses said it was gravely concerned at the
effect of the decision on its members. Mr Robbie Gilbert, the Confederation
of British Industry's employment affairs director, said the decision brought
a 'welcome clarification to the law', though it would hit small employers.
The government would now have to end all forms of discrimination against
part-time workers, said Ms Harriet Harman, shadow employment secretary.
Mr John Monks, TUC general secretary, said trade unions would continue
campaigning for complete equality between part-time and full-time workers.
Part-time employees were already protected over sex and race discrimination,
unlawful deductions from wages by employers and time off for antenatal care,
according to the Department of Employment.
Farm wages board granted reprieve, Page 7
