FT  04 MAR 94 / Employers differ over part-time worker ruling: The rights of
employees must be equal. Lisa Wood gauges the chances of a labour market
shake-up
The two main employers' bodies reacted very differently to the House of
Lords ruling that part-time workers must have the same rights as full-time
workers to redundancy benefits and against unfair dismissal.
The Institute of Directors, which has more than 35,000 members, said: 'The
Lords' decision will mean a lot of employers will think very hard about
taking on part-time workers for people for whom they have new liabilities.
What good are rights if you have not got a job?'
The Confederation of British Industry, which represents 250,000 companies,
was more muted. 'There is always a danger that extending redundancy
protections to part-time workers will reduce employers' willingness to
create new part-time jobs,' it said.
'But in this case we think that most employers will be relaxed about the
implications, although we shall need to study the judgment carefully before
advising them on what it means.'
Government amendments to employment protection laws to extend unfair
dismissal and redundancy rights to anyone with two years' service who works
eight hours or more could have big implications for the labour market.
The vast majority of new jobs are part-time, and most are taken by women.
The UK has 5m part-time workers, about a fifth of the workforce and more
than any other European Union country. The sectors where they are most
commonly found are retailing, education, hotels, and health.
Whether this growth will be interrupted by the Lords' judgment is likely to
depend on the reasons employers hire part-time workers. For some, it has
been a response to business needs, providing flexible workers at peak
business times. This was the reason recently given by Burton Group, one of
the UK's largest retailers, for switching significant numbers of its workers
to part-time.
For other employers, part-timers provide a cheap and convenient way of
taking on workers when they have not the business confidence to take on
full-time staff.
Employers say it is unlikely that those taking on employees because of the
structure of their business will alter their policies, in spite of potential
increased costs should they have to terminate employment.
The Local Government Management Board, which represents local authorities
employing more than 800,000 part-time workers said: 'We need part-timers.
You need catering staff at lunch-time in schools, not all day.'
Smaller companies that have recently altered their employment patterns for
strategic reasons agree. Stateside Foods, of Rossingdale Valley in
Lancashire, a manufacturer of chilled foods, cut its workforce in 1992 from
84 to 34 but has built it back to over 85, with the new recruits mostly
being women working part-time. This was to respond to daily fluctuations in
customers' demands.
Mr Leonard Haysom, operations director, said: 'When we took this strategic
decision it did not even enter our considerations that employing people
part-time would make it easier to dismiss them. Our whole objective was to
produce the goods that our customers wanted at the right time. As to
increased potential costs - we are not looking to get rid of people.'
Other companies may be more nervous. Mr Richard Brown, deputy director
general of the Association of British Chambers of Commerce, said: 'One
reason many companies, particularly smaller ones, take on part-time workers
is because they cannot decide whether to employ somebody full-time. By
increasing the cost of doing this, this ruling will mitigate against that.'
However, the ruling may not make as much difference as at first appears. The
National Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux this week published a report
which highlighted anecdotes of employers getting rid of workers just before
their two years' employment protection rights began.
