FT  22 JUL 94 / Hanley condemns Blair for being 'all style, no substance'
Mr Jeremy Hanley, the Conservative party's new chairman, was quick to
describe Mr Blair yesterday as 'all style and no substance'.
Mr Hanley said in a robust attack that the new Labour leader had been
elected 'for his looks, not for his policies' and that he had 'failed to
produce any positive reasons for voting Labour'.
He added: 'Wherever he goes, he will not make progress weighed down with the
baggage of Labour's out-of-date and unwanted policies. Whoever is their
leader, Labour is the traditional party of high taxation.'
Some Tory backbenchers frankly admitted that Mr Blair would pose a
substantial new threat to them. One said: 'He is an effective communicator
whom we will have to watch very carefully.'
But another backbencher suggested that Mr John Prescott might have made a
more effective leader, appealing more directly to Labour's core voters. 'I
have sat next to Prescott on Commons committees and he is very effective
indeed,' he said. The Liberal Democrats were generous in their response. Mr
Malcolm Bruce, the party's new Treasury spokesman, said he welcomed Mr Blair
because 'Britain desperately needs good leadership'.
But he added: 'There is much work to be done before Labour can claim to be a
modern political party. There is no point in having an economic programme
unless it is clearly costed.'
Mr Alex Salmond, leader of the Scottish National Party, said that Mr Blair
had ignored Scotland in his acceptance speech.
Referring to what he called Labour's 'commitment' to set up a Scottish
parliament, Mr Salmond said: 'It would seem extraordinary, if devolution is
to be an important plank in his policy programme, that our entire nation
should be omitted from such a comprehensive address.' Commenting in similar
vein, Mr Dafydd Wigley, president of Plaid Cymru, complained that Mr Blair's
omission of any commitment to self-government showed Labour was 'turning
away from Wales and Scotland in a bid to win votes in the south-east of
England'.
