FT  20 AUG 94 / London Stock Exchange: Strong demand for recs
Investor appetite for the regional electricity stocks (recs) remained
insatiable yesterday with strong gains across the board. Driving the stocks
forward was continuing speculation of potential bid and merger activity, as
well as strong talk of share buy-backs and special dividend payments.
Underpinning the bullish tone were a combination of broker and company
roadshow presentations to institutional investors, all of which were
highlighting the highly positive view taken by the industry and observers
post the Offer distribution review just over a week ago.
Yesterday came suggestions that East Midlands would be unveiling a Pounds 2
a share special dividend with its interim figures next month. There was also
further talk of stake building following the 2.9 per cent block bought in
Eastern by a US institution shortly before the Offer review.
There were strong performances across the board, although one dealer was
keen to point out that turnover was not exceptional. Yorkshire surged 31 to
718p, South West 26 to 767p, South Wales 32 to 787p, Norweb 30 to 805p, East
Midlands 29 to 742p and Eastern 29 1/2 to 809 1/2 p. As a point of
reference, Eastern shares have risen 10 per cent since the Offer review on
August 11.
The generators were also attracting attention as the recs caught up with
their ratings. Scottish Power stood out, Panmure Gordon recommending the
shares, which jumped 16 to 423p with 8.5m traded.
The strength in the recs was also turning some investors, particularly in
income funds, towards the water stocks. Yield considerations helped Thames
rise 19 1/2 to 536 1/2 p, Severn Trent 17 to 593p and Northumbrian 27 to
711p.
A large seller of stock in Lloyds Chemist, the high street drugs group, sent
the shares into retreat, ending the session 8 down at 304p. Dealers
speculating on the sale were pointing the finger at one of the big US
shareholders as the seller of the 8 per cent stake, which is thought to have
been sold by Goldman Sachs via Smith New Court. The 10.3m shares were sold
into the market at 293p a share in two large blocks and were believed bought
by a number of UK institutions.
Boots rallied after falling in late trading on Thursday on talk of a rival
thyroid drug from Glaxo. Analysts were dismissive of the tale and the shares
opened brightly and were supported by rumours of a share buy-back. These
were seemingly emanating from presentations by the company to institutions
in which fund managers' fears over any dilution coming from the sale of the
pharmaceutical division were being allayed with the buy-back hints. Boots
shares climbed 8 to 547p.
Bargain-hunters in British Gas which has underperformed the market
throughout the year, helped the shares advance 7 to 302p, in trade of 6.1m.
The shares are favoured by Nomura Securities and this week it issued a
strong buy circular on the stock. Analysts at the broker said: 'Regulatory
uncertainity has been instrumental in the 20 per cent underperformance of
the shares since December last year. However, the regulatory fog is now
starting to clear.' They concluded: 'The current yield relative is too high
for a company capable of increasing its dividend in the medium term.'
Food retailers awoke from their recent slumber with Argyll Group responding
to a profits upgrade. Smith New Court was said to have been responsible. The
shares added 6 to 288p. Kwik Save managed to steady at 597p despite negative
press comment.
Market speculation over an increase in the price of The Sun from 20 to 22p,
and a less likely possibility that The Times would follow with a 5p jump,
pushed Mirror Group up 5 to 138p. Analysts suggested that the price war
between The Times and The Telegraph was unlikely to end soon but added that
if the former raised its price, it would mark the beginning of the end of
the war, in which The Times has gained most ground. However, they suggested
that News International had significant scope to raise the prices of its
newspapers since The Sun was 7p cheaper than its main rival, The Mirror, and
the bulk of revenue generated by The Times came from advertising profits.
Shares in The Telegraph lost 3 to 378p in turn-over of 1.2m shares. Pearson
fell 5 to 629p ahead of interim results. United Newsspapers moved up 8 to
543p.
Relaxation of ownership rules in ITV increased market speculation of
possible takeover bids, strengthening TV contractor share prices. Scottish
TV put on 8 to 429p, Ulster TV 14 to 619p and Yorkshire TV 17 to 351p, its
highest price since February.
Positive comment by James Capel pushed constructions group Vibroplant up 2
to 105p. Analysts expected the sector to pick up next week when a batch of
company results are to be announced, in which they would especially focus on
the company reports. The ruling earlier this week by a US district judge
that a class action settlement involving 20 companies including components
group T&amp;N was fair, continued to boost the shares. They hardened another 2
to 249p.
Shares in engineering group Siebe were down 24 at the day's worst before
steadying to close 17 off at 583p, after a close look at the company
accounts by several brokers revealed that the company had taken an Pounds
11.3m profit on the sale of assets as an operational profit rather than as
an exceptional item. Analysts suggested that profits should thus be lowered
by that amount.
However, Mr Paul Compton at Credit Lyonnais among those to study the
figures, said the shares price fall was 'something of an extreme reaction to
comments made at a morning meeting.'
The group's shares have from time to time been vulnerable to comments made
about its accounting policy.
The falls on the Hong-Kong and Tokyo markets hurt services group Inchcape
which has interests in Hong-Kong and is an importer of Japanese cars into
the UK. The shares relinquished 9 to 477p, after trade of 1.7m.
Elsewhere among oils, turnover in Dragon Oil was a massive 263m shares as
two funds said to be connected to Morgan Grenfell changed stakes. The shares
closed unchanged at 1 3/4p.
