FT  21 JUN 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: World Bank accused of
attempting raid on gene reserves - Geoff Tansey on a row over control of
germplasm, a vital resource for the world's plant breeders
Some 40 major environmental and development NGOs (non-governmental
organisations) have accused the World Bank of attempting a coup to take over
control of the 500,000 crop samples held in gene banks in the various
international agricultural research centres, such as the International Rice
Research Institute in the Philippines and the Mexico-based International
Research Centre for Wheat and Maize, which developed the green revolution
varieties of rice and wheat.
The row over who controls this germplasm - a vital resource for future plant
breeding and a major asset gathered from the poor farmers and countries of
the world - looks set to dominate an international meeting on biological
diversity that began in Nairobi yesterday.
The NGOs want the second session of the Intergovernmental Committee of the
Convention on Biological Diversity to ensure that control over these
germplasm collections stays with an intergovernmental body run on a one
nation one vote system and that recognises farmers' rights.
Agreement on such a body was expected to be endorsed at a meeting of the
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research in New Delhi at
the end of May after post-UN Conference on Environment and Development
negotiations between the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation's Commission
on Plant Genetic Resources and the individual research centres.
However, this was rejected at the consultative group meeting, at which the
bank sought to strengthen its 'leadership' of the international agricultural
research system.
The research centres are funded by the consultative group - an informal
group of donors mainly from the industrialised countries and international
agencies, which is chaired by the bank - and faces the worst funding crisis
in its 23-year history. Funding fell by 7 per cent (Dollars 18m) last year
and another 6 per cent fall is projected for this year.
As part of its support to the group, the Bank announced in New Delhi that it
would forgive existing debts, increase its normal grant to Dollars 40m and
offer to match new funds from other donors up to a total of Dollars 60m. It
also announced the creation of a new Dollars 2.5bn fund over five years for
lending to national agricultural research linked to the consultative group.
Along with this cash came the creation, for the first time in its 23 years,
of a group steering committee chaired by the bank. It also announced that it
would consult the World Trade Organisation about the intellectual property
provisions in General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the disposition of
the group's germplasm.
The NGOs see this as aimed at preventing intergovernmental control of the
germplasm, which will become increasingly important once countries begin
charging for collecting crops within their borders. If they set high prices
then searching out materials from the existing collections will become more
important for users.
At present, the legal status of the research centres' collections is not
clear. Countries where they are based, such as the Philippines, which hosts
IRRI for example, might be tempted to exert national control over the
collections if they feel that developing countries will be kept out of
policy-making over the use of these collections, according to Rene Vellve of
Grain (Genetic Resources Action International).
In a statement on plant genetic resources to the Nairobi meeting, Ismail
Serageldin, Chairman of the consultative group and a vice president of the
World Bank, confirms that the research centres 'should not seek to benefit
financially from the commercialisation of germplasm, but should help
developing countries obtain financial benefit when opportunities occur'.
