FT  06 JAN 94 / Leading Article Education reform
Sir Ron Dearing's final report on the national curriculum and its assessment
will be judged in the short term by the extent to which his recommendations
restore good order in English schools. Opposition by teachers to plans for
the compulsory testing of 14-year-olds last summer blew the government's
education reforms off course. Early indications are that the Dearing report
will be enough to win back the co-operation of the moderate teachers'
unions.
In the longer term, however, Sir Ron's recommendations must be judged by the
extent to which they preserve the basic principles of the government's
reforms. The national curriculum survives, slimmed down to occupy no more
than 80 per cent of school time for most children. It will be more closely
focused on the basics of literacy, oracy and numeracy. Some critics will be
disappointed that the core curriculum has not been scaled back even more.
However, Sir Ron's proposals give teachers increased discretion over the
content of the school day.
Compulsory testing also survives, though simplified and limited to the core
subjects of English, mathematics and science. Reductions are also to be made
in the number of attainment targets, the profusion of which has multiplied
paperwork for teachers. With testing now focusing only on the three core
subjects, monitoring progress on non-core subjects will be left to teacher
assessment. There is a danger that this could leave parents in the dark over
their children's performance in these subjects until a system of comparing
teacher assessments can be established.
These changes have been introduced with the aim of winning over all but the
most implacable opponents of the government's education reforms. But Sir Ron
has gone further in his recommendation that schools should be allowed to
offer 14-16-year-olds a wider range of vocational subjects. For these
children, he suggests that the time spent on the core curriculum could be
reduced to 60 per cent so that they can develop their interests and
preferences.
In principle, this is an excellent idea. More practical and work-oriented
courses can engage and motivate children who are not making good progress in
a wholly academic curriculum. They can also help such children develop work
practices and competences which will equip them for the fast-changing world
of work.
However, such courses need to be carefully thought out, adequately resourced
and taught by properly trained teachers. They must also avoid being too
narrowly work-specific, an accusation made by critics of the new national
vocational qualifications for people in training. Sir Ron rightly says that
he expects the development of proper courses to take some years. The
creation of vocational and technical dimensions in English schools has
already been botched once since the last war. The same mistake must not be
made again.
