FT  25 AUG 94 / International Company News: BHP acts on Beswick shareholding
Broken Hill Proprietary, Australia's largest company, yesterday moved to
quell unease among some of its institutional shareholders over the group's
share structure.
It said that the 18.2 per cent stake in BHP which is held by Beswick, a
company in which BHP owns a half-share, would in future be voted by an
independent trustee.
The Beswick board, however, would still be able to decide whether the
tranche of shares should be voted at all.
The complex Beswick situation dates back to the late 1980s, when BHP was the
subject of takeover efforts by Mr John Elliott and the late Robert Holmes a
Court.
Peace was finally declared in 1988, and it was agreed that Beswick would
house the stake which Mr Elliott had acquired in BHP. Beswick, in turn,
would be owned jointly by Mr Elliott's Elders IXL (which later became
Foster's Brewing) and BHP.
It was obvious in 1988 that the circularity of the structure might mean that
BHP was able to influence the voting of the Beswick shares - a potentially
undesirable situation.
ANZ Executors &amp; Trustee Company was therefore given a tiny share stake in
Beswick. Many shareholders, voting on the arrangement in 1988, assumed that
the trustee held responsibility for voting the entire Beswick holding in
'the best interests of BHP as a whole in a manner which promotes or enhances
the continued long-term development of BHP as a significant independent
Australian and international company'.
However, over the past six years, the Beswick board - which is made up of
one representative from BHP, one from Foster's and three independents - has
tended to vote the stake, or simply given its proxy to BHP's chairman, and
the trustee's role has been minimal.
This situation has prompted persistent shareholder complaints.
Earlier this year, for example, the Australian Shareholders' Association
called for the holding either to be converted to non-voting status or for
the trustee's role to be enforced.
The new procedures, which were announced yesterday, state that the decision
of how the Beswick shares are voted will be left to ANZ Executors unless the
Beswick board resolves that the stock should not be voted at all.
In each specific case, Beswick directors will seek a written statement from
the trustee setting out its voting intention, and this will be announced to
the stock exchange.
Some shareholders have also questioned if the entire Beswick structure -
adopted to prevent two major blocks of shares hitting the market at the same
time - could be dismantled and the shares distributed.
However, BHP has said that this would incur a large tax liability.
