FT  17 DEC 94 / Minding Your Own Business: Novelty value - One man's quest
for stocking-fillers goes on all year
Sid Templer says his rather unusual business is best described as 'a quest'.
It is a quest for what he calls 'barmy things' - so-called stocking-fillers
that sell all the year round - and this is the time of year when he begins
to know whether his more recent searches have been successful.
'It's looking very good, probably better than ever,' said Templer, 53, a
former teacher and founder, 21 years ago, of Tobar, the company he named
after his sons, Toby and Barnaby.
For most of the autumn the barns and outhouses standing on the 20 acres
surrounding his Elizabethan farmhouse in rural Norfolk have been full to
bursting. But now they are largely cleared of the vast stock of novelties,
knick-knacks, games and toys for the nine-to-nineties that Tobar sells.
Business is by no means complete for Christmas. 'Many of the 2,500 retail
outlets, including museums and some specialist toy shops we supply go on
ordering until December 23 for delivery on December 24,' said Templer.
'After 21 years in business we are able to supply goods so fast that the
shops have no need to carry vast stocks. They usually get orders from us
within 24 hours so they order very frequently and in effect use us as their
warehouse.'
After a week's break after Christmas 'the quest' will start all over again.
In 1995 it will take Templer and his son Toby, 25, who is a co-director, to
the US and Germany. Sid Templer is also planning to go seeking ideas in
India and Hong Kong.
Toby, who runs the wholesale side of the business, said: 'We buy from most
countries. This year we have added some letter beads from Germany, some
traditional games from India and some painted acrobat toys from Sri Lanka,
and also reintroduced the original sets of five hand-painted Russian wooden
dolls.
'We are currently evaluating some calico hammocks from El Salvador - our
first line from that country.'
Not everything is imported. A specialist publisher in Bury St Edmunds, 40
miles away, produces colourful, embossed Victorian and Edwardian party masks
that have been a successful line for 12 years. A local printer is
responsible for the toy theatres that are another of Tobar's most successful
paper lines.
The plastic goods come from many countries. They range from a new range of
clockwork tortoises to a barking bulldog, an indoor boomerang, and a hen
that lays eggs. Altogether the company sells more than 500 lines.
'Prices start at a few pence. You could buy one of each of many of our
500-or-so lines for less than Pounds 100,' said Toby.
The most expensive line is a children's terracotta-brick building kit at
Pounds 39.90. 'I discovered it in Spain this year,' said Templer. 'I had
owned a similar British-made kit myself as a boy in the 1950s, but had been
trying unsuccessfully to find one for the Tobar range ever since my sons
were small.'
Among the least expensive lines is the fish - a paper novelty that sells at
5p. Templer introduced it 20 years ago and it is still going strong. He
estimated that in the run-up to Christmas there were 100,000 fortune-telling
fish in the Tobar warehouse.
When pressed, Templer admits that his real skill is in what he calls
'developing and adapting old-fashioned ideas' and in selling them to
different markets. A good example was a Victorian paper butterfly novelty
which he 'rediscovered' three years ago and sold as The Magic Moth. With a
little help from Templer, it metamorphosed a year later to become The
Balancing Butterfly. These now sell in packs of four for Pounds 1.85 as part
of the mail-order operation, headed by third director Diane Harper.
The cardboard toy theatre is another Victorian speciality that Sid Templer
has reintroduced. 'I was always interested in toy theatres, but really, like
a lot of our successes I put its entry into the Tobar catalogue largely down
to luck,' he said.
'It was a cold February day in 1990. There was a knock on the door in this
remote part of Norfolk and it was a man with plans for several full-scale
toy theatres. He explained that he was a former theatre director with a
passion for toy theatres and theatre history and he wanted to do business
with us.
'Four years later we reckon we are the biggest suppliers of Victorian-style
toy theatres in the country.'
An offshoot was the series of theatrical jumping jacks, that, like many
lines, have developed organically from others, and appear in both the mail
order and trade catalogues.
The company has never made a loss and Templer does not think business would
have been so good if he had not developed the skill of what he calls
'listening to improbable people'. The tables in the large book-lined room in
his house that is the company nerve-centre groan under piles of packages
containing ideas and samples of novelties from people who have approached
him.
'Somehow they manage to find us,' he said. 'However, this is not to say we
do not go out to find ideas. We exhibit at four gift fairs in the UK and
Germany every year and we are very receptive to ideas.'
Tobar does its importing through agents, and finances this by means of
letters of credit. 'We have never had any problems with this arrangement,
nor with our bank, Barclays,' Templer said.
'The only time we have ever had a major loan was seven years ago when we
bought the freehold here for Pounds 250,000. We still have a Pounds 100,000
loan on the property through Barclays, and although we have an overdraft
facility I can't remember the figure, as we so rarely use it.'
Collecting money from retailers can be a problem, but Templer has two key
policies that help. Tobar will not supply goods until the previous account
has been settled, and the company offers a 5 per cent discount to retailers
who settle within 10 days. Templer says it is 'unwise' of Tobar to offer
this discount, and equally unwise for his customers not to make use of it.
'But it suits our office procedure - or lack of it,' he added.
Templer does not know whether it is the mail-order or the trade side of
Tobar that has the bigger turnover, but he is categorical about the
financial success of his company.
'In 1993 our turnover was 28 per cent up on that of 1992, and that was 40
per cent up on 1991, which in turn was 29 per cent up on 1990. In its last
complete year Tobar made a net profit of Pounds 225,500 on a turnover of
Pounds 2.5m,' he said.
'In the run-up to Christmas we are bursting at the seams, with countless
part-time staff in addition to our dozen regulars. We had to have a
temporary marquee to hold excess stock and we desperately need some new
storage buildings. The business seems to be recession-proof - but really I
don't know why]'
Tobar Ltd, St Margaret, Harleston, Norfolk IP20 OPJ. Tel: 01986-782222.
