FT  06 AUG 94 / Mahathir opens high-risk crusade against Islamic sect: The
Al Arqam dispute
Entering the Kuala Lumpur headquarters of Al Arqam, an Islamic sect founded
in Malaysia in the late 1960s and which claims more than 100,000 followers
at home and abroad, is like walking into another century.
Men are dressed in flowing khaki robes and turbans, in imitation of a style
said to have been favoured during the time of the prophet Mohammed. Women
are draped in the black hijab, a familiar sight in many parts of the Middle
East but rare in Malaysia, a country which prides itself on its religious
and racial diversity. The sound of children chanting verses from the Koran
comes from the Al Arqam school in the sprawling, five-acre compound.
According to the Malaysian authorities, this tranquil scene hides an
altogether darker reality. Yesterday, most of Al Arqam's activities were
labelled as 'deviationist' by Malaysia's National Fatwa council, the body
that rules on Islamic orthodoxy, and the government pledged to use a battery
of laws to stop Al Arqam's proselytising activities. More than 200 schools
run by the sect throughout Malaysia will be closed down and Al Arqam members
could be liable to imprisonment without trial under the terms of Malaysia's
wide-ranging internal security act.
Dr Mahathir Mohamad, Malaysia's prime minister, has described Al Arqam as 'a
threat to national security'. Yesterday the group filed a defamation suit
against the government for accusing it of raising a private army.
The government seems intent on doing battle with the sect. 'They are the
biggest threat faced by the government since the communists,' a senior
government official said yesterday. Malaysia has lobbied other countries in
the region to take action against the group.
Quite why Dr Mahathir's government has taken such a sudden dislike to Al
Arqam is far from clear.
Over the years it has been tolerated and at times encouraged by the
authorities. Al Arqam (the name is derived from the house from which
Mohammed is said to have spread his teachings) promotes a mystical path to
Islam, in which a movement will rise in the East to hail the return of a
messiah who will lead an Islamic revival. Members live relatively
unobtrusively, mostly in a series of communes spread throughout Malaysia.
The sect believes in strict adherence to Islamic principles in which, among
other things, polygamy is encouraged. Al Arqam's founder and leader, Ashaari
Muhammad, exercises influence over every aspect of the sect's activities;
all members wear badges bearing his portrait.
An Al Arqam media centre gives out lavishly produced books of Mr Ashaari's
teachings. Video cassettes promote his views while Al Arqam musical groups
have produced record albums on similar themes. Mr Ashaari has lived in
self-imposed exile in Thailand since 1988 but is now believed to have gone
with a large number of his followers to Jordan.
The catalyst of official concern could have have been the arrest of 19
Malaysian Al Arqam members at a Moslem fundamentalist demonstration in Cairo
in April. About 55 per cent of Malaysia's 19m people are Moslem Malays.
For several years the government has been worried over Malays going abroad
to study coming under the influence of militant Islamic groups, most of them
on government scholarships. Serious tensions could arise in multicultural
Malaysia if such fiery brands of Islam took hold.
Some feel that Dr Mahathir sees Al Arqam as a potential political threat. Mr
Ashaari ruffled official feathers recently when he is reported to have said
that he was a more popular figure in Malaysia than Dr Mahathir.
General elections will probably be held in Malaysia later this year or early
next. Dr Mahathir's United Malays National Organisation (Umno) is unlikely
to lose its tight grip on power but some Malays feel that, in the rush to
modernise, the government has not paid enough attention to things spiritual.
There is concern within Umno that some members, once party stalwarts, have
recently decided to join the ranks of Al Arqam.
The fundamentalist Parti Islam (PAS), based in the northern state of
Kelantan, appeals to the poorer, rural voters. Of more concern is a movement
like Al Arqam whose followers come mainly from the urban-based
intelligentsia, many of who hold senior positions in the civil service, the
police and the armed forces.
Dr Mahathir will have to tread carefully in acting against the sect: any
rigorous action could send shockwaves through the Malay community. A
relatively tranquil political atmosphere has been one of the key elements in
attracting foreign investment to Malaysia, a central part of the country's
economic success.
Al Arqam has considerable economic clout. It has not allowed its brand of
Islam to stand in the way of building a business empire which includes
livestock, food processing, retail outlets, restaurants and clothing
businesses both in Malaysia and the region. Mr Hashim Jaafar, an Al Arqam
spokesman, says the sect has commercial assets of Dollars 100m (Pounds
64.5m). The sect denies having political ambitions.
Mr Hashim claims Dr Mahathir fears the influence of his group which he says
has established schools, hospitals and shops distributing services to 'the
masses'. He adds that Dr Mahathir is also creating a climate of fear in
advance of the elections. 'He is trying to create a monster in order to win
the support of non-Moslems', he says.
