FT  18 JUN 94 / Partners dance to different tunes: As political uncertainty
becomes more widespread across Europe, Maastricht looks less relevant
Spawned in the polling booths of 12 nations, a new form of late 20th-century
political hybrid has emerged this week: a many-headed Europe.
After the setbacks since 1991 to the Maastricht treaty goal of European
union, most governments had accepted the likelihood of a multi-speed Europe.
Already in immigration, foreign and defence policies, as well as monetary
co-operation, different groupings in the European Union have been
implementing integration at disparate paces.
The results of the European parliament elections on June 9 and June 12
indicate that post-cold-war Europe has become still more heterogeneous.
Euro-diversity now stems from the power of the ballot box.
The variety of the poll results helps explain why the plan for European
unity agreed in 1991 has been looking increasingly unrealistic. Europe's
political map, only three years ago painted in uniform integrationist hue,
is now polychrome.
'We have a multi-polar Europe,' says Lord Dahrendorf, the German-born
sociologist and former European Commissioner who is now Warden of St
Antony's College, Oxford. 'In nearly all countries, there is a tendency
towards greater splintering of political preferences.'
An article in 1991*, co-authored by Mr Karlheinz Reif, the head of the
European Commission's survey research unit, held out 'the prospect of an EC
that is united, not only politically, but also economically (as) no idle
dream.' That Euro-optimism has now withered in the harsher economic climate
and resurgence of inward-looking policies across the EU. Mr Reif says
electorates will again grow supportive of integration as the economy
recovers, 'but the problem (of attitudes on a united Europe) as such will
not disappear.'
Surprisingly, the Maastricht treaty is being questioned even by some of its
firmest supporters. In a book published this week, Mr Jacques Delors,
European Commission president, is quoted in an interview as calling the
treaty over-ambitious and poorly drafted. 'We shouldn't have made a treaty
on political union, it was too soon.'***
In similar vein, Prof Andre Szasz, an executive director of the Dutch
central bank, who strongly backs the Maastricht aim of economic and monetary
union (Emu), says: 'Rarely was a treaty concluded with such far-reaching
implications and such lack of clarity as to what was intended and why.'
Mr Szasz says the prospective widening of the Union - to 15 or 16 countries
next year, 20 or more by early next century - increases the necessity of
'deepening' existing structures. 'The alternatives are not either widening
or deepening. It is both or neither.' But far more clarity is needed. 'The
authorities should consider how long they can continue to argue that
monetary union requires economic and even political union'.
The one country that clearly favoured European integration on Sunday was
Austria, where 67 per cent of voters approved membership of the EU next
year. But Austria is aware of slackening momentum behind the Maastricht
treaty. 'On the question of institutional deepening, I remain rather
sceptical,' says Mr Manfred Scheich, Austria's ambassador to the EU and
negotiator on EU accession. 'Maastricht has exhausted, if not
over-exhausted, the potential for qualitative steps forward in this field.'
Austria will be part of the 'hard core' of countries eventually
participating in Emu, Mr Scheich predicts. But, recalling that German
Chancellor Helmut Kohl had recently queried whether Emu was feasible by
1999, he added: 'We all have doubts about the timetable laid down in
Maastricht. In economic integration, we should concentrate on making the
single market work.'
The questioning of Maastricht is just one of Europe's uncertainties.
Fissiparous tendencies in western Europe mirror the breakdown of political
structures and allegiances in eastern and central Europe during the past
five years.
Prof Loukas Tsoukalis of Athens university says cynicism about European
union and establishment politicians is part of a general malaise. 'This time
of pessimism is different from those in the past. It is linked to a crisis
of governance in most European countries.'
According to Mr Brian Gosschalk, managing director of the UK's Mori opinion
research company, 'There is a sense of disillusionment. Europe is suffering
from a lack of positive symbols.' His organisation has just carried out a
poll across Europe indicating only 30 per cent of the EU electorate supports
a 'United States of Europe', against 50 per cent who are opposed.
Since no member of the European parliament wields executive power,
Euro-elections - with a built-in tendency to amplify protest votes - provide
only an imperfect gauge of the public's views on European integration. But
the voting on June 9 and 12 gave some pointers to political trends. Voter
turn-out across the 12 members was 57 per cent, the lowest of the four
direct elections since 1979. Particularly large falls came in Ireland,
Netherlands and Portugal, states traditionally enthusiastic about
integration.
Under Maastricht and the 1987 Single European Act, governments have given
the parliament significant new powers to help correct Europe's 'democratic
deficit'. But a large proportion of voters still regard it with lack of
interest or sympathy. Additional powers for the parliament could thus,
ironically, widen rather than narrow the gap between European
decision-makers and the people.
Public doubts about the role of the parliament could increase if the greater
variety of parties represented there - especially on the right  - undermines
its cohesiveness. As a foretaste, Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the Italian prime
minister, apparently failed this week to persuade Mr Kohl to allow his
victorious Forza Italia movement to join the Christian Democrat group in
Strasbourg.
Overtly anti-Maastricht parties did well in France, Belgium, Greece and
Denmark. The conservative Popular Party, which topped the poll in Spain, is
more lukewarm on Emu than the governing Socialists. In Italy, Mr Berlusconi
emerged with his position reinforced as Italy's first Eurosceptic prime
minister since the second world war.
The elections brought contrasting results in France and Germany, the
traditional driving forces for greater European co-operation. In France, the
shift from mainstream groupings resulted in the two governing parties, the
neo-Gaullist RPR and centre-right UDF, gaining just 25.5 per cent of the
vote.
In Germany, the governing parties showed they could still rally voters. Mr
Kohl's Christian Democrats and their Bavarian sister party, the Christian
Social Union, achieved a better-than-expected 38.8 per cent, with
anti-Maastricht parties failing to win seats.
But fragmentation is making its presence felt in Germany, too. The score of
Mr Kohl's three coalition parties, including the Free Democrats, was 42.9
per cent, the lowest government result in a national German election since
1949.
Low scores for left- and rightwing mainstream parties in France was because
both the RPR/UDF and the Socialists 'mishandled the internal contradictions
of their European policies', according to Mr Didier Witkowski, a political
analyst at France's Sofres opinion research company. By contrast, he says,
Mr Kohl benefited from the general German perception that the country is now
the stronger partner in the relationship with Paris.
The French government wants to 'bind' reunited Germany within a strengthened
European framework. But a substantial part of the French electorate appears
to doubt whether French eagerness to follow a German lead over Europe is in
France's interests. Some of these doubts seem to be shared by Mr Edouard
Balladur, the French prime minister. Mr Balladur, who said this week the
splitting of the French presence at Strasbourg would weaken France's voice,
warned in 1989 it was an 'illusion . . . (that) we can bind Germany
irreversibly into western Europe'.**
Mr Kohl's success on Sunday underlines how he has become Europe's pivotal
leader. But for all the good intentions being displayed by Bonn ahead of
Germany's six-month EU presidency starting next month, any increase in
German assertiveness is likely to brake rather than speed moves towards
European unity.
One Bonn official says Mr Kohl benefited particularly from the support of
older people worried about a resurgence of nationalism in eastern Europe. He
adds, however, that these are voters generally hostile to the Emu objective
of replacing the D-Mark with a single currency.
Mr Gunther Nonnenmacher, co-editor of the conservative Frankfurter
Allgemeine Zeitung, says Mr Kohl succeeded in 'defusing' monetary union as
an election issue. This reflects last October's ruling by the Federal
Constitutional court that Emu can come about only via strict fulfilment of
the rigorous Maastricht 'convergence criteria'.
Mr Hans-Joachim Veen, head of research at the Christian Democrats' Konrad
Adenauer Foundation in Bonn, says two-thirds of Germans oppose monetary
union. Mr Kohl is seen as the 'guarantor that, if the Ecu, or common
currency, comes one day, it will not be a radical change.' Since Bonn is
sticking to the slogan that 'stability (of the future European currency) is
more important than the timetable', Mr Veen accepts the date for introducing
Emu may slip beyond 1999.
On the future, he says, about 25 per cent of Germans want Europe to deepen
integration, 30 per cent want to widen it to the east, and 45 per cent
favour the status quo. 'We will have to muddle through.'
An opinion poll by Germany's Allensbach organisation this month showed
ambivalence in German attitudes to Europe. Although most Germans say they
favour closer co-operation, they show strong opposition to concrete projects
affecting German sovereignty.
If in coming years the future of Europe is to be determined by any one
country, it seems likely that the continent will be marching to music
composed in Germany. Yet it will not be a fast drum-beat, rather a slow and
cacophonous waltz with many pauses and contradictions. The travellers along
the European trail will be moving at varying speeds. And some, on the
evidence of this week's news, will be heading in different directions.
* Eurobarometer, ed. by Karlheinz Reif and Ronald Inglehart, (Macmillan,
1991)
***Delors, by Charles Grant, (Nicholas Brealey, 1994)
** Il faut repenser l'Europe, Le Monde, 16.11.89
