FT  09 DEC 94 / Strong yen biggest risk for Japan
The yen's strength is the biggest risk to the emerging economic recovery in
Japan, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development warned
yesterday.
Its annual survey of Japan argues that the high yen could force companies to
reduce capital investment and employment again, in response a decline in
export market share. At present exchange rates, gross domestic product is
expected to rise by 1 per cent this year - higher than the OECD's
preliminary June estimate of 0.8 per cent - and by 2.5 per cent in 1995.
The OECD does not expect Japan to revert to the high growth rates of the
1980s, though it says there is a 'good chance' that this upswing will be
more durable than last year's phantom recovery.
A cut in official interest rates could ease the pressure on the yen and lift
sluggish credit growth, says the OECD, a regular critic of the Bank of
Japan's cautious monetary policy. Yet the need for monetary relaxation is
being reduced as the economy strengthens, it admits. The OECD counsels
against risking another boom in asset prices, the main reason why the Bank
of Japan is reluctant to cut official interest rates below their already
record lows.
On the whole, the Japanese government wins the OECD's praise for the way in
which it has pulled the economy out of the deepest recession since the first
oil crisis, through a mixture of public works spending worth 10 per cent of
GDP over the past two years, income tax cuts, and easy monetary conditions.
This strategy has had success in compensating for the declines in private
sector investment and exports, where the recession was rooted.
Private consumption, stimulated by the tax cuts, appears to be leading a
turnaround which started in the first half of this year. Business investment
is expected to follow, to stabilise from a four-year decline in the second
half of the year and to start growing again in 1995.
However, output will continue to be below potential, so that the present
gentle decline in consumer prices will continue in 1995. Unemployment, now
at 3 per cent, is expected to drop slightly as growth recovers. Imports
should rise rapidly enough for the current account surplus to fall from last
year's 3.1 per cent of GDP to 2.8 per cent this year and 2.5 per cent next.
The government should now turn its attention to controlling the budget
deficit, which has risen steeply since 1992, so as to fund the fiscal
packages. This piece of advice will please the austere finance ministry as
it fights other ministries' claims for increased spending in the final
preparation of next year's budget, due to be published late this month.
According to the report, the combined central and local government deficit
will rise by two percentage points this year to nearly 6 per cent of GDP.
This would bring gross debt, excluding a temporary surplus on the social
security budget, to 83 per cent of GDP, well above the OECD average.
A recently agreed increase in Japan's sales tax will help restrain the
deficit and contribute to finding an expected rise in welfare payments, says
the OECD. A further shift towards indirect taxation is recommended, because
the government is seen as over-reliant on revenues from direct taxation at a
time when the income tax take is set to decline because of a fall in the
number of wage-earners. The government should meanwhile seek more savings by
making the public sector more efficient, the OECD recommends.
In the medium term, the key to sustaining the recovery lies in economic
deregulation. says the OECD. Yet progress so far in reducing regulations on
business, representing 42 per cent of total value added, is too cautious and
slow, says the study. The four deregulation packages published over the past
year covered some of the issues in a 1988 deregulation scheme, much of which
remains to be adopted.
The government should switch its deregulation strategy from the present
focus on packages containing hundreds of small steps to the sweeping
approach advocated by Mr Gaishi Hiraiwa, former chairman of the Keidanren,
Japan's leading business federation, in a report to the government.
Editorial Comment, Page 17
