FT  15 OCT 94 / Travel: A history of enterprise in the Yorkshire Dales -
Adrian Gardiner on the stream of visitors that has left its mark
The sign says: 'Crackpot 2 miles', and as I drive the twisting lanes I muse
on interesting addresses. There is a village called Paradise in
Gloucestershire, one named Puddledub in Fife and, closer to home, a farm
called Phantassie.
Crackpot is in the Yorkshire Dales. Nineteenth-century travellers described
'awful caverns and frightful ravines' but where the rivers of Swale and Ure
have dissected England's Pennine backbone to give us Swaledale and
Wensleydale, the landscape has been tamed over the centuries. And since
nothing puts a place on the map quite like a TV series, the area has been
dubbed 'Herriot Country' after the television programme All Creatures Great
and Small and the well-known vet books.
Long before intensive farming necessitated veterinary surgeons, Norse
invaders took a liking to this land of rolling hills of layered limestone
and sandstone. They left behind curious place names: Muker, Reeth and
Crackpot (said to be a corruption of the Norse for 'pothole of the crows').
Later, in the Middle Ages, French monks came and constructed the great
abbeys of Fountains, Rievaulx and Jervaulx. They cleared forests and built
walls, establishing the topography we see today. These same monks brought
the recipe for the cheese which made Wensleydale famous.
Hawes, a typical mill and chapel village at the head of the dale, is home to
Wensleydale Dairy Products. Last June it opened a History of Cheese Museum,
winning the coveted White Rose award for best newcomer to tourism.
Another local enterprise, the rope works of WR Outhwaite, welcomes visitors
with demonstrations of traditional rope making.
From Hawes, a lonely road leads to Muker, another solid, pretty dales
village with a fine Victorian Literary Institute. Before the ascent over the
Buttertubs Pass - there are potholes by the roadside where market-bound
farmers stored their butter - we make a short detour to Hardraw Force.
'Stones of all colours and sizes encased in the clearest ice,' wrote
Wordsworth to Coleridge, 'I cannot express to you the enchanted effect
formed by this Arabian scene of colour.'
Entrance to this spectacular waterfall is through the back door of the Green
Dragon pub, following the track past an open-air bandstand which is the
venue for the Hardraw Brass Band Competition, a big Yorkshire event held
every September.
From Muker, the Swale flows through Gunnerside to Reeth, where Langhorn
House was Skeldale House in the original film All Creatures Great and Small.
Two roads follow the Ure east from Hawes and, in the film, the King's Arms
at Askrigg became the Drovers' Arms frequented by Siegfried, James and
Tristram.
Great Shunner Fell; Lovely Seat; Pen-Y-Ghent . . . few hills are higher than
2,000ft, yet there are tremendous panoramas and wide vistas of moorland
dotted with squat stone barns and blackfaced Swaledale sheep.
Walkers take the Pennine Way or follow the corpse roads: tracks designed for
funeral processions to cross the dales avoiding towns and villages. In a
superstition which survived from Norse times well into the last century, it
was believed that the deceased might be tempted by the sight of habitation
to return to the land of the living.
Walking these roads you see ruined huts and spoil heaps, relics of the
lead-mining industry. History records that soldiers defeated by the Romans
at the battle of Stanwick in AD74 were taken as slaves to the lead mines in
the dales. The observant will pick out hushes: man-made gullies created when
dams were broken up, letting water scour out the lead seams.
In places, stone quarrying has had a devastating effect on the landscape. As
a cottage industry consistent with local needs it was never a problem.
(Parts of Manchester are built of Hawes stone.) But today quarrying on a
massive scale has made ugly gashes in the land - and all this in a national
park.
We leave Wensleydale through the serviceable town of Leyburn, where houses
retain bricked-up windows, relics of the window tax. Nearby is Masham, the
place to wash down all that crumbly Wensleydale cheese. The village has two
breweries: Paul Theakston's Black Sheep brewery and his previous venture
Theakston's, now owned by Scottish &amp; Newcastle, and offering a visitor
centre and guided tours.
West of Masham is one of Yorkshire's best-kept secrets, hidden in a forest
near Healey: the Druid's Temple, an enclosure of towers, archways and huge
granite slabs, is the result of a job-creation project conceived by local
squire William Danby in the 1820s. It is atmospheric. It is eerie. It is
only a few miles from the massive trucks thundering along the main A1.
Herriot Country is good short-break territory. But Yorkshire's cities have
much to offer too. Largest is Leeds where, in the covered city market, Mr
Marks set up his penny bazaar which grew into one of Britain's largest chain
stores. Connoisseurs of industrial heritage can take a trip along the Leeds
and Liverpool canal, pausing in Bradford, tourism's success story of the
past decade.
Bradford's prime attraction is the six-storey National Museum of
Photography, Film and Television, which includes the advanced technology of
the Imax cinema with the largest screen in Britain. Many of the exhibits are
interactive: the children's favourite was a device which allows you to
remodel yourself digitally on a TV screen.
Also in Bradford - which has some remarkable inner-city architecture - is
the model mill village of Saltaire, built by a Victorian philanthropist.
Another wool town, Halifax, merits a visit. Eureka is a new, award-winning,
hands-on museum for younger children, while the Piece Hall, where merchants
once haggled over 'pieces' (sample lengths of cloth) is now an exhibition
centre. North of Halifax, the 50-mile Calderdale Way takes in gritstone
villages with packhorse bridges and Wuthering Heights country around
Haworth, once home to the Brontes.
York's attractions are well-documented. Visitors make for the Minster, the
National Railway Museum and the recreated Viking metropolis of the Yorvik
Centre. We wander through the web of narrow cobbled lanes lined with
half-timbered houses of bottle-glass windows and overhanging gables. We are
back in curious name territory, with streets called Whip-ma Whop-ma and The
Shambles.
Tourist Information: Yorks and Humberside, 312 Tadcaster Rd, York YO2 2HF
(0904-707961); Richmond (0748-850252); Hebden Bridge (0422-843831); Bradford
(0274-753678).
Museums: National Museum of Photography, Film and TV, admission free, charge
for cinema performances. Open Tuesday-Sunday (0274-727488). Eureka,
Discovery Rd, Halifax (0426-983191).
