FT  18 APR 94 / People: Greenwald flies friendless skies
'There's never been a problem I don't like solving,' said Gerald Greenwald,
chairman-designate of United Airlines, the biggest US carrier, last week.
'And I like working with human nuance.'
It is just as well: for as boss of an airline that has been targeted for the
world's biggest-ever employee buy-out, the 58-year-old former Chrysler
vice-chairman could find himself facing problems and nuances a-plenty in his
new role.
Under a deal hammered out by United's management and labour unions - but yet
to be approved by shareholders - the airline's employees have agreed to big
pay cuts and other labour concessions in return for a controlling stake in
the company.
It is a bold endeavour, but nobody knows quite how worker control will pan
out. Who, for example, is to say that employees will not cripple the company
by voting themselves big pay rises once they have a foot in the boardroom
door?
Greenwald, the unions' nominee for the chairmanship, clearly relishes the
challenge ahead.
In a New York presentation aimed at selling the deal to United's
shareholders, he spoke repeatedly in terms of making history with the
buy-out.
In one sense, history has already turned full circle. Four years ago
Greenwald was heir apparent to Lee Iacocca as Chrysler's chairman when he
abruptly left the car maker to head an earlier union buy-out plan at United.
That buy-out collapsed, however, leaving Greenwald to join Dillon Read, a
Wall Street investment bank, before going on to head the restructuring of
Olympia &amp; York Developments, the failed Canadian property development group.
Now established as a bit of a trouble-shooter, Greenwald is currently
chairman of Tetra, a Czech Republic truck company, where he has been
retained until February 1995 to turn the company around. But United is where
he really belongs, he says, even though he has no previous airline
experience.
He must be spending many a quiet hour praying that United's shareholders
agree.
