FT  05 APR 94 / Arts: Beautiful Thing - London Theatre
When it first appeared at The Bush last summer, Jonathan Harvey's Beautiful
Thing had reviews ranging from the mildly appreciative to the strongly
enthusiastic. It has arrived with a different cast at the Donmar Warehouse
but it may have been better in the more intimate, run-down environs of The
Bush.
The setting is a block of apartments in Thamesmead, South East London, 1993.
Admittedly there is a heat wave, so much of the action takes place outside
on what is remarkably like a sunroof. It might be bleaker if it were
raining, but on this showing - for all the references to paper walls - life
in South East London seems okay. This is not a play about poverty or
deprivation; broken families perhaps, but still economically above water.
Central to the piece is the love affair between two male adolescents. It is
delicately done: first sharing a bed head to foot, then touching each other.
They end dancing smoochily in the presence of one of the boys' mothers.
Just a couple of points. Beautiful Thing is extraordinarily sentimental. I
wonder if there would be any interest in it if the affair were not
homosexual: the dialogue is pretty trite. And despite a lot of audience
laughter, at least on the first night, I didn't find the piece funny. The
semi-educated characters who spend their lives watching and quoting
television seem to me rather sad. If it were not for the artificial ending
of the mother accepting the love affair, Beautiful Thing would be a harsh
not a sentimental play. It is not at all clear what Harvey is saying.
The two boys are excellently played by Mark Letheren and Shaun Dingwall. The
implausible mother is Amelda Brown. She looks good, acts well, and it is not
her fault that the part fails to make sense. The director is Hettie
Macdonald, as at The Bush, so presumably she is satisfied with the move to
smarter surroundings. Possibly Harvey deserves something rougher for a bit
longer.
Johnny on a Spot, Olivier Theatre (071 928 2252); Beautiful Thing, Donmar
Warehouse (071 867 1150)
