FT  02 NOV 94 / Summit paves way the for Mideast trade zone
Political and business leaders yesterday took the first steps towards
creating a Middle East economic common market from the Atlantic to the Gulf,
based on the free movement of goods, services and labour.
The three-day Middle East and north Africa economic summit in Casablanca was
itself a sign of the progress made in peace negotiations in the region, and
showed the willingness of past adversaries to discuss business.
A closing declaration pledged governments to 'building the foundations' of
an economic community, establishing a regional tourist board, and studying
the creation of a Middle East development bank.
The 14-point declaration also said governments would encourage the
establishment of a private sector regional chamber of commerce and business
council to facilitate intra-regional trade. It also hopes to develop a
partnership between the public and private sectors and produce further free
market reforms. It looked forward to 'rapid movement' towards a regional
peace which would include Syria and Lebanon, though both countries boycotted
the event.
A follow-up conference is to be held in the Jordanian capital Amman before
June next year. Mr Shimon Peres, Israeli foreign minister, said the
revolutionary declaration was 'not a piece of paper, but a birth' of a new
Middle East. Mr Klaus Schwab, president of the summit's co-sponsors - the
World Economic Forum - welcomed the talks, and called on participants to
'turn contacts into contracts'.
The event, which brought together 1,200 international businessmen, ended on
a note of conciliation when Crown Prince Hassan of Jordan said yesterday his
country would hand over administration of Islamic sites to Palestinians when
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organisation reach a final settlement on
the status of Jerusalem.
The statement was aimed at defusing tensions between Jordan and the PLO
after Israel recognised the special custodial role of King Hussein of Jordan
over the sites in last month's Israel-Jordan peace treaty.
The declaration sought to calm PLO fears that it was being marginalised at
the summit by urging attention from international aid donors and private
companies towards the plight of Palestinians and by implicitly criticising
Israel for closing the borders with the Palestinian territories two weeks
ago.
Mr Peres, addressing PLO chairman Mr Yassir Arafat, said: 'We consider the
Palestinian people the heart of the problem and we want to solve it together
rightly and justly.'
Mr Arafat said that Palestinians were expecting the dawning of 'a new era
and new region' and said that talks over the future of Jerusalem should mark
a 'new vocabulary of dialogue' among Islam, Christianity and Judaism.
Tricky task to lay Mideast bank's foundations, Page 6
