FT  16 JUL 94 / Complex calculations for C&amp;G: The conundrum which faces the
building society
The task facing the Cheltenham &amp; Gloucester Building Society is a complex
one. It is having to devise a scheme for distributing the Pounds 1.8bn that
Lloyds Bank bid for the society that will be seen as legal by the courts and
as attractive by its investors.
The task before the society after the High Court ruling that certain
payments it planned to make to members were unlawful is reminiscent of the
sort of mathematical problem set in exams.
In essence it appears to amount to devising a lawful scheme where there is
the greatest possible overlap between members who can vote and members who
are eligible for cash payments. But the smaller number of those qualifying
for payments means that the payments themselves should be higher than
originally intended.
The original scheme involved cash payments of up to Pounds 10,000 to every
member, including borrowers, as well as to others who could not vote, such
as depositors - people with a savings account which did not make them
society members.
But Sir Donald Nicholls, the vice-chancellor, ruled that cash payments could
not be made to investors of less than two years' standing, nor to borrowers,
although it was lawful to give cash to depositors and staff. The requirement
in the 1986 Building Societies Act for high levels of support among
investors for such a takeover to go ahead, makes the task more difficult.
While borrowers have to approve the move only by a simple majority of those
voting, at least 75 per cent of investors voting - or investors representing
90 per cent of the value of investments which carry voting rights - have to
consent.
The details of a new scheme will be announced in mid-August, but there are a
few clues already about features it might contain. It appears unlikely, for
example, that an alternative way of handing out the Pounds 500 cash payments
to borrowers will be on offer.
The voting threshold for getting consent of borrowing members is lower than
for investors. Borrowers are also less mobile than investors, and so perhaps
more susceptible to the long-term benefits of accepting the Lloyds' offer,
for example in terms of the lower interest rates they may be charged. It is
also clear that a critical factor will be what is known as the qualifying
date - the date for the start of the counting back to establish who is of
two years' standing.
At the end of March, 27 per cent of C&amp;G investors were of less than two
years' standing, but that proportion will already have fallen, since the
society closed to new investing members in mid-June, the day after the
judgment.
There is nothing in principle to stop the society setting a qualifying date
well ahead of the announcement of the new scheme, thus increasing further
the overlap between those investors able to vote, and those able to receive
cash.
C&amp;G would not necessarily have to wait anything like two years before the
proportion of voting investors ineligible for cash fell to a level which the
society's board believed would enable it to win the vote.
There is a further, slightly baroque, twist, which involves encouraging
relatively new investors, and perhaps, borrowers, to open deposit accounts
as a way of receiving payments.
There are some difficulties with this - for example, the Building Societies
Commission, the sector's statutory regulator, might well look unkindly on
such an account if it were confined to existing members of the society.
Yet if it were open to anyone, the fact that its existence was announced
before the closing date for eligibility might lead to the very fluctuations
in funds between societies that the regulatory system has been keen to
avoid.
