FT  10 DEC 94 / Weekend Money (Saving and Borrowing): Bank code 'not enough'
A married couple who deposited their savings in a bank's 30-day notice Extra
Interest account, only to find they would have got more interest if they had
put the money in the Instant Savings account, received compensation after
taking their case to Laurence Shurman, the banking ombudsman.
In another case, a couple sold their car for Pounds 6,000 to a person paying
by banker's draft and went abroad. They called their bank to check and
received a telegram back confirming the draft had been 'received and
credited'. They then allowed the new owner to take the car - but later found
their account debited by Pounds 6,000.
The bank said the draft was a forgery and the couple should have asked
whether it had been 'cleared' rather than 'credited'. But the ombudsman
decided the bank should have taken care to avoid confusion, since it was
likely the customers did not know the difference. The bank refunded the
Pounds 6,000.
Shurman, who this week presented his 1993-94 annual report containing these
and other cases, said the revised Code of Good Banking Practice still did
not go far enough in setting standards.
Banks, he said, were still not doing enough to display the official code in
branches, or to make their staff aware of it and their internal complaints
procedures. He cited the case of a customer who telephoned his bank to find
out how to complain, and was surprised after holding for several minutes to
be told: 'I cannot find a bank in Ombudsman. Have you got the sort code?'
The Code of Good Banking Practice is a voluntary scheme drawn up in 1992
along the principle that banks should 'act fairly and reasonably in all
their dealings with their customers'. But Shurman urged inclusion of a
requirement that terms and conditions be 'fair in substance'.
The report, to end-September, showed that complaints against banks fell in
the period but a higher proportion of customers received compensation
compared with the previous 12 months.
There were 8,027 preliminary complaints, a fall of 16 per cent on 1993. The
number accepted for full investigation also fell (by 25 per cent) to 833.
Of the 1,095 full investigations completed in the year, 44 per cent were
resolved in favour of the complainant compared with 36 per cent in 1992-93.
The average award also rose to Pounds 1,464 from Pounds 1,352, with the
range from Pounds 5 to Pounds 53,250.
The single biggest category of complaint needing full investigation was
mortgages and lending. Common mistakes were the amount of repayment
instalments and the calculation of final redemption figures. Another
concerned fixed-rate mortgages where applicants were not told about early
redemption penalties.
Shurman said he had to reject some mortgage complaints because banks did not
have to give 'best advice' about mortgages. A code of lending would help, he
said.
Complaints about automated teller machines were the next highest category.
Shurman said banks had to take more action against cash machine fraud, even
if the cost of safeguards outweighed the probable savings.
The Banking Ombudsman, 70 Gray's Inn Road, London WC1X 8NB. Tel: 071-404
9944.
