FT  02 SEP 94 / Falling prosperity hurts family planning
In a continent where population growth outstrips economic growth, Nigeria at
90m people is by far the biggest nation in Africa.
Until 1988, when Prof Olikoye Ransome-Kuti, then health minister, launched a
national population policy, Nigerians had been so proud of their self-styled
tag as the 'giant of Africa' that, as long as the oil money rolled in, they
regarded high population growth as healthy and saw little point in
controlling the rate of growth.
Nigeria was then believed to have at least 110m people, putting it among the
10 largest populations in the world. The 1991 census caused a surprise:
Nigeria had only 88.5m. The over-estimate was a result of inflated numbers
by tribal chiefs and regional governors hoping to boost their political
clout and revenue allocation.
The United Nations Population Fund has projected the average population
growth rate between 1990 and 1995 as 3.1 per cent (which would double the
population in about 30 years) with the birth rate at 45 per 1,000 persons
and death rate at 14 per 1,000 (including an infant mortality rate of 96).
The UN estimates the fertility rate at 6.1 children per woman, while the
national policy set a target of only four. Since the 1970s the urban
population has risen from 30 per cent to nearly half and the rate of growth
in the towns is higher at 5.5 per cent.
Generalising about Nigeria, a country of over 200 ethnic groups and very
diverse cultures, is often deceptive and never more so than in attitudes to
education and the role of women.
In the mainly Christian south, female education and literacy are far higher
than in the predominantly Moslem north, where even the discussion of birth
control is not widely accepted.
In the south-east there is a high percentage of Catholics especially among
the Ibo tribe. The alarming decline in social services during the 1990s has
halted the progress towards family planning clinics and universal primary
education, especially in the north, bolstering the influence of the Koranic
schools.
Even nationally, the UN paints a bleak picture. 'The status of women in
Nigeria has improved little over the last decade. In general, they are
considered second-class citizens not by law but because of the social and
cultural climate', says the UNFPA's 1993 review of the national programme.
The literacy rate for women was 31 per cent (54 per cent for men) and more
than half of all Nigerian women were married at the age of 15.
The problem of education lies not just with women. As a prominent women's
group in Nigeria points out, there may be a target of four children per
woman, but in a polygamous society many men far exceed that figure.
If the prospect of curtailing population growth is limited, the outlook for
economic growth has become bleak. Despite the massive oil boom in the 1970s,
the GDP income per capita is down to around Dollars 290, about the level of
1963. In the period, Indonesia has risen from a lower per capita income to a
level three times that of Nigeria.
In January's budget speech the finance minister, Mr Kalu I Kalu, commented
on three years of political uncertainty, capital flight government
over-spending, which 'resulted in a further decline in GDP growth rate from
4.8 per cent in 1991 to 2.9 per cent in 1993. A comparison with the average
growth rate of 5 per cent from 1988-91 demonstrates the enormity of the task
involved in resuscitating the economy in 1994 and beyond,' concluded Mr
Kalu.
Since then strikes, shortages and a dearth of foreign exchange have taken
the economy further down hill. Nigeria accounts for about half of West
Africa's population and whereas Ghanaians once poured into Nigeria for a
better life, the chances of reverse migration look more likely.
