FT  08 JUL 94 / Ex-minister 'gave confused evidence': Credibility of former
Matrix chief queried after allegations at Scott inquiry
The businessman at the centre of the Matrix Churchill case yesterday told
the Scott arms-for-Iraq inquiry that Lord Trefgarne, the former trade and
defence minister, had given 'inaccurate' and 'confused' evidence relating to
the export of machine tools to Iraq.
But the credibility as a witness of Mr Paul Henderson, the former managing
director of Matrix Churchill, was itself challenged by Ms Presiley Baxendale
QC, Lord Justice Scott's counsel.
Mr Henderson was giving evidence in response to statements to the inquiry by
Lord Trefgarne in March. The former minister said then that Mr Henderson had
deceived him about the purpose of machine tools exported to Iraq by Matrix
Churchill in the 1980s.
Yesterday Mr Henderson insisted that he had never personally assured the
minister that the machine tools in a number of pending contracts with Iraq
were for civilian use. Mr Henderson said discussions at a meeting in
September 1989 had been conducted only at a general level.
Mr Henderson was repeatedly questioned about other accounts of the meeting
which appeared to support Lord Trefgarne's evidence.
In a series of sharp exchanges, Ms Baxendale told Mr Henderson she could not
understand how he could describe as 'wrong' and 'confused' an account of a
meeting about which several witnesses concurred.
Mr Henderson later agreed that an account of the meeting in his recently
published autobiography The Unlikely Spy was inaccurate. In it, he writes
that he told Lord Trefgarne that the machine tools had commercial as well as
military uses. Mr Henderson also stated in the book that he knew that the
intelligence services had informed all relevant ministers about the military
use of the tools.
After giving evidence yesterday, Mr Henderson said he was glad to have been
given the opportunity to answer Lord Trefgarne's allegations.
But within Whitehall, yesterday's hearing was seen as potentially mitigating
the case against ministers and officials. Some feel that the full Matrix
Churchill story was not sufficiently aired because the trial of Mr Henderson
and other company directors collapsed before they had been cross-examined by
the prosecution.
After yesterday's two-hour public hearing, Lord Justice Scott heard evidence
in private from Mr Henderson about his contacts with the intelligence
services.
The intelligence service MI6 is thought to have given evidence alleging that
it was not fully briefed by Mr Henderson about the extent to which his
company was engaged in the export of military sensitive machine tools to
Iraq.
The judge has also received written evidence from Mr Mark Gutteridge,
another former Matrix Churchill employee, which contradicts some of Mr
Henderson's evidence.
Yesterday's hearing is expected to be the last before Lord Justice Scott
prepares his report for publication at the end of the year.
