FT  08 JUL 94 / Management: Start slow, end fast - Jean Louis Barsoux offers
advice on working in multicultural teams
When 3M recently restructured its European operations employing 21,000
people, it limited relocation to fewer than 40 managers. Yet about 1,000 of
its managers have been given permanent and/or project responsibilities
across national borders.
Increasingly, companies are asking employees to participate in multiple work
groups - project teams, task forces, steering committees, commissions and
boards - which transcend national boundaries.
The idea, confirmed by research, is that cultural diversity promotes
creativity, overcomes group-think and leads to better decision making.
'Establishing a situation that is unfamiliar and slightly uncomfortable
forces people to look at things differently', says Irene Rodgers of the
Paris-based consultancy ICM.
The gains from diversity, however, are not automatic. In order to fulfill
their creative potential, multicultural teams have to overcome barriers that
uniform teams resolve quickly, often instinctively. They have to confront
differences in attitudes, values, behaviour, experience, background, and
expectations, as well as language. The team's biggest problem though is the
lack of trust. Multicultural team members often find it difficult to
overcome long-held prejudices and stereotypes about people who speak and
behave strangely and have different ideas from themselves.
From the very inception of the team, members will have different views about
how to build up the level of trust - and about how much time should be
devoted to relationship building prior to 'getting down to business'.
North American managers, for instance, tend to have an instrumental view of
relationships. Teams can be put together mechanistically and expected to
function effectively, or fixed if they fail to do so. The directness of the
team-building approach reflects the directness of American culture.
Members from more relationship-oriented cultures such as southern Europe,
the Middle East or Latin America may feel rushed or distrustful of
colleagues if the getting-to-know-each-other phase is curtailed.
What is more, artificial efforts to speed up that team-building process may
backfire. Consider the example of a French medical equipment maker, taken
over by General Electric in 1988. GE decided to boost the morale of its new
French employees by organising a training seminar for French and other
European managers.
In their hotel rooms, the company left colourful T-shirts emblazoned with
the GE slogan 'Go for One'. A note urged the managers to wear the T-shirts
'to show that you are members of the team'. The French managers wore them,
grudgingly, to the seminar, but as one of them recalled: 'It was like Hitler
was back, forcing us to wear uniforms. It was humiliating.'
The build-up of trust may prove especially problematic if it is a project
team which only meets periodically. Not only will opportunities to develop
trust be restricted, the need for trust will be higher since individuals
rely on one another to advance work outside the formal meetings.
Trust is universally important but it is built up and sustained in different
ways. For instance, in Germany, trust is heavily biased towards a person's
dependability. Delivering on promises, honesty and punctuality all increase
trust. If a task is not going to be completed by a promised date, the
deadline must be renegotiated in advance to let people make arrangements. In
other cultures, where time is more elastic, and words and statements taken
less literally, not meeting a deadline is not critical and will not
necessarily lead to a loss of trust.
A further problem is that cultural misunderstandings often happen in
situations where trust may already be low. Disagreement and suspicion may
therefore be magnified out of proportion. The misunderstanding serves as
additional proof of lack of trustworthiness. There is no benefit of the
doubt.
As Rodgers saw it: 'People get hung up on a word and it flies up into a huge
event, and becomes a focus for all sorts of displaced anger and frustration
 -a bit like domestic quarrels caused by leaving the lid off the
toothpaste.'
In America and Europe, trust is usually enhanced by looking people in the
eye. This is considered a sign of respect and sincerity. But in East Asia,
for instance, eye contact indicates anger or aggression.
That makes it easy to misinterpret cultural problems for personality
differences. A manager may consider a colleague to be awkward or sabotaging
group efforts when that person is merely responding to cultural upbringing
and beliefs.
Digging into cultural differences is a high-risk activity for the team since
all sorts of value-laden differences and prejudices can come to the surface.
Multicultural teams, therefore, have to find ways of describing and
surfacing differences in a depersonalised way. For instance, one
multicultural team of MBA students was exposed to the idea that cultures may
have a polychronic (flexible) versus a monochronic (rigid) view of time.
An Italian student who turned up late to a session was teased about being
polychronic. This served to mark his 'violation' of team norms without
attacking him personally. His colleagues gave him the 'benefit of the doubt'
by ascribing his lateness to cultural programming rather than to the
individual's own behaviour.
Humour can also provide a means of putting the cultural differences 'on the
table'. The level of shared humour within a group, therefore, serves as a
kind of barometer of team integration. 'If a team has reached a high level
of emotional security and members can laugh, joke, question and play devil's
advocate with each other while completing the task, then it has done well,'
observes Sue Canney Davison of the London Business School.
Every culture has its own particular insights and blind spots. So it is a
question of using these differences, not just living with them. In
neglecting to work through these differences at the beginning, multicultural
teams are storing up problems for later.
All this may sound rather time-consuming but, as Canney Davison comments:
'You have to start slowly and end faster; by starting too fast, you run the
risk of not ending at all.'
The author is a research fellow at Insead.
