FT  01 JUN 94 / Labour set to support lifting of BT ban
The Labour party is set to support a lifting of the controversial ban on
British Telecommunications carrying entertainment over its network.
The commitment, in a policy statement on competitiveness published this
week, provides encouragement to BT and a signals a significant shift in
Labour's approach to the privatised telecoms company.
The BT ban, which the government is determined should last until at least
1998, was imposed to encourage cable companies - mostly US-owned  - to
invest in telecommunications networks in competition with BT.
The cable companies argue that the ban, which includes broadcast television,
is essential to the viability of their planned Pounds 6bn investment over
the next five years.
They also claim to be installing a 'superhighway' in much of urban Britain,
taking fibre-optic cable to local level.
BT counters that it alone can provide a nationwide fibre-optic grid, but
cannot justify the investment until it is allowed to tap the entertainment
market.
It also points to the danger of giving local monopolies to a patchwork of
cable operators building to different standards.
Labour has, in effect, come out for BT. It proposes to scrap the
entertainment ban, in return for BT undertaking to pioneer a 'nationwide
communications link-up' offering nationwide access to 'broadband' services.
Until now Labour has been consistently hostile to BT's grander ambitions,
and has called for tough regulation to curb its prices and profits. It now
sees a deal in the making: BT will be allowed greater commercial freedom in
return for a commitment to use a large part of its profits to construct a
superhighway, without the Exchequer having to meet any of the projected
Pounds 15bn bill.
'We witness the paradox of the recabling of Britain being carried out by
American and French telephone companies while their major British rivals are
excluded from the market,' says the paper.
A continuation of the policy would 'risk widening the gap' between urban
areas with cable networks and less developed regions.
