FT  28 JUN 94 / Leading Article: Beyond the Corfu thunder
The weekend thunder and lightning on Corfu cast European Union
decision-making in a malevolent light. Yet the storm over the choice of the
next European Commission president could not totally obscure the progress
made at the EU summit in other areas. The responsibility for resolving the
impasse over the succession to Mr Jacques Delors now passes to Germany,
which takes over the EU presidency from July 1. Time to reach accord before
the leaders re-convene in Brussels on July 15 is short, but if the Bonn
government can find the skill to rally support from all 12 capitals behind
an appropriate candidate, the EU could even emerge strengthened from its
midsummer squall.
For all the chaos over the presidential selection, the EU showed at the
weekend that it can maintain momentum on important issues. The summit took a
significant step forward on liberalising telecommunications, now widely seen
as a key to EU competitiveness in the emerging 'information society'.
Overriding opposition from the EU's telecommunications monopolies, the
meeting opened the way to early competition in the supply of infrastructure
as well as services, allowing new operators to build their own networks. An
Anglo-German initiative to try to weed out obstacles to competitiveness was
approved.
The summit also agreed to give priority to 11 trans-European transport
projects, overcoming differences on financing. The German-sponsored
agreement on involving the European parliament in the preparations for the
1996 Maastricht review conference was also welcome. On enlargement, the EU
now has the outlines of a route map - although nothing resembling a driving
schedule - for widening the Union to the north and east.
Clinching agreement
This record of accomplishment will, however, weigh lightly unless the EU
finds a suitable personality to lead it through the challenges of the rest
of the 1990s. Despite the pressures of the timetable, there are three
reasons why the EU can be reasonably confident of clinching agreement on a
successor to Mr Delors during the next 2 1/2 weeks.
First, the German government will channel much more diplomatic energy into
engineering a deal than that employed by the current holder of the EU
presidency, Greece, under its ailing prime minister. The Bonn government is
a long way from admitting that it was mistaken in trying to push through
with France the candidacy of Mr Jean-Luc Dehaene. But Chancellor Helmut Kohl
yesterday gave a welcome signal of flexibility by hinting he would now drop
support for the Belgian premier.
UK self-restraint
Second, the British government, having had its way on a point of principle
and substance, can now show a modicum of self-restraint. There must be no
question of Mr John Major employing a second veto. The true test of Mr
Major's mettle will be his readiness to engage in a constructive search for
a solution - even at the risk of Eurosceptic hostility from his own party -
to achieve an agreement on July 15.
Third, even after excluding the candidates courting support at Corfu, there
is no shortage of suitable contenders. Mr Renato Ruggiero, the former
Italian trade minister, and Mr Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, the former Danish
foreign minister, would both command wide support. The apparent elimination
of two serving heads of government, Mr Dehaene and Mr Ruud Lubbers of the
Netherlands, is far from an ill omen. It is worth remembering that of the
European Commission's eight presidents so far, only one, the unsuccessful Mr
Gaston Thorn from Luxembourg, was an ex-prime minister.
At a time of recession and post-cold war upheaval, the EU's failure to reach
agreement on its leadership is regrettable, but it is neither a disaster nor
even a surprise. If the weekend confusion increases EU governments'
readiness to correct the shortcomings of the present selection procedures,
then the debacle may even turn out to have positive consequences. Equally,
when they were not squabbling over Mr Delors' succession, EU leaders showed
at Corfu they have an agenda to make Europe stronger, more efficient and
more cohesive. The next president of the European Commission should make
sure they stick to it.
