FT  13 SEP 94 / UK Company News: Measure for market measure - Peter Martin
considers the gap between analysts' and FT-SE figures
Why, stock market analysts have been asking, have their calculations of the
overall valuation of the market diverged so much from the official
price/earnings ratio for the FT-SE Actuaries All-Share index published every
day in the Financial Times?
Some small difference is normal. But since the beginning of 1993, the gap
has widened sharply.
In August, for example, the FT-SE figure had the All-Share selling at a
ratio of 19.9. The average broker calculated the figure at 16.2.
There is more than just statistical amour-propre at stake. The overall p/e
ratio is used for assessing whether British equities are fairly priced in
relation to those overseas, and whether any individual share is expensive or
cheap relative to the market as a whole.
The FT-SE version of the other important market indicator, gross dividend
yield for the All-Share, has also been showing a marked gap with analysts'
calculations.
In August, the official FT-SE figure showed that equities, overall, were
yielding 3.74 per cent. Analysts put the figure at 4.07 per cent.
Over the summer, a working party of the FT-SE Actuaries UK indices
committee, under the chairmanship of Mr Peter Jones of M&amp;G, has been looking
at the issue.
The burden of the work fell on Mr Paul Walton and his colleagues in the
research department of James Capel, supplied with data by the FT's
statisticians.
After studying the earnings and dividend figures of the companies in the
FT-SE Actuaries 350 index, Mr Walton's conclusion was that three main
factors explained almost all the gap:
Timing. FT Statistics calculates the index's earnings figure by adding
together each company's two most recent half-years. As soon as a company's
interim results are issued, the earnings included in the index figures
become those for the latest six months and the second half of the previous
financial year. At a company's year end, the figures are its full-year
earnings. Brokers, by contrast, use their analysts' estimates of each
company's earnings for the current calendar year.
The FT-SE Actuaries numbers are objective, in the sense that they are based
on official company data, but they will inevitably always lag behind
brokers' estimates. Normally, this generates only a slight difference
between the two series, but when earnings are swinging sharply - as when a
company moves from loss to profit or from recession to growth - a gap opens.
The recent recession produced a sharp swing in companies' results. In
particular, a number of big losses from large companies last year are still
in the All-Share earnings figure, but have now dropped out of the brokers'.
Mr Walton's study says that the timing effect is responsible for 1.8
percentage points of the 3 point gap between Capel's p/e estimate and the
official All-Share figure. (Capel's p/e estimate is roughly in line with
that of other brokers.)
Unrelieved ACT. The problem of how to treat Advance Corporation Tax arises
in acute form for those companies that fail to generate enough UK earnings
to offset the ACT they must pay on their dividends. The FT and the brokers
adopt different approaches to tackling this problem. However, it is unlikely
to be a significant factor in distorting either side's figures; at most it
may be responsible for half a percentage point of the three point gap.
Interpretation. The likelihood that individual companies' results will be
treated differently by different compilers has been heightened by the new
FRS 3 accounting standard, because more judgment is needed to estimate a
company's underlying earnings figure.
FT Statistics, which calculates the index earnings figures, adheres to the
definition of headline earnings proposed by the Institute of Investment
Management and Research, but this does not always provide unambiguous
answers. So differences of opinion will persist.
They tend to cancel each other out, however, and contribute only another
half a percentage point to the three point gap.
Overall, therefore, only 0.2 percentage points of the gap are left
unexplained by Mr Walton's study, a negligible amount. The gap itself can be
expected to close over the next few months, as the 'bad' earnings figures
drop out of the official series.
There are two lessons from this. The sharpness of the swing in earnings
during this recession is perhaps partly a reflection of the growing
enthusiasm among companies for managing their earnings, a trend which FRS 3
has slowed rather than reversed. There is a great temptation for finance
directors, faced with a bad year or half-year, to throw as much bad news in
as possible, starting next year with a clean sheet. This exaggerates the
timing differences inherent in the two approaches to calculating market
earnings.
In addition a market p/e ratio or yield is not a single, monolithic figure
suitable for all purposes. The official versions calculated for the indices,
which appear each day in the FT, are 'objective' numbers, intended to
provide the best yardstick of historical performance. Individual brokers,
with different objectives, will produce figures which inevitably differ.
Such differences are to be welcomed as a sign of diversity of approach, not
feared as a weakness of the credibility of the market statistics.
An exposure draft explaining in detail the methods used to calculate the
earnings and dividend figures for the FT-SE Actuaries series of indices will
shortly be available. Copies may be obtained, when published, from the
Indices Unit, London Stock Exchange, London EC2N 1HP and from FT Statistics,
One Southwark Bridge, London SE1 9HL.
