FT  02 SEP 94 / Approval for fifth TV channel likely soon
The Independent Television Commission hopes to announce approval for a fifth
national TV channel in the next two weeks.
The final decision has yet to be taken by the members of the commission, but
there are growing signs that the new channel is likely to go ahead and that,
in theory, the channel could reach as much as 70 per cent of the UK
population.
If the ITC decided to go ahead the new channel would be advertised in
November, with bids expected to be submitted in two or three months. A
similar period would be needed to look at the plans submitted and choose a
winner by April or May next year.
The main work being undertaken by the commission is to try to win permission
to use more frequencies for the channel, to take it beyond a minimum
guaranteed coverage of about 52 per cent of the population. Its difficulty
is that information on the frequencies which could be used will not be
available in time for a decision on the channel.
There seems to be growing interest in bidding for the channel, particularly
from the US and Canada, even though some of the potential frequencies have
been reserved for the development of digital terrestrial television in the
UK. As well as launching a fifth channel using existing technology, 12 new
digital terrestrial channels would be feasible.
An important option which the ITC is believed to be looking at would involve
asking bidders to do an analysis in their business plans looking at the
possibilities for coverage of between 50 per cent and 70 per cent.
This would enable the work on the channel to go ahead while the ITC sought
permission to use the maximum number of frequencies. Agreement would have to
be obtained from neighbouring countries, particularly the Irish Republic.
A winner could be chosen but the licence not be awarded until the maximum
possible coverage was known.
The situation is complex and the largest number of homes covered may not
necessarily make the most viable business, because of the need for new
aerials.
One option being considered would produce about 60 per cent coverage but
limit the need for new aerials.
Those who have expressed interest in the channel range from NBC and other US
networks to Mr Richard Branson's Virgin Group and a consortium bringing
together Time Warner of the US; MAI, the UK television and financial
services group; and Pearson, the media group that owns the Financial Times.
