FT  18 MAY 94 / Price wars over name-dropping: The commercial threat posed
by generics to the world's top drugs companies
A drug price war starts today. At midnight, one of the world's best-selling
drugs, the ulcer treatment Tagamet, lost patent protection in its biggest
market, the US. Its manufacturer, the Anglo-US company SmithKline Beecham,
estimates that it could lose sales worth Dollars 500m a year as about 10
makers of cut-price unbranded versions - generics - enter the market.
While this is worrying for SmithKline, the world's sixth-biggest drug
company is not alone. Tagamet is just one of 17 drugs with combined annual
sales of Dollars 2.8bn in the US whose patents expire this year, according
to Goldman Sachs, the US stockbroker.
Between 1993 and 2005 drugs with total US sales of more than Dollars 27bn
will lose patent protection. None of the world's leading drugs companies is
immune to growing competition from a new generation of generic products.
The race is on to enter the generics market because of a bulge in the number
of patents which are expiring. Valium, the anti-depressant made by the Swiss
company Hoffman-La Roche, was a patented drug whose success in the 1960s
showed other groups how profitable the process could be.
The subsequent research boom of the 1970s generated the blockbuster drugs of
the 1980s. They included drugs for heart treatment such as ICI's Tenormin
(see chart), as well as Tagamet and the closely related Zantac, made by
Glaxo of the UK and still the world's best-selling compound. Drug patents
usually last 20 years and the industry is now seeing the fall-out from these
post-Valium efforts.
By unhappy coincidence for the drugs companies, healthcare costs are being
scrutinised by those who pay the bills - US employers who pay insurance
premiums, insurance companies which meet claims, and governments throughout
the industrialised world. All three groups are eager to substitute cheap
generics for costly branded drugs.
There are huge potential savings. 'The industry used to calculate that the
price of a generic version fell to less than 20 per cent of the branded
drug's price within 18 months,' says Mr Jim Hageman, the vice-president
responsible for US generics at US company Upjohn. 'Now you get the same
price fall in under 12 months.'
This is welcome news for drugs buyers, but damaging for drugs producers.
Earlier this month, the US company Syntex agreed to a Dollars 5.3bn takeover
by Hoffman-La Roche. Syntex had seen sales of its best-selling product
Naprosyn, an anti-inflammatory, fall by 60 per cent after the patent expired
at the end of 1993. 'Naprosyn prices have fallen as far as 95 per cent,'
says Mr Paul Freiman, Syntex chairman.
The Davids who are humbling these Goliaths are small but fast-growing
companies. Goldman Sachs estimates that there are between 350 and 400 US
generic drugs companies, of which nine count as 'major independent firms'
but only four have sales worth more than Dollars 100m a year.
While sales of many generics are rising, it remains unclear whether
companies reliant on them will generate sufficient profits to rival
brand-name groups. Mr Peter Goldsbrough, vice-president in charge of
healthcare at management consultancy Boston Consulting Group in the UK, says
the generics business is driven by cutting costs and prices to a minimum to
win market share.
'There will always be room for a few fast-moving companies,' he says, 'but
the real winners may be alliances led by the big drugs makers.'
This idea is already taking root. Bristol Myers Squibb, the second-biggest
US drugs company, launched its US generics subsidiary in 1989 and claims it
is now so big that it would be the country's seventh-biggest drugs
manufacturer if it stood alone.
Last week, Bristol Myers Squibb bought 25 per cent of a German generics
company, Azupharma. The deal followed acquisitions this year by German
chemicals and drugs makers Bayer and Hoechst of stakes in US generics
companies Schein and Copley for Dollars 310m and Dollars 546m respectively.
More important still are the takeovers by Merck of Medco, the US drugs
distributor, last summer for Dollars 6bn, and of Diversified Pharmaceuticals
Services by SmithKline Beecham for Dollars 2.3bn this month. Defence against
the threat of generic competition is part of the rationale for these deals.
Medco and Diversified are the middlemen of the drugs industry, linking the
drugs companies with healthcare buyers. They offer a complete range of drugs
and will now promote their owners' products first whether they are branded
or generic drugs.
But such deals are an expensive and unproven means of defence by drugs
groups against generics. Lawyers and chemists have a record for beefing up
old patents.
Glaxo's Zantac was first patented in a crystalline form that proved
difficult to produce. Eventually a second, more stable, form was patented
and it is this version that has been so successful. The patents for the
early version lapse next year while the later version is protected until
2002.
Glaxo's reliance on its newer Zantac patent was exposed in March when Ciba
said it had found a way of manufacturing the earlier crystalline version of
Zantac. Glaxo shares have underperformed since the Ciba announcement. In
April Glaxo filed a patent-infringement suit in the US against Ciba, which
is still 18 months away from the launch of its generic rival.
SmithKline Beecham says it would have been happy to follow Glaxo and file a
patent on an improved version of Tagamet. 'We looked at that but it wasn't
possible for us to improve Tagamet,' says Mr Jerry Karabelas, president of
SmithKline's North American pharmaceuticals business. Instead, SmithKline
launched its own generic version of Tagamet last week. It will also supply
the generic to Lederle, part of American Cyanamid, the US drugs maker, to
sell only to pharmacies.
But these strategies - supplying distributors with generics and launching
generics - have their weaknesses.
The now-subsumed Syntex decided it would supply the generics market but was
overwhelmed by the number of competitors, according to experts at the US
stockbroker Lehman Brothers. The UK company Zeneca, then part of ICI,
entered the generics market with a version of its heart treatment Tenormin.
ICI's market share fell by 70 per cent in the two years after the patent
lapsed in 1991 because the generic was too expensive and made customers more
receptive to independent generic suppliers, adds Lehman Brothers.
The recognition is rapidly dawning on the drugs industry that despite
efforts to counter the generics threat, there is only one genuine defence:
new products with new patents.
SmithKline Beecham, for one, says this is a central plank of its
anti-generics strategy. It will continue to fight to extract full commercial
value from Tagamet, but it sees its future in two new drugs with potential
to match the sales Tagamet enjoyed in its heyday: anti-depressant Seroxat
and anti-viral Famvir.
But not every company has suitable drugs in clinical trials ready to come to
the market as older drugs lose their patents. And relying on scientists to
rescue the business is risky: the cost of research and development is about
Dollars 200m a product, while it typically takes seven years from patent
application to market launch, with no guarantee of success.
The fact that SmithKline Beecham and others have decided to make new product
development, however risky, the priority in fighting generics is an
admission that branded prescription drugs will eventually succumb to
unbranded rivals when their patents expire.
The decision to make new product development a higher priority than the
defence of drugs whose patents have expired might be welcomed by
governments, health insurers and employers eager to see lower prices for old
drugs and prepared to pay a price for genuinely innovative cures.
Drugs companies might like it less, but those that take this route fear that
the alternative is to go the way of Syntex.
