FT  30 JUN 94 / Labour districts press for review support
Labour district-council leaders yesterday stepped up their attempts to
ensure that the party backs local government reorganisation in England.
Their move, announced on the opening day of the cross-party Association of
District Councils' annual conference in Harrogate, follows calls by several
Labour-affiliated unions for the review to be abandoned.
Labour still officially supports replacing the two-tier system of local
government of counties and district councils with new all-purpose unitary
authorities.
However, Mr Jack Straw, the party's local-government spokesman, is
attempting to distance himself from the conduct of the review so far, which
has produced several controversial proposals for abolishing counties.
He has written to Mr John Gummer, the environment secretary, saying that
failure to make guarantees on start-up elections for new councils and on
transfer of staff 'could make for serious difficulties in the house'.
Mr Pat Doyle, leader of Hull City Council, published a campaign document
calling for unitary authorities to be created, and saying that Labour
district councillors should discuss reorganisation with their Labour MPs.
He said withdrawing support for the review would 'leave in place confusion
and duplication', 'weaken local government as a whole', and 'permit the
government to introduce compulsory competitive tendering more rapidly in the
shire counties'.
Labour's position on the review could be crucial: all proposals for
reorganisation must be passed by both houses of parliament and several
Conservative backbenchers are strongly opposed to changing the status quo.
The Local Government Commission for England, which is drawing up detailed
proposals for reorganisation, announced that it intends to publish a report
at the end of this year with suggestions on how problems with the two-tier
system could be improved if unitary councils are not introduced.
It will announce proposals for reorganisation in 16 counties next week and
the week after. Proposals will be published for Staffordshire on July 4;
Surrey, Hereford &amp; Worcester and Nottinghamshire on July 5; Warwickshire and
Wiltshire on July 6; Dorset on July 7; Devon and Essex on July 11; Durham,
East and West Sussex on July 12; Northumberland and Northamptonshire on July
13; and Norfolk and Suffolk on July 14.
