FT  08 JUL 94 / North Yemeni forces capture centre of Aden
The North Yemeni forces of President Ali Abdullah Saleh appeared to have
secured victory in the two-month-old Yemeni civil war yesterday after
capturing Aden, the last main southern stronghold, and forcing southern
leaders to flee.
North Yemeni officials said their forces had wrested control of central Aden
after several days' fierce fighting in suburbs north of the city.
Their claim was backed by news agency reports from Aden saying northern
troops had won control of the airport and taken the city's central suburbs
of Crater, Tawahi and Maalla. The dispatches said that fighting in Aden had
subsided and that a captured Aden television centre was broadcasting scenes
of northern troops in the city centre.
With the capture of Aden and most of south Yemen's strategic sites, Mr Saleh
seems to have realised his presumed ambition of reimposing unity on the
country by force. But western diplomats in the region said that remnants of
the southern forces might continue to harass their northern foes through
guerrilla fighting and sabotage from Yemen's rugged hinterland.
Mr Ali Salem al-Beidh, head of the southern government and former
vice-president of unified Yemen, has fled to neighbouring Oman from
Mukallah, which fell to northern forces earlier this week. An Omani official
said he arrived there on Wednesday night with some top officials.
In New York, Mr Haidar Abu Bakr al-Attas, prime minister of the
self-declared southern government, called for the safe passage out of Aden
for 'those who want to leave' but denied this amounted to capitulation.
'People are resisting in many places,' he said.
Mr Abdul Karim el-Eryani, planning minister in the Sanaa government, who was
also in New York for talks at the United Nations, said he considered Mr
al-Attas' plea for safe passage signified 'the end of the war'.
Northern officials in Sanaa called on southern 'rebels' to stop fighting and
take advantage of an amnesty.
Aden's fall crowns a series of telling military blows against the
secessionist south. In the past few days northern troops captured Mukallah,
the south's second city, its airport and the south's sole commercial
oilfield at Masilah.
The civil war broke out in May after four years of uneasy unification
between North and South Yemen. Mr Saleh and Mr al-Beidh became increasingly
bitter enemies after Yemen's first multi-party elections in April last year.
The south's repeated call for recognition from powerful Arab friends and
neighbours went unrequited, though Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, in particular,
were believed to be sympathetic to its cause and, according to western
diplomats in the region, may have supplied Aden's leadership with arms.
The six Gulf Co-operation Council states, along with Egypt and Syria, on
Wednesday called for a ceasefire but avoided giving the south diplomatic
recognition.
