FT  28 NOV 94 / Brussels boost for mechanical engineering
The European Commission is proposing a series of measures to improve the
competitiveness of the European Union's Ecu210bn (Dollars 250bn) mechanical
engineering industry, one of the sectors worst hit by the recent recession.
The move reflects concern in the Commission about a potential loss of global
competitiveness in the industry, which accounts for 8 per cent of total EU
industrial output.
This would have serious consequences for all manufacturing in the EU,
because of machinery makers' central role in supplying production equipment,
the commission warns.
A commission communication, Strengthening the Competitiveness of the
European Machinery Construction Industry, was presented to EU industry
ministers at their last meeting on November 8.
It is the result of more than two years of talks with industry leaders, who
have been keen to raise the awareness in Brussels of the strategically
important but highly fragmented mechanical engineering sector.
The communication discloses that production in the EU mechanical engineering
industry fell from Ecu225bn in 1991 to Ecu210bn last year, apparent
consumption from Ecu190bn to Ecu170bn, and employment from 2.7m to 2.3m.
The commission says the industry has to meet challenges on a number of
fronts: it needs to reduce its sensitivity to recession, accelerate its
restructuring, learn how to exploit innovation fully and step up efforts to
become a true global force.
Its proposals are designed to provide guidelines for action over the next
few years by the EU, member states and the industry itself.
The most important cover investment promotion, where member states will be
encouraged to improve tax depreciation rules for capital goods; industrial
co-operation especially among small and medium-sized machine manufacturers;
and fiscal incentives for research and development.
The proposals were welcomed last week by Orgalime, the Brussels-based
liaison group for the European mechanical, electrical, electronic and metal
working industries.
