FT  14 JAN 94 / The Italian job
The story so far: Britain's genteel form of corruption was described in this
space on Tuesday as a collection of 'wholly legal Italian practices'. In a
letter published in the FT yesterday Mr Antonio Armellini asked whether this
implied 'that corruption and impropriety are by definition connected to the
idea of Italy and things Italian'. Well of course it did. We all know the
disquieting features of Italian political life. The good news is that the
peninsula's voters have shown over the past year that they reject
single-party government and its consequences. The British electorate has not
been so perspicacious.
As Mr Armellini suggested, no country has a monopoly of rectitude. The
charge that president Clinton, when governor of Arkansas, did special
favours for a bank and benefitted from a deal in land speculation is
unproven, but the proposition that the US polity has often been soiled by
corruption is incontrovertible. The English are no different. They have,
however, been peculiarly adept at hiding their moral turpitude behind lace
curtains of outraged innocence. Italy is therefore owed an apology. Here
goes: various British political practices now being alleged or revealed
would bring a blush to the cheeks of any honest Italian.
Now read on: The indictment of Britain's party of government is becoming
serious. On Wednesday Lord Howe, who should know better, whinged about the
rules of the Scott inquiry into allegations of morally challenged behaviour
by Conservative ministers over the sale of arms to Iraq. The distinguished
former foreign secretary intimated that Lord Justice Scott's findings might
well be disregarded. Those who had already appeared before the inquiry, and
others watching from outside, were 'bound to be less enthusiastic to accept
the conclusions'.
That would be troubling enough, but it is not the whole charge-sheet.
Yesterday the Tories, who for many years appeared to regard Westminster city
council as naturally theirs to rule, were accused of what amounts to
vote-rigging. This devastating blow was struck by a report from the district
auditor, Mr John Magill, published in summary form. Mr Magill made a
statement containing the 'provisional' conclusion that Westminster sold
public housing in a manner that was 'influenced by an irrelevant
consideration, namely the electoral advantage of the majority party'. In his
view the council was engaged in gerrymandering, 'which I am minded to find
is a disgraceful and improper purpose . . .'
To be fair to the individuals concerned, this is not a verdict of guilty
after a hearing in court. Due process has yet to be completed. The outcome
cannot be prejudged. Yet the accusations alone will further damage the
Conservatives' attempt to project their party as the arbiter of the nation's
morals. Recent tittle-tattle about whose trousers have been found around
whose ankles is politically insignificant when set against this sort of
statement, provisional or otherwise. The Scott inquiry and Mr Magill's
report may in time be characterised by historians as glimpses of the kind of
rot that might set in when one party holds office for longer than its
natural shelf-life.
That said, it must be conceded that Lord Howe's protest is not wholly
without merit. His principal objection appears to be that Lord Justice Scott
acts as 'detective, inquisitor, advocate and judge'. So he does, but this
would not be astonishing in a French court, where the inquisitorial
procedure is preferred to the adversarial.
Again, the inquiry is not a criminal trial. All that Lord Justice Scott can
do at the end of the day is point a finger, possibly at individual
politicians and certain officials. He can say that so-and-so misled
parliament, or improperly signed document immunity forms, an action that
might have led to an unjust outcome to the Matrix Churchill trial.
If he reaches that sort of conclusion - and he may not - some careers may be
damaged, but the alternative might have been the addition to the proceedings
of many delays and mountains of legal fees. In any event, it was the prime
minister himself - who appears before Scott on Monday  - who chose the form
of the inquiry. Its rules were agreed in Whitehall, perhaps before certain
ministers became worried about the possible outcome. Their alarm is what
should give us the greatest confidence in the Scott procedure.
Yet it would be wrong to be pious about this. Britain earns its living by
selling arms, and its secretive bureaucrats find no difficulty in tying
themselves into philosophical and terminological knots to protect both the
industry and their own flexible sense of right and wrong.
This has long been true. In 1935 and 1936 a Royal Commission on the Private
Manufacture of and Trade in Arms sat for 22 public sessions. It produced a
unanimous report broadly favouring greater governmental control over the
arms industry. Shortly after publication, the report was quietly buried. It
is an instructive little fable, recounted by David G. Anderson in the
January 1994 issue of the Journal of Contemporary History. 'Sir Thomas
Inskip, the minister for the co-ordination of defence . . . thanked the
commission for its hard work . . . and promptly sent the report to a
bureaucratic resting place . . . ,' writes Mr Anderson. Those who,
fortunately, favoured rearmament in view of the threat from Nazi Germany
could tell themselves that they were right to protect the munitions industry
from a well-meaning committee of honourable persons.
The days when such things could so easily be kicked into touch are, however,
gone. It is not possible to avoid the political effect of regular accounts
of appearances before Lord Justice Scott, or to wish that his lordship had
not been appointed to do the job he has been given in the manner that he is
undertaking it. The same irrevocability applies to the Westminster affair.
However innocent the individuals named by Mr Magill may be, however
provisional his findings, the effect on the Conservatives of yesterday's
news cannot be erased from the public consciousness. Crying 'sub judice' and
hoping the whole nightmare will go away for a few more years will not
achieve that. One more British delusion, that ours is the country of the
righteous and the incorruptible, is rapidly being destroyed.
