FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Singapore (12): Shoppers spoilt for choice - An
oversupply of outlets is threatening retailers' profitability
Singaporeans proudly proclaim the work ethic and the relentless quest for
economic self-improvement to be their bedrock national values. Yet the
casual stroller down Orchard Road, centre of Singapore's prime retailing
district, might conclude that what really makes the country tick is
shopping.
The teeming boulevard is a showcase of affluent consumerism crammed with
labyrinthine shopping complexes, designer boutiques and department stores
offering everything from Paris fashions to cameras and computers.
Towering above it all is the twin-towered Ngee Ann City, which opened last
autumn. A gleaming pink marble palace, it houses a massive 66,000 sq m of
retail space, more than half of it occupied by Takashimaya, a Japanese
up-market department store.
But first impressions are deceptive. Passionate as Singaporeans may be about
acquiring the good things of life, their capacity to spend is being
outstripped by the number of retailers stampeding to supply them.
While the country's total retail space, at about 7 sq ft per head, is low by
western standards, it is growing at breakneck speed. On current plans, it is
estimated that it will rise by more than 40 per cent between 1993 and 1996.
Takashimaya is only the latest and grandest foreign-owned outlet to open on
Orchard Road. It follows recent department store openings by other Japanese
chains, including Isetan, Sogo, Tokyu and Yaohan. Lavish stores are planned
by Seiyo, also of Japan, and Lane Crawford of Hong Kong.
This expansion coincides with two other ominous trends. One is that foreign
visitors, long an important source of custom, have trimmed back spending as
the country's appreciating currency has eliminated its former
bargain-basement appeal. Many retail prices today are at least as high as in
London.
Simultaneously, Orchard Road's long-standing pole position is threatened by
an accelerating shift in retail trade to the suburbs prompted by lower
rental costs and government moves to encourage more modern shopping
facilities closer to the public housing estates which ring the city.
The result has been a savage squeeze on retailers' margins. In the second
half of last year only one department store group, Robinson's, reported a
profit. With further new capacity still to hit the market, conditions seem
unlikely to improve soon. 'A big shake-out is on the way,' says Mr Alex
Hill, managing editor of Asian Retailer, a Singapore-based industry
publication. 'I would be very worried if I were a retailer just entering
this market. It will take years of losses to get established.'
Mr Hitoshi Hanehira, Takashimaya's local managing director, professes not to
be concerned. Though his store will take at least 10 years to return an
overall profit, he claims it has captured 25 per cent of total department
store sales, thanks to its wide range of goods and novel attractions such as
a health club, art gallery and exhibition centre.
However, he admits Takashimaya's success will be at the expense of other,
smaller retailers. 'Department stores of only 10,000 sq m will be unable to
compete,' he says. Indeed, Tokyu has already been forced to abandon its
original store for cheaper premises and a less luxurious format.
Several indigenous Singaporean retailing groups are responding by seeking to
expand in other parts of Asia, notably in China, although it is too early to
judge how well the tactic will succeed.
But there is also a brighter side to Singapore retailing. It lies in the
rapid growth of supermarkets, spurred by more sophisticated consumer tastes
and the steady contraction of the country's traditional covered food
markets, which are increasingly circumscribed by stricter hygiene rules.
The best supermarkets offer a wide range of branded products, attractively
displayed in modern surroundings. 'They are as good as any in the world,'
says Mr John Deuchars of Davids Holdings, an Australian distribution and
wholesaling company which recently set up in Singapore.
However, the supermarkets' development remains dogged by primitive and
costly distribution methods, which involve irregular deliveries of
individual products in small quantities by different suppliers.
'Singapore has the most inefficient distribution system of any country I
know,' says Mr Chris Nelson, head of Asian operations at Dairy Farm, the
Hong Kong-based retail group which recently acquired Singapore's Cold
Storage supermarket chain.
Davids aims to change all that. In partnership with NTUC Fairprice, the
country's biggest grocery chain, it plans to centralise distribution and
deliveries and replace paper work with electronic billing and ordering
systems. It reckons it can almost halve supermarkets' stock and save them 4
percentage points of gross margin.
Consumers should also benefit in time from keener prices. These have been
kept high by Singapore's long-standing tradition of exclusive agents, which
use their monopoly over the supply of many imports to cream off big profits.
Changing the system, a British colonial relic, may prove politically
controversial. But the Singapore government, which once fiercely defended
the interests of small merchants and shopkeepers, appears increasingly to
accept the case for modernising distribution.
Further impetus is likely to come from the growth of discounting. Yaohan of
Japan has already set up a vast American-style suburban merchandise mart,
which claims to undercut city-centre prices by 10-15 per cent, while Kmart
and other US discount chains are considering setting up local operations.
These developments all point to further rapid changes in Singaporean
retailing in the next few years. But while new growth opportunities are
likely to emerge, fiercer competition in all parts of the business is likely
to make fat margins and easy profits a thing of the past. But then, that is
increasingly the industry pattern in many other parts of the world.
