FT  08 JUN 94 / OFT gives the individual top priority: Report calls for
deregulation of business lending - Homebuyers would be given fuller details
of mortgage packages / Reactions to the proposals to change consumer credit
rules
Yesterday's report by the Office of Fair Trading on the Consumer Credit Act
contains a range of measures aimed both at reducing the burden of regulation
on business and, in certain cases, at providing extra protection for
consumers.
The main recommendations it makes are:
All business lending and hiring should be removed from regulation under the
act. 'The real point of this legislation is to protect individuals, not
business people,' said Sir Bryan Carsberg, director-general of fair trading.
The office believes that the present scope of the act, which includes all
unincorporated businesses, is anomalous since it includes large businesses
such as accountancy and law practices, while many small businesses are
excluded.
This move was welcomed by the Federation of Small Businesses, which
represents businesses employing less than 20 people. The federation said:
'Businesses should be well able to look after themselves on a caveat emptor
basis, whether they are small traders or incorporated companies.
'The removal of excessive regulation should release more funds into the
small business sector.'
The Finance and Leasing Association, a trade body for providers of credit
and hire facilities, also welcomed the recommendation, which it said would
lessen the regulatory burden on small businesses. 'We were afraid that if
the act was extended then small businesses would find their access to medium
term finance severely curtailed.'
Mortgage lenders should be required to give more information about mortgage
'packages', in which loans are marketed together with connected services
such as life or general insurance.
The office said there was need for greater 'transparency and choice' for
borrowers. It published research yesterday which showed that about half the
consumers surveyed had taken mortgages that were conditional on the
acceptance of services provided by the lender or intermediary, whether or
not they had initially looked for a package.
Only 25 per cent of these respondents had received any information on the
cost of tied services and 15 per cent were sufficiently dissatisfied to try
to change the provider of the connected service.
The office recommended that the relevant section of the Courts and Legal
Services Act 1990 concerning 'tying-in' be implemented immediately. This
would require lenders to give prospective borrowers separate information on
the price of connected services.
Sir Bryan acknowledged that this would only affect mortgages arranged
directly with lenders, which account for about half of the market.
Nonetheless, he said he would 'expect to see greater competition in
insurance products related to home purchase as a result of this change'.
The office's proposals were given a guarded welcome by the Consumers'
Association on the grounds that it would provide consumers with some
additional information.
However, it warned that a solution that covered only half the market could
not be adequate in the long term.
The Council of Mortgage Lenders said it was disappointed at the office's
recommendation. 'Given the popularity of mortgage packages and the fierce
competition for mortgage business, this step seems unnecessary and unlikely
to enhance consumer choice,' it said.
Regulations relating to credit and hire quotations should be revoked. The
office said that the present rules were of little effect because written
quotations were rarely requested by consumers.
Rules for credit and hire advertisements should be simplified. The
regulations now called for 'a lot of small print that does not convey
information effectively'. The rules also tended to focus rules on issues of
compliance, rather than on conveying a fair and reasonable picture.
Calculations of early-settlement rebates should be made more equitable to
borrowers. The office recommended clearer disclosure of penalties, changes
to the formula for calculating early settlements and a ceiling of Pounds 100
on the early-settlement fee charged by lenders.
The upper limit for a regulated credit or hire agreement should be increased
from Pounds 15,000 to Pounds 25,000 to reflect inflation since 1974.
The lower limit for liability under the act should be increased to Pounds
150. Lenders should not be required to display an APR for small loans since
the office considered it was of little relevance to consumers taking out
small loans.
The powers of exemption under the act should be widened to deal with
specific products where compliance was extremely difficult.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Cutting the burden on business
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
The OFT report's main recommendations are ....
  to remove all business lending and hiring from regulation under the
Consumer Credit Act
  to revoke regulations relating to credit and hire quotations
  to simplify rules for credit and hire advertisements
  to change the way APRs are calculated or disclosed to improve their
value for comparing credit terms
  to make early settlement rebates more equitable to borrowers
  to widen the powers of exemption under the Act to deal with specific
products where compliance was extremely difficult.
  to implement section 104 of the Courts and Legal Services Act to give
borrowers more information about mortgage packages
  to increase the upper limit for a regulated credit or hire agreement
from Pounds15000 to Pounds25000.
  to increase the lower limit for liability under the act to
Pounds150.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
