FT  10 MAY 94 / Bankers Trust replaces chairman of WM
Bankers Trust, the US-based bank, has replaced the long-time chairman of WM
Company, its performance measurement subsidiary, with a senior banking
official in an effort to build a 'global' business selling its services to
other bank clients.
In particular, Bankers Trust would like to offer performance measurement to
clients of its global custody operations, which offer a safekeeping service
for securities. WM could expand its client list by offering performance
measurement to US and European pension funds for whom it is the global
custodian.
Mr Charlie Kiley, managing director of Bankers Trust Company and
vice-chairman of Bankers Trust International, will be chairman, replacing Mr
Dougald Eadie who will remain as a non-executive director. Mr Eadie, who has
been with WM since 1968, was chiefly responsible for developing its computer
systems and was instrumental in the company's success.
Mr Kiley will be dividing his time between WM and other duties.
Bankers Trust, which has been reviewing its London operations, has a
strategy of pursuing businesses along global lines. 'We made the changes
because we would like to use WM more globally, and knit it into services
such as custody more than it is,' the company said. WM Company, which it
acquired in 1987, has remained largely a UK business where it is a leading
provider of performance measurement services to pension funds.
Bankers Trust bought WM partly in the hope that its clients would use the
bank's index-tracking fund management services which are among the largest
in the US. However, the desired synergy did not materialise and Bankers
Trust sold its UK-based index-tracking fund management business to Invesco
earlier this year.
Index-tracking is a style of investment in which managers purchase stocks to
mimic the relative weighting of each in an index.
Fund management industry officials have said Bankers Trust efforts to
capitalise on its WM subsidiary have been hampered by fears among clients
that confidential information could be misused.
'We are very aware of the necessary autonomy that WM has to have as a
performance measurement company. We need to balance the independence against
the desire to integrate the businesses,' Bankers Trust said.
