FT  15 JAN 94 / Rush to place their bets: Gambling is a fast-growing
industry in the US
Has the US gone gambling crazy? You bet. Never have punters had so many
opportunities to be parted from their money. With casinos and other forms of
gaming proliferating throughout the US, the nation appears to be in the grip
of a gambling frenzy.
Last month the world's biggest casino opened in Las Vegas. Part of the
Dollars 1bn MGM Grand resort, it features 165 gaming tables and 3,500 slot
machines in a gaming area bigger than the playing field at Yankee Stadium.
The MGM Grand is just the latest of three mega-casinos to open in Las Vegas.
Its arrival came a few weeks after the opening of the Dollars 450m Treasure
Island, a themed hotel and casino featuring hourly mock battles between
pirates and the British navy on two 90ft frigates. A few days before that
came the opening of the Dollars 390m Luxor hotel and casino, a vast
pyramid-shaped structure on an Egyptian theme in which guests are carried
from reception to the elevators on an indoor river Nile.
But more significantly, gambling has started to spread across the country. A
quirk in the law has allowed Indian tribes to set up casinos on their
reservations: at the last count 65 had been established in 17 states. More
than 20 riverboat casinos have started operating in Mississippi and
Illinois, and neighbouring states have authorised many more. State lotteries
have legitimised the gambling habit in 37 states. Only Utah and Hawaii are
gambling-free.
As the opportunities for gambling have increased, so have the stakes. The
total amount gambled on slot machines, gaming tables, lotteries and racing
grew by 8.4 per cent to a staggering Dollars 330bn in 1992. True, the
punters won a lot of that back: but the Dollars 30bn they lost was more than
the nation's total spending on cinema tickets, books, records and spectator
sports combined.
Ten years ago, the US gambling industry was barely a third its present size.
The only states allowing casinos were Nevada and New Jersey, where punters
placed bets totalling Dollars 100bn a year. Elsewhere, about Dollars 15bn a
year was wagered on horse and greyhound racing, and another Dollars 4bn was
spent on a handful of state lotteries.
One factor spurring the industry's sudden growth has been the spread of the
lottery. State governments needing to raise revenues have found it hard to
resist the idea of using lotteries to avoid the alternative of higher taxes.
In doing so they have not only widened public acceptability of gambling, but
compromised their ability to argue against it in other forms.
Simultaneously, the gambling industry has been at pains to clean up its act.
Once predominantly a male activity associated with smoke-filled rooms, green
eye shades and organised crime, it has broadened its appeal by combining the
gambling experience with dining, cabaret, shopping or tourism.
Lotteries apart, gambling's most remarkable advance in geographical terms
has been the appearance of large numbers of casinos on the Indian
reservations - a phenomenon arising from the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act of
1988, which allowed Indians to offer games of chance if the same games were
legal elsewhere in the state.
Soon after the act took effect, it had unforeseen consequences when the
state of Connecticut interpreted it as including games of chance used in
charity fund-raising, which embraced just about everything. The state's
poverty-stricken Mashantucket Pequot tribe took the law at its word and
found financial backing for the construction of the Foxwoods casino on its
reservation in Ledyard, south-east Connecticut.
With the nearest competition several hours' drive away in Atlantic City,
Foxwoods flourished - as did its many imitators. Now, gambling in Indian
reservation casinos is big business: the value of bets taken at the tables
and slot machines shot up from Dollars 5bn to Dollars 15bn in 1992, and
continues to grow fast.
Meanwhile, the geographical spread of gambling has taken another direction.
In 1988 Iowa decided gambling could encourage tourism, and passed a law
allowing riverboat casinos to operate. The attraction of this device was
that riverboats could be justified as a re-creation of America's
19th-century paddleboats, while keeping them in the water separated them
from the rest of the community, and made them easier to control.
The casinos proved a success. Soon neighbouring states started authorising
riverboat casinos too. The amount of money handled rose from Dollars 1.1bn
in 1991 to Dollars 7.3bn in 1992, and licence applications pending or
granted are expected to take the number of riverboat casinos to more than 60
by 1995.
As casinos have spread from the traditional gambling centres of Las Vegas
and Atlantic City to Indian reservations and riverboats, the rest of the US
has started asking why it should not join in the spree. Many big cities are
considering the possibility of legitimising casino gambling in one form or
another: Philadelphia has already authorised its first riverboat casino; the
mayor of Washington DC has suggested that the revenues from casino gambling
could provide a remedy for the city's financial problems; and the mayor of
Chicago has proposed a Dollars 2bn gambling and entertainment complex for
the city centre.
Technology is also playing its part in encouraging the gambling habit. Many
punters feel more comfortable playing a machine than playing a human being:
for one thing, they feel a machine is less likely to cheat. Advances in
technology have offered a proliferation of increasingly sophisticated
electronic gaming devices, such as video poker machines.
Looking to the future, technology could further extend the market by
offering gambling opportunities through the electronic super-highways now
beginning to evolve - in other words, allowing people to gamble in their
homes by taking part in interactive casino games using cable channels and
their television screens.
But can gambling really go on growing at its present rate? It depends. Some
gambling markets already seem to be at, or near, maturity. For example, the
amount of money staked on bingo, racing and the older-established lotteries
has hardly changed in the past few years. But if the legitimisation of
casino gambling continues, the growth in that sector may have only just
begun.
Mr Eugene Martin Christiansen of Christiansen/Cummings Associates, a New
York consultancy specialising in leisure industries, points out that the
growth in casino gambling is unusual because it is driven by pent-up
consumer demand.
Clearly, the growth is not limitless. At some point, supply and demand will
come into balance. This is already happening at Las Vegas - hence the
development of new hotel/theme park/casino complexes like the MGM Grand,
Treasure Island and the Luxor, which are aimed at drawing in customers by
providing them and their families with ever more entertaining sideshows to
the casino itself. Many of those customers will come from other Las Vegas
casinos, not from newly created markets.
Even so, statistical evidence suggests people will on average spend about 1
per cent of personal income on gambling, given the opportunity. In 1992, the
amount spent on gambling across the US represented just 0.65 per cent of
personal income. Seen in those terms, the industry's growth has a long way
to go.
The one thing that could stop it, of course, is an outbreak of moral
indignation over gambling's spread, leading to the reimposition of legal
constraints. As yet, in spite of objections in some states to the spread of
video poker machines because some people are playing them compulsively,
there is little evidence to suggest such a backlash is likely.
Perhaps gambling has entered the mainstream entertainment industry for good.
But as Mr Christiansen notes, the history of US society is permeated with
violent swings between liberalism and conservatism in attitudes to supposed
vices: the US is, after all, the land that once prohibited alcohol. The
gambling industry's comfort lies in the ultimate failure of that notorious
attempt by the US to come between its citizens and their pleasure.
