FT  19 JUL 94 / Survey of Monaco (4): Talking business is a big industry -
Chilly economic climate and French franc's rise hits tourism
Only a few days ago a crowd of Flintstone fans crowded into the open-air
cinema at Monte Carlo to watch Fred, Wilma, Barney and their fellow
characters caper around in the movie version of The Flintstones; the smash
hit at the US box office this summer.
The Flintstones - La Famille Pierreafeu, as they are called in France - has
not yet opened for general release in Europe. It was screened as an al
fresco preview in Monaco this weekend as part of a summer season of English
language films at the open-air cinema. The special showing of The
Flintstones is only one of the attractions with which the Monegasques hope
to persuade more people to visit the principality at a time when the
European tourist industry is emerging from the recession.
Monaco remained relatively resilient to the downturn in tourism until autumn
1992, when the combination of the chilly economic climate and the French
franc's rise after the European currency crisis, triggered a steep decline
in the number of visitors.
Last year the full effect of the downturn became apparent. The number of
foreign tourists, which had been fairly stable at about 240,000 a year
during the late 1980s and early 1990s, fell sharply, Monaco Government
Tourism and Convention Office figures show a drop of just over 15 per cent
to 208,206 in 1993, from 245,592 in 1992.
One difficulty was an acceleration of the fall in the number of French
visitors, which had been in decline since the late 1980s. The French
recession deepened last year, with a devastating effect on foreign travel
and leisure expenditure. As a result the number of French visitors to Monaco
fell to 35,359 in 1993 from 41,352 in 1992. Tourism from the US, UK and
Germany was also down during the year.
Yet the chief problem for the Monegasques was a dramatic downturn in the
influx of visitors from neighbouring Italy, which had emerged as its single
biggest source of tourism in the 1980s when it ousted France from pole
position. The number of Italian visitors rose each year in succession from
43,169 in 1984 to peak at 86,097 in 1992. It plummeted to 67,727 in 1993.
'It's easy to see why Italian tourism was down so significantly,' says Raoul
Biancheri, chairman of Societe des Bains de Mer (SBM), the largest leisure
group in the principality, which owns the Monte Carlo Casino together with
the Hotel Hermitage and Hotel de Paris. 'There has been a great deal of
political instability in Italy for the past two years. Then there was the
anti-corruption drive and also the economic downturn culminating in the
devaluation of the lire.'
Yet the overall impact of the decline in the number of visitors has not been
quite so damaging to the Monegasque economy (which depends on tourism for
about a quarter of its gross domestic product) as the bald statistics
suggest.
The most depressed area of the tourist industry has been the least lucrative
 -the day trippers who pour across the borders from France and Italy. These
casual visitors provide a useful source of revenue for the principality's
cafes, souvenir shops, slot machines and tourist attractions. But their
absence has little impact on the more profitable part of the tourist
business - the luxury hotels, Michelin-starred restaurants, designer fashion
shops and exclusive gaming rooms.
The official figures do not identify the total number of day trippers but
they show that while the total number of visitors declined by 15 per cent to
208,206 from 245,592, the number of overnight stays fell at the lower rate
of less than 13 per cent to 601,111 from 698,047.
Similarly, although the overall rate of hotel occupancy was 7.2 per cent
lower at 48.3 per cent for 1993 against 55.5 per cent during the previous
year, the upmarket SBM hotels maintained higher occupancy rates of just over
54 per cent, thanks to the patronage of their wealthy private clients and
corporate customers.
One of the main reasons for the comparative strength of the upper end of the
tourism industry is Monaco's success at establishing itself as a business
conference centre. The principality only started to develop its conference
activities in the 1970s. It opened the Centre des Congres, its first
important venue, in the late 1970s, followed later by the Centre de
Rencontres Internationales.
Monaco now hosts large business conferences for the insurance and television
industries, as well as for individual companies which use it as a location
for internal meetings and promotional events (such as Elizabeth Arden's
elaborate launch this spring of the new Karl Lagerfeld perfume, Sun Moon and
Stars). The conference industry now accounts for almost a third of all
Monaco's foreign visitors, against under one tenth in the early 1970s.
The focus of future investment is in conferences. The main project in the
principality is the construction of the huge new Centre Culturel et
d'Expositions, which will provide more conference and exhibition space,
thereby enabling Monaco to host more than one big event at a time.
The opening of the new centre, originally scheduled for the end of this year
but delayed due to construction problems until 1998, might also catalyse a
new spurt of hotel construction.
The hotel sector has been relatively quiet since the openings four years ago
of the Abela and the Metropole. There have been no important new hotels
since then, although SBM does have one possible project: it is considering
building a new 300-room luxury hotel on the Larvotto peninsula.
In the meantime the Monegasques are anxiously waiting to see whether the
local tourist industry will fare better in 1994 than in 1993. So far the
signs are encouraging. The number of visitors during the first few months of
the year was healthily higher than in the same period of 1993. So far this
summer, thanks to The Flintstones and other attractions, it seems likely to
rise again.
