FT  01 JUL 94 / International Capital Markets: S&amp;P ratings set to reflect
derivatives
Standard &amp; Poor's, the US credit rating agency, plans to introduce a new
type of rating designed to alert investors to the risks, other than credit
risk, involved in structured products such as those with embedded
derivatives.
'During the 1980s, the most significant risk was credit risk; during the
1990s it is still important, but it is becoming overshadowed by the
repayment risk from derivatives embedded in bond issues,' said Mr Leo
O'Neill, S&amp;P's president. 'To continue just to apply credit ratings would
not be alerting investors to other risks.' he added.
In the first phase, S&amp;P will add an 'r' to existing bond ratings - for
example, a bond could be rated AAAr, instead of AAA.
At a later stage, the agency plans to attempt to quantify the nature of that
risk by indicating a high, medium or low level of risk.
Securities which would be likely to merit an 'r' rating include
interest-only and principal-only mortgage securities, because of the risk of
pre-payment; structured notes, with interest repayments derived from swaps
which could terminate at any time; and notes with redemption linked to an
index which could go up or down.
'If these ratings stimulate greater discussion between investors and their
advisers, we will have done our job,' said Mr Hendrik Kranenburg, executive
managing director of S&amp;P.
S&amp;P is setting up a comprehensive database of all such outstanding
securities. The new service is expected to be launched later this month.
The move reflects growing concern over the new risks created by the rapid
expansion of the derivatives market, and is one of a number of efforts to
take account of the resulting changes in the international financial
markets.
In May, Moody's rating agency started assigning specific ratings to
institutions, based on their creditworthiness as counterparties in the
derivatives market.
Those ratings are designed to provide 'a more accurate system for
derivatives claims ratings' which apply specifically to the financial
capacity of individual obligors to meet their contracts, said Mr John Kriz,
managing director of Moody's.
Mr Kriz warned that bond and deposit ratings may not accurately reflect an
obligor's creditworthiness from a derivatives claim perspective.
