FT  17 DEC 94 / Saatchi chairman forced to quit by US shareholders
Mr Maurice Saatchi was last night forced to stand down as chairman of
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, the advertising group he founded in 1970, after the board
succumbed to pressure from a group of US shareholders who had been
campaigning to oust him.
The board formerly recommended that 'Saatchi' should no longer figure in the
holding company name. It will be retained only by the advertising
subsidiary. No decision has been taken on the new name.
After a four-hour board meeting, Mr Saatchi was presented with a choice: he
could either quit the group altogether or stay on as chairman of one of its
advertising subsidiaries, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide.
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi said late last night Mr Saatchi was considering the offer
to be chairman of Saatchi Advertising Worldwide and also to be appointed
joint president of the company.
A colleague said that Mr Saatchi had consulted his brother Charles - the
so-called 'creative' half of the famous advertising double act - and was
minded to sever all connections with the group.
The leader of the dissident shareholders, Mr David Herro, of Chicago-based
Harris Associates, said: 'This removes the final impediment to the
restoration of the company into the best advertising and marketing group in
the world.'
During a day of boardroom drama, Mr Robert Louis-Dreyfus, a non-executive
director who was the group's chief executive in the early 1990s, also
resigned.
Mr Jeremy Sinclair, deputy chairman and the last of the group's nine
founders still with the company, was last night named acting chairman. 'The
hope is that clients will see him as a link with the past,' said a director.
Mr Saatchi had been making a last-ditch attempt to persuade the board of the
damage to the company that might result from his departure.
On Thursday he contacted his friends, John and Forrest Mars, owners of
confectionery and foods group, Mars, who assured him they would review
whether to keep their advertising business at the company if he went. Mars
is one of the group's biggest clients.
Meanwhile Mr Saatchi also presented the board with letters from several
senior executives stressing Mr Saatchi's value to the group in maintaining
relationships with clients.
The board was reluctant to take the decision. Directors were told by their
financial and legal advisers - there were around a dozen lawyers in the
boardroom - that Mr Saatchi had to go in the face of shareholder pressure.
US shareholders controlling 30 per cent of the shares, led by Harris, have
been campaigning for Mr Saatchi's removal, because of their anger at a
proposal that he receive a Pounds 5m option package.
They were also furious at Mr Saatchi's opposition to dropping 'Saatchi' from
the masthead of the holding company.
A decision was taken at the meeting, which took place at the group's
headquarters in London's Charlotte Street, for a new option scheme to be put
in place to reward directors and senior executives. Unlike the 'super
option' scheme which was criticised by the shareholders, the new plan will
meet the guidelines of the Association of British Insurers, the investment
institution lobby group.
The scales were tipped against Mr Saatchi by soundings taken on Thursday of
UK investment institutions, led by unit trust group, M&amp;G, which owns 5 per
cent. This informal poll showed that shareholders controlling a further 28
per cent would either support a motion to oust Mr Saatchi or abstain.
Because shareholders owning more than half the group were showing no support
for Mr Saatchi, the company's merchant bank, SG Warburg, told the board that
it could see little alternative to Mr Saatchi's departure.
Advertising flag-bearer made all seem possible, Page 7
