FT  29 APR 94 / Campaign Diary: Revolutionaries storm the borough barricades
Revolution seems to breaking out all over Camden, the ultra-correct Labour
borough which runs from Hampstead Heath to the council estates of Kentish
Town in north London.
Apart from the usual crop of independent candidates, three groups are
putting up candidates demanding independence or devolution for areas
including Hampstead, Kilburn and St Pancras. Helen Marcus, an opera singer
standing for Hampstead Charter in the Tory-held Frognal ward, says the group
is fed up with town hall bias against the borough's leafier northern areas.
The unrest started among council tenants, annoyed at maintenance problems,
and Camden Charter, in the south of the borough, may have the best chance of
winning a seat - one of its candidates came second in a Labour ward in the
last elections.
But the council has also produced a raft of highly unpopular parking
restrictions which have annoyed just about everyone. One group, in leafy
Primrose Hill, has even asked the High Court to quash the policy on the
grounds that it is illegally designed to raise funds rather than administer
parking. The council should watch out. The group is chaired by Mark Cran,
the QC who has appeared for Sony in its case against the pop singer George
Michael.
* * *
Jim Coxon, Conservative candidate for Birmingham's Billesley ward, is
anything but shy. Coxon warns in his election leaflets that a Labour victory
would lead to a leftwing council that would 'make Brent look sensible'.
Warming to his theme, he claims that Labour's 'loony extremists' are lying
low until after the election. He warns voters: 'Don't let Birmingham become
a laughing stock like Brent.' Only one problem: Brent has been
Conservative-controlled since 1991.
* * *
Theresa Stewart, leader of Birmingham's ruling Labour group, is also
fighting off the loony label. But Bernard Zissman, Brum's Tory leader, is
having almost as much trouble as Coxon in making the charge stick.
Zissman's line is that Stewart is a dangerous revolutionary who exasperated
Labour's moderates and fell out with the leadership during the 1980s. But
Stewart is the sort of woman you'd leave your children with. Nestling behind
her spectacles, she looks like an inoffensive granny who is really rather
surprised to be Labour leader. Anyway, she reads books in the bath.
Ironically, Zissman is less than convincing as the Tory rabble rouser. A
genial businessman, he belongs firmly in the 19th century Birmingham
tradition of commerce and council. Strange how politicians sometimes
misrepresent themselves as much as their opponents.
* * *
Michael Portillo, chief secretary to the Treasury, who is running the
Conservative campaign in London, is unpopular with some cabinet ministers
after the fuss caused by his recent musings on the quiet majority. But watch
out for further doses of rightwing philosophy.
On holiday recently at the sumptuous Gazelle d'Or resort in Morocco,
Portillo puzzled guests by spending most of his time by the swimming pool
writing reams of notes. Eventually, someone plucked up the courage to ask
him what he was doing. 'Preparing a series of keynote addresses I intend to
deliver in the summer,' replied Portillo. John Major, you have been warned.
* * *
What a shy lot Conservative MPs are. Most of them spend their working hours
lecturing the rest of us on the merits of the Conservative party. So why are
so few of them advertising the party's local election candidates in the
front windows of their London homes?
Peter Lilley, social security secretary, is the most prominent offender  -
no sign of Tory life in the windows of his Islington terrace. At least he
has the excuse that the Conservatives have a hopeless task on solidly Labour
Islington council.
No such excuses in fashionable Westminster, where the ruling Conservatives
are fighting off a determined Labour attack. Offenders include Jonathan
Aitken, defence minister, and Teresa Gorman, the hyperactive rightwing MP
for Billericay. All the fault of Westminster's local Tories, says Mrs
Gorman. 'They haven't given us any posters. I'll have to get some now.'
* * *
Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, is often misrepresented by
opponents who claim, scurrilously, that he is less than popular with his
rank and file. So clearly untrue is this that Lib Dem eyebrows are being
raised in Kingston upon Thames, the London borough the party hopes to wrest
from the Tories. Ashdown told party workers he would campaign there on
Tuesday, two days before polling day. 'We told him not to bother,' says John
Tilley, leader of the Lib Dem councillors. 'He would make far better use of
his time by going somewhere else.' Mr Tilley has nothing against Paddy, of
course.
