FT  26 APR 94 / Space centre blast hits China satellite hopes
An explosion at China's space centre, which destroyed a Dollars 75m (Pounds
50m) advanced weather satellite and killed at least one person, has dealt a
significant blow to the country's efforts to break into the world commercial
satellite launch market.
The accident is likely to damage China's image as one of a handful of
countries capable of competing in the Dollars 1bn-a-year commercial
satellite launch business by stirring doubts about the reliability and
safety record of its space industry.
The Chinese Aerospace Industry Corporation, successor to the former space
ministry, confirmed yesterday that an 'accidental event' had occurred on
April 2 at the Xichang Satellite Launch Centre in the south-western province
of Sichuan.
China has been seeking to win western business by offering cheaper satellite
launches at 30-50 per cent of the cost of equivalent European or US
launches. The explosion killed at least one person, injured more than 20 and
destroyed a laboratory as well as the Dollars 75m Fengyun-2 meteorological
satellite.
The satellite was originally due to be launched on a Chinese Long March
rocket. Western diplomats suggested the accident happened during final
testing, with the explosion probably provoked by a leak in the satellite's
fuel system.
China acknowledged the explosion would hit its planned launch of five
domestic and foreign satellites this year. The setback comes at a delicate
time for China, because it coincides with increasing competition in the
commercial satellite launch business.
'The market remains difficult with an average of 15-18 new commercial
satellite launch opportunities a year,' said Mr Charles Bigot, chief
executive of Arianespace, the European satellite launch company, which at
present commands about 60 per cent of the commercial market.
The recent emergence of Russia in the commercial market is putting extra
pressure on the traditional European and US rocket suppliers, as well as on
the Chinese.
