FT  18 FEB 94 / Survey of Malta (2): Back from the giddy heights - Godfrey
Grima on prospects for the economy
Malta's tiny economy is no longer generating wealth at a spectacular rate.
Gone are the giddy heights to which economic growth spiralled in the wake of
Dr Eddie Fenech Adami's electoral victory over the Socialists in 1987. Gone
are the two-digit growth rates.
The relatively large government spending programme has run its course.
Slowdown measures to stop the economy from overheating included a 10 per
cent devaluation in 1992. Even so, Mr John Dalli, the island's finance
minister, expects Malta to net a 4 per cent GDP increase this year, a bold
prediction given the depressed worldwide economic climate.
Malta's star has been rising for several years. Even as other European
economies have lurched in the grip of a seemingly endless recession, the
islands, as recently as 1992, netted an 8 per cent increase on GNP. Gross
profits rose and average take-home pay climbed to Lm54.41.
Malta owes its economic performance to two competitively priced activities:
tourism and light manufacturing industry. Both provide the Maltese with more
cash, jobs and development opportunities than ever before. Last year 1m
tourists - with Britons the biggest contingent - holidayed in Malta,
spending up to September a total of a Lm173.6m, which is Lm40m more than in
the 1992 comparative period.
With tourism booming, the island's national airline, Air Malta, whose fleet
of 12 Boeings flies to 29 destinations, placed a Dollars 100m order in
January for another four aircraft from Avro International Aerospace, the UK
company. Mr Joseph Tabone, Air Malta chairman, says: 'The task ahead is to
upgrade our tourism.'
Subsidies to British tour operators from the central bank in the form of
favourable forward buying exchange rates to help fill up some of Malta's
40,000 holiday beds were drastically cut in the summer.
Industrial development is another smart card through which Malta has
increased prosperity. Mr Dalli says: 'We are no longer marketing cheap
labour. There has been a steady process of upgrading human resources to fit
our new agenda. We have, for example, opened our university to some 5,000
students.'
There are now about 300 companies on industrial estates, employing 29,200
people, which last year shipped Lm366.4m worth of semi manufactures, an
increase of 1.6 per cent over the previous year's figure, mostly to European
clients.
Factories on a specially designed technopark built recently for electronics
companies have all been taken up. 'Investment goes to countries that are
successful, where the industrial and political climates are stable and
friendly. Once we join the European Union investments will increase
further,' Mr Dalli argues.
However, ship-repairing - one of Malta's oldest trades - and shipbuilding
are currently going through a difficult patch. Mr Albert Mizzi, one of
Malta's leading entrepreneurs who ran Air Malta for almost 20 years, says
shipbuilding on its own will never be profitable. Some 200 people working in
shipbuilding may soon be absorbed by the freeport corporation which sees a
profitable future in building wharfside cranes. 'The island's future lies in
service industry. Maltese exporters need levies and trade barriers to be
lifted before they can show their true mettle,' says Mr Mizzi who started
out in life as an importer.
By spearheading a relatively hefty spending programme, the Fenech Adami
administration has turned round a sluggish economy bequeathed by the
Socialists into one that consistently yields encouraging results: since
coming to power it has created 11,000 jobs, pushing the number of those
gainfully occupied to 134,052. Several infrastructural projects have came on
stream, including a power plant, an airport terminal, completion of the
freeport terminal, road networks and state-of-the-art telecommunications
facilities. All of this has been achieved while keeping the budget deficit
at below 3 per cent of GNP.
'In 1987 we had 25,000 people waiting for telephones. We are now heading
towards putting the service on demand. You can't begin to attract
investments and fulfil your social obligations unless you have modern
telecommunication facilities in place,' says Dr Frances Zammit Dimech,
Malta's transport and telecommunications minister.
Signs of sustained prosperity are not too hard to find. The Maltese save, on
average, 15 per cent of their income. There is as much as Lm347m in
circulation, almost Lm1,000 for every man, woman and child.
Investment opportunities tend to have a magnetic pull on the Maltese. One
guesstimate puts Maltese private reserves abroad, mostly in Britain, at
Lm2bn. The relatively small markets that are beginning to appear at home
have proved popular. A government decision to reduce its shareholding in
Bank of Valletta and Mid-Med Bank led to 18,000 people snapping up the
shares.
But the leading investment vehicle remains property, a key industry
temporarily dampened by the imposition of a capital gains tax.
An atavistic preference for brick and mortar probably explains Malta's
excellent rating among the best housed countries in Europe. Meanwhile,
Maltese commercial banks offer added investment openings by matching and
often improving on yields offered abroad. Bank of Valletta and Mid-Med Bank,
the island's two major commercial institutions currently woo investors with
a 7 per cent yield on sterling time deposits.
With exchange controls due to be lifted, Malta's relatively limited currency
and securities markets will need to maintain their high yields to stop
capital from taking flight.
Praiseworthy as Malta's recent economic achievements might appear, the
wellbeing of several economic activities, particularly those run by the
private sector, still depend heavily on the fortunes of the national
economy. This, basically, explains the government's firm commitment to
restructure the foundations of Malta's tiny economy and align its mechanics
with those found in the European Union.
As old structures give way to yet untried tools - the Maltese start paying
VAT next year - fresh challenges face the administration of Mr Fenech Adami.
Increased growth and wealth will in the years to come, need to keep up their
pace. The threat is that the quest for a modern welfare society will sow the
seeds of social dissent.
