FT  05 NOV 94 / Ministry acts on industrial data 'leaks': Journalists in
Germany called to meeting as officials deny responsibility for disclosures
International news agencies have been threatened with severe sanctions if
they fail to attend a meeting called by the German economics ministry in a
move to staunch the persistent leaking of industrial data into financial
markets.
Representatives from 18 agency bureaux in Germany were summoned by letter
yesterday to talks at the ministry on November 15.
The aim of the discussions was 'to take precautions to ensure that figures
are no longer published or passed on to market participants before the
embargo', the letter said.
'If you are interested in continuing to receive production and order intake
figures before the embargo, I would request the participation of a
representative of your agency at the meeting,' it concluded.
The summons was faxed yesterday morning in response to a report in the
Financial Times that the ministry was investigating leaks of
market-sensitive information, which analysts and economists claimed had been
going on for months.
The FT report stemmed from a non-German bank's complaint that German bond
prices had been affected on Thursday when some traders appeared to have had
access before the official publication time to unexpectedly strong
industrial orders data.
News agencies compete vigorously to be first on the wires with potentially
'market-moving' economic or financial data which is often supplied in
advance to allow reports to be written on condition that strict transmission
embargoes are observed.
There was no evidence yesterday that this week's orders data had been
released prematurely through the normal distribution channels of any agency.
Agency staff said there was no suggestion of sanctions from other official
data sources, although the potential commercial consequences of losing
privileged early access to economics ministry information were expected to
ensure full attendance on November 15. 'It's a threat and it's not even
thinly-veiled,' one correspondent said.
The letter forcefully denied analysts' suggestions, reported in the FT, that
the source of the pre-publication information could be the ministry itself.
It rejected 'any suspicion. . . that the passing on of figures can be traced
to leaks in the ministry'.
Mr Franz Wauschkuhn, a ministry spokesman quoted by a German agency as
condemning the FT report of possible ministry leaks as 'malicious
insinuation', could not be reached for comment.
Mr Reinhard Krause, the ministry spokesman who signed the letter, said an
investigation carried out yesterday had shown the ministry was not the
source.
He also challenged claims that the only information ever leaked came from
the economics ministry.
Independent economists, too, pointed out that regional inflation data were
routinely transmitted 'to any number of banks' in haphazard fashion. 'It is
about time the Third World standards of German data publication got some
attention,' one analyst wrote in a note for internal circulation.
