FT  12 JAN 94 / PM stands by 'back to basics': Major pressed to regain grip
on government
Mr John Major faced intense pressure last night to regain a grip on the
government as senior ministers acknowledged that the recent spate of
scandals had delivered a serious blow to his political authority.
The prime minister insisted that the revelations about the private lives of
ministers and Tory MPs would not derail the 'back to basics' initiative he
has put at the heart of his domestic policy agenda.
He dismissed suggestions that the government was engulfed in a crisis of its
own making, describing recent events as no more than a 'little flurry'.
Speaking in Brussels before his return from the Nato summit, he emphasised
that the government's call for a return to traditional values was not an
excuse for a witch-hunt against ministers guilty of private indiscretion.
But the return of MPs to Westminster after the Christmas break brought
charges from the Tory backbenchers that Mr Major had failed to act
decisively to end the row provoked by the resignations of three junior
members of the government.
The first opinion poll since the furore began showed the Conservatives 24
points behind Labour. The poll, produced by ICM for The Guardian, put Labour
at 50 per cent (47 per cent in December), the Conservatives at 26 per cent
(unchanged) and the Liberal Democrats at 20 per cent (23 per cent).
The media focus on the marital difficulties preceding the apparent suicide
of Lady Caithness, the wife of Lord Caithness, who resigned at the weekend
as a transport minister, added to the air of crisis.
Senior ministers predicted that, barring further damaging revelations or
resignations, the present storm would 'blow itself out' over the next few
days.
But there was little attempt to deny that Mr Major personally and the
government generally had been badly damaged.
The discordant notes struck by different ministers over the extent to which
the 'back to basics' campaign had a moral dimension had underlined the
diminished authority of the prime minister's office. Colleagues will urge Mr
Major to set a more coherent framework after discussing the issue at
tomorrow's cabinet meeting.
Some ministers called for a wholesale shake-up of Mr Major's Downing Street
advisers. But suggestions that the prime minister might be forced into an
early cabinet reshuffle were dismissed.
Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, accused the Conservatives of operating a
system with one set of rules for ministers and another for the voters.
But Mr Major said the 'back to basics' policy appealed 'to the basic
instincts of an overwhelming majority of people in the UK'. He was confident
that the initial warm public response to the policy would be maintained.
The core of the policy lay in reforms such as the Criminal Justice Bill,
proposed changes in education and alteration of the adoption laws. It was a
campaign to 'get back to good, basic, solid common sense', he said.
'What it is not about is a witch hunt against individual transgressions,' he
added. 'It is not our job as politicians to preach about values.'
That view, however, is not shared by a number of prominent ministers on the
right of the Tory party who continued to insist yesterday that personal
behaviour could not be ignored.
Many senior ministers believe the best immediate strategy would be for Mr
Major to order a period of 'quiet reflection'.
Who will be next? Page 9
Poll details Page 9
Party labouring to make a point Page 24
Observer Page 25
