FT  28 JUN 94 / World Trade News: Ford plans Dollars 50m China investment -
US giant signs joint ventures with two components makers
Ford Motor Company is to spend more than Dollars 50m (Pounds 33m) on its
first motor components manufacturing investment in China.
It said yesterday it had signed joint venture agreements with two Chinese
components makers, in what it intends to be the first substantive step
towards assembling vehicles in China.
The company, which has been relatively slow in comparison with its western
rivals in establishing a presence in China, signed agreements with Shanghai
companies engaged in producing plastic automotive items such as instrument
panels and in making safety glass.
Ford's partners are the Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation (SAIC) and
the Yao Hua Glass Works. Both ventures are expected to get under way this
year.
China has told international automotive makers that before they become
involved in vehicle assembly in China they must show their commitment by
investing in the components sector.
Beijing has placed a freeze on new entrants to vehicle manufacture and
assembly until 1996.
Mr James Paulsen, president of Ford China Operations, said the new
partnerships 'represent the beginning of our manufacturing presence in this
important new market and the chance to show our strengths and commitment'.
Ford is negotiating other deals with components makers. General Motors and
the big Japanese car makers are simultaneously engaged in a similar
exercise.
Yen Feng is the largest supplier of automotive trim components in China,
while Yao Hua is said to have the highest quality glass fabrication line in
China.
Ford, which is in the process of a global reorganisation aimed partly at
establishing a much greater manufacturing presence throughout Asia, is also
investigating electronics, engine management, cooling and air conditioning
systems as other potential areas for collaboration with Chinese enterprises.
Ford officials declined to give a breakdown of the Dollars 50m investment
between the two ventures. Both agreements are subject to final approval by
the Chinese government. Ford is taking a 51 per cent stake in both ventures.
