FT  04 JAN 94 / Travel industry predicts record holiday sales
Travel agents have reported brisk sales of holidays following the
introduction of price discounts after Christmas, saying yesterday that
business increased faster than originally reported.
Lunn Poly, one of the three largest chains, said it sold 120,000 holidays
last week. This accounted for just under half the total sold by travel
agents, it estimated, and compared with the 112,000 holidays Lunn Poly sold
in the same period a year ago, it said. Of the bookings, 30,000 were for
winter holidays and 90,000 for summer ones.
'We sold 20,000 on the first day, compared with 12,000 on the same day last
year when we had a 10 per cent discount,' said Mr Richard Bowden-Doyle,
marketing director.
The 11 per cent price discounts came into effect on December 27.
Mr Bowden-Doyle said there have been record bookings for the whole industry
of about 2m package holidays for this summer since brochures came out in
August. That compared with under 1.5m at the same stage last year.
The top three travel agency chains - Lunn Poly, Going Places and Thomas Cook
 -have extended the discount period, due to end yesterday, until the close
of business next Saturday, and Lunn Poly yesterday said it would offer
further savings on winter holidays booked until Saturday.
'The market is up because people have a little bit more confidence about
their future,' said Mr Keith Betton of the Association of British Travel
Agents. He suggested that sales overall last week could be considerably
higher than 250,000.
However, he emphasised that two bouts of discounting last autumn and over
Christmas had simply encouraged people to buy earlier and that sales levels
were unlikely to be sustained. Although this year would produce a third
consecutive record for package holidays, with sales likely to reach 13.5m to
14m, this would be up only 5 per cent to 10 per cent on last year, Mr Betton
said.
Initial figures from the industry last week indicated little overall
increase resulting from the winter price war compared with the same period a
year ago. But yesterday Thomas Cook said it had sold about 50,000 holidays
in the past week, 'slightly higher than last year'.
Mr Betton said that small independent travel agents appeared to be surviving
in spite of the battle for market share between the leading travel agents.
