FT  01 DEC 94 / Survey of Software at Work - Winter 1994 (9): Seeking a
winner - Authors of the submissions for this year's Business Software
Challenge ranged from teams of HND students, to specialised entries from
individual postgraduate and PhD students
Brainbox
Written by: Peter Smee of the Open University
Aimed at: individual users who wish to organise their ideas on-screen
Runs on: IBM compatible PCs (486) under Microsoft Windows 3.1, written in
Visual Basic 3.0
Professional
'Mental scaffolding' was the phrase the author himself used to describe the
process created by his program, Brainbox.
The system organised and collated ideas, depicting them on the screen in a
series of boxes or 'connective maps'.
Its target audience could be almost anybody, doing anything from writing an
essay to formulating a marketing campaign.
The screen used drop-down 'sheets' of ideas to prompt users to rank ideas
and topics in order of importance, and rate them - something that was
actually easier to do on the computer than by using the traditional
'card-shuffling' exercise with slips of paper.
Using a computer might legitimise this simple but effective way of
organising ideas, argued the author. The success of at least two well-known
commercial products in the same area suggests that he may be right.
Marketing is already under way and well-produced documentation was part of
the demonstration.
***
Scrapcutter- product-based optimisation
Written by: Glynn Timmins of Aston University
Aimed at: A company specialising in manufacturing metal safe-access
equipment
Runs on: IBM compatible PCs (486) under Microsoft Windows 3.1, written in
Visual Basic
3.0 Professional
Where there is scrap, there is money being wasted. This product was written
in order to save money on material and optimise the process of cutting
specified lengths from fixed-length raw material.
Clever use of the screen-space showed the pattern being cut, and allowed the
user to define and store it to create the basis of a 'materials database'
that would eventually link up with other systems in order to carry out stock
control and job estimation.
The idea came to the author while working on industrial placement, and the
system has already proved its worth in saving manufacturing costs in a live
implementation. Users appreciated the ability to design and store
custom-sheets, and create automatic orders.
While other similar products exist, this one won a place on the shortlist
because of the flexibility built into the PC-based design, and the creative
use of the screen, which made it easy to follow the process.
As his product is well-established in its beta-test site, the author hopes
to interest other potential users.
***
Hydroponics Controller
Written by: Stephen Armitage, Peter Collins, Kevin Hatcher, Will Halsall,
Ian Wilson of the Farnborough College of Technology
Aimed at: Market gardeners and greenhouse
nurseries
Runs on: IBM PC 386 or compatible under MS-DOS 5.0, written in Microsoft
Windows, C and
C++ Version 7
Nursery growers and greenhouses are always racing to get their products to
market before anyone else does, especially those working on large-scale
sites.
The trick is to extend the growing season, and that means keeping careful
control of heat, light, and other factors. It was this commercial ambition
that gave the team the idea of developing a 'real time' system.
The system makes automatic adjustments to control greenhouse equipment for
warmth, light, moisture and other factors used to encourage growth, using
levels chosen by the user to suit the crop. This entry found favour for its
thoroughness and well thought out programming and screen depiction.
Each 'cell' or growing unit showed a graph for each variable, which
responded in real time to changes in the values.
The system itself had been well-built and tested, sadly without the
involvement of a real life grower.
***
Merlin Metrics System
Written by: Antony Powell of Aston University
Aimed at: Any company which needs to estimate the cost of producing software
Runs on: Sun Microsystems Sparcstations and compatibles under Unix (SunOs),
written using Ingres database and Windows 4GL Version 2.0/02
'You can't deliver what you can't measure' is a well-known conundrum of the
software industry. Software metrics provide one of the traditional
yardsticks used to estimate the time and effort it will take in order to to
create new software.
Such metrics are based on generally accepted, tried and tested rules of
thumb, often an estimate of lines of code written per day. These were simply
too wide of the mark for a specialised company such as Rolls Royce and
Associates, where the Scientific Software Department had highly trained
staff, working on scientific problems.
Other measurement systems proved unsatisfactory, so the author set out to
create a system that could 'model' specialised developments.
Models could be stored, manipulated, and drawn on to adapt to new
circumstances, so that the development model closely reflects the experience
and the culture of a particular company.
Most important, the author had defeated the main problem experienced with
such systems in that the data was simple to collect and enter.
Commercial plans for this product have not spread beyond its enthusiastic
users at Rolls-Royce as yet.
***
Live - Makaton Environments
Written by: Richard Eastgate, Mirabelle D'Cruz, Brendan Collins and
Christopher Lee of Nottingham Univerity
Aimed at: Schools for children with learning difficulties, including
multiple disabilities
Runs on: IBM compatible 486 PC, with joystick and SVGA graphics, under
MS-DOS 5.0, written using Virtual R
The word 'Live' in the title of this product stands for 'Learning In Virtual
Environments', a description of an innovative computer-based approach to the
teaching of a special sign language, Makaton.
This cross-disciplinary team, inspired by practical research, set out to
create a world within the classroom. The teacher can explore the various
properties of an item (such as a ringing telephone, shown on an office desk)
and children taught and tested using the signs within a 'real' environment.
The system supports various special peripherals - such as a joystick and
speakers - so that it can be used by multiply-handicapped children with
learning difficulties.
The split screen shows on one side a moving cartoon figure who demonstrates
the making of the sign (this is easier to follow and interpret than the
traditional card-based pictures with arrows) and on the other the
'environment'. The product may soon be available through a specialist
software company, Rompa, and the team is continuing to develop new modules
and facilities.
***
Inspire - Intelligent System for the Purpose of Information Retrieval in
Education
Written by: Alan Cloughley, David Black, John Taylor of Napier University,
Edinburgh
Aimed at: Educational institutions and students in higher education
Runs on: IBM compatible PCs under MS-DOS or SCO Xenix, written in Borland
Turbo C Version 5.0.
This product is aimed at the overworked student counsellor who needs an
instant source of information on higher education grants and funding.
Currently such advisors, and those students that are trying to help
themselves, find that they have to wade through a maze of books, pamphlets
and other sources to find the information they need.
Furthermore, they may remain ignorant of special funds - such as charities
and trusts - that could help them, given the right set of qualifications.
Inspire uses a series of menus and draws a 'profile' of the enquirer's
special circumstances and connections, so that every possible source of
funding is revealed, with an analysis of the potential grants, loans,
benefits, trusts and sponsorships, and even tax benefits, that could be
drawn upon.
The enormous effort made in gathering and organising the information was
matched by a thoughtfully-planned screen presentation.
This enterprising team of authors has already formed itself into a company,
called Knowledge Tree Systems, and is marketing and supporting the system
commercially.
They will, however, have to keep a close eye on pricing and the cost of
maintaining an up-to-date knowledge bank.
***
The Word-Of-Mouth- Emulator
Written by: Clare Harvey of University of Sunderland
Aimed at: Any company which needs to centralise and use its body of research
knowledge
Runs on: IBM compatible PC 486 under Microsoft Windows 3.1, written in
Visual Basic
A researcher starting off on a new project is well-advised to finding
someone who already knows something about the subject. The traditional
method is word of mouth.
In a large, widely-spread organisation, this might not be so easy, and many
a goldmine is stashed away in laboratory notebooks of which colleagues may
not even be aware. It was to create a knowledge network at Courtaulds
Coatings Research and Development Department that this student created the
Word of Mouth Emulator.
A database registers the interests of users as they file and retrieve their
everyday work, and builds up its knowledge on their enquiries, so that the
more the system is used, the more useful it becomes as a 'map' of internal
knowledge.
The screen showed simple-to-use prompts and listings of areas of expertise
and interest, so that people could investigate for themselves, a popular
feature with pilot users.
***
Minvest - Financial Evaluation of Mining Projects
Written by: Dr Chaoshui Xu of the University of Leeds
Aimed at: Mining companies assessing investments
Runs on: IBM Compatible PC 386 under MS-DOS version 4.0, written using
Zortech C++ from Symantec, Version 3.1.
Mining is a high-capital investment business, and assessing the risk of a
new venture is a job for experts. Few experts, however, are equally at home
in the worlds of mining and high finance.
This PhD student set out to marry the two topics in one robust and
easy-to-use piece of software, having researched the limitations of current
methods and software tools. The screen walks the user through a number of
considerations and variables, including the quality and amount of ore, tax
rules and profitability, (which vary according to the country of origin and
the material).
The answers can be constructed into a model, using a series of spreadsheets,
grids and graphics to show cash-flow and payback analysis. Although
developed without the benefit of Windows, this thorough and professional
tool used simple Windows-like techniques.
The pool of 35 test users are reported to be enthusiastic, and this product
has good commercial prospects.
