FT  28 OCT 94 / Tourism industry seeks a fresh brochure for Britain
Sell Britain as a modern society and the Americans will stay away. Stress
tea parties rather than castles if you want to attract the Japanese. And do
not mention Britain to the Irish. Urge them to come to England, Wales or
Scotland instead.
The conclusions were reached by the British Tourist Authority, which has
been conducting market research into how to reverse the fall in the UK's
share of world tourism.
Although a record 19.2m foreign visitors came to the UK last year, Britain's
share of world tourism earnings fell from 6.7 per cent in 1980 to 4.3 per
cent last year.
Researchers interviewed people in Chicago, Los Angeles, Miami and New York
to find out whether the authority should change its US projection of the UK
to that of a modern society rather than one steeped in history.
The answer was a categorical 'no'. Americans told researchers that Britain
conjured up images of bobbies, barristers, Big Ben and Westminster Abbey -
and they wanted it to stay that way.
Americans also said they found the British 'friendly but proper'. One said
he found the prospect of visiting the UK 'daunting' as he would have to be
on his best behaviour.
Research in Japan found that Britain's image was too masculine, making it
difficult to attract more Japanese women travellers.
Mr Keith Beecham, manager of the authority's Tokyo office, said the BTA was
concentrating on afternoon tea when selling Britain to the Japanese.
He said: 'The Japanese tend to associate Britain with heroic, masculine
castles. Our campaign is designed to create a softer and more feminine feel
 -quaint country house hotels, green landscapes and Laura Ashley. Afternoon
tea is the ideal vehicle.'
The authority placed a two-page advertisement in a Japanese newspaper
inviting people to buy tickets to a British tea party. It received 18,000
replies.
A survey in Ireland detected unsympathetic responses to the notion of
Britain. When asked about England, Scotland or Wales, the answers were far
warmer, so advertising was changed.
Lex, Page 20
