FT  12 MAR 94 / Despatches: Where the wounds of war heal slowly - Leslie
Crawford travels through a battle-weary country / Mozambique
Mozambique Island lost contact with civilisation during the 17-year civil
war which scarred the country to which it gave its name.
Cut off from mainland Mozambique by anti-government rebels and abandoned by
its Portuguese merchants, the small coral island only became accessible
again after news of a peace accord, signed in Rome, filtered back last year.
Until recently, it was imprudent to travel to Mozambique Island without the
protection of military escorts. Along the main road from Nampula, 100 miles
inland, the bus driver pointed out the wreckage of rebel attacks as if they
were scenic spots on a tourist route. Twenty-five peasants killed on a bend
of the road; a white farmer ambushed just beyond a rocky outcrop; whole
villages burned down and their men marched into the bush.
Curiously, the driver seemed to bear little resentment towards the 'bandits'
who had caused so much havoc. He even thought the Mozambique National
Resistance (Renamo) rebels might win the elections in October. The
government, he said, had stolen too much and people were tired of hearing
about foreign aid which never arrived.
While haggling continued over the terms of the peace accord in Maputo, the
capital far to the south, the war in Nampula was definitely over. There was
maize and cotton in the fields, new huts of baked red earth, and mangoes for
sale on the side of the road.
The island, like every settlement in Mozambique, was divided into an
'African' town of thatched huts and the 'stone-built' town of their colonial
masters. A mere 19 years of independence, most of it under Marxist rule, had
not been enough to erase five centuries of segregated urban planning.
The stone-built town was in ruins. Vast mansions of Portuguese, Arab and
Goan merchants had been stripped of everything that could be burned or
traded for fuel. The warehouses by the sea-front, built when Mozambique
Island was the busiest entrepot between Europe and the far east, were now
empty save for a few scavenging goats. The town council did its best to
preserve the old governor's palace, which had been a Jesuit monastery in the
17th century, but the roof leaked and there was no money to replaster the
crumbling exterior.
In spite of the decay, the stone-built town was inhabited by several hundred
refugees from the civil war. There were children everywhere, playing with
hoops. It began to rain and they splashed in puddles, and stood under broken
drainpipes for impromptu showers. I took refuge in a courtyard and watched
the rain cascade down a stone stairway.
There was no food at the inn, no electricity, and I was warned not to
venture out after dark. The islanders were afraid of vampires and threw
stones at strangers who prowled the streets at night.
Beira, along the coast to the south, was also plagued by power cuts and an
even bigger refugee crisis, although the belief in vampires did not seem to
form part of the local folklore there.
The fighting there reached the outskirts of town and the hotels, abandoned
by the Portuguese after independence, were overflowing with squatters. Few
buildings had running water. Refuse was left to rot on the streets. The port
and the railway corridor to Zimbabwe were working, thanks to millions of
dollars of foreign aid, but the resettlement of refugees had yet to begin.
On the outskirts of Beira, a tall, blonde woman was erecting tents for war
orphans, hundreds of whom live on the streets of Beira. Barbara Hofmann, a
32-year-old former Swiss banker, had spent three years trying to get
planning permission for a school and boarding house. As she was not prepared
to bribe the authorities, the permit was not forthcoming, so she looked
after her children in makeshift surroundings.
It was difficult to see the scars of war on these young faces. But Barbara
quietly named one or another and recited their traumas. Many saw their
parents being murdered; some were forced to take part in the gruesome
killings - a kind of 'psychological warfare' frequently practised by the
South African-backed rebels.
The received wisdom in Maputo was that Mozambique was tired of war, and that
the long-suffering peasantry would forgive the atrocities committed by
Renamo and the government. And against all expectations, the ceasefire has
now held for more than a year, while old enemies prepare to do battle in the
electoral arena.
The key to peace has been money - lots of it - liberally supplied by donor
governments, aid agencies and the UN. Peacekeeping in Mozambique has been
reduced to a cynical formula of financial inducements: belligerent generals
must be pensioned off; rival armies must be lured into UN assembly points
for demobilisation. Afonso Dhlakama, Renamo's leader, has to be given a big
enough campaign chest to persuade him to fight an election, which donors
will then ask him to lose.
The present government may be incompetent, but Dhlakama's rag-tag army of
bush fighters are not a reassuring alternative.
Mozambicans say they are witnessing the end of an era, a particularly cursed
one, without knowing what the new one will bring. The Marxist ideals which
carried Mozambique to independence have been discarded; South Africa, which
destabilised its neighbour to such devastating effect, is now Mozambique's
biggest trading partner. There is no shame attached to living from foreign
handouts, but equally no vestige of nationalist pride.
Old habits, however, die hard. At the Polana, one of the finest colonial
hotels in Africa, a white Mozambican lashes out at a porter for using the
informal 'tu'. 'Did you go to school with me?' the white man shouts in a
drunken rage, again and again. 'Learn to address your superiors with
respect.'
