FT  19 NOV 94 / Gaza killings threaten peace: 12 killed and 200 injured as
violence erupts between PLO and Islamic extremists
At least 12 Palestinians were killed and 200 wounded in the Gaza Strip
yesterday in the worst internal violence since the establishment of
self-rule in May.
The first bloodshed between Palestinian police and Islamic extremists marks
a dangerous escalation of the conflict between the Palestinian Liberation
Organisation, which controls the police, and the Islamic extremists in the
self-rule areas.
Palestinian observers warned increasing confrontation could spark civil war.
'Israel is placing more obstacles and pressures on the Palestinian authority
and is pushing it towards civil war,' said Mr Farouk Kaddoumi, head of the
PLO political department.
The shootings come amid warnings from PLO officials and western diplomats
that the Israeli-Palestinian peace process is in danger of collapsing.
Hours before yesterday's clashes, Mr Terje Larsen, United Nations
under-secretary general responsible for Palestinian territories, said: 'If
there is no change immediately, there will be more killing, more blood. . .
My assessment is that both the peace process and the legitimacy of the
Palestinian Authority are losing ground day by day and the reason is that
nearly nothing has been delivered on the ground.'
Witnesses said the violence began outside a Gaza City mosque during Friday
prayers. Palestinian police took loudspeakers off a truck being prepared for
a rally of the Hamas Islamic Resistance Movement and the Islamic Jihad
groups which oppose the Israel-PLO peace accords. Supporters then attacked
police with stones and bottles. After warning the crowd to stop, police
opened fire at close range with automatic rifles.
Sheikh Ahmed Bahar, a leading Hamas activist who gave the Friday sermon,
appealed over loudspeakers to police to cease fire. 'Stop shooting your own
people or else you will pay a high price,' he said.
Sporadic fire was exchanged between police and Islamic gunmen all day. A
Palestinian policeman was among the dead.
Hundreds of relatives gathered outside Gaza's Shifta Hospital, shouting
slogans against Mr Yassir Arafat, chairman of the PLO and head of the
self-rule authority, whom they dubbed a 'traitor' and a 'collaborator'.
Police arrested about 300 Islamic militants and posted sharp-shooters on the
roofs of buildings.
The violence follows increasing tension between Mr Arafat and a resurgent
Islamic opposition which has challenged his authority on Gaza's streets and
aimed to sabotage the peace process.
Mr Arafat, under pressure from Israel to crack down on extremists
responsible for recent attacks on Israel, has twice ordered the police to
arrest scores of activists and said he would not tolerate unlawful activity.
He has banned illegal weapons but Islamic groups openly defy him.
Police said later they had been acting on information that armed Islamic
Jihad activists were planning a rally after Friday prayers. They said they
had been provoked into confrontation. Officials said Mr Arafat had given
orders to security personnel to act firmly and 'respond severely with armed
militants no matter what the results'.
Hamas, calling the shootings a 'massacre', urged its supporters to defy the
police.
Arafat on ropes, Page 4
