FT  15 MAR 94 / UK Company News: Traffic side helps Peek to Pounds 7.7m
Peek, the international traffic and field data systems group, announced
pre-tax profits up from Pounds 4.84m to Pounds 7.7m for the year to
end-December, aided by a strong performance from its traffic business.
Turnover rose 13 per cent to Pounds 100.6m (Pounds 88.8m), but organic
growth was only 5 per cent, as a result of weak UK and US markets and a fall
in orders from Husky, its mobile data systems company.
Peek has expanded aggressively through acquisition in the past five years,
building up its traffic business from 28 per cent of group sales to its
present level of 70 per cent.
Traffic operations focus on systems and products related to traffic
evaluation and control, and in 1993 the division contributed Pounds 7.1m in
trading profit, up from Pounds 6.6m.
Peek invested about Pounds 1.7m in building up its presence in Asia, Germany
and the US, during the year, and this should be reflected in stronger 1994
figures. It has picked up a Pounds 5m order to develop a traffic control
system in Bangkok, and contracts worth Pounds 8m for a second phase of this
system are under negotiation.
Mr Allen Standley, chief executive, said Peek was tendering for Pounds 50m
of contracts in Asia, including a number of projects in China, through a 41
per cent owned joint venture.
Field data operations saw trading profit fall to Pounds 1.9m (Pounds 2.12m),
primarily due to delayed orders, but the company said Husky experienced 'an
excellent order intake in the fourth quarter'.
The final dividend is maintained at 2.35p, for an unchanged 3.4p total.
Earnings per share were 4.6p, against 7.2p, although the 1992 figure was
significantly inflated by the release of tax provisions.
Peek will have a 17 per cent stake in TrafficMaster, thetraffic monitoring
system producer, following its imminent flotation. Peek said this was a
long-term strategic investment.
COMMENT
Peek has succeeded in developing a dynamic and broadly appealing business,
traffic control, but it has yet to translate this into strong organic
growth. The longer term potential from new developments, such as electronic
vehicle tagging, is enormous. But in the shorter term, Peek's earnings
growth will be more pedestrian. Pre-tax profits should increase by 10 per
cent to Pounds 8.5m in 1994. The shares are on a prospective p/e of 19 and a
yield of 3.7 per cent, which appears to leave it fully valued.
