FT  10 MAY 94 / Reuters starts TV service for market news
Reuters, the news and financial information group, next month launches a new
form of specialist television by satellite to computer screens.
The service, an example of multimedia in action, is aimed at foreign
exchange, debt and treasury financial markets, and will be far removed from
conventional television.
Mr Mark Wood, editor-in-chief of Reuters Holdings, said yesterday extensive
research showed City professionals 'did not want television - they want
video information that is useful'.
Usually Reuters Financial Television will go on air only when there are
events or comments capable of driving markets. There will be a 15-minute
morning briefing at 7.15 and possibly a second at lunchtime. There will also
be five-minute bursts of live television when justified by the news.
The service will be available on adapted Reuters dealing screens. A screen
icon will flash two minutes before a transmission and the television picture
can either be a small square in the corner of the screen or be enlarged to
occupy the full screen.
Charges will be Pounds 80 to Pounds 100 a month per screen.
Apart from news and instant live commentary from analysts, Mr Wood said the
service would provide the opportunity to communicate directly with the
markets for the first time. 'It will show the furrows in the brow and how
people react to questions and how they give information,' said Mr Wood.
A pilot item carried an interview with Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor,
about his discussions with Mr Eddie George, governor of the Bank of England.
Reuters Financial Television, which will be delivered to foreign exchange
dealers across Europe, will use the digital video compression system
developed by NTL, the privatised engineering division of the former
Independent Broadcasting Authority.
Reuters said yesterday it hoped to develop a retrieval system for video
information within the next year or two and launch a separate television
service for equities dealers.
