FT  08 NOV 94 / Business and the Law: Turk granted more time in Germany -
European Court
A Turkish national living in Germany was entitled to an extension of a
temporary residence permit, because it would enable her to take up a job
offer, the European Court of Justice has ruled.
Mrs Eroglu, a Turkish student, arrived in Germany in 1980 to follow a
business administration course. Her father had been living and working quite
lawfully in Germany since 1976. In 1987, she completed the course
successfully and began to study for a doctorate. During these years, she had
been granted temporary residence permits all limited to one year and marked
valid only for the purposes of study.
In 1989, she was granted a conditional residence authorisation allowing her
to carry out specific work for a specified company. This authorisation was
given until 1992 and was varied in 1991 to allow her to work for another
company. She also had the necessary work permits.
In 1992, she applied for an extension of her residence permit to allow her
to continue working for her last employer. Her application and subsequent
appeal were turned down. She then brought proceedings before the Karlsruhe
Administrative Court. In the meantime, she had been offered a job by her
first employer. In court, Mrs Eroglu claimed she had the right of residence
in Germany by virtue of two provisions contained in a decision made pursuant
to the Association Agreement between the then EEC and Turkey.
The first provision of the decision gave a Turkish worker, duly registered
as belonging to the labour force of a member state, the right to the renewal
of a work permit after one year's employment with that employer.
The second provision allowed children of Turkish workers who had completed a
course of vocational training in the relevant member state to respond to any
offer of employment there, irrespective of how long they had been resident
there, provided that one of their parents had been legally employed in that
member state for at least three years.
The German court held that although the refusal to renew the residence
permit was lawful under German law, the position was not clear with regard
to EC law. It referred the issue to the ECJ.
The ECJ held as a general point that the relevant decision within which this
provision was contained did not encroach on the power of member states to
regulate both the entry into their territory of Turkish nationals and the
conditions of their first employment. Rather, insofar as the first provision
was concerned, it made provision exclusively for Turkish workers already
registered as belonging to the EU labour force. The Court said the aim of
the first provision was solely to ensure continuity of employment with the
same employer after an initial period of one year.
In the present case, Mrs Eroglu had changed employers but was seeking a work
permit extension to allow her to work for her first employer. The Court said
the relevant provision did not entitle a person in such a position to the
renewal of a work permit.
As to the second provision, the Court stated that the right to residence was
essential to access to, and pursuit of, any paid employment, whether for the
same employer in connection with renewal of a work permit, or for another
employer. It was clear therefore that the right conferred on a person by the
second provision implied the recognition of a right of residence for that
person.
The German government's argument that the right under the second provision
was subject to conditions concerning the grounds on which a right to enter
and to stay in a member state was granted, was not upheld by the Court. The
fact that the right was not given with a view to reuniting a family, but
rather, was for the purposes of study, did not therefore deprive the child
of a Turkish worker from enjoying the rights conferred by the provision in
question.
The Court said therefore that a Turkish national who satisfied the
conditions in the second provision could rely on that provision to obtain a
residence permit extension.
C-355/93: Eroglu v Land Baden-Wurttemberg, ECJ 6CH, 5 October 1994.
