FT  28 JAN 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (27): If the
next-to-the-worst should happen - Financing the Family / Critical illness
insurance / An illness does not have to be terminal to trigger a claim, or
even prevent your working. And the lump sum can be spent as you wish
Fear of premature death is being replaced by fear of serious illness as a
marketing tool for the life insurance industry. Medical advances mean that
the chance of a family's main wage earner dying before retirement are now
considerably lower than the chance of contracting a serious,
life-threatening but ultimately non-fatal illness.
But a serious illness can still have a devastating impact on a family's
financial situation, and the consequences for a single person can be just as
harsh. A person may never be able to work again after a stroke or heart
attack, or may not be able to return to the same well-paid career. Serious
illness can also put extra strain on what money is coming in, as nursing
care or home alterations may be needed. Life insurance, which pays out only
on death, is useless in such cases.
So recent years have seen the gradual rise of critical illness, or dread
disease, insurance - policies which pay a lump sum if the insured person
contracts one of a list of common serious illnesses, principally heart
attack, stroke, and cancer. It also covers kidney failure, organ transplant,
heart bypass surgery, and total permanent disability. Some insurers also add
other, more obscure, illnesses to the list, but heart attacks, strokes and
cancer account for by far the largest proportion of claims. The one dreaded
disease excluded by virtually all insurers is Aids, or any HIV-related
condition. General Accident is a notable exception to this.
An illness does not have to be terminal to trigger a claim, or even prevent
you from working; and the lump sum can be spent as you wish: to pay for
treatment, clear debts, buy a more manageable home, or take a holiday to
recuperate. Or, if it seems that you may not return to work for some time,
if at all, the money can be invested to provide an income.
Critical illness insurance was first developed in South Africa, and was
introduced in the UK by Cannon Lincoln in the mid-1980s. Most large insurers
now offer policies, and a few smaller companies specialise in it. So far,
sales figures for critical illness insurance have been low, largely because
of lack of understanding by both the public and financial advisers of what
it is and why it is useful.
Another problem which may have been hindering the development of the market
was solved last year. The National Federation of Independent Financial
Advisers (Nfifa) consulted the insurance industry and medical professionals,
and came up with a list of standard definitions of the seven core conditions
covered by critical illness policies. This should put a stop to anomalies,
such as one company paying out for single heart bypass surgery while another
only covers double bypasses. Some companies have already adopted these
definitions, and more are expected to follow. Previously, financial advisers
were wary of critical illness, because they found it difficult to compare
cover offered by different policies.
Insurers are also trying a different tack, and packaging critical illness
together with other products rather than as stand-alone cover. One example
of this is the proliferation of mortgage endowment policies with critical
illness cover as an optional extra. Critical illness can be relatively cheap
as a mortgage add-on, with extra premiums as low as Pounds 5 a month for
young, healthy people with a good family medical history.
Critical illness cover is also frequently packaged together with life
assurance, either term cover or whole-of-life. Such policies pay out either
when you suffer a critical illness or when you die.
Some more innovative critical illness products can be confusing to buy, as
they are parcelled up with long-term care, medical and permanent health
insurance in addition to life cover. The logic behind this is sensible - a
single policy to provide protection for most of life's unpleasant surprises
 -but it can make it difficult to work out what you are paying for and
whether it is good value. Others have a mix-and-match approach, where you
can choose which benefits you want, but it is difficult for most people to
assess whether they are more likely to get a critical illness, or a
long-term incapacitating condition needing nursing home care.
Some insurers have added a terminal illness benefit to standard life
assurance, which means that the sum insured can be paid out as soon as the
insured person is diagnosed as having only a short time to live. This is
much cheaper than critical illness benefit, but it is much more restrictive:
only a small proportion of critical illness claims are from people who have
received a terminal diagnosis.
Permanent health insurance is another related product: it provides a
replacement income if you are unable to work due to health problems. It can
cover non-life-threatening conditions, such as chronic back problems, as
well as serious illnesses, and pays out weekly or monthly benefits rather
than a lump sum. Payments stop as soon as you recuperate, or return to work.
PHI is particularly useful for the self-employed, who are not covered by
company sick pay schemes, but more people are expected to become interested
in it as the government's reforms of the state sick pay system take effect.
