FT  24 NOV 94 / Arts: That Woman - a tour de force / Theate
I won't take my shoes off, don't worry,' says the eponymous heroine of That
Woman, a new comedy by John Antrobus. 'I don't go in for familiarity.'
Is this funny? In itself, not particularly. With that superb character
actress Patricia Hayes, however, it is the first great hoot of a memorably
hilarious evening. The character she plays - an old eccentric who keeps
inviting herself into young Jack's flat, and anywhere else, for a cuppa and
biscuits - is the kind of role we seem to have seen Hayes play a hundred
times, and yet there is not a jot of staleness in it. Hayes's voice still
ranges so easily from chest to head tones, from urgency to tremulousness,
and her diction is so good, that by the time she has got to the juicy word
'familiarity', slowly savoured, she has us in the palm of her hand.
That Woman is being presented upstairs in Riverside's Studio 3 as if its
actors were delivering a BBC radio play, scripts in hand: which is a
charming way of ensuring that Hayes herself, who alone seems in need of a
script, need not undergo the old actor's nightmare of forgetting her lines.
Indeed, since That Woman began as a pair of radio plays, How I Met Franz and
Rats, little camouflage is involved.
Antrobus's writing is a perfect vehicle for Hayes's gift for creating
monstrous bizarrerie out of her harmless-old-crone facade. (Would that we
could hear again the tremendous Sarah Gamp she once created in Radio 4's
Martin Chuzzlewit.) Her obsession here is that she has been the sexual
plaything of the medical profession. By the time she has got to 'I don't
know when I last had a stethoscope on my chest,' convulsions are occurring
all round the audience. Yet the role has its pathos ('I want to talk to
someone'), and eventually its bizarrerie goes beyond humour into purest
fantasy.
In the second half, she sets to work on a police inspector. She offers
herself as a material witness, but she wants also (a) tea and biscuits, and
a proper meal if poss. (b) seduction ('Out comes the truncheon' - spoken
with fabulous lasciviousness). Yet her behaviour in the police station is
more normal than the story she has to narrate. She tells of her passionate
affair with her late lamented: 'I was Josephine to his Napoleon, Emma
Thomson to his Kenneth Banner' (sic). The late lamented's wife had repressed
his artistic talent: 'She wouldn't let him express himself in oils.' But her
he painted: ''Let yourself go into a pose of the southern seas,' he said.'
What had she to offer him? 'Unendurable pleasure indefinitely prolonged.'
I would like to take Hayes's utterance of that last line to a desert island.
But, then, she is uproarious in her myriad different ways of saying 'Yes,
dear,' all of them loaded. And she is perfectly complimented by Brian Murphy
and Peter Woodward. Murphy, a wonderful study in working-class perturbation,
is a fine comic actor who is the more funny for giving every attention to
Hayes and his co-actors; Woodward, with his striking presence, anchors the
first half by playing the innocent deadpan dupe to this aged visitation.
Philip Grout directs. On press night, the cast seemed scarcely able to
suppress their own giggles. And we who watched gave our laughter full vent.
At the Riverside Studios, W6.
