FT  01 AUG 94 / Working Life: Invest in a sun hat and save your skin - Style
When they give you sunburn levels in the papers and on Teletext, you can be
sure that there is a risk out there, thanks to the hole in the ozone layer
over northern Europe. That means concern about sun exposure here and on a
Mediterranean holiday.
Those who ring Freephone line 0800 556655 will hear a soothing voice telling
them about the dangers of skin cancer and ageing from exposure to WA and WB
rays.
'Wear a wide-brimmed hat and good sunglasses,' says the voice.
This is the most important instruction of all. Nothing protects the skin
from pollution and sunburn like a hat. And yet it's often something that
only the mother-of-the-bride invests in.
If you're going to change your ways and wear a hat, then it makes sense to
buy one that combines glamour and practicality.
A cheap, chain store straw hat that is too small and perched on the back of
the head is no good at all. A good Panama designed for a man would be
infinitely better (Herbert Johnson, Bond Street, London, Wl), especially as
they are built for travelling and look even better on a woman.
Gilly Forge (071-603 3833) and Patricia Underwood (Browns, South Molton
Street, London, WI) both use a fine Italian straw that really does travel
without crushing although they might cost you upwards of Pounds 75.
Herald and Heart in SW8 always have untrimmed straws with brims of every
size. The Hat Shop (58 Neal St, London, WC2 and 30 Wilson Street, Glasgow)
offers alternatives to the basic straw - a large-brimmed cotton hat with
safari overtones, a fashionable fishing pull-on or a navy casquette. All
good staples that don't cost more than the holiday itself and don't look
like an afterthought or a panic midday purchase.
Incidentally when you try a hat on, look yourself straight in the eye. You
can't wear a hat casually without pencilling in your eyebrows and
considering your make-up.
There are no hard and fast rules but the crown of the hat should balance the
shape of your face from the eyebrows down. It is a mathematical equation.
Therefore, if you've got a big face make the crown of your hat higher in
proportion.
