FT  27 JUL 94 / Engineers urge more N-plants
Leading engineering com-panies yesterday tried to steer the emphasis of the
government's nuclear review away from privatisation. They outlined a
strategy which some hope could lead to the UK opening a nuclear plant every
three years from 2002.
Lord Weir, chairman of Weir Group, who was helping to launch the British
Nuclear Industry Forum's submission to the government, said the most
important practical decision was when and on what basis Britain would build
more nuclear power plants.
Mr Roy Broadhead, chairman of Taylor Woodrow Civil Engineering, said the
privatisation of Nuclear Electric and Scottish Nuclear, the two generating
companies, was a matter between them and the government. 'What we are
talking about is industry's request that the government has a balanced
energy strategy,' he said.
Their remarks reflect concern among many of the 72 companies represented by
the forum that the two generating companies' decision to concentrate on
privatisation has diverted attention from plant construction.
Lord Weir said that the government had to ensure that nuclear power
maintained a presence in the electricity market. One possibility was
reserving a share of the market for nuclear power.
The forum says in its submission that, given a clear commitment to further
nuclear construction at home, British companies will be well placed to
exploit opportunities of a potential world nuclear market of Pounds 500bn.
The submission says: 'As things stand the nuclear industry is set to earn
Britain Pounds 1bn a year by 2000, but with the government's backing for
more power stations in Britain the export earnings could grow much larger.'
The nuclear industry provided direct and indirect employment for about
100,000 people, many highly skilled, working in companies at the heart of
manufacturing.
The forum pointed out yesterday that building a new nuclear power plant
every two to three years from 2002 would merely maintain capacity.
Lord Weir said the industry justified itself financially and economically
and added that, although nuclear power would need state support, this did
not necessarily mean subsidies. 'It will not be acceptable for the Treasury
simply to say that the requirements for financing Sizewell C are too complex
or too different to fit in with their normal way of handling such things,'
he said.
Hot problem, Page 16
