FT  19 FEB 94 / Nato holds Serbs to strict deadline: Slow pull-back prompts
renewed air strike threat - UK challenges US commitment
Concern over the slow pace of the Bosnian Serb pull-back from Sarajevo
prompted Nato yesterday to renew its threat to launch air strikes if the
deadline for a complete withdrawal is not met by midnight tomorrow.
In Washington Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, said an expected
new deployment of 400 Russian troops in the war zone would not affect Nato's
ultimatum and he rejected a Russian warning that air strikes risked all-out
war in Bosnia.
'We have information that they've taken out probably 50 or so of the heavy
weapons . . . it means that they've got lots more to take out,' he said. If
they did not meet the ultimatum to withdraw all heavy weapons from the 20km
exclusion zone they would be 'subject to air attacks . . . there will be
severe punishment if they don't comply . . . they will pay a very heavy
price,' Mr Christopher said.
The warning to the Bosnian Serbs came as Russia and Britain called on the US
to become more actively involved in helping to negotiate a permanent peace
settlement for Bosnia, with Mr Malcolm Rifkind, UK defence secretary,
pointedly remarking that the US had only 15 men on the ground in Bosnia.
In Washington, officials said the US remained willing to commit ground
troops only if a peace settlement were agreed.
Yesterday's warning from Nato was made despite Russia's diplomatic success
in securing an agreement by President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia that
Bosnia's Serbs would meet Nato's ultimatum.
In Bosnia there was conflicting evidence about the extent of the withdrawal.
General Sir Michael Rose, commander of UN troops in Bosnia, repeated his
conviction that Bosnian Serbs would hand their siege weapons over to UN
forces or pull them out of the exclusion zone around the city by Saturday
night, 24 hours before the Nato deadline.
A Nato official said: 'If Russian pressure will help, we welcome that. But
there should be no misunderstanding; any initiative will be assessed by its
results.'
But Russia, determined to maintain the diplomatic initiative, called on the
US to play a more active role.
Mr Andrei Kozyrev, Russia's foreign minister, who was in Athens for talks
with the German, Greek and Belgian foreign ministers, said: 'It is important
that the other side, the United States and others, encourage other parties
not to try to exploit the withdrawal but to exploit the possibility for
peace and also make progressive steps from their side.'
In Moscow, Mr Anatoly Adamishin, the first deputy Russian foreign minister,
challenged the west. 'Russia has done her part of the job - now the west
must do its part,' he said. 'We used our strong point - our influence on the
Bosnian Serbs. Now the west must use its influence on the Bosnian Moslems.
They too must hand over their weapons within the deadline specified by the
United Nations.'
In an interview with the Financial Times, Mr Adamishin said the Moslems
should not be allowed to use the Serbs' withdrawal to improve their
battlefield positions.
But France said more measures were needed to lift the siege of Sarajevo. Mr
Alain Juppe, the French foreign minister, said a withdrawal of Serbian
artillery from around Sarajevo had to be followed by other measures to end
the siege of the city.
Serbs take heart from Russian intervention, Page 2
Chance for life in the dead zone, Page 6
