FT  25 JUN 94 / Sport: Why small is beautiful - Olympic politics
As he stood in the Sorbonne this week, paying homage to the efforts of Baron
Pierre de Coubertin in 1894 to revive the Olympic Games, Juan Antonio
Samaranch, president of the International Olympic Committee, must have felt
a sense of irony.
When de Coubertin's invitees met 100 years ago, in the Salle Octave Greard
at the university, the young French aristocrat sought to make his tiny
committee internationally powerful. Today, Samaranch is struggling to find
ways to make his powerful group smaller.
De Coubertin would have made a superb lobbyist in any modern democracy. In
spite of a bizarre appearance - he grew a wide, feathery moustache - the
baron was worldly enough to have a hand-picked group of powerful
sympathisers who attracted public attention.
By June 1894, after 10 years of effort, de Coubertin had hustled enough
support in French public life to organise his Sorbonne Congress, at which
the rebirth of the Olympics was formally discussed. There were 2,000 guests
at the opening banquet, with athletes' representatives from 12 countries.
Throughout the Congress, de Coubertin staged fete after fete - including
night foot-races and fencing matches in a Parisian playing field lit by
1,000 torches. Trumpet fanfares, military music and fireworks rounded off
the events.
The main principles of the Olympics were approved almost without debate, de
Coubertin said. These were: four-year intervals between Games, modern
sports, no children's contests, different sites for each Olympics and a
stable IOC. It is remarkable how these principles have endured, in spite of
developments such as television and sponsorship.
Earlier this year, Samaranch wrote privately to each IOC member asking for
views on two subjects: fixed rather than lifetime membership and the
involvement of presidents of individual sports federations as temporary
members during their terms of office.
So far, 52 have replied - a little more than half. Samaranch is looking for
a reform consensus he can bring to the August Congress of the Olympic
movement - the first since Baden-Baden in 1981 - but, as one IOC insider put
it, 'asking members to support fixed terms is like getting turkeys to vote
for Christmas'.
One tactic that Samaranch and his executive board seem to be employing,
perhaps to show the IOC the dangers of atrophy, is not replacing members who
die or reach mandatory retirement age.
No new members have been elected for over two years. And the Lausanne
headquarters of the IOC has made no commitment to elections at the congress.
Countries such as the UK, Italy and the US, which have previously had two
members (as a recognition of having held the Games) now have one, simply
through non-replacement.
Possibly, Britain is in the most curious position of all. Having fought hard
in the last five years or so, in concert with other Europeans and Americans,
against the increasing Latin-American domination of the IOC voting process,
the country that gave most to de Coubertin's vision of modern athleticism is
now becoming marginalised.
Princess Anne is the sole current UK member, but her position and other
commitments make it impossible for her to become completely involved in the
Machiavellian and high-stakes world of international sports politics.
Sebastian Coe, the Olympic gold-medal runner turned Tory MP, and Craig
Reedie, chairman of the British Olympic Association, are the candidates to
fill the IOC vacancy created by the mandatory retirement of Dame Mary Glen
Haig.
Coe is much liked by Samaranch, who appointed him a member of the Athletes
Commission and - notoriously - gave him a personal invitation to compete in
Seoul after the middle-distance runner had failed to qualify for the British
team. Reedie, a former president of the Badminton federation, is
well-connected in the top echelons of sport and would quickly become a force
for common sense and less grandeur within the IOC.
Both men are the type the IOC needs to embrace if it is to renew itself for
the coming 100 years. But the 'recruitment freeze' - based around the
Samaranch passion to reform and tighten the movement - means neither will
have an opportunity to contribute.
In the US, a similar problem surrounds the vacancy created by the
resignation from the committee two years ago of the disgraced Robert
Helmick. The obvious candidate, Peter Ueberroth, maestro of the Los Angeles
Olympics, has much to contribute but seems to have little chance of joining
the IOC.
There is always friction between a host city and the Olympic committee in
the frantic couple of years before a Games. However, relations between
Atlanta and Lausanne are unusually frosty, with some senior IOC figures
beginning to wonder if it was not a terrible mistake to award the games to
that city.
Some of those difficulties - which are likely to get worse in the two years
left before the 1996 Games - might have been avoided if the Olympic
experience Ueberroth garnered in Los Angeles in 1984 were available within
the IOC.
