FT  30 APR 94 / Private View: The billionaire without a penny
Run your finger down the form guide to British billionaires and you will
find, tucked in behind the Duke of Westminster at number eight and valued at
around Pounds 1.35bn, the name Hinduja.
Who?
The Hindujas, four brothers, belong to that mysterious caste of
international middlemen who spin the wheels of the world economy. Originally
from Sind in the Indus valley, a cradle of civilisation and now part of
Pakistan, the family made its first fortune as traders in Iran before moving
headquarters to London when they saw the Shah was about to fall.
Srichand P. Hinduja ('Mr SP') is the eldest brother and chairman of the
group. As one would expect of the head of a private empire whose
secretiveness has encouraged whispers of financial scandal, or of a father
who has lost his only son in tragic circumstances, he very rarely succumbs
to interviews.
He sat, a diminutive figure, at the head of a big polished table high up in
New Zealand House in London's Haymarket. A secretary placed a tape recorder
at his elbow and Mr SP opened the interview: Had I been to India? Had I
interviewed other Indians, other Asians? What did I know about the group?
He was as suspicious as a mussel exposed by the tide, slow and circuitous in
his replies, warily parrying each question as if expecting to be
disbelieved. But when he talked about his 22-year-old son Dharam (Hinduja
does not accept the coroner's verdict of suicide) the shell began to open
and soon he was calling me 'my dear friend'.
Apart from commodity trading and finance, the brothers have asset management
and investment banking in Switzerland, motor manufacture (Ashok Leyland) and
chemicals (IDL Chemicals) in India, oil deals (Gulf Oil Trading) and
infrastructure projects almost everywhere. They have just set up one of the
first private banks in India in 40 years. They have a staff of 20,000 and a
turnover of 'several billions'.
What they own, they own collectively. 'All the houses belong to everybody,
all the cars belong to everybody,' Hinduja senior said. 'There is no 'this
is mine, this is yours'. All the children belong to everyone. We have kept
one kitty. Everyone works as a duty. There are no wills.'
So you, Mr SP, don't have . . . ?
'Not a single penny]'
Gopichand ('Mr GP'), the second brother and group president also based in
London, is rounder and jollier. He and SP jostle each other verbally like
competing schoolboys. The third brother, Prakash, runs the financial arm,
AMAS, in Geneva and the fourth brother, Ashok, the Indian businesses.
They are vegetarian, teetotal and non-smoking. Hinduja senior does not even
drink tea, coffee or fruit juice. 'I don't want to depend on things which if
tomorrow I don't get I feel sorry about,' he explained.
'My parents used to live this way. They thought it was religious. We are not
living like this because of religion but because we have made research on
what is good for the human body.'
From their father Parmanand ('the late father') they inherited not only the
first Dollars 1m but also a sense of philanthropic duty. Their Hinduja
Foundation supports a hospital and colleges in India, scholarships to
Cambridge University, research at Harvard and various youth adventure,
artistic and sporting concerns. This was to honour the Vedic tradition of
altruism, where self-promotion is rewarded with disgrace.
The brothers refuse to deal in meat, because that offends a scriptural
injunction against killing animals, or in alcohol, gambling or racecourses.
What about weapons? I asked, recalling newspaper allegations, later
retracted, that they had traded arms in Iran.
'We don't deal in weapons. We were supplying the defence industry with
non-ferrous metals, batteries, lead, antimony, chemicals. But where there is
a financial package to be organised, or counter-trade to be organised we
will do it. Let's make it very clear. We do not promote arms sales. But if
someone asks us to arrange the raw material end of a counter-trade, we will
gladly assist.'
Gopichand was one of those named in a prosecution report following the
Bofors scandal of 1987 when bribes were alleged to have been paid by the
Swedish company to secure a howitzer order from the Indian Government. The
allegations were dropped after a Delhi high court ruling. Srichand said he
had never denied having counter-trade relations with Bofors' parent group,
but was not involved in arms promotion. The accusation was the work of
political enemies.
Politically-motivated 'character assassination' was also to blame for the
fact that AMAS had been involved in a Swiss investigation into drug-money
laundering this year. It was not a bank, said Hinduja, and could not accept
deposits.
'Because we don't speak, we don't blow our trumpet, people think 'Oh, there
must be something going on.' If I were to publish the prosecutor's letter
people will be astonished to see how they are being taken for a ride.'
So the accusation against AMAS . . . ?
' . . . is bullshit.'
If secrecy leads to these false suspicions, why not open up?
'A private group, being a trader and banker, doesn't have an obligation to
the public or media to say why and how I have made my money. But if they are
interested to know what business I am doing, that is very open.' Once the
deals were complete the media could easily find out about them, he added.
There was nothing wrong in paying or receiving commissions. Every banker or
professional did it. Even those who offered access - 'the door-openers' -
were entitled to charge.
'I only see a problem where the system, like in the developing countries, is
not of the free market, where it is more protected. This leads to a lot of
corruption. I am against the corruption. I have been lobbying in every
country that they should leave business to the business people.'
Often described as friends of Baroness Thatcher, the brothers have been
entertained in Downing Street and named in the press as donors to the
Conservative Party. Was that true?
Hinduja embarked on a rambling answer about how the brothers never courted
publicity, how much they were misunderstood, but how their consciences were
clear. 'Let anybody say anything. It doesn't matter to us.'
He went to Downing Street and other such functions, he said, to promote
understanding between his host country and his mother country, just as he
does between Iran and India.
Mr Hinduja, I said, do you give money, have you given money, to the
Conservative Party?
'OK. Let me tell you. We have never given money to any political party for
the party funds. We have been attending the balls, Conservative balls,
Labour balls, where we take our friends to observe what is happening, how
they are having these functions, how they collect funds . . . with
auctions.'
Have they asked you for money?
'Well, they do keep on inviting us so that we would contribute for the
funds. They know that we are rich men, but most of our contributions have
been for dinners, like contributing for good causes where we know that it is
directly concerning mankind. But what you have read in the newspapers we
don't like to contradict. We don't like to get into that controversy.'
Later he said: 'I am not saying that I don't like to make money. But my
first objective is how I can offer my services to mankind, which can bring
in better understanding and lesser miseries and sufferings in the human
race.
'It is obvious in a free market each will get a slice of cake according to
his capability. If I am one of them, there is nothing wrong in it. But I
haven't started with the objective of how big the slice of the cake will be
for me.
'I have not told any head of state 'You have to do this for me.' On the
contrary, I keep on telling them that there should not be any favour given
to any businessman, so that later on people can finger you and finger me. I
am against protection. I say there should be a competition, open and fair.
Then let us see who wins the race.'
If his business philosophy is free market and secular, Hinduja's private
philosophy is increasingly mystical. His chief memorial to his dead son is a
research institute set up last October with the help of Columbia University
in New York to study religious texts for the pre-scientific knowledge they
contain. 'This knowledge can benefit the entire world with proven scientific
applications,' he said.
Dharam died of severe burns in London two years ago after he and the girl he
had secretly married were traced to a hotel in Mauritius. Press reports
described his death as a suicide pact and blamed it on the family's
rejection of the girl as a suitable daughter-in-law.
But Hinduja senior - who was at his son's bedside but refused to attend the
inquest - does not accept either assumption. 'It is a mystery to the family.
This is all I can tell you. That is why we are still very much confused.'
Did you try to stop the marriage?
'My dear friend, people are free to write what they like. But this is not
the truth. This is all I can tell you. I cannot say that it was a suicide. I
cannot say that in our family one is not allowed to live and operate the way
he or she wants.'
Do you blame yourself at all?
'No, because if there was any blame I would not have revived. I would have
gone crazy. On the contrary I am going in such directions and getting such
enlightenment that I feel more strength, more and more confidence.'
His next project is to make a Hollywood film, 'the biggest production ever
made', to convey his message to the world.
What is it about?
'What is everyone in this world interested in?'
Security?
'Not security.'
Contentment?
'Can you name in one word something everyone wants?'
Self-respect?
'No. Success. Success is the bottom line of everything. There is no human
being in this world who says he doesn't want success.'
