FT  02 FEB 94 / Management: Must try harder - Many companies are having
trouble with performance-related pay schemes / BT
Performance-related pay is by no means a trouble-free method for determining
individual remuneration, as a growing number of UK companies are
discovering.
Recent research carried out by the Institute for Manpower Studies over a
wide range of companies across industrial sectors suggests many PRP schemes
do not motivate workers effectively, fail to reward individual effort and,
above all, do not noticeably improve business efficiency.
The latest example of a PRP scheme in trouble also underlines the dangers of
introducing one in difficult times if it makes no commercial sense.
British Telecommunications, the telecoms group and Britain's largest
private-sector company, last week suspended its 10-month-old PRP scheme for
26,000 managers and professional staff because it threatened to undermine
the pay bill.
Ironically, BT introduced its scheme last year to control labour costs, but
it now finds that the PRP arrangements, if applied, would breach the 2.3 per
cent overall increase for managerial staff that it has set for 1994. 'This
does not provide us with enough money to make our PRP scheme a sensible way
of deciding pay rises this year,' says David Scott, BT's industrial
relations manager.
The company may improve its present overall cash allocation a little in
negotiations with the Society of Telecom Executives (STE), the union
representing its management. But it is determined not to apply the PRP
system it negotiated less than two years ago.
Under the terms of an earlier deal, the company this year intends to reward
only its top 10 per cent of managerial high-flyers with rises of up to 6 per
cent, while others can expect unconsolidated payments. Half its managers
will get no rise in 1994. But Scott argues pay is not the 'main cause for
anxiety' this year among BT's managers. 'Their job security is the more
serious problem,' he adds.
The problem for the company though, is not just the short-term one of
keeping within a budgetary pay allocation. More fundamentally BT's own pay
comparison study, which relates its PRP assessments to outside competitors,
indicates that it is already paying its managerial grades 11-14 per cent
more than their colleagues in broadly similar jobs in other enterprises.
BT's study covers not just its main telecommunications rivals - Mercury in
the UK, Sprint and AT&amp;T in the US - but companies such as Siemens, the
German electronics group; Thorn EMI, the UK leisure and electronics group;
IBM, the international computer group; Ericsson, the Swedish
telecommunications giant; and Hewlett-Packard, the US electronics group, as
well as TSB and National Westminster, the UK high street banks, and large
retailers like J. Sainsbury.
The basic earnings of the core of BT's managers, the company says, are in
the upper quartile of the market range. Scott says: 'We do not want to be
upper quartile payers for our managers any more. We want to move down the
market.'
BT has, therefore, told the union that it needs to bring its managerial
salaries more into line with those in the rest of the telecommunications
industry if the company hopes to defend its competitive cost base in the
medium to long term.
Scott insists BT has not set itself any precise timetable in which to drive
down the managerial pay bill but BT's intention to do so clearly cuts across
any plan to use PRP to reward improved managerial performance.
He recognises that some of the company's more talented managers might leave
as a result of suspending the PRP scheme, but says BT 'has to lose managers
in the next financial year anyway', as it restructures in the face of
competitive pressures and regulatory changes.
The company's hard-nosed attitude towards its PRP scheme this year has
angered many managers. 'BT's aim through its PRP scheme has been to penalise
managers, not reward them,' claims Leslie Manasseh, the union's national
organiser. 'It took eight months of hard bargaining with BT to reach
agreement on a PRP scheme,' he adds. 'We warned the company not to introduce
the scheme if they could not make enough money available to ensure its
success.'
At the time of its implementation though, the increasingly competitive
climate in telecommunications was driving the company towards the PRP
option. The full story goes back to just after privatisation 10 years ago
when BT took its 7,500 senior managers out of the collective bargaining
system and introduced personal employment contracts.
But it continued to pay other managerial grades a general cost of living pay
rise every spring and, in addition, what BT called a performance-related pay
progression increase in the autumn (to be distinguished from the scheme that
is now in question). 'We had to put a stop to this double hit pay round for
our managers,' explains Scott.
Last year BT negotiated a single salary increase based on performance
assessment, under the new PRP scheme, without a cost of living addition.
This enabled it to halve its managerial pay bill. The size of the PRP rises
was determined through the application of a computer-generated matrix, which
calculated a salary rise for each manager. This was based on assessments by
senior managers using the earlier individual appraisal marking system and a
more specific zero to 100 performance score.
From the start the company's PRP scheme aroused widespread anxiety and
suspicion. The fears were common to those experienced by employees in other
companies in the early stages of a PRP sys-tem.
'It was not applied consistently. People were not told their assessment
score,' says Manasseh. 'Nearly a third raised grievances over this.' In a
recent survey, the union catalogued a litany of complaints from BT managers
about its first year of operation.
Only 6.5 per cent of the union survey respondents said PRP at BT had brought
an improvement in managerial performance, while as many as 63 per cent
believed it had been applied unfairly in practice.
Companies have had trouble with PRP schemes have often refined them to
convince employees of their ultimate fairness and this is what BT may well
have to do. Even the STE wants to see BT continue with some form of PRP.
Previous articles on PRP appeared on November 3 and 17.
