FT  21 JUL 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Black gold draws investors to a
Balkan backwater - As Albania rejoins the international community after 70
years of isolation Anthony Robinson and Robert Corzine assess the state of
its oil sector, once thought more promising than Saudi Arabia's
Oil fields are usually a symbol of national wealth and prestige. But in
Albania, the Balkan state which for 50 years was one of the most isolated
countries in the world, their shabby state symbolises decades of
under-investment and near total disregard for the environment.
Large tracts of central-coastal Albania above the main onshore oil reserves
are covered with spindly rigs and ever-so-slowly nodding donkeys sucking out
thick bituminous oil. The crude then runs in rusting and often exposed pipes
or shallow trenches to leaking storage tanks.
The foul stench of crude is all-pervasive. Black pools of oil lie on the
surface around the rigs and the rivers run with tell-tale rainbow coloured
oil slicks.
Hundreds of wells are simply abandoned, with rusting metal, broken pipes and
chunks of machinery littering the ground around them. The cost of clearing
up over 70 years of environmental damage to acceptable western standards
will be enormous; and it is unlikely to be shouldered by any future western
partner.
On the other hand western oilmen believe that spectacular productivity gains
could be achievable from the introduction of modern production techniques.
The Albanian oil industry may never live up to its initial promise in the
1920s, when a director of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, the predecessor of
British Petroleum, recommended that the company end its exploration efforts
in Saudi Arabia in favour of Albania. But a successful rehabilitation and
exploration programme over the next few years could make it a net oil
exporter.
Premier Consolidated Oil Fields, a UK-based independent exploration and
production company, has been negotiating with the Tirana government for more
than a year to rehabilitate Albania's largest oil field, Patos Marinza, near
the town of Fier.
About 1,500 wells, each topped with a rusting derrick, have been drilled in
an area of about 16km by 35km. But output from the field, which could
contain as much as 1bn barrels of oil, is only about 3,000 barrels a day.
Premier is close to signing a 25-year production sharing contract that could
result in output being boosted to 20,000 b/d or more. But Mr Gerry Orbell,
Premier's head of exploration, says negotiating the deal has been a complex
and at times frustrating exercise.
As in many other former communist countries, few ministers or officials are
accustomed to taking decisions. This meant that many of the issues raised
during negotiations had to be settled by President Sali Berisha himself.
Unfamiliarity with western legal concepts meant that even after seven months
of discussions, the Albanian-authored first draft of a production sharing
contract was 'riddled with so many ambiguities that it wouldn't stand up in
any international court', according to Mr Orbell.
Premier brought in lawyers with experience in Russia to re-draft the
contract. Mr David Davies, Premier's commercial manager, said the final
version was more in line with western norms, but 'it still had to go some
way way towards their way of doing things'.
Albanian expectations that millions of pounds of investment would
materialise immediately following an agreement had to be dispelled.
Instead the field will be developed in stages. Although Premier will put up
some cash to 'kick-start' higher production, the company plans to use
revenues earned from gradual increases in output to fund additional
expansion.
The first phase will include tests of the reservoir and evaluation of steam
injection and other techniques to increase the flow of the field's heavy
oil.
It will also include an environmental audit to determine the extent of the
pollution problem.
Once they are confident about the production potential of the reservoir,
Premier and its Albanian partners will probably approach the European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development for help in funding the power and water
projects that would be needed to bring the field to its full potential of
20,000 b/d. The EBRD has said that it wants to see the field working
properly before it makes any significant commitments.
Premier hopes to export its share of the field's production to neighbouring
countries. But the absence of an established market for Albanian crude means
it might have to sell some to Albanian refineries for US dollars.
The refineries, however, are in an equally dilapidated state. The main
working refinery, just outside the dusty town of Ballsh, spews flame from
waste stacks and plumes of dark smoke over the surrounding hills.
Some western oil executives believe that it would be cheaper and more
environmentally sound for Albania to export its crude to modern refineries
in neighbouring countries and import products. But the politically-sensitive
employment implications of refinery closures could keep the obsolete
facilities going for some time.
The only signs of relatively new investment in Albania's oil sector are
fleets of second or third hand road tankers and private petrol stations.
The latter are now springing up like mushrooms alongside the main roads as
private entrepreneurs seek a profitable outlet for the small fortunes made
over the last three years following the liberalisation of trade and foreign
exchange transactions.
The road tanker fleets that have replaced lumbering old Chinese-built trucks
are now privatised; but they still ply the narrow and tortuous roads from
collection points to the refinery and service stations with their former
Italian or Greek owners names stencilled on their sides.
Tomorrow - Geoff Tansey describes the transformation of Albanian agriculture
over the past three years
