FT  18 OCT 94 / Prices unveiled for Eurostar channel service
The railways of Britain, France and Belgium yesterday announced the start of
their high-speed Eurostar service through the Channel tunnel with prices for
a return ticket from London to Paris or Brussels starting at Pounds 95.
European Passenger Services, the British partner in the three-country
project, said the prices did not seek to undercut airline fares because
Eurostar aims to sell tickets on the basis of more convenient travel. Mr
Richard Edgley, managing director, said: 'We will run a city centre to city
centre service with less hassle. We will also offer better and more
interesting meals.'
He said Eurostar would gain 'a major share' of the market for journeys
between the three capitals and a significant, though probably smaller, share
of longer distance journeys between Manchester and Paris.
Fares for what Eurostar calls its Discovery service start at Pounds 95
return between London and Paris or Brussels if the traveller books 14 days
in advance. They rise to Pounds 155 for a standard ticket, without
pre-booking, and Pounds 195 for first-class travel which includes a hot
three-course meal.
The service starts on November 14 with tickets on sale from October 24.
British Airways said the Eurostar fares were higher than expected, making
its own cheap flights look competitive. BA said air travellers could buy
return flights from London to Paris for Pounds 83, provided they travelled
in mid-week and stayed in the French capital over a Saturday night.
However, Mr Cris Rees, commercial manager at Thomas Cook, the travel agents,
said Eurostar could probably afford to charge a small premium because it
offered a convenient route from the centre of London to the centres of Paris
and Brussels, cutting out travel to and from airports. Mr Rees said
travelling by rail for the weekend would also be more appealing for families
than flying.
American Express, the financial services and travel group, said it welcomed
the added competition for London-Paris travel, the world's busiest air
route. The company said it expected Eurostar to win over travellers who
found it easier to travel to Waterloo station than to Heathrow airport.
American Express said: 'Commuters to Waterloo will just have to change
platforms to travel to Paris.' They would also be able to work more
comfortably on the trains than on an aircraft, the company said.
In the first few months of Eurostar travel departures will be limited to two
a day each way. Services will increase in frequency as more trains and
carriages are delivered.
Because of continued work on the tunnel by Eurotunnel, operator of the
cross-Channel link, there will be no Eurostar services on Saturdays and
Sunday mornings. But the Friday afternoon and Sunday afternoon services will
allow travellers to spend weekends away.
Tickets will go on sale through Eurostar's telesales office, at main railway
stations and through travel agents.
The journey time between London and Paris is three hours and between London
and Brussels 3 1/4 hours. These times will fall when the Belgian and British
high-speed links have been completed.
Lex, Page 22
Track record defended, Page 23
