FT  12 AUG 94 / Reed Elsevier plans to gear up for US bid: Anglo-Dutch
publisher eyes two targets and seeks New York listing as profits rise 12%
Reed Elsevier, the Anglo-Dutch information and publishing group, yesterday
said it was considering making a bid to expand its presence in the US.
The group has been conducting due diligence on Ziff Communications, the
world's largest publisher of computer magazines, and Mead Data Central, the
electronic information arm of Mead Corporation, the US paper group, and is
expected decide whether to make an offer for either next month.
Mr Ian Irvine, Reed Elsevier's co-chairman, said the group made first-half
operating profits in the US of Pounds 134m, against Pounds 107m. Gains in
North America helped lift pre-tax profits 12 per cent to Pounds 314m.
Acquisitions in English language markets are part of the group's long-term
strategy, but Mr Irvine warned that the current prices demanded for Ziff and
Mead Data 'were nowhere near our expectations'.
City analysts said Ziff - the privately held publisher with annual sales of
about Dollars 1bn (Pounds 600m) - was on the market for between Dollars 2bn
and Dollars 3bn, while Mead Data - the world leader in providing on-line and
CD-Rom legal information - could fetch more than Dollars 1bn.
Mr Irvine said Reed Elsevier would be prepared to borrow up to Pounds 1bn to
finance acquisitions, but would proceed only if the target businesses
promised to generate substantial cash.
Analysts said such borrowings could increase full-year interest payments to
more than Pounds 80m. Net interest expenses in the first half nearly doubled
to Pounds 26m on net borrowings of Pounds 552m.
Mr Irvine ruled out a rights issue to finance the deals, saying debt funding
would prove cheaper as long as the group maintained its healthy cash flow.
At the interim stage, operating cash flow stood at Pounds 217m.
Mr Pierre Vinken, co-chairman, said the group would also raise its profile
in North America by seeking a listing in New York. 'This move recognises the
increasing importance of Reed Elsevier's business in the US and the desire
to achieve a broader ownership of shares in Reed International and
Elsevier.' It could also make it easier to raise dollar-denominated loans.
Analysts suggested that plans for large US acquisitions and the New York
listing were hatched by Mr Peter Davis, Reed Elsevier's former co-chairman
who resigned in June. Mr Vinken, however, said: 'Mr Davis's departure had
nothing to do with strategic differences. It was all about refocused
responsibilities.'
The group is next week expected to announce a compensation package for Mr
Davis, who earned Pounds 636,592 last year including performance related
bonuses. Although one analyst said he could receive Pounds 800,000, Mr
Irvine said: 'The package will be well within the maximum that could have
been paid.' Shares in Elsevier, which is planning a 10-for-1 share split to
improve liquidity, ended down Fl 2.10 at Fl 171.90 in Amsterdam. Reed
International shares closed down 22p at 806p in London.
Lex, Page 14; Results, Page 17; Market, Page 32
