FT  28 NOV 94 / Survey of Energy Efficiency (11): Don't forget the dinosaurs
 -UK has no target but could do 20% better
You are looking at a model of the Dinodome' said Mr John Gummer, the
environment secretary, with an embarrassed laugh. On the table before him
stood a plastic dome with models of what looked like dinosaurs wearing human
dress.
In fact, that was precisely what they were. Mr Gummer was launching the
government's latest energy efficiency drive: 'Wasting energy costs the
earth' - a campaign is typical of the policy adopted by the government to
encourage energy efficiency in the UK.
It is based on what it calls 'partnership', a voluntary effort by
government, homeowners and businessmen to work together to achieve the
energy reduction goals. Shortly after the dinosaurs were launched, the
government squashed an attempt by opposition parties to introduce an energy
efficiency Bill into parliament on the grounds that it would add to costs
and regulation.
There is no official target for energy efficiency in the UK, though Mr
Robert Atkins, one of Mr Gummer's ministerial colleagues, told parliament
that he believed the UK economy could operate on 20 per cent less energy
than it does to-day. The more constraining target is the UK's commitment,
made at the Rio Earth Summit, to bring carbon dioxide emissions back to 1990
levels by the year 2000. This implies a cut of some 10m tonnes a year, or
about 6-7 per cent.
However, the government's own research shows that despite earlier publicity
campaigns to raise awareness of global warming issues the public's knowledge
is still poor: one official poll showed that nearly half the population
confuses the issues of global warming and the ozone layer. The public's
willingness to invest in energy efficiency is also low. A poll by Projects
in Partnership, an independent group funded by the Department of the
Environment, found homeowners 'disinterested, confused and mistrustful'.
A year ago, the government took what it thought was a big step forward in
persuading people of the value of energy saving investment when it extended
 -after long deliberation - value added tax to home heating. VAT was
introduced at 8 per cent last April and will rise to the standard rate of 17
1/2 per cent next April. Although this conflicted with the 'partnership'
idea, the temptation for the Treasury to cash in on pressure for greater
energy efficiency was evidently irresistible.
However, the impact of this measure is already being eroded by the steady
decline in gas and electricity prices which has been caused by deregulation
and privatisation of the gas and power utilities. Some specialists believe
that the entire effect may be offset by the end of this decade - in which
case further measures may be needed to get the 1.5m tonne CO saving which
VAT was supposed to deliver.
This could strengthen the chances for further development of nuclear power.
Mr Michael Heseltine, president of the Board of Trade, is currently
reviewing the future of the nuclear power industry, and he will weigh the
contribution that N-stations can make to reducing greenhouse gases when
deciding whether to authorise construction of further nuclear capacity.
Meanwhile, the government suffered another setback when the regulators of
the gas and electricity industries refused to sanction further levies on
consumers to fund the Energy Saving Trust, the agency which the government
had set up to subsidise and promote energy efficiency projects. Mr Eoin
Lees, the EST's chief executive, still hopes to be able to promote various
schemes, such as low energy light bulbs and self-financing improvements. But
until the government devises alternative ways of providing long-term
funding, the EST will not be able to fulfil its promised role.
Instead, much of the official energy saving effort is being directed through
Neighbourhood Energy Action, a government sponsored charity which has a
budget of Pounds 75m to help the heating problems of low income households.
A recent report by the Gas Consumers Council and the EST concluded that the
market for energy services (helping customers make better use of the energy
they buy) will not be helped by deregulation, at least in the short term.
Deregulation will stimulate competition to cut prices, and energy saving
will be sidelined.
The report says: 'Price reductions cannot go on indefinitely. But whilst
customers can get significant savings just by signing a new supply contract,
why should they be interested in having new process equipment or heating
controls/insulation fitted?'
The picture in industry is better. A recent report by Touche Ross, the
accountants, showed that energy intensive industry has taken steps to cut
its power bills because of the strategic importance of energy costs. But
less intensive industries still tend to treat spending on energy efficiency
as discretionary rather than vital.
Mr Simon Lloyd, the marketing director of BP Energy, one of the country's
largest industrial contract energy companies, says that energy management
has only 'scratched the surface' of the country's annual Pounds 9bn energy
bill. 'But attitudes are changing very fast now', he says, as companies try
to cut costs and protect themselves from the risk of changing energy prices.
However, this has yet to feed through to widespread use of combined heat and
power schemes. The government has a target of 4,000MW of additional
capacity, but so far only about 1,000MW has been built.
Mr David Green, director of the Combined Heat and Power Association, says
that projects have been squeezed by adverse trends in power prices.
Electricity prices are falling, while contracts for gas on which CHP schemes
are based have been going up, contrary to the trend for gas generally.
Mr Green thinks the government should require all new power schemes to
provide heating as well - something it could enforce since the Department of
Trade and Industry has to approve all new electricity generation projects
over a certain size. This is the case in a number of other European
countries, such as Denmark, he points out, but government officials are
unsympathetic, taking the view that CHP 'should be able to stand on its own
two feet'.
One aspect of power generation which does get financial support is
alternative energy. The government will shortly announce a new round of
subsidy for renewable energy projects, though with public opposition to wind
power now increasing, even this aspect is not without controversy.
A further area where the government is being pressed is transport. The
recent report of the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution called for
a massive redirection of resources away from roads towards public transport
and other means of reducing traffic on grounds of pollution control and
energy efficiency.
However, the report received a cautious welcome from ministers because it
challenges many key aspects of government policy: the preference for roads,
the reluctance to subsidise public transport and the planning process. It
does, however, reinforce the policy of increasing fuel taxes, which the
government must welcome.
