FT  10 SEP 94 / Books: Flashes of sunlight from America's finest novelist -
JDF Jones reviews Saul Bellow's non-fiction work
IT ALL ADDS UP by Saul Bellow Secker &amp; Warburg Pounds 20, 327 pages
We can take it, I assume, that Saul Bellow is the finest living American
novelist. (A colleague has just said to me, 'I simply can't read him'. Fair
enough. We can agree, nevertheless, that Saul Bellow is the finest living
American novelist.) He's getting old, of course, and there's a whiff of
farewell in this - first - collection of his non-fiction writing.
The selection of pieces in It All Adds Up, which their begetter says is 'not
a reliquary but a gathering' of 'the trifles I wrote to support myself', is
rather odd. Why, for instance, has he chosen to start with what are surely
the less impressive essays? We have a chat about Mozart, some memories of
Chicago in the Roosevelt era, a few thoughts about Khruschev in New York, a
recollection of Paris in 1948, a portrait of an elderly Mid-West con-man, an
interview with himself (never a good idea), the necessarily high-minded
Nobel Prize lecture of 1976, and some more memories of pre-war Chicago,
including the surprising news that Bellow was in Taxco when Trotsky was
assassinated, with an appointment to see him the next day, instead of which
he went to see the bloodied body. I was beginning to think my colleague
might be right about the non-fiction.
Then, suddenly, the sun breaks through with the Jefferson Lectures of 1977,
and all is well. Here the combination of memory and reflection works
triumphantly. Like this, for example: 'On winter afternoons when the soil
was frozen to a depth of five feet and the Chicago cold seemed to have the
headhunter's power of shrinking your face, you felt in the salt-whitened
streets and amid the spattered car bodies the characteristic mixture of
tedium and excitement, of narrowness of life together with a strong
intimation of scope, a simultaneous expansion and constriction in the soul,
a clumsy sense of inadequacy, poverty of means, desperate limitation, and,
at the same time, a craving for more, which demanded that 'impractical'
measures be taken. There was literally nothing to be done about this . . .
The only remedy for it was to read and write stories and novels . . .'
From which it is a short step to Bellow's conclusions about the role of the
writer and artist in America today, where the degradation of modern urban
society, the abasement of man, is the price paid for the economic and
technical success story of the century. On the way we get a glancing
rebuttal of Hemingway and what John Berryman called his 'moral vacancy' -
'Hemingway's dignity in the face of nothingness is not a negligible
conception . . . But 'moral vacancy' is nihilism, and nihilism acknowledges
the victory of the bourgeois outlook . . . Other responses may be possible.'
Bellow goes on: 'There is no human life without the attachments that we
express in words like 'good', 'moral', 'just', 'beautiful'. The restoration
of these connections is to be undertaken only out of the soul's recognition
of their necessity . . . It will begin when the intellect confirms what the
soul desires . . .' There speaks the creator of Herzog, Henderson, Mr
Sammler and the rest.
Now at last we get Bellow the reporter and traveller. Spain in 1948 where he
witnessed a political trial, Paris (and Hemingway again - 'Hemingway the
writer I admired without limits; Hemingway the figure was to my mind the
quintessential tourist'), the Six-Day War, Vermont and Illinois, obituaries
of friends such as John Cheever.
And finally, a good and long interview from Bostonia magazine in 1990, full
of fascinating autobiographical revelation and quick, flashing insights, as
Bellow the young Marxist begins to see his life as 'a process of revision,
of the correction of errors' - a process, he assures us in the preface,
which is still going on. This interview serves to draw proper attention to
the importance of The Adventures of Augie Marsh, and Bellow's discovery that
it was necessary to move on from the English mandarin model - 'I wanted to
invent a new sort of American sentence. Something like a fusion of
colloquialism and elegance . . . Street language combined with high style'.
There is nothing in this volume to convey to the stranger, or the sceptical
colleague, the magnificence of Bellow the Novelist's portrait gallery of
characters, but for the initiate it will be a necessary addition to the
bookshelf.
