FT  05 MAR 94 / The word on the street: Andrew Taylor and John Willman on a
rise in house prices
The talk over the smoked salmon and chablis at Hampstead dinner parties this
weekend might revert for the first time in six years to a favourite topic -
UK house prices.
With the news this week that prices were again rising faster than inflation,
for the first time since 1989, home owners may be discussing trends in the
market with a new sense of optimism. Between 1983 and 1988 home-owners saw
the nominal value of their investment double.
With the collapse of the housing market, prices dropped by about 14 per cent
on average between mid-1989 and early 1993 - and by double that in some
areas. Almost 2m people found themselves living in homes worth less than
their mortgage - trapped by negative equity. Those who fell behind with
mortgage payments were unable to sell, leading to unprecedented levels of
repossessions.
Home-owning - seen in the 1970s and 1980s as a sure-fire way of making money
 -had lost its lustre. But the long-awaited recovery is now under way, says
Mr John Wriglesworth, housing analyst at brokers UBS.
'We are no longer bumping along the bottom of the housing market,' he says.
'We have now begun to climb the hill.'
On Wednesday, Halifax, the UK's largest building society, reported a 2.2 per
cent rise in house prices in February, the biggest monthly gain since
September 1988. The number of homes sold has also risen sharply, according
to the Inland Revenue, which records the completion of sales.
There is good news, too, from the construction industry, with builders
reporting that work started on 186,400 new homes in 1993 - nearly a fifth
higher than the previous year.
But the recovery will be uneven, cautions Mr Wriglesworth. Halifax's latest
figures conflict with a report on Tuesday by Nationwide, the country's
second-largest building society, which said average UK house prices had
fallen by 0.6 per cent in February.
The societies' figures for the previous two months also differed. But the
two broadly agree on the annual rate of increase. Nationwide reports a 3.2
per cent price rise in the 12 months to February 1994, Halifax 3.8 per cent.
This modest growth has been sufficient to lift some home owners out of
negative equity. The Bank of England estimates the number of households
stuck in this trap has fallen almost a third from the peak. But many others
will have a long wait until their homes are worth more than the amount of
their mortgage - especially if they bought just before prices crashed.
For the 300,000 buyers estimated by the Woolwich Building Society to have
held back from buying during the slump, house prices now look like a
bargain. The average house price is now just over 3 1/2 times average
earnings, having peaked at almost 4 1/2 times in 1989. Today's low interest
rates mean the cost of buying a house for a first-time buyer is lower than
for decades - 26 per cent of average income, according to the affordability
index produced by TSB, the bank.
But no '1980s-style housing boom' is likely, says Mr Wriglesworth. He
predicts price rises of 7 per cent for each of the next two years as the
market bounces back, but then 'medium-term stagnation'. One reason is the
caution of lenders after the slump in prices. At one stage, more than
800,000 borrowers were in arrears with mortgage payments. About 300,000
homes have been repossessed over the past five years, leaving building
societies and banks with large amounts of empty property, often in poor
condition.
Even if lenders were tempted to relax their lending practices, insurance
companies would veto a return to loans of up to 100 per cent or more of the
value of a home. Insurers guaranteed repayment of the top slice of such
loans through mortgage indemnity policies - and paid out Pounds 2bn in 1991
and 1992, as repossessed homes were sold for less than the debt on them.
The result is that it is becoming difficult to borrow more than 95 per cent
of the value of a home.  First-time buyers now need Pounds 5,000 for deposit
and expenses to get onto the bottom rung of the ownership ladder.
The main dampener on house-price inflation over the rest of the decade will
be decreasing demand from younger buyers as a result of the falling birth
rate, says Mr Martin Ellis of Woolwich building society. The number of 25-
to 29-year-olds - the age-group of most first-time buyers - will fall from
4.7m in 1991 to 3.7m in 2001.
'Over the rest of the decade, we expect prices to rise in line with
inflation,' says Mr Ellis.
If that is so, it will be welcomed by economists, who believe the house
price roller-coaster has been responsible for amplifying the stop-go cycle
in the UK economy.
'When house prices forge ahead, owners increase their mortgages and spend
the money on luxury goods,' says Professor Duncan MacLennan of Glasgow
University. 'In 1988, for example, equity withdrawal injected over Pounds
20bn into the economy, the equivalent of over 7 per cent of consumer
spending.
'When house prices drop, equity withdrawal naturally falls, depressing
demand generally. Home owners also tend to save more in housing slumps,
because they feel less secure financially.'
Despite cautious predictions from observers, Prof MacLennan worries that the
underlying causes of instability in the UK housing market remain. Chief
among these is the absence of alternatives to home ownership for most
people.
There are signs the decline in the privately rented sectors has been halted.
But with just 7 per cent of homes in this form of tenure, it is one of the
smallest in Europe. And the chances of the sector expanding have been
diminished by the government's failure to offer tax incentives to landlords.
As for the public rented housing provided by local authorities and housing
associations, it is subject to long waiting lists. Hence it is hardly
surprising that more than 80 per cent of all households say their preferred
form of tenure remains owner-occupation.
And with home ownership still hovering at about 65 per cent, there is
clearly a large unmet demand for home ownership that could fuel any future
house price rises. Dinner tables may yet hum to excited talk of double-digit
house price inflation if that demand is to be satisfied.
