FT  28 FEB 94 / Construction workers could lose tax right
As many as 500,000 self-employed construction workers who are paid without
deduction of tax and National Insurance could lose this right under
proposals announced by Mr Stephen Dorrell, financial secretary.
The Inland Revenue says that eight out of 10 construction workers could have
tax and National Insurance contributions taken directly from their pay
packets by the end of the century.
As many as two-thirds of workers on building sites are now self-employed.
Mr Dorrell, in a written answer to Parliament, says that the government
intends to make changes to the tax system in next year's finance bill.
The arrangements would not come into effect until the new system for
self-assessment for tax, announced in last November's Budget, is introduced,
probably in 1998.
Deductions would be based on an average effective tax for self-employed
building workers.
This would be lower than basic rate and would take into account the fact
that self-employed workers normally would be able to offset some of their
liability against business expenses.
On the basis of current deductions the construction industry believes that
the effective tax and National Insurance rate for self-employed building
workers would be about 18 per cent.
The current tax exemption scheme, which was introduced in 1971 and revised
in 1975, allows sub-contractors who qualify for '714 certificates' to
receive payment without prior deduction of tax and National Insurance.
The main qualification has been that individuals genuinely are self-employed
and that they should have a bona fide tax record covering three continuous
years.
Workers who are paid gross settle their tax at the end of the year. Policing
 -through a system of vouchers issued by employers - involves the Revenue in
costly paperwork which would be substantially reduced.
In a consultation document published in 1991, the Revenue was highly
critical of the present system, which it suggested was being heavily abused,
with even one-man labouring operations qualifying for 714 certificates.
Under the new system, businesses would have to have a minimum annual
turnover in order to qualify for their 714 certificates.
The consultation paper suggested the turnover figure might be Pounds 25,000,
which would exclude the vast majority of workers who now hold the
certificates.
However, most workers will remain classed as self-employed, even if they
have tax deducted directly from their pay packets.
