FT  07 APR 94 / Sainsbury forms retail alliance with three European groups
J Sainsbury, the UK food retailer, is joining three continental European
groups to form one of Europe's largest retailing partnerships.
Other members of the group, to be known as SEDD, are the family-owned
Esselunga, Italy's third largest retailer; Docks de France, one of France's
biggest grocery groups; and Delhaize 'Le Lion', Belgium's largest
supermarket operator.
Mr Michael Morgan, Sainsbury's director of international buying, said the
partnership was not just a buying group, but a 'multi-functional' alliance.
'This will be a strong pan-European association of leading and respected
companies, a group that could benefit many people.
'If we go into something like this, we will not be keeping one hand behind
our back. There has got to be a relationship of trust and mutual respect,'
he said.
He said all members would exchange knowledge in areas such as information
technology and systems. There could also be co-operation in marketing and
distribution. Sainsbury's partners might benefit from its expertise in
developing own-label products.
The four groups together exert considerable buying power, but Mr Morgan said
that while buying would be 'co-ordinated', it would not be centralised.
He added that manufacturers would also gain from the partnership, with the
opportunity eventually to launch products in four markets simultaneously.
Mr Morgan said the groups, which all retain a strong family influence, were
'culturally alike'. There were, however, no plans to strengthen the
relationship, for example through cross-ownership of shares.
Sainsbury began informal contacts several years ago with Esselunga and
Delhaize, but it was the development of links last year with Docks de
France, which operates the Mammouth hypermarket chain, which led to the
decision to formalise the partnership. The UK company and Docks de France
are to open a jointly owned off-licence in Calais at the end of this month.
As growth opportunities within home markets diminish, analysts expect more
European retailers to be pushed into forming alliances. Argyll, the UK's
third largest grocer, is already a member of the European Retail Alliance
(ERA), with Ahold of the Netherlands and France's Casino.
