FT  31 JAN 94 / Ministers plan tactical retreats: Tory whip says measure to
hit student-union spending power is a 'dead duck'
Senior officials in Westminster and Whitehall said yesterday that the
government was preparing a number of tactical retreats rather than risk
defeat by its own party.
Plans by Mr John Patten, education secretary, to end the student union
closed shop and give the government a greater say in deciding how unions
spend their funds were described by one government whip as a 'dead duck'.
He predicted that the education bill would be altered to win over Tory
opponents in both houses.
Mr Robert Jackson, a former education minister, said: 'John Patten has to
recognise that there is strong opposition to his plans from Conservatives
who stand by the traditional Conservative view which rejects the analysis
that student unions are the same as trade unions. The minister's impulse to
take power, in effect overturning the status of universities, is quite
unacceptable.'
Mr Patten's retreat comes as Mr Michael Howard, the home secretary, prepares
to back down over his plans to overhaul the structure of the police in the
hope of defusing opposition in the Lords.
Whitehall officials believe that Mr Howard is ready to drop the proposal
that the home secretary appoint the chairman of each police authority.
He yesterday made an impassioned plea to troubled Tories to 'keep cool
heads, calm nerves and a sense of perspective - and then we can see things
going our way'.
But a further government retreat may be necessary as it emerged that many
Conservative MPs are opposed to plans to replace the dual structure of
English local government by a single tier of all-purpose councils.
Sir Norman Fowler, Conservative party chairman, denied that the party was
failing to deliver strong government.
He said: 'In terms of performance, the government is delivering. What I also
think you have got is a strong prime minister, and a prime minister who is
leading, and will lead us through. The party stands behind the government
and it stands behind John Major, and what you will see over the coming
months is the recovery of the economy and the recovery of the political
position and the political fortunes of the government'.
Lord Archer, who has offered himself as party chairman, called on
Conservatives at all levels to 'stop squabbling among themselves'. He added:
'We have become not only the best government, we are also the best
opposition.'
However, Lord Tebbit said the prime minister and his colleagues 'must carry
a major part of the blame' for their situation. They had made 'some serious
errors' but had also worked against a difficult background. 'One of their
key problems is tax.'
Lord Tebbit told London Weekend Television's Walden programme that there had
been some 'very poor staff work' by the government, and that had been very
damaging.
