FT  13 AUG 94 / Poll opens for Labour NEC seats
A new generation of Labour politicians from the left and right is fighting
for places on the National Executive Committee in elections which start
today under a one member, one vote national postal ballot.
For the first time in more than three decades, Mr Tony Benn, the veteran
leftwinger, is not standing. Although Mr Benn was removed at the last party
conference after more than 30 years' service, he recently found himself back
on the NEC because of three vacancies.
These have been created by John Smith's death, the move to the European
Commission by Mr Neil Kinnock, the former Labour leader, and Mr John
Prescott's elevation to the deputy leadership.
Among the 21 candidates for the seven seats in the NEC's constituency
section, Mr Peter Hain, one of Labour's main critics of the party's economic
policy, is seen as the principal challenger from the left. Mr Dennis
Skinner, a member of the hard-left campaign group, is not expected to win
back the seat he lost last year.
In an attempt to create a wider left alliance Mr Hain recently criticised
the modernising tendency in the party without naming the new Labour leader,
Mr Tony Blair.
Mr Hain said Labour was in danger of becoming 'an empty shell of a party
with its activist base destroyed', and claimed that the power of activists
had been usurped in the party 'which has become centralised to an
unprecedented extent'.
These are the first NEC elections to be conducted among the party's
260,000-strong national membership on a one member, one vote basis.
It is expected that Mr Robin Cook, shadow trade and industry secretary; Mr
David Blunkett, shadow health secretary; and Ms Harriet Harman, shadow chief
secretary, will retain their seats. Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor,
also looks safe.
The front-runners for the three vacancies from the right are Mr Jack Straw,
shadow environment secretary; Ms Mo Mowlam, shadow heritage secretary; and
Mr Chris Smith, environment spokesman.
Two of the seven elected members have to be women. Ms Mowlam is being
challenged by Ms Dawn Primarolo, the leftwinger who speaks on health.
