FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of Slovakia (8): The voice of reassurance
Sergej Kozlik has the task of putting the best possible face on the HZDS and
its economic policies, writes ANTHONY ROBINSON.
He is anxious to reassure potential foreign investors worried at the
prospect of a HZDS-led coalition government supported by xenophobic
nationalists and a working class movement demanding higher pay and lower
unemployment.
'We simply cannot make concessions to the ZRS workers' association which
would lead to the loss of macro-economic stability and probably bring down
the government yet again,' he says. 'We are looking for compromises from
them which would ensure long term growth. We cannot allow wage increases
without higher productivity but we can and will reform the social security
system to focus benefits on the really needy,' he adds.
According to Mr Kozlik, the HZDS has three economic priorities: higher
public investment in highways; infrastructure and telecommunications;
stabilisation of the agricultural sector and encouragement of exports and
the entrepreneurial sector. For good measure, the HZDS policymaker adds
banking sector reform.
He does not include privatisation but it has been a point of contention
between the HZDS and the Moravcik government which cancelled some of the
sell-offs rushed through in the last days of the Meciar government but whose
own privatisation policies were bitterly criticised by Mr Meciar.
'In substance there are no real differences between the Moravcik government
and the HZDS over privatisation. The differences are in the detail. We do
not think that a majority of shares in companies should be distributed
through the voucher privatisation method, but at least 51 per cent of a
company should be in the hands of a clearly defined owner.'
He is also sceptical about the role of investment funds which now have
shares of 200 of the largest Slovak enterprises in their portfolios. 'Funds
may be good at managing portfolios but what we need are people who know how
to manage the enterprises,' he says. This is why the HZDS tends to favour
management and worker buyouts rather than the dispersion of ownership
through coupon privatisation and corporate governance in the hands of
investment funds, he adds.
He is quick to pledge that coupon privatisation will continue, given the
enthusiastic public response to the Moravcik government's launch of the
second round of mass privatisation through vouchers. But he insists that the
scale and volume of privatisation through the mass privatisation programme
will change with greater emphasis on trade sales and other more conventional
privatisation methods.
