FT  03 NOV 94 / Hualon project faces fresh doubts
The government's Pounds 61m grant to Hualon, a Taiwanese group, to build a
Belfast textile plant was plunged into renewed controversy yesterday when a
director of Northern Ireland's Industrial Development Board resigned in
protest at the project.
Mrs Jennifer d'Abo said she had quit because the board, which is responsible
for the Dollars 255m project, had failed to give her satisfactory
information about the legal and financial arrangements for the deal.
She said the board had refused to answer questions about a recent stock
market scandal involving subsidiaries and executives of Hualon, and had
refused her request for a special board meeting to reconsider the deal.
'I am not happy to agree to going forward with a very large project when
there have been accusations of scandal, share transactions (and) land
transactions . . . to which I have not been given satisfactory answers,' she
said.
She said there should be a proper inquiry into the project, the largest
manufacturing investment in Northern Ireland since the state-backed De
Lorean car venture, which collapsed with heavy losses in the late 1970s. The
Commons Northern Ireland committee is already investigating the proposed
plant. British textiles manufacturers are considering challenging in the
European Court the European Commission's approval this year of the Pounds
61m grant.
Mrs d'Abo is chairman of the Moyses Stevens florists group and headed
Rymans, the stationery chain in the 1980s. She said she and other IDB
directors had repeatedly raised questions about the Hualon project since it
was first submitted to them more than two years ago. The IDB said last night
that it had declined Mrs d'Abo's request for a special board meeting last
month because it wanted first to talk with Hualon executives.
It said it had made 'very considerable efforts' to answer her questions. The
last board meeting had discussed her objections and reviewed developments
relating to the project, to which no grant had yet been paid.
The IDB said there was no justification for suspending the progress of the
project. If no legal challenge were mounted by the end of this month to the
Commission's approval of aid, it expected the company to go ahead.
Questions remain over Pounds 61m Hualon grant, Page 9
Observer, Page 23
