FT  25 JAN 94 / Roche finds new meaning post-Valium: The world's most highly
valued drugs group
Roche is back. The big Swiss drugs group has staged a remarkable recovery to
the head of its field following a long and severe case of post-Valium
depression.
The publication last week of the FT-500 ranking of Europe's top companies
revealed that Roche had risen to become the third largest with a market
value of Dollars 35.7bn (Pounds 24bn), exceeded only by British Telecom and
Royal Dutch/Shell.
This followed another milestone last September when the group surpassed
Merck of the US to become the world's most highly valued drugs group, a rank
it had not held since the peak of the tranquiliser boom in the late 1960s.
Roche - still remembered by some for its prosecution of a British former
employee who exposed its vitamin price fixing practices in 1973 - has
achieved this comeback at a time when the profits and prospects of most big
pharmaceuticals groups are suffering from government moves to rein in
healthcare spending.
Roche sales jumped 11 per cent to SFr14.3bn (Pounds 6.5bn) last year, the
third successive year of double digit growth, and net income is estimated at
SFr2.54bn, a third above the 1992 level.
Investors believe that the group has several more years of double digit
profit growth in store, and have bid up the shares to 18 times estimated
1994 earnings, well ahead of other leading drugs groups.
The main reason for this optimism is Roche's chock-full pipeline of new
products.
The group's extraordinarily strong balance sheet, with cash and securities
believed to total about SFr2bn, is also much valued at a time when the
pressures on competitors might yield a once-in-a-lifetime acquisition
opportunity.
All this is a long way from 1978 when Mr Paul Sacher, the orchestra
conductor and musical philanthropist who leads the controlling Hoffmann-La
Roche family interests in the group, called on Mr Fritz Gerber, a prominent
Swiss industrialist, to become executive chairman.
Mr Sacher sensed that the phenomenal success of Valium and Librium had
undermined the group's dynamism, and the impending expiry of patents on
these tranquilisers threatened its future. Mr Gerber entered to find the
group with few profitable products other than tranquilisers, and a research
department that lived well but had nothing coming along.
As it takes 10 years to bring a new drug to market, he did a deal with Glaxo
whereby the British group would use Roche's large sales force in the US to
sell its then new anti-ulcer drug, Zantac.
He also brought out an injectible antibiotic that had been developed
in-house, but rejected by Roche's R&amp;D managers as uninteresting. Rocephin
hit the market just at the right time. Its use in hospitals has become
widespread because its once-a-day application saves staff time and money. It
is still Roche's top selling product.
These two moves alone probably saved the group from traumatic surgery. Since
then, it has patiently rebuilt a dynamic R&amp;D system, and now has a wide
variety of products both on the market and in the pipeline. Never again will
it depend on a blockbuster like Valium, Roche officials promise.
Roche's product line impresses investors because it is aimed mainly at
hospitals rather than retail chemists. The hospital market has long been a
tough professional sell, so the group is suffering less than competitors
from the squeeze on retail drug prices.
Gerber admits that the potential for price rises, even to keep pace with
inflation, will be severely limited for the foreseeable future, so the group
has to rely even more on innovative products.
Increasingly, it is aiming its efforts at intractable diseases where the
rewards, although difficult to achieve, could be the greatest. It has
leading products for easing chemotherapy effects, for leukaemia, depression,
Parkinson's disease, epilepsy, rheumatism, heart failure and Aids.
Gerber has sharpened Roche's other divisions, selling off some unpromising
businesses, such as agricultural chemicals, and strengthening others with
acquisitions.
The over-the-counter medicines division was propelled to internationally
competitive size with the Dollars 821m purchase of Nicholas, maker of Aspro
and Rennie, in 1991.
The flavours and fragrances division became the number two in its sector
with the acquisition of Fritzsche, Dodge and Olcott in 1990 and the merger
of Givaudan and Roure the following year.
Investors are especially excited by two biotechnology ventures.
Three years ago, Roche bought a 60 per cent stake in Genentech of California
for Dollars 2bn. Genentech produces a widely used genetically engineered
drug, Activase, for combating blood clotting in heart attack victims, and
has just won approval for Pulmozyme, which treats cystic fibrosis and has
prospects for easing bronchitis. Genentech puts Roche at the forefront of
genetic engineering which is beginning to challenge chemistry as a source of
drug innovation.
In 1991, Roche paid Dollars 300m to a US company for a diagnostic
technology, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), which analyses blood for
various diseases. It has since spent several hundreds of millions of dollars
getting PCR into marketable form.
With PCR kits, technicians can test for HIV, the virus that is thought to
cause Aids, in a matter of hours rather than the several weeks required by
former methods, and with greater accuracy. The group has just launched an
automated PCR system for medium-sized laboratories that will test for up to
eight diseases, and is already pressed to fill orders.
In spite of these aggressive investments, Roche has amassed an immense cash
pile. Gerber says the strong balance sheet enables the group to take big
risks, such as the Genentech and PCR purchases.
'I would never have had the courage to do those if I had had to borrow,' he
says.
The group's financial dealings have also provided a healthy profits stream.
Mr Henri Meier, finance director, refuses to reveal tactical details, but
insists that the group invests only in top-rated securities. He rejects
allegations that it invests in its own shares, manipulating the market in
them.
The once secretive and arrogant Roche has become much more investor and
consumer friendly, but there is still some mystery and concern about its
future control, especially as Mr Sacher is 88. All voting shares are in
bearer form and so the only thing that is clear is that the family owns a
majority.
Gerber simply says that there is an iron clad pooling arrangement among
family members to maintain an outright majority of the voting shares 'well
into the next century'.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Roche
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Sales by divisions
                                     1992       1993        %
                                    Sfr(m)     Sfr(m)    change
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Pharma                              6,886     7,813        13
Vitamins &amp; fine chemicals           3,070     3,275         7
Diagnostics                         1,561     1,720        10
Fragrances &amp; flavors                1,352     1,436         6
Others                                 84        87         4
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Total sales                        12,953    14,331        11
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
