FT  12 JAN 94 / Clinton in Europe: Eastern Europe caught up in new arms race
 -Defence fears and potential profits in the weapons trade have forced
states to change track
Central European leaders meet President Bill Clinton today aware that in
future they will have to pay more attention to their own defence. This
conviction had been growing long before the rise of Mr Vladimir Zhirinovsky
underlined the potential risk from Russian nationalism.
The initial revulsion against the arms trade from the idealistic former
dissidents who formed the first post-communist governments did not last
long. It gave way to a more sombre reassessment of future military
requirements and a more aggressive approach to selling arms on world
markets. What remains is a deep reluctance to jeopardise economic reforms by
diverting funds from hard-pressed budgets to the military.
Strapped for cash, several of the former Warsaw pact states have been
quietly turning to Russia to update their arsenals, taking advantage of
Moscow's willingness to supply arms in return for writing off rouble credits
left over from the old days of state trading.
The Hungarian army, for example, was always kept small and poorly equipped
by Moscow after it sided with 'counter-revolutionaries' during the 1956
Budapest uprising. But the war in neighbouring Yugoslavia and a resurgence
of anti-Hungarian sentiment in Slovakia and Romania, two other neighbours
with large ethnic Hungarian minorities, caused Budapest to take a fresh look
at its armed forces two years ago.
Russian President Boris Yeltsin, on a visit to Hungary, offered to supply
modern Mig-29 fighters, spare parts and equipment worth Dollars 800m (Pounds
540.5m) in partial repayment of Russia's Dollars 2bn accumulated trade debt
with Hungary. The Hungarian government agreed. It wanted to deter repeated
breaches of Hungarian airspace by Yugoslav air force jets making
intimidatory flights over Croatian villages across the Danube. Further
negotiations are taking place between Budapest and Moscow over the possible
acquisition of sophisticated surface-to-air missiles.
Shortly after the original Russian aircraft deal, the German government
donated spare parts and equipment from the vast stockpile of military
equipment inherited from the former east German army.
To allay the fears of sensitive neighbours, Budapest announced it was
destroying 510 older tanks to fulfil its obligations under the Conventional
Forces in Europe (CFE) agreements which led to the scrapping of thousands of
tanks and other arms throughout the region. But this did not mollify Mr
Vladimir Meciar, the Slovak leader, who arranged a matching MiGs for credit
write-off deal with Moscow last autumn.
Hungary's decision to upgrade its military equipment drew attention to the
non-Russian factors conspiring to make governments and arms producers
reassess their military thinking throughout the former Soviet bloc.
The clearest turnabout is apparent in both sides of former Czechoslovakia.
The moral revulsion of the leaders of the 1989 'velvet revolution' against
communist Czechoslovakia's role as an arms manufacturer and exporter led to
a virtual embargo on arms exports. But this had a devastating effect on arms
factories and related heavy industries located mainly in Slovakia and became
a big element in the divorce between the two states last year.
Czech and Slovak arms exports dropped from a peak of CzKr27bn (Dollars 1bn)
in 1987 to only CzKr6bn in 1992 while arms companies from the west and other
former Warsaw pact states scooped up potential contracts.
Once Slovakia gained its independence, however, Mr Meciar made clear that
former federal restrictions on arms sales were no longer valid and the Czech
Republic has also been busy re-building a smaller but more competitive arms
industry, with industrial groups like Skoda Pilsen attracting western
partners to produce updated arms.
Poland, like the other former Soviet satellites, has retired hundreds of
Soviet-trained senior officers. It now faces a power struggle over political
control of the armed forces between President Lech Walesa and the new
left-of-centre government. It has also been discussing co-operation with
foreign companies, including Israel with its close military hardware links
with the US and South Africa. All the former Warsaw pact countries of
central Europe are operating new defence strategies which reduce the overall
level of forces and shift units away from the western deployment demanded in
the old days.
But progress is slow, largely because of the cost.
It is not that Poland sees an immediate military threat from the east,
although Warsaw is anxious to see the complete Russian military withdrawal
from Estonia and Latvia and remains nervous about the concentration of
former Soviet forces in Kaliningrad. This Russian port-city enclave on the
Baltic has an estimated 300,000 troops and their equipment withdrawn from
east Germany and awaiting repatriation. Kaliningrad has become one of the
great arms bazaars in a region awash with military equipment and demoralised
soldiers.
The most worrisome scenario remains the prospect of a destabilising wave of
economic refugees. This is not a problem which can be solved by military
means, but higher unemployment in the former Soviet states is inevitable if
the military-industrial complex is slimmed down. Ironically the prospect of
mass unemployment in the military industries may recede somewhat as the
military-industrial lobbies regain ground in post-election Russia, but Poles
fear this will tend to reinforce the political influence of hardliners who
remain unreconciled to the loss of the Baltic states and central Europe.
