FT  23 NOV 94 / Survey of Mexico (12): Drug problem grows - Assassination
links are officially denied
After Jose Francisco Ruiz Massieu, the number two official in the ruling
party, was gunned down six weeks ago, Mexicans began to talk about the
'Colombianisation' of the political system, reports Damian Fraser.
Drug barons and their allies in the ruling party, it was claimed, were
seeking to block political change and police operations against them by
killing reform-minded public figures. Cardinal Juan Jesus Posadas of
Guadalajara had been a victim last year; presidential candidate Luis Donaldo
Colosio in March; and now Mr Ruiz Massieu, went the conspiracy theory.
'Who's next?' asked Carlos Fuentes, the novelist, in an article in La
Jornada. Columnists pointed to the spate of political killings in Colombia
in the late 1980s - that preceded moves by Colombia to accept extradition of
traffickers to the US - and suggested that Mexico's co-operation with the US
over drug enforcement was provoking a similar reaction.
'President Salinas broke the truce between drug barons and the government.
They are now fighting back,' says Federico Reyes Heroles, editor of Este
Pais, a magazine dedicated to public opinion. Mr Eduardo Valle, a former
senior aide to the attorney-general, until earlier this year, and now in
exile in the US, publicly claimed that drug traffickers and senior members
of the ruling party were in cahoots, and were behind the Colosio killing.
Such a view, although widely held, is rejected by the attorney-general's
office, which says that 'no connection' has been found between the killings.
The official line is that drug traffickers mistook Cardinal Posadas for the
head of a rival gang and killed him by accident; that Mr Colosio was
assassinated by a lone, deranged gunman; and that drug traffickers at most
played a secondary role in planning Mr Ruiz Massieu's murder.
Backing up the official version is the lack of clear motive for recent
killings: there is no evidence that drug traffickers have gained from the
murders. Nor has any evidence emerged that contradicts the government
explanation for the three deaths, or links them in any direct way.
Nevertheless, the conspiracy theories thrive. Many find it difficult to
believe that a Roman Catholic Cardinal could be confused with a 28-year-old
drug dealer; that it was by chance that Mr Colosio was murdered in Tijuana,
home to the powerful cartel of that name; and that is a co-incidence that
one of the alleged conspirators in the Ruiz Massieu killing, is thought to
be related to a top lieutenant of the Gulf cartel.
While the amateur execution of the Ruiz Massieu assassination does not bear
the hallmarks of a drug killing, some have suggested the Gulf cartel killed
Mr Ruiz Massieu to take revenge on his brother, Mario Ruiz Massieu, the
deputy attorney-general who has cracked down on the Gulf cartel.
Others believe that Ruiz Massieu had fallen out with members of the Gulf
cartel when governor of Guerrero, who had him killed before his expected
appointment to the interior ministry. Still others claim that Mr Ruiz
Massieu was killed by old-styled politicians, who feared his supposed
reformist instincts.
