FT  05 OCT 94 / IMF/World Bank in Madrid: IMF pledges to remain tough lender
Mr Michel Camdessus, managing director of the International Monetary Fund,
yesterday emphasised that the IMF would not weaken its insistence on sound
economic policies in countries to which it gives financial assistance.
Mr Camdessus told the annual meeting of the IMF/World Bank that this was 'a
responsibility we owe to our members in difficulty', in order for the IMF to
preserve its role as a catalyst for other forms of investment.
The IMF would continue to adapt its instruments of financial assistance. He
cited efforts to put together a package to help meet the needs of developing
countries and those in transition from communism.
'The fund's endorsement of policies is what other creditors and donors look
for before providing their own support. The fund's seal of approval must
maintain its credibility, and we shall ensure that it will,' he said.
Mr Camdessus said the fund's tasks of promoting exchange rate stability
faced new challenges from the globalisation of financial markets which had
sharply increased the risk of some countries being marginalised.
Strong surveillance of economic policies was essential because a global
market meant a bigger risk of domestic policy mistakes in one country
spilling over into others, and increasing exchange rate volatility.
The fund would have to 'further intensify our efforts' to promote current
account convertibility by eliminating exchange controls. Sixteen more
countries had accepted their treaty obligations for this since last year.
Mr Camdessus said the role of the special drawing right (SDR) - the reserve
asset that can be created by the IMF - should be the subject of an in-depth
study, taking account of the development of the European currency unit.
Mr Camdessus thus signalled his continued interest in promoting the SDR in
the world monetary system.
Predictably, yesterday's formal opening session of the IMF-World Bank
meeting yielded no progress towards resolving the dispute between the Group
of Seven industrialised countries and developing nations over an SDR
allocation.
In spite of Mr Camdessus's opposition to the G7's plans on the SDR, the IMF
managing director was given ringing endorsement by Mr Kenneth Clarke, the UK
chancellor and one of the G7 finance ministers.
'I personally like and admire Mr Camdessus,' the chancellor told a press
conference. 'I enjoy working with him, I like his enthusiasm, and he's a man
who inspires one with his competence and technical grasp,' Mr Clarke said.
In his speech to the meeting, Mr Lewis Preston, president of the World Bank,
said that the bank had to be more selective in its assistance, tailoring it
to the needs of countries, and focusing on issues where it would have the
most impact.
The bank also had to collaborate more effectively with its partners,
including the non-governmental organisations which took part in half the
projects supported by the bank last year.
