FT  27 MAY 94 / Campaign Diary: Unions delighted by a traditionalist
John Prescott's 'back to 1945' speech yesterday went down well with his
union audience. But glowing references to traditionalist icons such as
nationalisation and Clement Attlee are one thing; getting them into party
policy is something else. Hard-headed Prescott watchers will be combing
through the party's response - due to be published today, if it arrives from
the printers on time - to Jacques Delors's employment white paper. It will
show that Prescott's first draft has been sanitised by the removal of
traditionalist rallying calls on issues such as government intervention in
industry and minimum incomes. Senior shadow cabinet members are making clear
privately that the paper is a joint effort - not a Prescott solo. Which goes
to show just how tight the modernist grip on Labour's top echelons really
is. Still, Prescott loves a good scrap.
Gordon Brown is keeping his sense of humour in spite of the leadership
tensions. Quizzed about opinion polls putting him well down the list of
candidates, he said voters were probably confusing him with George Brown,
Labour's tired and emotional deputy prime minister in the 1960s. George, a
right-winger, was beaten to the leadership by his great enemy Harold Wilson,
a nominal left-winger. Gordon is on rather bad terms with Robin Cook and
John Prescott, two of the likely leftwing contenders this time round. But
relations have yet to reach the depths of Attlee's cabinet, in which foreign
secretary Ernie Bevin, told that chancellor Hugh Dalton was his own worst
enemy, snapped back: 'Not while I'm alive, he ain't'
                       *      *      *
Philip Treleaven is pulling no punches as Conservative Euro candidate for
London South West, the UK's most marginal seat, where Labour has a 518
majority. Treleaven, a computing professor at University College, London,
says he is the Conservatives' most Eurosceptic candidate. He may be right.
No cabinet ministers are lined up to speak for him - however, Lord Tebbit
will be on the stump on Wednesday for his only intervention in the campaign.
Sir James Goldsmith was coming too, but he's busy running his own campaign
in France. The seat looks winnable on the basis of council results, but
Treleaven would stick out like a sore thumb among Tory crypto-federalist
Euro MPs.
                       *      *      *
If you really want a federal Europe, vote Green. The British Greens have
been bashing the Tories for playing the 'tired old nationalist card' and
accusing Labour and the Liberal Democrats of hiding their centralist
leanings behind domestic issues. There is no such equivocation in the common
manifesto of the European Union's 12 Green parties, published today. It
calls on the European parliament to draw up a constitution covering
legislative, executive and judicial powers. Doesn't leave much for poor old
Westminster, does it?
                       *      *      *
The Green party was traduced in this column on Monday by the suggestion that
it forgot to invite Fleet Street's political editors to the launch of its
manifesto. Actually, they did send the invitations, but no-one noticed.
Are the Liberal Democrats preparing their revenge on one of the centre
party's past benefactors? Launching a rural affairs policy paper this week,
Paul Tyler had much to say about the raw deal farmers were getting as a
result of the market power of a small number of food processors and
supermarket chains. Farm prices had 'bumped along the bottom' during 15
years of Tory rule, but supermarket prices had risen by 50 per cent, Tyler
complained, leaving the distinct impression that the Liberal Democrats would
try to do something about it. Lord Sainsbury, the former SDP benefactor, is
unlikely to be amused.
                       *      *      *
Not much in the Scottish National party's manifesto about defence - which is
odd given the SNP's agitation about the future of the closure-threatened
Rosyth naval base in Fife. The manifesto re-affirms the party's commitment
to eliminate nuclear weapons, which implies closure of the Faslane base on
the Clyde, suitable only for Trident submarines. But Faslane is Scotland's
only other naval base, so if Rosyth is closed that leaves the SNP without a
naval base. Bit awkward for a party committed to maintaining a surface navy.
