FT  07 OCT 94 / Top Yugoslav military chiefs are dismissed
Three senior officers in the Serb-controlled Yugoslav armed forces have been
removed from their posts, in line with a general shift in Serbian policy
towards a Bosnian peace settlement.
The head of the navy, Admiral Dojicilo Isakovic, and two commanders from the
army, General Jevrem Cokic and General Bozidar Djokic, were officially
retired, according to a military communique published in Belgrade yesterday.
Observers said they believed the dismissals signalled the start of changes
aimed at removing officers most closely associated with Serbian President
Slobodan Milosovic's former nationalist policies.
'Many officers in the army are unhappy with Milosovic's move against the
Bosnian Serbs. We are now seeing him move against those who oppose the new
policy and other nationalist figures who threaten to rock the boat,' said
one diplomat.
Last week the leader of the nationalist Serbian Radical party, Mr Vojislav
Seselj, was arrested and jailed on charges of threatening members of the
Yugoslav parliament. Mr Seselj, a leader of a Serbian paramilitary group, is
believed to be one of those responsible for Serb atrocities in Bosnia and
has openly criticised Mr Milosovic's break with the Bosnian Serbs.
The Serbian president cut links with his former proteges, the Bosnian Serbs,
in early August to try to force them into accepting a peace plan. The
rejection of the plan by Mr Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, was a
blow to Mr Milosovic who is facing increasing economic problems in Serbia
and Montenegro and needs a peace settlement.
Since the rebuff, coverage of the war in Bosnia has virtually disappeared
from the government-controlled media.
The dismissal of three generals comes against a backdrop of dissatisfaction
in the armed forces. Earlier this week there were reports that the Yugoslav
army's chief of staff, Gen Momcilo Perisic, had threatened to resign over a
planned 30 per cent increase in army salaries. Wages and living standards
for the armed forces have dropped sharply since the break-up of Yugoslavia
and morale is low.
There is also jealousy of the police force, whose power and prestige have
been built up by Mr Milosovic since the war in Yugoslavia began in 1991. The
number of police officers is estimated to have more than doubled to 110,000.
