FT  21 JUN 94 / British Steel lifts payout on return to profit
British Steel is raising its final dividend after returning to the black
after two years of losses.
Pre-tax profits for the year to April 2, were Pounds 80m, in the middle of
analysts' expectations and representing a sharp recovery from the previous
year's Pounds 149m loss - the company's worst result since privatisation.
The company is also close to deciding on investing Dollars 150m (Pounds
100m) in its Alabama subsidiary, Tuscaloosa Steel.
The shares jumped 5 3/4 p to 139p as the final dividend was increased from
1p to 1.5p, making a total of 2p (1p) for the year. Most analysts had
expected the final dividend to be held at 1p.
Mr Brian Moffat, chairman and chief executive, said the company had used its
product range, competitive cost base and marketing strengths to distance
itself from competitors. The continuing recession in western Europe meant
that trading conditions were not easy. There was some improvement in demand
in the UK but mainland Europe remained weak - although the downturn appears
to have halted.
Turnover at Pounds 4.19bn was down 3 per cent on the Pounds 4.3bn of the
previous year. Excluding the effects of the November 1992 merger of British
Steel's stainless steel interests into Avesta Sheffield, turnover rose 4 per
cent, reflecting higher sales volumes and improved average revenue per
tonne. Trading profit for the year was Pounds 116m, compared with a Pounds
113m loss, because of better selling prices and enhanced operating
performance.
Operating costs at Pounds 4.07bn were 8 per cent lower, with the stainless
steel merger accounting for three-quarters of the decline. The balance came
from such factors as higher sales volume and greater efficiency.
Offsetting this, the company has made a full provision of Pounds 24m for the
European Commission fine imposed in February relating to its involvement in
an alleged European cartel in steel beams. The company is appealing against
the judgment.
The Tuscaloosa plan, on which a study is due to be completed later this
summer, would create a 1m tonne-a-year 'mini-mill' producing steel plate in
coil and cut lengths. The Dollars 150m investment would be spread over two
years. Two direct reduced iron (DRI) units would be moved from Hunterston,
Scotland, to lift product quality.
Earnings per share were 3.45p, against a loss per share of 6.5p.
Lex, Page 20; Overseas growth, Page 22; High-speed group, Page 27
