FT  13 AUG 94 / Books: 'Sex for text' contracts - Did Brecht's lovers write
his plays?
THE LIFE AND LIES OF BERTOLT BRECHT by John Fuegi HarperCollins Pounds 25,
732 pages
When Maxim Gorky toured one of the first Soviet concentration camps in the
1920s, the guards spruced up the camp, put flowers on the tables and, to
suggest a regime of intellectual freedom, added the latest newspapers. The
prisoners, too frightened to protest openly, decided to hold their
newspapers upside down as a kind of international distress signal. But Gorky
marched past unaware and wrote a glowing report of the camp. Almost all the
prisoners later died there.
This anecdote introduces the sensational argument which lies at the core of
John Fuegi's new biography of Brecht. According to Fuegi, not Brecht but
three actresses who were his lovers, wrote most of the works  - The
Threepenny Opera, Mother Courage, Galileo - on which Brecht's reputation
stands. Ignored and reviled, they spent a lifetime in silent protest,
metaphorically reading their newspapers upside down.
By contrast, Brecht, like his murderer-hero Mac the Knife, intoxicated
millions with his charisma and sexy lyrics while pursuing a career as thief,
woman-hater and political chameleon.
Is Brecht the latest victim of the politically-correct school of biography,
or are these serious allegations which should change our view of the Brecht
oeuvre? Either way, this book is compelling. First, its focus on the precise
moments of creation of Brecht plays, of who said or wrote what when,
illuminates those key movements in the revolution in 20th century theatre
which were Brecht's great achievement.
Second, its multiple biographies of the so-called 'real' authors of Brecht
plays give a vivid backcloth to the society and culture from which Brecht
came.
Third, it is a provocative detective story set, like the best of Le Carre,
in the shadow of the Nazis and the Cold War.
Brecht became famous at 30 when The Threepenny Opera opened in 1928; with
its ragtime beat, biting anti-capitalism and cast of crooks and tarts, it
remains the signature tune for 1920s Berlin.
Fuegi shows that a week before the first night, the work was half written
and the leading lady, certain it would flop, had signed to appear elsewhere.
There was some ugly exploitation - Brecht's besotted lover, Elizabeth
Hauptmann, wrote-in a 'sex for text' contract, which Brecht later repeated
with other women; when he married, Hauptmann attempted suicide. But mostly
the piece was just thrown together, as happens in the theatre, by Brecht,
Weill, Lotte Lenya and others, in a last-minute rush.
Lenya, who had been a teenage prostitute, gave life to the tarts' songs.
Hauptmann was behind the fantasy of female revenge in Pirate Jenny. Brecht
took inspiration for 'The Cannon Song' from his own homosexual lover and
from Kipling's 'Barrack Room Ballads'. When Harold Paulsen, Berlin's
crowd-pulling operetta star, spent all the budget on a ludicrously-slick
suit and spats for the criminal Mac, and threatened to give up the part
rather than the costume, Brecht was forced to write an introductory ballad
describing his crimes - thus, 'Mac the Knife', the most popular song in the
show.
Fuegi rightly points out that it is the disparate elements, especially the
contrast between the male and female dreams - mashing soldiers to beefsteak
tartare versus love in a shack by moonlight - that raises The Threepenny
Opera to mythic level.
He also offers evidence that two subsequent lovers - Grete Steffin, the
communist girl from the Berlin slums whom Brecht abandoned to die in Russia,
and Ruth Berlau, a Danish bourgeois revolutionary - provided some material
for the strong female roles in later pieces, such as Mother Courage. But to
accuse Brecht of plagiarising them is as absurd as suggesting Norah Joyce to
be the author of Ulysses because Joyce 'listened at the door of her heart'
to create the language for Molly Bloom.
As muses, Steffin and Berlau are significant; Fuegi's problem is that he
does not care about his subject's psyche or inspiration but only about
attributing blame. He calls Brecht a political turncoat for flirting with
right and left, with America and Russia, before settling in East Germany
while keeping his Swiss bank account. But Brecht was the quintessential
non-conforming artist who ended up in East Berlin because the GDR offered
him a theatre when neither West Germany nor America would let him within
their borders.
And, of course, he kept his bourgeois habits while satirising them on stage
 -his plays are rooted in his love-hate affair with the German bourgeoisie.
In Berlin, he juggled six girlfriends but would live only with the family
maid he had imported from Augsburg. Nevertheless, he found a tailor to equip
each lover with the white Mother Hubbard nightgowns his prim mother had worn
in Bavaria - and negotiated a discount for the bulk orders.
It seems perverse to write about Brecht, the socialist icon, if your only
interest is in his feet of clay. When Brecht visited Russia with Steffin in
1935, he turned down an invitation to stay because, he said, he could not
find enough sugar for his coffee. Does that mean he was an unprincipled
spoilt brat or that he cleverly hit on a metaphor for the lack of sweetness
in the political regime which would not offend his communist colleagues?
An in-depth study of Brecht must paint both aspects of the man: this book is
spirited and engaging but hopelessly lop-sided.
