FT  12 MAY 94 / Book Review: Green warrior turns on his own troops
One Man's Environmental Crusade
By Pete Wilkinson with Julia Schofield
Lutterworth Press, Pounds 17.50, 142 pages
'You can't sink a rainbow', their lapel badges proclaimed. But on the
morning of July 10 1985, Pete Wilkinson and other board members of
Greenpeace International, planning an anti-whaling campaign from a hotel
room in Bournemouth, Dorset, received a reverse-charge call from New Zealand
telling them that their flagship, the Rainbow Warrior, had been sunk by two
explosions. One crew member died.
It emerged that the blasts were caused by explosives deliberately attached
to the hull, and that French secret agents were responsible. The
international condemnation that followed brought Greenpeace, already one of
the world's best-known environmental pressure groups, greater prominence.
For Wilkinson, a leading campaigner for Greenpeace in the UK since its early
days in the 1970s, the evidence of the violence which their protests could
provoke was a turning point, which 'forced me to make the transition from
the idealism of the '70s into the harsh reality of the '80s'.
But Wilkinson also makes clear that the sinking coincided with - and may
have accelerated - a change in Greenpeace's character. From a small band of
penniless conservationists in the 1970s, it now spans 30 countries with an
annual worldwide income from donations of Dollars 150m.
In this entertaining chronicle, Wilkinson makes the charge that, during this
transformation, Greenpeace has 'lost direction'. It has become bureaucratic,
he claims, staffed with lawyers and well-paid administrators with
briefcases, who are unwilling to don rubber suits to stop up the outlet
pipes of industrial plants.
This metamorphosis is characteristic of many 'green' pressure groups, he
alleges. In his view, 'the green movement has faced a difficult time since
(the mid-1980s). Some would say it has been neutered. It is certainly less
radical'.
He bases his case on a comparison of present sophistication with the
enthusiasm of campaigns in the early 1970s, even though methods then were
sometimes amateurish. In one campaign for Friends of the Earth, he and his
colleagues set out to collect non-returnable soft drinks bottles from
streets to deliver to Schweppes, the manufacturer, in protest at the litter.
Failing to find enough, they were forced to buy hundreds of bottles and
poured the fizzy drink into vats. (Friends of the Earth says this manoeuvre
would be unthinkable now.)
Despite the group's rapid growth, the hippy element remained strong for
years. Wilkinson describes campaigners dancing naked under the Antarctic
sun.
But the group's interest in attracting media attention developed rapidly. A
1985 BBC documentary 'netted Greenpeace a cool Pounds 100,000 in boosted
donations and membership', he says. When an assault on the Department of the
Environment's tower block failed to attract immediate publicity, Wilkinson
urged a colleague to call the police. His anxiety subsided only when 'a
squad car came screaming up and I heard the familiar words: 'Wilkinson,
you're nicked' '.
Despite those self-conscious heroics, Wilkinson is an engagingly
self-deprecating narrator. He notes he 'never quite seemed to be given
responsibility': he is not, he makes clear, one of the natural stars of the
green movement.
But beyond the details of Greenpeace's evolution, his account illustrates
how the green movement built up public support and how the nature of
campaigning has changed.
'When Greenpeace had grown to be a sought-after prize, control of the
organisation was to preoccupy the time of many people,' he says. From 1981
Greenpeace began to build a formal structure, linking all the national
branches, which Wilkinson found claustrophobic. It led, he says, to
'computer and communications technology as could be found in the offices of
Rio Tinto Zinc or ICI'.
Wilkinson himself, with the sound of Jimi Hendrix blaring in the background,
finally drafted his resignation letter in 1987. Since then, there is
evidence that green groups have tried to address some of the flaws he
identifies. In 1990 Greenpeace began to trim some of its internal hierarchy.
Chris Rose, campaigns director of Greenpeace UK, says: 'We are trying to put
more of our resources into the front line - though I know that sounds like
the reform of the National Health Service.'
But he contests many of Wilkinson's charges. According to Rose, 'we are as
keen to engage in direct actions as ever, but effectiveness is now the main
question'. He points out that when Greenpeace blocked British Nuclear Fuels'
discharge pipe off the Cumbrian coast in 1987, 'two people went to jail and
the plant carried on'. Instead, last year, in trying to stop BNF's Thorp
reprocessing plant, Greenpeace took BNF and the government to court.
Although in the end Greenpeace lost, it delayed the start of operations for
a year.
Rose also points out that targets have become more difficult to find: some
of the worst cases of pollution - such as sewage, or dumping highly coloured
titanium oxide waste - have been addressed. The group now needs lawyers and
researchers because, frequently, the cause of pollution 'is not clear cut',
he says.
Greenpeace will now also talk to big business: it recently helped
manufacturers develop a fridge that does not harm the ozone layer.
Rose, one of the green movement's more thoughtful strategists, is surely
right that the pressure groups needed to change in these ways. While
Wilkinson can be accused of nostalgia on many counts, he raises an important
question: whether Greenpeace's supporters are reconciled to this change. If
they are not, and if their donations are still inspired by the images of
heroic campaigns, then Greenpeace's income and influence may eventually be
threatened by its growing sophistication.
