FT  03 MAR 94 / Europe lagging in drugs research
Europe's drugs companies are losing their pre-eminence by not spending
enough on research and development, the European Commission warned
yesterday.
They are also too small, production is too fragmented, companies have not
yet been able to respond to the single market and have been left behind in
the exploitation of biotechnology.
'It is hard to escape the conclusion that the US, rather than Europe, is now
the main base for pharmaceutical research and development and for
therapeutic innovation,' the Commission said in its document 'Outlines of an
industrial policy for the pharmaceutical sector in the EC'.
The Commission nevertheless backed away from last year's proposals calling
for the phasing out of direct price controls. This is a blow to the EU
pharmaceuticals sector, which has been lobbying against tighter price
controls being imposed by governments in an attempt to control healthcare
spending.
It emerged in Brussels yesterday that the Commission changed its position
following pressure from member states and the social affairs commission. Mrs
Nelly Baudrihaye, director general of the European federation of
pharmaceutical industries, the umbrella group for the sector, said yesterday
there was 'strong disappointment' in the industry at the watering down of
the proposals on price controls.
Instead, the Commission called on separate member states to take steps to
introduce greater market transparency and open competition to boost the
European industry, which has experienced a significant slow down in the last
year and seems set to shed some 27,000 jobs in the next three years.
With European companies only allocating half the average R&amp;D funds of their
American competitors, they are in danger of lagging in the development of
new drugs, the report said. It noted that only two British companies came
close to matching the levels of funding of American and Swiss companies.
'The picture is most worrying in respect of biotechnology,' the report
added, pointing out that whereas half of all new medicines were developed in
the community 20 years ago, this share had fallen to a third, with 65 per
cent of the patents in biotechnology now held by US companies.
The report recommended a greater emphasis on biotechnology R&amp;D, a reform of
legislation guarding intellectual property rights and a harmonisation of
sector regulation.
