FT  05 SEP 94 / Media Futures: National security tap dance - Motoko Rich
reports on the battle over Internet-based encryption codes
Officials in most countries would agree that the recent spate of plutonium
smuggling poses a serious threat to international weapons security, and want
to prevent the build-up of nuclear material in the storage banks of would-be
nuclear states or international terrorist groups.
In some countries, governments are not just worried about nuclear weapons.
They fear that encryption codes - programs for scrambling private messages -
can be deadly in the hands of potential enemies.
During World War II the Enigma code, the German encrypting machine, which
the Allies cracked and used to eavesdrop on Nazi communications, was a vital
key in the Allied victory.
But today, just as plutonium is frighteningly simple to transport in a
suitcase, encryption codes are easily transmitted via the Internet, the
global computer network, where there are no national borders and no customs
agents to stop smugglers.
These codes consist primarily of complicated computer software which
scrambles electronic messages and requires 'keys' - extended versions of the
familiar ATM pin number - to decode them. With the explosive use of the
Internet for both personal and commercial reasons, security has become a
major issue and such codes offer comfort to users worried about their
privacy.
Businesses want such codes to protect their sensitive data. Civil rights
advocates argue that encryption codes are essential to guard against
unwanted surveillance. Human rights organisations in the former Soviet
Union, South America and Burma are said to be using computer cryptography to
protect their Internet messages from the eyes of the police.
On the other hand, some governments argue that if encryption codes are
widely available on the Internet, any individual or group - including
potential terrorists or enemy states - will also be able to protect their
messages from national security organisations.
In the US, the government demonstrated this argument in its proposals for
the Clipper Chip, an encryption code developed by the National Security
Agency which would have allowed computer users to scramble their messages
but would also have allowed law enforcement or intelligence agencies to tap
in.
But many software authors have developed sophisticated programs which
incorporate encryption technology that is virtually uncrackable. It is this
technology that governments fear.
In the US, it is against federal law to export strong encryption codes. For
the past 18 months, a US federal grand jury in San Jose, California has been
investigating whether Philip Zimmermann, author of the computer software PGP
 -for Pretty Good Privacy - had a role in putting his cryptographic software
on the Internet and thus allowed it to be exported.
Zimmermann denies having loaded PGP on the Internet, though he is pleased
that the software has circumnavigated the globe and claimed he invented the
code in part for political reasons.
'If we allow the government to have the technological power to monitor every
movement of the political opposition, then the normal mechanisms we have to
change our government may be neutralised,' he said
PGP is available commercially in the US from Viacrypt, an Arizona-based
software company, for Dollars 100. Leonard Mikus, president of Viacrypt,
believes the government's efforts to ban the export of PGP, or any similar
technology, is futile because anyone could have put it on the Internet. 'The
information is now available and there is no way to bottle it up,' he said.
'Anything you do to try to stop it is artificial.' He said the US's export
ban merely stymied multinational companies which wanted to use US technology
to protect their data. Other US firms complain the US law just creates
unfair competition because other countries, including the UK, are not as
strict in enforcing export laws on cryptography.
Phil Dubois, Zimmermann's lawyer, said he could face a prison sentence of up
to four years if he were convicted by the grand jury. But he said he wasn't
sure why the government was singling out his client. 'The fact is that this
sort of software is out on the street in every country,' he said. 'And it's
not just because someone here has broke the law but because everyone else is
as smart as us and they have created their own cryptography.'
