FT  21 SEP 94 / Northern Electric to cut 800 jobs
Northern Electric, the power company based in Newcastle upon Tyne, is to
shed 800 jobs, taking to 3,700 the planned cuts in the sector since the
electricity regulator announced a review of distribution businesses last
month.
The losses, to be spread over three years, are part of a restructuring that
will provide annual cost savings of Pounds 20m by 1997-98.
The company also announced a tariff cut averaging 5 per cent from December 1
and said it expected to hold prices at that level through 1995 at least.
In addition the company said it expected cash flows to remain positive. It
would be moving towards sharing out earnings more equally between dividend
payment and company retention.
Dividend cover, the amount by which dividend payments are covered by
earnings per share, would move towards 2.0, the company said. Last year the
cover was 3.2.
The jobs announcement drew strong criticism from unions which said it was
further evidence that electricity companies were putting the interests of
shareholders above those of customers and staff.
Mr Paul Gallagher, general secretary of the AEEU engineering union, said:
'It will inevitably mean that standards of service will decline. One supply
company after another is laying off its workers to save money that can be
passed on in dividends to its shareholders.'
Northern is the fourth company to announce job losses since the regulatory
review. It follows Midlands Electricity and Norweb, shedding 1,200 each, and
Manweb, which is losing 500 staff.
Northern reduced its core staff by about 1,000, to 4,700, between
privatisation in December 1990 and the end of March this year.
The company's restructuring involves its core electricity distribution
business. The company will in future operate its distribution business
through two principal units, Northern Electric Distribution and Northern
Utility Services.
Northern Electric Distribution will manage the network while Northern
Utility Services will provide services including construction and
maintenance.
The company said the new business structures would enable it to provide
services with fewer staff than envisaged.
All job reductions would be achieved through voluntary means. Northern made
no new financial provisions yesterday to fund the severances, although it
did not rule out doing so in the future.
