FT  13 DEC 94 / Estonia takes Treuhand sell-off route: About 80 per cent of
the young Baltic state's enterprises are in private hands after a
German-style search for new investment and management
Tallinn's Polumeer basketball factory was a central planner's dream. Rubber
mixers, vulcanisers, moulders and weaving machines were imported from Japan
to produce a million balls a year for the Soviet Union.
Alas, before a single orange Polumeer could be made, political winds shifted
and newly independent Estonia's Polumeer lost its guaranteed basketball
market. The plant is now up for sale along with 41 other large state-owned
enterprises under the northernmost Baltic country's fifth and last
international tender.
'One million basketballs a year is a little too much for Estonia (which has
a population of only 1.5m),' says Mr Vano Sarnet, director of the Estonian
Privatisation Agency. 'And the export market is very competitive, divided by
major players long ago. Even Russia only wants western basketballs.'
The two-year-old privatisation programme, based on Germany's Treuhand model,
has sought to salvage just such companies with fresh investment and new
management. 'Through direct sales we can bring effective owners into our
economy much faster than through voucher privatisation,' says Mr Sarnet.
A good bid for Polumeer would include a price estimate, employment and
investment guarantees, and a business plan on how a rubber ball plant can
compete, he says. The agency then selects the winner and monitors the
contract.
By this method, 192 companies have been sold for Dollars 98.2m, putting
about 80 per cent of state property in private hands, excluding transport
and public utilities infrastructure. A further Dollars 65m in capital inputs
has been pledged and 24,400 jobs guaranteed. Foreigners account for about 40
per cent of investment.
The agency plans to finish its work by next year. Public utilities, train
lines, harbours and oil shale industries are to go up for sale then, too.
The World Bank this spring praised Estonia's progress, after a slow start.
But the system has its critics. Mr Ardo Hanson, an American economist who
helped put together Estonia's currency board system, says the privatisation
programme is too subjective and bureaucratic and is ill-suited for
relatively dynamic Estonia.
Once a contract is signed, adds Mr Hanson, 'it's not clear what happens when
the buyer wants to change conditions'.
The World Bank was also worried that the Treuhand model might keep 'leftover
items' from successful privatisations on state books too long  - such as the
basketball factory, whose parent company was broken up and sold off last
year.
The agency has therefore moved to put these companies on the market.
The investor most interested in Polumeer Basketball is Polumeer Toys, a
privatised offshoot of the parent company.
Unlike Russia or Lithuania, where a preferential employee voucher programme
enabled many old directors to keep control over their old factories, in
Estonia they must submit a competitive bid.
Mr Ulo Uisk, who runs the rubber department at Polumeer Toys, is guardedly
stoic. He only concedes that, 'since this is the biggest rubber
manufacturing in Estonia, it is important to keep it going in Estonian
hands.'
While very open to foreign investment - it is the only former Soviet
republic that permits foreigners to own land - Estonia has felt a ripple of
political backlash in recent months.
A public opinion poll this month found that the privatisation agency and the
police were Estonia's least-trusted institutions.
An Estonian analyst notes this stems not only from the large flow of foreign
investment, which doubles every six months, but also from the perception
that criminal domestic groups are legally capitalising on the bid scheme.
Last week Mr Indrek Toome, Estonia's last Soviet prime minister and now
active in real estate, was arrested for offering a Dollars 2,400 bribe. His
role in privatising the large Viru Hotel in central Tallinn fed public
discontent about privatisation.
Under political pressure, the Estonian government last month went ahead with
a voucher privatisation programme, against Treuhand's advice.
Shares in the large Tallinn Department Store were offered on November 9, and
three other prominent companies are due on the market early next year. A
single core investor still will keep a majority in these companies to
provide the corporate governance the Estonian programme's supporters say the
country's neighbours to the east and south lack.
Another benefit from voucher privatisation is an expected boost to Estonia's
fledgling equities market. Mr Alvo Reiner, who runs the Exchange Association
of Estonia, expects the input of capital into the market, not only into
companies, to help open a real stock exchange in a year.
Mr Sarnet defensively says Estonia's scheme at first helped bring in capital
and restructure inefficient companies, such as Polumeer, but adds new
methods may now be needed.
