FT  26 MAY 94 / Technology: From sand dune to science park - Israel is
learning fast how to exploit its technical skills, writes Peter Norman in a
continuing series on research
'My generation saw this country grow from sand dunes into a garden and then
into an industrial state. As modern Zionists, we want our country to excel
in high-tech and scientific achievement.'
 -Dan Propper, president Israeli Manufacturers' Association.
Propper need not worry. Israel already appears to be one big science park
and is learning fast how to exploit and commercialise its scientific
expertise.
More than 60 per cent of Israeli university students graduate with degrees
in science-based disciplines. Israel has the highest ratio of scientists and
engineers to population in the world. Its expenditure on research and
development, at about 3 per cent of gross domestic product, is
proportionally higher than the US, Japan and the other Group of Seven
leading industrialised countries.
The country's Ministry of Trade and Industry has a battery of statistical
superlatives at hand. No fewer than 135 scientists and engineers per 10,000
inhabitants are engaged on R&amp;D against 70 in the US, 65 in Japan, 48 in
Germany and 28 in the UK. Israel's natural scientists and engineers produced
61 papers of published research per 10,000 of the labour force in 1987,
about twice the rate of the US, Britain and Canada and more than four times
that of Japan.
This performance predated recent immigration from the former Soviet Union
which has increased Israel's population by a tenth and further enhanced its
scientific potential. About 36 per cent of the 550,000 mainly Russian
immigrants since 1989 have scientific occupations and 53 per cent have more
than 13 years of schooling.
But it is only since the mid-1980s that Israel has focused on turning its
formidable R&amp;D potential to commercial ends. An increasingly open economy
and the gradual lifting of the threat of war have encouraged researchers and
companies to explore peaceful uses for many of the technologies developed
when the nation's existence was under threat. This potential has been
boosted by improvements in the Israeli approach to marketing - a traditional
area of weakness - and the greater availability of start-up finance and
venture capital after the 'discovery' of Israel by foreign investors.
The government has also increased its support for industrial R&amp;D through the
Office of the Chief Scientist, an agency of the trade ministry. This
invested about Dollars 330m (Pounds 220m) in R&amp;D last year and has sponsored
an innovative programme of technological 'incubators' attached to research
institutes and established high-tech companies to create conditions in which
recent immigrants, in particular, can develop their ideas.
Basic research is centred on seven universities, of which four, the Hebrew
University in Jerusalem, the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot near
Tel Aviv, Technion - the Israel Institute of Technology in Haifa - and Tel
Aviv University, are of worldwide renown. All have set up companies to
commercialise their discoveries and develop technological transfer to
industry while protecting their patent rights. Some, such as Technion and
the Weizmann Institute, have also created science parks.
Technion, Israel's equivalent to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
has the Technion Research and Development Foundation to strengthen the
university's applied technological research activities and create closer
ties with industry. R&amp;D efforts are focused in 22 different centres covering
research in areas such as aeronautics, space technology, electro-optics,
microelectronics, advanced silicon chips, solid state electronics and
robotics.
There is no barrier to collaborative research efforts between academia and
industry in Israel. It is a small country - about the size of Belgium. The
constant threat of war since its creation in 1948 led to the build-up of a
large and innovative defence industry and intimate links between the
military-industrial complex, academia and the government. People know each
other and move easily in and out of the various sectors.
The interaction between industry and research institutions inside Israel has
been augmented by close ties with the US scientific establishment. Israeli
academics are generally not well paid. But they often make up for lack of
earnings at home by spending several months a year on sabbatical at US
universities or research centres. Exposure to American ways has not only
boosted academic incomes. It has led to an interchange of ideas and helped
spread the spirit of entrepreneurship in Israel.
Bob Buckwald, president of CI Systems, was born in the US and has lived in
Israel for 23 years. He taught physics at Technion until 1982 when he
decided to set up his company. CI began as an R&amp;D subcontractor, helping to
make testing equipment for advanced weapons systems. Based in Migdal HaEmek,
one of several industrial towns about half an hour from Haifa, CI has grown
from a Dollars 100,000 company in 1984 to a developer and manufacturer of
electro-optical test and measuring systems, worth an estimated Dollars 40m
today.
Buckwald says Technion played an important part in getting his company
launched when it had few resources. He used Technion facilities to develop
CI's first electro-optical device, paying royalties in return. He has
continued to maintain close ties: Technion scientists visit CI about every
two weeks. The company is developing a spectral imaging system, the
SpectraCube. Scientists at the Technion and the Weizmann Institute have
helped in its development.
Orgenics, a diagnostic bio-technology company, is located in a nondescript
business park in Yavne, south Israel, just 10 minutes' drive from the
Weizmann Institute. It was founded in 1983 by Professor Max Herzberg, who
emigrated with his family to Israel from France after the 1967 six-day war,
and who then shuttled between Israel and the US teaching and researching
before finally taking a position at Tel Aviv University in 1982 to teach
molecular and cell biology.
Orgenics is a small research-oriented company with annual sales of Dollars
6.5m. It has invested about Dollars 14m on R&amp;D since start up, is now
profitable and exports 98 per cent of its output of diagnostic products.
The company exemplifies how Israel's new high-tech companies interact with
the country's research establishment. It is currently carrying out a joint
research programme with Tel Aviv University on monoclonal antibodies, used
to control food quality. Herzberg is no longer an academic. But since 1991,
he has chaired the Israeli National Steering Committee on Biotechnology
which centralises the government's funding activities in the sector. He is
also a member of the chief scientist's research committee.
Technion's academic excellence was one factor behind the decision of Intel,
the big US semiconductor group, to start a development centre in Haifa in
1974 which now employs 550 people. Intel's Israeli scientists developed the
numerical maths processors for the 386 chip and helped develop the Pentium
processor.
Dov Frohman, general manager of Intel Israel, says it was attracted to Haifa
in part because of the large pool of talented science graduates. A
concentration of technologists in Jerusalem was one factor behind the
company's decision to set up its production facilities there.
But he does not think Israel's academic institutions are particularly
productive. According to Frohman, much of the collaboration between science
and industry is based on personal contacts. Intel has invited scientists
from Technion to visit its Haifa facilities. It currently has a small joint
programme with the Hebrew University to develop neural networks in data
processing.
With government backing, Intel staff have also set up an incubator: one of
two dozen in the country which provide infrastructure for small high-tech
projects to help them towards commercial viability.
Israel's incubators and recently established high-tech companies are
producing 'some really world class projects', says Ilana Gerard, president
of Gerard Group International, a US-Israeli consultancy that puts Israeli
high-tech companies in contact with US 'Fortune 500' companies.
She shares none of Frohman's reservations. 'The prediction may seem far
fetched,' she says. 'But by the year 2005, Israel will be the world centre
of high-tech R&amp;D'
Next week: Sweden
