FT  06 APR 94 / Government Bonds: Treasuries rally after two heavy selling
sessions
The US Treasury market rallied yesterday as traders took advantage of yields
pushed to attractive levels by two sessions of heavy selling.
Late in the session, the benchmark 30-year government bond was 1 1/4 ahead
at 87 17/32 , with the yield easing by about 13 basis points to 7.278 per
cent. On the short end, the two-year note was  3/16 better at 99 3/8 , to
yield 5.444 per cent.
The firm opening came on the heels of more stable trading conditions
overnight in Asia and Europe. Volatility overseas has contributed to the
recent weakness in US bonds, as traders have been forced to sell their
holdings in the more liquid US Treasury market to cover their losses
elsewhere.
After two days in which the yield on the long bond climbed nearly 20 basis
points and prices dropped by about 4 points, buyers were finally coaxed back
into the market. But traders said the activity was mostly based on technical
factors and stressed that fear of inflation and concern over the direction
of interest rates would limit the extent of any rebound.
The day's economic news - a 0.1 per cent decline in the Commerce
Department's composite index of leading indicators - elicited little
reaction in the market. The February reading, which is designed to predict
future economic activity, compared with a consensus forecast of a 0.2 per
cent drop and a revised 0.4 per cent increase the previous month.
The rally briefly stalled in mid-afternoon after Mr Thomas Hoening,
president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, suggested that the
economy was on the 'threshold' of higher inflation. But bonds soon regained
their stride and were hovering just below their session highs near the end
of the day.
European government bond prices were marked down by as much as a point
yesterday morning in response to the decline in the US markets over the long
Easter weekend. However, a combination of light buying and signs that Europe
was finally de-coupling from the US fuelled a respectable recovery in the
afternoon.
Traders said that most of the activity was concentrated in the futures
markets but that volume in the cash markets was relatively thin. Some buying
of call options was also reported.
Analysts said that the start of the second quarter might have encouraged a
change of sentiment among investors. 'There appears to be a feeling that
Europe can and will de-couple from the US,' said Mr Julian Callow, European
economist at Kleinwort Benson.
Mr Ifty Islam, fixed-income strategist at Merrill Lynch, said that the
widening of the yield differential between 10-year German government bunds
and US Treasuries provided some evidence that the de-coupling process was
under way.
The semi-annual yield spread between US Treasuries and bunds went as high as
85 basis points yesterday before stabilising around 76 basis points. This
compared with 59 basis points last Thursday and 15 basis points on March 23,
Mr Islam said.
Hopes that the Bundesbank would today announce a further cut in its repo
rate contributed to the rise in bund prices yesterday. The market expects
the central bank to cut up to three basis points off the rate which
currently stands at 5.76 per cent.
Speculation was also growing that the Bundesbank might cut its discount rate
at its next central council meeting on April 14, traders said.
The June contract of the bund future on Liffe recovered from a low of 95.90
to touch the day's best level of 96.95. In the late afternoon the contract
traded at 96.90, up 0.13 point on the day.
UK gilts failed to end the day in positive territory despite the recovery in
the afternoon. The June contract of the long gilt future on Liffe traded at
107 7/8 in the late afternoon, down  5/16 on the day but off the day's low
of 106 9/16 and close to the day's high of 107 15/16.
Mr Islam said the afternoon recovery had prompted some volatility in the
yield differential between gilts and bunds. The spread fluctuated between
120 and 140 basis points on the day.
News in the late afternoon that Mr Silvio Berlusconi had suspended talks
with his Northern League election allies on forming a government sent
Italian government bond futures into a tailspin.
The June contract of the 10-year Italian government bond future on Liffe
dropped by 0.83 point to 112.01 just minutes after the news flashed across
trading screens.
Before the news broke, the contract had stabilised around 112.70, down 0.14
point from Thursday's close, after a day of volatile trading which had seen
a high of 113 and a low of 111.
