FT  24 NOV 94 / Personal View: There's no time like European time
Boosting a country's prosperity is rather like keeping a company moving
forward. You must strive to increase revenues, to cut costs and to make
yourself more competitive. Do this and in financial terms you will live to
do more for your shareholders.
If into the bargain you can improve the quality of life of those you are
responsible for, you may even be liked as well - though that is asking a
lot] Which has led me to wonder if it would not be remiss of the government
to pass up an opportunity to bring in an extra Pounds 1bn a year for the
UK's tourism and leisure industries, boost business and employment
prospects, and consolidate the positions of London and Edinburgh as Europe's
pre-eminent financial centres, all without costing us a penny.
For that very opportunity is before us now.
It goes by various names and has appeared in different guises over the years
without ever quite making it on to the statute books. It is the remarkably
simple idea of putting our clocks forward by one hour throughout the year on
to what Eurotunnel is at present forced to call 'concession time'. This is
what we operate from Folkestone, and what the Home Office has laboriously
christened 'single/double summertime'.
A campaign to achieve this objective - unifying the UK with European Time -
was launched recently, with the aim of bringing forward a private member's
bill on the subject in the annual ballot that allows a backbench member of
Parliament to introduce a bill to the House of Commons.
The campaign, Daylight Extra . . . Now, is rightly pointing out the
advantages of an extra hour's daylight at the end of the day, when most of
us would notice the difference. Most notable is the reduction in road
accidents, evidence for which is provided by the Transport Research
Laboratory and endorsed by the Royal Society for the Prevention of
Accidents. There are also the greater opportunities for sport and leisure,
but from my commercial perspective there are other benefits too.
For a start, the change to synchronise UK time with that in continental
Europe would spell an end to the current absurdity whereby we enjoy a mere
four hours of overlap in working time with the continent of which we are
part and to which about three-fifths of our exports now go. Never do the 22
miles separating us seem so long as when you try to call a colleague in
Paris around 'lunchtime'.
But there is far more at stake than mere convenience. Putting the clocks
forward will synchronise Britain's financial markets with those of
continental Europe, it will confirm English as the main language of European
business and it will open up a precious 60 minutes of overlap in working
time with the tiger economies of the Far East.
British executives will also experience the novelty of attending normal
meetings in Paris, Brussels, Amsterdam, Geneva and Frankfurt without the
expensive and time-consuming process of flying over the night before to stay
in anonymous hotels.
The tourist industry, which is heavily dependent on daylight hours already,
would have its season extended - thereby encouraging the rapidly expanding
domestic market in off-peak and short-break holidays.
Small wonder then that the campaign has the backing of, among 130 others,
the Confederation of British Industry, British Tourist Authority and the
Association of British Chambers of Commerce.
It is time to break inertia's grip on our parliamentary decision makers, and
there is evidence to suggest that the grip is now slackening among MPs. Like
all matters that affect the way we live our lives - be it the compulsory
wearing of seat belts or imposing a smoking ban on public transport - there
is an inbuilt reluctance to shift from the status quo.
Ultimately, however, passive opposition in those examples was overcome and I
am confident it can be in this one.
As there was reluctance in Downing Street to include this measure in the
Queen's Speech, then let there be support for a private member's bill which
is included in today's ballot. Government by lottery it may be, but this is
one issue whose number must surely now be called.
The author is co-chairman of Eurotunnel
