FT  27 AUG 94 / The Long View: Strange case of Lord A
Shame about Lord Archer's political career. But the wayward novelist does
enliven an otherwise dull week. The snag is that his curious share dealings
cast serious doubt on one of our most cherished and comfortable assumptions
 -namely that the British are wonderfully successful at maintaining the rule
of law without a surfeit of lawyers.
For those who have been sunning themselves on some foreign beach, here is an
edited version of the plot to date. In January, Lord A, whose wife is a
director of Anglia Television, buys shares in Anglia. This he does through a
stockbroker, Charles Stanley, that he has not hitherto employed. Within days
Anglia is the subject of a bid from MAI, whereupon the shares are sold at a
profit of Pounds 80,000.
While the broker had at first assumed that Lord Archer was buying for
himself, the noble peer subsequently demonstrates an admirable concern for
wider share ownership by asking for the shares to be registered in the name
of a Kurdish acquaintance, Mr Broosk Saib. He also provides Saib with an
unusually ritzy accommodation address. All correspondence, including the
cheque, is sent to Lord Archer's own London penthouse.
Britain's Department of Trade and Industry has never been noted for a
suspicious turn of mind where insider trading is concerned. Yet it did, in
this instance, investigate the transactions involved, which suggests that
its sense of smell is not entirely deficient in these matters. It then
decided to take no further action against any of the parties concerned in
the investigation.
Lord Archer now admits that his share dealings were a 'grave error', but
only because they embarrassed his wife, who later said that she did not pass
on information to him. This week the chivalrous novelist was to be heard on
the radio declaring repeatedly that he had nothing further to say, sounding
for all the world like an 'I speak your weight' machine that had acquired a
good lawyer. The newspaper pictures of Saib, meantime, portray a man of
exceptionally cheerful disposition.
For some, this is good knockabout fun in the silly season. Others of more
serious inclination feel that it demonstrates the stupidity of Britain's
insider trading legislation. Here, they argue, is a case of a man being
caught at the wicket and promptly declared not out.
Nor is this the first time that such a thing has happened. Since insider
dealing is a criminal offence, the burden of proof is exceptionally onerous.
The definitions of an insider, and of inside information, are
extraordinarily difficult to draw in a watertight legal manner. Enforcement
is therefore difficult and the authorities become absurdly preoccupied with
the table manners of people at brokers' lunches. Would we be better off
without such legislation in the first place, given that failure to enforce
the law brings the law into contempt?
It is not difficult to make the case. Market skulduggery can be divided into
two categories. Some behaviour involves the distortion of prices. If, as in
the case of the Guinness bid for Distillers, large companies change hands on
the basis of false information, there is a risk that resources will be
misallocated and the economy damaged.
Insider dealing, in contrast, makes for more efficient pricing. The victims
tend not to be the small shareholders, in whose name the legislation is so
often justified, but professional market makers who know how to look after
themselves.
Moreover, insider dealing laws, which originated in the liberal,
English-speaking economies, distance shareholders from management. They give
institutional investors an incentive not to lock themselves into a
supportive dialogue with companies because this would restrict their ability
to sell the shares. By reinforcing the fetish of liquidity, insider dealing
laws weaken the chain of accountability from management to the legal owners
of the company.
Well, up to a point. But the Germans and Japanese themselves now have
insider dealing laws; and the reason is political rather than economic. In
Japan, in particular, the fact that brokers' inside clients were recently
protected from an unprecedented market crash, while private shareholders
were not, caused huge disillusionment with the country's ruling elite. That
resentment partly explains the erosion of the Japanese political consensus.
Nor are the economic arguments for legislation negligible. A biased roulette
wheel deters punters from the casino. It is noteworthy that in countries
such as Italy, where insider dealing legislation is weakly enforced, the
stock market is distrusted by the public. That can lead to a higher cost of
capital.
Indeed it is possible that the low level of private share ownership in
Britain reflects a general suspicion of behaviour in the stock market as
well as the fiscal incentives for collective ownership. The fact that new
issues are so often underpriced and that companies change hands at large
premiums to their day-to-day market valuation tends to support that view.
Judging by comments overheard on the Clapham omnibus, Lord Archer's conduct
has done damage both to the Tories and the City - though not, dare one say,
as much as might have been done if he had been given a high profile
political role before the next election. There is surely mourning in the
Labour camp. It seems inconceivable, regardless of economic argument, that
any political party will repeal the insider trading legislation. Given
London's lucrative role as an entrepot in the capital markets, it would also
be damaging to part company with US practice, which is the international
norm.
We are thus condemned to frequent legislative amendments and repeated
criticism of poor enforcement. That means the law will continue to look like
an ass. But when has it not? As Mr Justice Cocklecarrot, the creation of
that connoisseur of legal form, JB Morton, remarked: 'If a cow with
handlebars is a bicycle, within the meaning of the Act, then a bicycle with
four legs instead of two wheels is a cow.'
