FT  01 AUG 94 / RPF keen to establish credentials: Rwanda's rulers must
rebut claims they are a foreign occupation force
English phrase books are much in demand in francophone Rwanda these days as
job prospects with the new government may hinge on whether the candidate
masters the language of the country's new rulers, the Rwandan Patriotic
Front.
Because the RPF recruited extensively among Tutsi exiles living in Uganda to
launch the guerrilla war that brought it to power, it has been easy for the
ousted Hutu regime to portray the RPF as a foreign occupation force.
Gen Paul Kagame, the RPF's military commander, speaks no French, and cabinet
meetings are reported to be held in English for his benefit.
The language barrier is only one of many difficulties facing a two-week-old
government desperate to establish its legitimacy, both at home and abroad.
Despite the presence of Hutus in prominent posts, and a discourse of
national unity, Rwanda's new leaders have not been able to dispel fears
among the majority Hutu population that they will run a government by and
for Tutsis, in a throwback to Rwanda's feudal past.
But the international community, which watched the genocide of Rwanda's
Tutsi population in silence, is now eager to help without asking too many
questions of the new regime. The UN has launched a Dollars 435m (Pounds
280m) appeal to assist Rwanda's reconstruction and alleviate the plight of
2.5m Hutu refugees who fled in fear of RPF reprisals.
The US is set to launch a round-the-clock airlift operation to bring food,
medicines and water to the cholera-ridden refugee camps in Goma, Zaire.
Britain has volunteered to repair Rwanda's war-damaged roads and bridges.
Germany has offered to donate fully equipped radio stations to enable the
RPF-led government to broadcast its message of reconciliation to the masses
huddled outside its borders.
The RPF knows that unless it can convince the Hutu population to return, its
chances of restoring stability to Rwanda are slim.
No one is more aware of this than the defeated soldiers and militia of the
former Hutu regime, who are threatening to kill anyone who dares leave
Zaire's hellish refugee camps.
UN relief officials are increasingly uncomfortable with the presence of mass
murderers among the refugees they are trying to help.
'Unless the international community takes steps to bring those responsible
to justice, we will be accessories to their crimes,' says one frustrated aid
official. According to confidential UN reports, Hutu extremists have also
taken control of Benaco camp in Tanzania, the home of 430,000 Rwandan
refugees. Relief workers who tried to expel the extremists were physically
threatened and had to leave Benaco themselves.
The UN has appointed a special rapporteur on human rights to document abuses
in Rwanda. But Mr Rene Degni-Segui is still waiting for the resources with
which to carry out his job.
He has been allocated only one field officer to investigate the
circumstances in which more than 500,000 people died. 'We need investigative
judges, forensic experts, ballistic experts, military intelligence analysts,
and prosecutors who have dealt with war crimes in the past,' says Ms Karen
Kenny, the field officer. 'If we don't address the issue of genocide, how
can we ask the RPF to uphold international standards of justice?'
Already there are fears the new government may not be able to balance the
demand for justice against the need to promote national reconciliation. Mr
Degni-Segui is alarmed at reports of RPF forces carrying out summary
executions in Kigali. Other UN officers say returning refugees are being
herded into RPF-controlled encampments.
'Hutus believe the new government's entreaties are a trap, and that they
will be massacred if they return,' says Mr Stewart Wallis, overseas director
of the British charity Oxfam. 'Unless we have human rights monitors to
accompany them, aid stations along the route, and international jurors on
the ground to hear their testimony, Hutus will not return.'
Mr Wallis believes fewer than 200,000 refugees will leave Zaire of their own
accord. The majority will become permanent exiles, a hostile and
destabilising force surrounding the new Rwanda.
The new government is ill-equipped to deliver services even to the few
thousand refugees who have begun the return journey home. Cholera has taken
hold in Kigali, and dysentery may soon follow. The capital has only one
fully functional hospital, run by the International Committee for the Red
Cross. Power, water and telecommunication services have not yet been
restored.
'Rwanda has a government, but it does not yet have an administration,' says
Mr Peter Hansen, the UN under-secretary general for humanitarian affairs.
Most ministries consist of the minister and three or four civil servants
with little or no experience, he says.
The UN Development Programme is looking at how to put together a 'government
kit' which would give the RPF a working administration. Mr Charles Petrie of
the UN Rwanda Emergency Office said: 'We are planning to draft experts from
all over Africa who know how to rebuild a country from scratch.'
