FT  19 MAR 94 / Despatches: Detour to danger in Soweto - Gordon Langridge
tells how a day trip ended in robbery at gunpoint
It was never our intention to go to Soweto. On the contrary we thought it
would be not only unsafe but ghoulish to visit so tragic a centre of
violence and misery.
So, on the eve of our only day in Johannesburg, we asked the hotel porter to
arrange for us a tour of the city centre. This, he said, might be difficult:
there were tours to Soweto on a Sunday but not normally of Johannesburg.
In the event a city tour was arranged and my wife and I set off in a minibus
driven by an amiable and well informed African guide.
At the Carlton hotel in the city centre the driver had arranged to pick up
two other customers, a New Zealander and his Canadian girlfriend, both
doctors. While we waited for them the tour guide explained apologetically
that the newcomers wanted to go to Soweto hospital where the girl had done
part of her training. Would we mind going there?
Was the route safe? 'Absolutely,' he replied 'We go there every day and
avoid possible trouble spots.' And he assured us that the Sowetans were glad
to see foreigners and anxious that their problems should be understood
abroad. It seemed churlish and craven to refuse.
As we headed along the dual carriageway to the west of the city our
misgivings began to seem silly. When we stopped on the hard shoulder for the
New Zealander to take photographs of the workers' hostels we were at least a
quarter of a mile away from them.
Certainly the view was interesting: we had not realised, for example, that,
almost adjacent to the extensive barrack-like hostel area, was a tidy estate
of detached family bungalows, small but clearly respectable and well cared
for. Beyond them in the distance we could see the hospital.
Resuming our journey, our uneasiness returned with a vengeance, as instead
of keeping to the highway, the driver took a rough road which divided the
hostels from the housing estate, presumably to a short cut to the hospital.
We had driven slowly almost to the T-junction at the end of this road when
it happened: a blue Toyota saloon overtook and stopped in front of us. From
it appeared three or four armed youths, one of whom aimed a pump-action
shotgun at the windscreen of the minibus.
The other youths ran to both sides of the bus and forced open the doors. The
driver was made to get out and his place was taken by a member of the gang.
A shotgun, accompanied by angry shouts, was thrust through the doorway of
the bus to within inches of the New Zealander's face. He thought he was
about to be murdered but was told to hand over his camera and valuables and
get out of the bus. We all had to do likewise.
The robbery completed, the youths got into the bus and drove off.
Relief at having escaped with our lives, and uninjured, was soon overtaken
by the realisation that we were in the middle of the township without
transport or access to a telephone.
Neither our driver nor any of the bystanders offered any help. My wife
fortunately had the presence of mind to ask a pleasant looking young woman
standing at the door of her bungalow if we might come in.
The woman hesitated, clearly aware that helping us was not without risk to
her family, but then agreed that we might wait in the house. The woman, her
husband and their neighbours proved to be kind and friendly people.
The police were called and, while we waited, we were offered beer; coffee
was served in the best china cups. The house was immaculate, furnished and
maintained with evident devotion and care. There was a gentleness and quiet
goodwill about these people which was touching.
Many of them said almost as if it had become a conventional greeting, 'All
we want is peace,' and one believed them.
The police came within 15 minutes - not a bad response time for a district
where houses seem not to be numbered sequentially and streets are not
obviously named.
They arrived in an armoured vehicle and a flying squad car. Three young
white Afrikaners with machine guns and pistols, wearing flak jackets, came
into the bungalow and took up positions by the front and back doors.
They clearly took seriously the possibility that the incident had been set
up as a trap for them - it had happened before.
They were calm, professional, extremely courteous to our hosts, and even
friendly to us, although they must have thought we had behaved
irresponsibly. They relayed at once to other squad cars the detailed
description the New Zealander was able to give of the car the gang had used,
and they patiently took statements from each of us.
None of us could describe our attackers in any detail: we were even unsure
whether there had been three, four or five of them. Shock and fear it seems,
enfeeble the power of observation.
'What about the many other witnesses?' we asked. 'There won't be any other
witnesses,' was the reply.
We asked the police about their work. We supposed that tours of duty in
Soweto were short. Not at all, they explained: it takes so long to get to
know the district that they have to stay. One of them had done seven years
there already.
The police escorted us all out of the township and drove the young doctors
to Soweto hospital which, to our amazement, they still wished to visit. We
were interested only in returning to the calm and security of our hotel.
The next morning my wife went to a department store in the hotel complex and
asked for a gift voucher to be sent to the woman who had given us sanctuary.
'It will never get there,' the girl explained, 'she will have to come here
to collect it.' We very much hope she did.
Had we been foolish, or unlucky, or had we been set up? Certainly there were
conflicting views about the wisdom of a visit to Soweto.
The hotel porter and the tour guide had assured us that there was nothing to
fear. The two young doctors had been similarly advised by the friends they
were staying with in Johannesburg. Yet the white South Africans we told of
our experience were aghast that we had gone to Soweto and that the staff of
the hotel had offered tours there. In the words of a startled young girl in
the bank: 'No one goes there; people get killed in Soweto.'
