FT  28 SEP 94 / Labour faces row on quotas for women
Labour is heading for a potentially divisive conference row over positive
discrimination in favour of women, in spite of attempts by the leadership to
defuse the issue.
The party's national executive committee will today approve a flexible
interpretation of the rules on female representation, in line with a
compromise approach adopted by Mr Tony Blair, Labour leader.
Opponents of positive discrimination said they remained hopeful that next
week's annual conference in Blackpool would overturn quota rules agreed last
year as part of a package of constitutional reforms.
Ms Nicola Kutapan, co-convenor of Labour Supporters for Real Equality, said
Mr Blair's flexible approach was a welcome sign that the party leadership no
longer believed the quota policy was workable.
She said: 'There is a considerable amount of opinion among constituency
parties about this, and I don't think people are going to be willing to let
it drop.'
Critics say that the rules discriminate against men because they require
female representation in constituency delegations and all-women short-lists
in some parliamentary seats.
Constituency parties have tabled 13 resolutions calling for the policy to be
scrapped. Delegates to the GMB general union conference earlier this year
also expressed support for a reversal of discriminatory selection
procedures.
The NEC will also formally approve an invitation from the Labour leadership
to Mr John Hume, leader of the nationalist SDLP, to address the conference
on Northern Ireland.
SDLP officials said Mr Hume would not attempt to intervene in the growing
Labour debate over the party's commitment to campaign for Irish
unity-by-consent.
Supporters of a more neutral approach fear that his speech will bolster
support for the party's nationalist wing, led by Mr Kevin Macnamara, shadow
Northern Ireland secretary.
Independent Labour Publications, the pressure group behind an emergency
resolution seeking a review of the unity-by-consent formula, said the
invitation to Mr Hume 'smacks of a manoeuvre to maintain support for a
discredited policy'.
Mr Calum MacDonald, Labour MP for the Western Isles, urged Labour to
'separate our political sympathies for John Hume as a socialist, and our
respect for the work he has done to get the peace process going, from his
nationalism, which is a different matter altogether'.
