FT  02 NOV 94 / Heseltine tables revised plan for Post Office sale
Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade and industry secretary, last night tabled a
complicated plan for partial privatisation of the Post Office.
His last-ditch attempt to rescue the government's privatisation would
involve a 40 per cent sell-off of the Royal Mail and the transfer of another
20 per cent to an independent trust.
The remaining 40 per cent would be held in the public sector for a minimum
of two parliaments and would include a 'golden share', guaranteeing the
government the final say in controversial strategic decisions.
The independent trust would comprise representatives of employees at all
levels of the Royal Mail and, crucially, members of the Federation of
Sub-Postmasters representing owners of rural post offices.
With senior ministers preparing for a critical meeting later today on
whether to scrap the sell-off, Mr Heseltine told Tory opponents of
privatisation that the new scheme would guarantee the future of rural Post
Offices.
But the outcome of his eleventh-hour manoeuvring remained uncertain last
night, with some Tory MPs insisting they would have to study the proposals
before deciding whether to drop their opposition.
Today's meeting of the cabinet's industry committee will consider also the
government's original plan to dispose of a 51 per cent stake in the Royal
Mail and the possibility of giving it greater commercial freedom.
In individual meetings with the backbench Tory MPs who have threatened to
wreck any sale, Mr Heseltine made it clear that his own preference remained
a straight flotation of 51 per cent.
But the new scheme had been devised to meet the concern of Tory backbenchers
that transfer of a majority stake to the private sector would undermine the
national coverage and the viability of rural Post Offices.
The plan will also meet the insistence of Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor,
that unless the government's stake is below 50 per cent, the Royal Mail
cannot be granted commercial freedom. With 40 per cent of the equity in the
private sector and 20 per cent held by the trust, management of the Royal
Mail would be free to make investment decisions.
Mr Heseltine told the rebels that unless the privatisation plan was included
in the Queen's Speech on November 16, the project would have to be dropped
until after the next election.
Background, Page 9
