FT  25 JAN 94 / Survey of International Legal Services (2): Firms recognise
a need to build up locally - Following a frenetic rush, lawyers are
consolidating in eastern Europe
Catch the last flight from London into Prague on a Sunday evening, and you
are left in little doubt that the lawyers are cashing in on one of Eastern
Europe's more lucrative markets. Cashmere coats and bulky legal document
bags are everywhere.
But after the frenetic pace at the start of the decade following the
collapse of the Berlin wall in 1989, the mood has recently begun to change -
and the seats on the aeroplanes to empty.
All across eastern and central Europe, lawyers and other financial advisers
have been taking advantage of the restructuring of the former Communist
economies. Now they are entering a different, more sober stage of
consolidation.
On paper, there are more than 30 international law firms based in the Czech
Republic alone. Similar numbers crop up in the Slovak Republic, in Poland,
Hungary, Ukraine and Russia.
But Mr Milan Ganik, partner in charge of the Prague office of Squires,
Sanders &amp; Dempsey, an Ohio, US-based firm, insists on what he calls 'the
corridor test': inspecting the firms' offices to ensure they have a physical
presence.
Many firms rely on 'fly-ins' from Western European cities and just a nominal
place on the letterhead. Squires, by contrast, is one of the larger
international firms with a local presence, with more than 50 staff including
lawyers and a large number of professional support staff such as
interpreters and legal assistants.
Like a number of the other pioneering Western firms that moved east, Squires
found that most early business from the government. Lawyers signed
agreements to act as privatisation advisers, even to the extent of
temporarily debarring them from working for potential purchasers.
That made sound commercial sense at the time. The public sector was where
most activity was taking place, it had the money to pay bills from the
proceeds of sales, and it offered the chance to make powerful contacts for
the future.
Some firms also took advantage of what one executive derisively calls
'breakfast directors' hired more for their influence and potential marketing
power than any professional or business skills. Latterly, that tactic has
proved double-edged, as some former civil servants and politicians have
moved out of favour, or become increasingly tarred by the legacy of the
past.
But most firms that take central and eastern Europe seriously recognise the
need to build up a local staff. They are now beginning to see the fruits of
their early attempts to recruit Czech staff at junior levels - with a
post-graduate legal qualification obtained elsewhere.
This is creating new tensions as some of the most highly-qualified are
poached at substantial salaries by direct competitors or by companies. Even
if they stay, it can cause friction with more senior local staff suddenly
seeing their juniors receiving expatriate-style remuneration.
Mr Ganik argues that there will always be a need for external skills.
Western clients very often still seek 'cultural comfort' by using a firm
that has some Western-trained lawyers, he says.
A more disturbing trend of late for international firms in the region has
been the backlash against advice from foreign consultants. In the Czech
republic it has been fuelled by the collapse of some recent prominent
corporate deals. Critical comments were directed at White &amp; Case, another of
the firms with a large Prague presence, which acted on the Volkswagen-Skoda
joint venture which ran into difficulties.
It has been reinforced by hostile remarks made by Mr Vaclav Klaus, the
out-spoken prime minister, who has criticised foreign advisers. His views
may be strong, but they reflect far wider calls for a distinctive,
nationally-inspired approach to economic and legal reform.
These concerns are echoed by Mr Petr Sramek of the Alliance of European
Lawyers, a group of independent firms across the continent which has
supported the establishment of a stand-alone member firm in Prague.
'Foreign firms eat the best clients and distort our legal practice,' he
says. 'They overcharge, and draft or impose contracts and legal concepts
that do not work here.'
He argues that there is still a 'missionary spirit' in the attitude of many
new lawyers coming to the east from other parts of the world, and that the
enthusiasm has created a substantial overhang of supply over demand.
Flicking through a five-inch-thick bundle of job applications from western
lawyers, he says: 'We need more Czech lawyers. The future here depends on
them.'
That is not to say that he is blindly in support of everything local. He
says most politicians in the country are 'second tier', and that much
legislation passed since 1989 has been too hasty and is riddled with
loopholes.
Equally, he says the judges are no more familiar with the laws than the
lawyers, and that they are applied differently in courts around the country.
Looking forward, many lawyers in the region argue that over the next few
years there will be a period of legal consolidation, as well as introduction
of laws on new areas Daniel Arbess, managing partner for Prague for White &amp;
Case, expects his firm to gather most business now from corporate finance
and capital markets work.
'The first stage was reshuffling the ownership deck (of companies),' he
says. 'The second stage is re-dealing the cards to make them more
profitable.' He also sees a shake-out of foreign law firms as inevitable.
'This is one of the most competitive legal markets in the world,' he says.
'And firms are likely to see diminishing business as local firms grow.'
