FT  20 DEC 94 / Technology: Aluminium can makers think small - Kenneth
Gooding on moves to reduce manufacturing costs
Kaiser Aluminium, part of the Maxxam Group of the US, says it has developed
a 'micro mill' process that could substantially reduce capital and operating
costs for producing can sheet, an aluminium alloy from which beverage cans
are made.
Kaiser says the capital cost would be Dollars 25m (Pounds 15.2m) to Dollars
30m for a micro mill with an annual capacity of 30,000 to 50,000 tonnes. It
also claims that the cost of converting metal into sheet is only half that
of a conventional mill.
'This size of mill would be ideal in developing can markets,' says Dick
Evans, Kaiser's corporate vice-president, flat rolled products. 'It could
provide stock for two can-making plants which could be close by. It would be
easier to raise the capital and it would avoid the heavy cost of
transporting can stock from the US, Japan or Europe.'
Can sheet, or can stock, is produced mainly in large plants costing from
Dollars 500m to Dollars 1bn and equipped to produce 225,000 to 500,000
tonnes of can sheet a year. Separately, Golden Aluminium, which makes cans
for Adolph Coors brewing group of the US, has tried in the past two years to
convince the industry that 'mini mills', which produce the material on a
small scale, will work. Mini mills need less capital and therefore do not
have to produce such large quantities of can sheet to be viable. Golden's
new mill at San Antonio, Texas, has the capacity to produce an annual 90,000
tonnes of can stock and the capital cost was Dollars 168m.
To achieve cost savings, both Golden and Kaiser have moved to a different
method of producing can sheet. The most expensive part of the conventional
process is hot rolling, which rolls the metal until it is the required
thickness. Each hot mill costs Dollars 15m to Dollars 25m. To eliminate the
need for the big aluminium slabs and hot rolling, Golden and Kaiser employ
continuous casting techniques. This involves molten metal, adjusted to the
right composition, being poured into a holding box with a chilled mould down
one side. Metal is poured continuously into the mould, as it is propelled
along by a moving belt, to produce a thin slab already the width needed by
the cold mill and only 3mm thick. The metal flows on to cold rolling where
mills are placed in tandem (three or four in a line) to save space.
The metal is rolled through these mills instead of moving backwards and
forwards in a reversing mill in the conventional process.
There are drawbacks, however. Only certain alloys are suitable for
continuous casting. Also, some competitors have raised questions about the
surface finish  - soft drinks companies require a sparkling surface to the
cans they use. There are questions, too, about the Golden Aluminium process.
'Golden claimed great things during construction of its mill but the
start-up has been costly and long. So many observers are sceptical,' says
Nick Mason at the CRU International consultancy.
Golden admits start-up costs so far at its San Antonio mill are Dollars
35.8m. However, it is producing 7bn cans a year and has an outside customer
in Reynolds Metals, the second-largest US aluminium group. Golden says the
project needs only one more customer to become viable.
Kaiser says it will have spent Dollars 20m on its micro mill project by the
middle of 1995. By late 1995 it hopes to have started on a micro mill in the
US.
