FT  12 AUG 94 / Management: Unravelled cloth - The Church of England is a
Pounds 630m-a-year operation but it lacks a centralised management structure
The problem with the Church of England, a member of its general synod
commented during a debate on the church's financial troubles last month, is
that it has 43 different management structures.
Unfortunately, the real problem is that this is an over-simplification. The
speaker had in mind the fact that each of the church's 43 dioceses is
largely autonomous. That would create enough problems for the central
management of any large organisation. But in the Church of England, the
central management does not exist.
There is no shortage of structure. In addition to the 43 dioceses there is a
policy-making General Synod, the Church Commissioners, the Central Board of
Finance, a pensions board and the offices of the Archbishops of Canterbury
and York.
Yet the church is a Pounds 630m-a-year operation for which no single body
has overall managerial responsibility. Church leaders, faced with the
biggest financial pressures of modern times, recognise this as a source of
inefficiency in decision-making that must be changed.
A variety of interconnected problems came to a head with a Pounds 800m slump
in the value of the Church Commissioners' assets between 1989 and 1992,
caused mainly by over-investment in property.
Although the asset values have since begun to recover, the collapse brought
belated recognition that the church had become over-dependent on the
commissioners, who contribute to clergy stipends and housing and provide
pensions.
Churchgoers are already painfully aware of the consequences for them -
parishes must meet more of the clergy pay bill, while dioceses are likely to
have to start financing pensions under plans to be published later this
year. But the consequences for the way the church is managed will be equally
far-reaching.
A commission chaired by Rt Rev Michael Turnbull, incoming Bishop of Durham,
is reviewing the entire central organisation and policy making structure,
and its relationship with dioceses and parishes.
Commission members began work with a presentation on management structures
from Charles Handy, visiting professor at London Business School, discussing
with him issues like the fashion for federal organisation in companies. But
although the Church of England has in many ways the ultimate federal
structure, comparisons with business have limitations.
'We have an organisational structure that in some senses is very progressive
and accords with modern management thinking - indeed, a number of
fashionable terms like mission statement and subsidiarity have religious
origins,' says Philip Mawer, general secretary of the Church of England
general synod and a former senior civil servant.
'But even in federally structured companies, there are ways for the central
management to exercise control. The downside of our highly dispersed and
locally-based structure is that we do not have arrangements at the centre to
pull the threads together. There is no Church of England board.'
Although Bishop Turnbull has described the existing structure as 'clumsy and
cumbersome', his commission is unlikely to propose simply sweeping it away
when it reports next year - that could be a recipe for a debate lasting a
decade. Radical change is, however, possible. One idea being discussed would
amalgamate the officials of bodies like the synod and Church Commissioners
into a single central support staff.
A similar approach could apply locally, creating Church of England area
offices to provide services to groups of bishops and dioceses. As well as
saving on administration costs, this form of organisation would increase the
scope for spreading common policies - and more of a 'corporate culture' -
within the fragmented structure.
Two reports to be published in advance of Turnbull this autumn will increase
pressure on the church to adopt a more overtly managerial style.
A study of clergy conditions of service will address the future of the
freehold system, by which most incumbents have total job security until they
choose to move or to retire. That is likely to lead to more formal ways of
dealing with individuals who underperform.
The second report will consider the way cathedrals are run. Famous historic
churches are not only places of worship - many are large tourist attractions
competing in increasingly commercial style for a share of the leisure
market.
The extent to which such business activities have moved beyond bookstalls
and brass rubbing is illustrated by the Westminster Abbey Experience
currently being offered to visitors to London. It is a mixed-media show in a
temporary auditorium alongside the abbey which, by using archive film and a
replica Coronation Chair, 'draws on techniques more familiar to theme parks
and the theatre', as the authorities admit.
Yet cathedrals are run by dean and chapter in a managerial style that
appears as ancient as most of the buildings. With members of the commission
producing the report including Ian Hay Davison, chairman of Storehouse, and
Peter Burnham of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, a more business-like approach to the
church's commercial activities may well be recommended.
Ultimately, however, the church is not a commercial organisation but a
voluntary one. While, in common with many charities, it faces pressures
familiar to private- and public-sector managers, its viability depends
ultimately on financial support from individuals. There are dangers that
this might be jeopardised by an excessively professional, businesslike
style.
Cut your coat according to the cloth may be a basic management commandment,
but it will not prove an easy one for the men and women of the cloth to
follow.
