FT  07 NOV 94 / Media Futures: ITV line to better schedules
The ITV Network has developed a computer system designed to predict the most
effective programming schedule in terms both of size of audience and
attractiveness to advertisers. ITV executives believe that the Evaluator, as
the system is being called, is the world's most sophisticated computerised
aid for programme scheduling.
For example, if ITV was considering moving The Russ Abbott Show to Tuesday
at 9.00pm, the Evaluator would be able to predict how many people were
likely to watch and the demographic profile and viewing characteristics of
the audience.
'The ITV network has a tool to take its understanding and evaluation of
programme performance and audience delivery to a higher level than
previously,' David Brennan, controller of audience planning for the ITV
Network Centre, told a Media Week conference at the weekend.
The Evaluator is going to be launched formally within the next few weeks.
After extensive testing to make sure is does not recommend playing top ITV
programmes such as Coronation Street at midnight, it will be let loose on
real schedules from the beginning of next year.
An essential ingredient in creating Evaluator has been the use of
confidential information from advertising agencies on their overall TV
spending, broken down into sub-demographic groups, the proportion of the UK
population they want to reach with advertisements and at what frequency.
This financial information was used to place a relative value on each member
of the panel of viewers that provides the official BARB TV ratings. After
analysing the audience to every networked programme transmitted so far this
year, it has been possible to place monetary values against each programme.
To try to predict accurately both the audience and advertising effects of
changes to the schedule, Evaluator has gone one step further. It has applied
cluster analysis to the viewing habits of every member of the BARB panel
over 12 weeks. They were divided up, not only into heavy, medium and light
viewers but into a total of 23 different categories according to their
viewing tastes and preferences.
Brennan said he had no doubt that Evaluator would be an important
decision-making tool both for the Network Centre and the individual ITV
companies, even though sometimes decisions would be taken despite
computerised recommendations.
