FT  17 MAY 94 / World Trade News: Saudis in oil supply talks with China
China and Saudi Arabia are this week consolidating a closer oil trading
relationship, as Beijing seeks long-term suppliers to help it overcome a
shortfall in its own production.
China last year became a net importer of crude.
Mr Hisham Nazer, the Saudi oil minister now on his first visit to Beijing,
will be seeking more extensive co-operation with China in the oil sector,
including possible new contracts for shipments of Saudi crude.
The minister's low-key mission also coincides with reports of Saudi
involvement in a Dollars 1.5bn (Pounds 1bn) oil refinery, with Chinese and
South Korean partners.
The Saudi embassy in Beijing said that Mr Nazer would meet officials from
the China National Petrolem Corporation, the China National Chemicals Import
and Export Corporation (Sinochem), and the Ministry of Foreign Trade and
Economic Co-operation.
China has been looking to the Middle East to satisfy increasing demand for
crude and derivatives in order to fuel its booming economy, which grew in
1993 by more than 13 per cent.
A western oil industry representative described China's relationship with
the Middle East, and especially with Saudi Arabia, as 'absolutely crucial'
because of China's growing demand for crude.
At a recent oil industry conference in Beijing, Mr Han Gensheng,
vice-president of Sinochem, forecast that imports would reach 50-60m tonnes
by 2000 to meet projected demand. Imports would exceed exports this year by
a small margin.
China, the world's fifth largest oil producer, registered output of 143.7m
tonnes last year, an increase of 2.5 per cent over the previous year.
China is expected this year to match the production of 1993, but is doing so
with great difficulty because most of its oilfields are mature, including
the Daqing field, which accounts for about 40 per cent of output.
Beijing's need to develop closer trading relations with Gulf states was
underlined by the visit to the region last June by the Chinese vice-premier,
Mr Li Lanqing.
He signed supply agreements with Saudi Arabia and Oman. This was the first
time the Chinese had dealt directly with Gulf states for oil purchases,
rather than via intermediaries.
While on his current visit to Beijing, Mr Nazer will also discuss details of
a new oil refinery project involving Aramco, the Saudi state oil company,
South Korea's Ssangyong, Sinochem, and the municipal government of Qingdao
in Shandong province, south-east of Beijing.
The official China Business Weekly reported at the weekend that Aramco would
take a 45 per cent share in the 200,000 barrels-a-day refinery, to be
located near Qingdao, and Ssangyong 15 per cent, with the remaining 40 per
cent shared between Sinochem and the Qingdao municipality.
