FT  01 OCT 94 / Labour leaders look to transcend wages row
The Labour leadership appeared hopeful last night that it could prevent a
row over the minimum wage from overshadowing Mr Tony Blair's plans to use
the party's Blackpool conference to set out the main planks of his electoral
strategy.
The last-minute efforts to defuse a potentially damaging dispute came as Mr
Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, reaffirmed the government's long-term
commitment to tax cuts.
In an attempt to regain some of the initiative after a week dominated by
Labour's efforts to discard its image as a high-spending, high-tax party, Mr
Clarke said the Conservatives would 're-establish with the voters that we
will deliver tax cuts when the economy can afford it'.
Mr Clarke offered no specific commitment on the timing - however he insisted
that the government's commitment to steady growth, low inflation and tight
control of public spending made lower taxes a question of 'when' not 'if'.
Mr Clarke's comments came in a letter to Conservative party constituency
chairmen. With a little more than a week to go until the Tory party
conference it said: 'Rushing into tax cuts in this coming Budget with
borrowing still high wouldn't have impressed anybody for very long.'
Labour party officials said the TGWU general union was increasingly isolated
in its insistence that Labour endorse a rigid formula to fix the level of a
minimum wage during Monday's opening conference debate on the economy.
Mr Blair wants the party to campaign on the principle of raising the pay of
low-paid workers rather than be drawn into internal arguments about a
particular level. A conference defeat on the issue would seriously dent his
authority but could be averted later today when officials and unions set the
precise terms of the planned debate.
That position has been backed forcefully by Mr John Prescott, the deputy
leader, who has used his considerable sway with the unions to warn against
an open conference split on the day before Mr Blair's first speech as
leader.
After this week's high-profile rejection of his party's past commitment to
high taxes and borrowing, Mr Blair intends to use the conference to show
that he now has a positive agenda on which to fight the Conservatives.
In a statement of his priorities later today, Mr Blair will set the central
themes as industrial and economic renewal, reform of the welfare state to
get people back into employment, and a commitment to social responsibility.
The statement, New Labour for New Britain, will represent the party as the
voice of the majority in contrast to the portrayed sectional interests
represented by the Conservatives.
Mr Blair will tell the conference that the party must be clearer in drawing
the dividing lines between the two parties and must shake off the perception
that it has been motivated by electoral expediency rather than firm
principles.
Testing journey, Page 7
