FT  11 MAY 94 / Survey of Spain (7): Fewer births, more equality - Women are
becoming more visible in public life
The changing face of Spain may be measured by the investment in
infrastructure, which makes it possible to drive 1,300km from the Portuguese
border to the French frontier without encountering a traffic light. Or it
may be quantified by the surge in sophisticated savings that has prompted a
twofold increase in domestic funds under management over the past year.
The increasing prominence of women is another yardstick of a profoundly
transformed society. In many aspects, Spain is now almost indistinguishable
from its ostensibly richer and more established European Union partners.
With nine women in its 60-member European parliament contingent, Spain has a
marginally higher proportion than the UK and a slightly lower one than
Belgium. The likelihood is that after the European elections in June, the
Spanish proportion of women MEPs will go up.
Ms Marina Subirachs, a sociologist who runs the Instituto de la Mujer, a
government agency created in 1983 to promote women's rights, argues that the
Strasbourg ratio is too low and that the 54 women elected to the 350-member
Madrid parliament in Spain's general elections last year, also representing
a 15 per cent proportion of women, are also far too few.
Echoing the views of those with similar responsibilities for promoting the
interests of women, Ms Subirachs believes the gender breakdown in any
legislative assembly should be 50-50 - give or take a percentage point.
As elsewhere, in Spain women are on track to achieve this political parity.
In 1982, out of 208 director-generals, the top civil service rank, three
were women. By last year 40 out of 289 were women.
The gap is closing in Spain because, as in other European societies, there
are now more women than men enrolled in higher education and gaining
university degrees. By 1976 the number of Spanish girls had overtaken boys
in secondary school enrolment. By 1990 there were as many female as male
undergraduates.
The Instituto de la Mujer notes a growing men-women equality among those who
pass the competitive exams for the main civil service positions. There are
proportionally fewer women entrants to high-flying private sector jobs,
particularly in industry - a fact Ms Subirachs attributes to 'greater
transparency of the civil service's recruitment'.
The growing success of women also owes something to the militancy of Ms
Subirachs and her colleagues, particularly in the Socialist party. Socialist
women carried a motion at the party's 1986 congress that made mandatory a 25
per cent proportion of women on all the party's internal committees. Last
March the congress raised this proportion to 33 per cent.
There was regret last year, after last June's elections, when Mr Felipe
Gonzalez, the prime minister, chose only three women to join his 17-member
government - just one more than in his outgoing cabinet. The party's women's
pressure group had expected six women ministers.
The significant difference between the status and role of women in Spain and
that in other European societies is the low overall women participation in
the labour market. Government surveys show that only 35 per cent of Spanish
women in the 16-65 years old age group are employed, or say they are
actively seeking a job. This is dismally low by EU standards.
But statistics show that 70 per cent of Spanish women under the age of 30
are employed or want employment - double the overall figure. (In Ms
Subirachs's home town of Barcelona the proportion has risen to 80 per cent.)
The overall figure is gradually climbing. During the past year, which has
registered a big rise in unemployment, it has been women, rather than men,
who are finding the scarce jobs available. New regulations encouraging
part-time employment are part of present reform of the existing labour
legislation. They are expected to lead to a significant increase in female
employment.
In the meantime, the fertility rate of childbearing Spanish women has
dropped to 1.2 children - the lowest in Europe, along with the Italian
women's fertility rate. This is a full point down from the 'replacement'
rate of 2.2, which was registered in 1980.
However, there is little difference between Spain and the EU in the battle
over equal pay for women. Although it is illegal to discriminate between
men's and women's salaries on gender grounds, the Instituto de la Mujer
estimates that women's take-home pay is between 20 and 30 per cent less than
men's pay in comparable jobs - a gap similar to that elsewhere in Europe,
Moreover, at far as the Instituto de la Mujer is concerned, male chauvinism
is a fact of life in Spain. But Ms Subirachs, who swaps views on the subject
at international conferences, says: 'Macho man is a very generalised
phenomenon. He is not a specifically Spanish animal and the species is
evolving only very slowly.'
