FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (17):
Customer-driven approach - Facilities management, the supplier's viewpoint
Starting a facilities management company might seem a radical departure for
Bull Information Systems, but when Athesa, its new facilities management
(FM) division, was launched in February, Philip Crawford, the chief
executive, insisted that the new company was no departure but a logical
evolution from the role that Bull has long held with its customers, writes
Claire Gooding.
Mr Crawford sees FM as an international opportunity - 'the use of partners
to offer a full range of services in the outsourcing arena will be a growing
trend. We can draw on facilities in 28 countries,' he says.
The company is experienced in changing its role as the computer industry has
evolved. Its primary markets - healthcare, police and local government - are
among those most drastically affected by the demands of cost- cutting and
compulsory competitive tendering.
According to Athesa director, Brian Gunn, the move is customer-driven - 'we
are focusing to deliver a range of services, from under one roof. In the
last 12 months customers, especially in local government, have been asking
us what we are doing in FM.'
Bull has used partnerships of various sorts as the platform for its own
sundry changes of direction. As part of its adjustment to Open Systems, it
has developed strong links with software vendors and value-added resellers.
In the past Bull has done well as the prime bidder in single-source
contracts, with clients who are comfortable with the 'one bottom to kick'
principle.
The key to success, he believes, is flexibility in the use of staff. There
is a core of 60 Athesa staff in the division, but he intends to treat the
rest of Bull as on call. At one client, Glaxo, Athesa is providing a desktop
service where it is installing, maintaining and supporting PCs, LANs, and
Unix servers, not only in the UK, but in 26 countries worldwide. The
contract has been worth Pounds 2.4m since it began in 1992, and is expected
to be renewed at the end of its current period in 1994.
'We can bring our skills to the fore in forging new partnerships. There is a
range of skills and complementary expertise we can draw on. Perhaps those
skills are not unique in themselves, but what is unusual is that we can pull
it all together,' says Gunn.
Development and systems integration are complementary to Athesa's plans.
Bull's Systems Integration section will provide the experts who are needed
on projects needed, for any period from a week to two or three years. Athesa
will provide the long-term support for operations and applications support,
and management of IT. Bull's plans are standard in this area, involving the
takeover of staff and assets. 'We have the resources on tap, they get the
career opportunities,' says Mr Gunn.
Athesa's sister company, the People Plus head-hunters, are part of the
partnership. In one sense, Gunn argues, the source of supply is the
cornerstone of the business. There has always been a division in programming
between those who develop and those who maintain software.
While this distinction has been largely broken down by the increased use of
software packages, and the availability of fourth generation languages,
there will be times when the aristocrats of development will be needed on a
short-term basis.
In concentrating on the desktop delivery, Bull is not alone. Desktop and the
network have become more important, Supporting legacy systems is bread and
butter, but the market is heading towards improving, not merely maintaining
operations.
'It is in the area of business operations that the opportunities of
cost-benefits are to be achieved', comments Mr Gunn.
 --------------------------------------------
Leading facilities management suppliers*
 --------------------------------------------
Supplier               UK         Europe
                     Per cent    Per cent
 --------------------------------------------
Hoskyns/CGS             22           10
EDS-Scicon              12           12
Sema Group              11            4
AT&amp;T Istel               9            3
Dat Sciences             8            3
CFM                      5            2
Andersen Consulting      4            -
DEC                      3            2
ITnet                    2            -
P&amp;P                      2            -
 --------------------------------------------
*Figures for 1991
Source: Input Research Group
 --------------------------------------------
