FT  15 JUL 94 / Sweeping changes urged on UN
A privately funded study of the United Nations and its agencies proposes
sweeping reforms to meet global problems that 'can no longer be neglected
without catastrophic consequences'.
The authors - former international civil servants with considerable
experience in the workings of the organisation - are Sir Brian Urquhart, a
British war hero who was the UN's first employee in 1945, and Mr Erskine
Childers, grandson of a former Irish president and an authority on third
world development problems.
In their report, financed jointly by the Ford Foundation and the Dag
Hammerskjold Foundation of Sweden, they state that as the UN nears its 50th
anniversary next year there is mounting concern about its ability to remain
an effective mechanism for peace and security in an increasingly complex
world.
The authors recommend radical reforms in the International Monetary Fund,
created by the Bretton Woods conference held 50 years ago this month. Third
world nations have long criticised the Fund and the World Bank and the
report notes that, despite or because of these institutions, 20 per cent of
the global population still holds 80 per cent of world wealth.
Sir Brian and Mr Childers call for a UN monetary, financial and trade
conference to develop an equitably governed, low-interest capital lending
facility, and an equitably governed monetary fund working with a similarly
governed universal trade organisation.
They also see a need for a single UN development authority consolidating all
present UN development funds, and a consolidation of now-scattered UN relief
operations.
Another proposal is for the establishment of a UN humanitarian security
police force. Critics have accused the world body of allowing politics to
influence too many decisions relating to human rights and humanitarian
affairs.
The report calls for an inter-governmental consultative board for the UN
system as a whole, an executive committee comprising the secretary-general
and heads of specialised agencies, and a new documentation office
responsible for creative management of economic and social reports.
The financially strapped world body could operate more efficiently from a
single headquarters, the report advises. This need not be in New York or
Geneva, although Sir Brian told correspondents at a briefing that he
believed keeping New York as the centre would maintain the interest and
support of the US.
Germany is prepared to offer inducements to the UN to move many or all
operations to Bonn after the German capital transfers to Berlin, but so far
this has not been seriously considered by member states.
Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, secretary-general, had yet to study the report,
his spokesman said. The document is not the first such contribution by the
authors to debate about the shape and future of the UN. While their
expertise is widely respected, far-reaching proposals are likely to
encounter opposition in a body fundamentally averse to change.
Renewing the United Nations System. Erskine Childers with Brian Urquhart.
Dag Hammarskjold Foundation, Ovre Slottsgatan 2, S-753 10 Uppsala, Sweden,
or Ford Foundation, 320 East 43rd Street, New York, NY 10017, US.
