FT  27 JUN 94 / Coopers faces conflict of interest issue
Partners from Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the UK's largest accountancy firm, have
become receivers to a property company in spite of a potential conflict of
interest with other insolvency appointments they have undertaken.
They have accepted appointment to Worldcatch in a move which has complex
implications for their existing work as receivers to Astra Holdings, the
failed arms manufacturer, and as administrators to Polly Peck International,
the conglomerate formerly controlled by Mr Asil Nadir.
Mr Chris Barlow and Mr Ian Barker-Bond of Coopers were appointed receivers
to Worldcatch earlier this year because of the company's guarantee to
another property company - Basic Bureau - which had defaulted on bank
repayments.
Worldcatch is the landlord of buildings including 8 Baker Street in London,
the headquarters of Stoy Hayward, the UK's tenth largest accountancy firm.
Stoy was the principal auditor to both Astra, which was subject to a highly
critical Department of Trade and Industry inspector's report last year, and
Polly Peck.
Mr Barlow is named as a receiver to Astra, and also recently replaced his
fellow partner Mr Michael Jordan of Coopers as one of the joint
administrators to Polly Peck.
It is believed that Coopers, in its role as Astra's receiver, is seriously
considering launching legal action imminently against Stoy in connection
with its audit of Astra. It is receiver to Astra.
Mr Christopher Morris of accountants Touche Ross, the Polly Peck
administrator who deals with matters relating to Stoy Hayward, has said
publicly that litigation against Stoy is highly likely for this audit.
But the two lawsuits against Stoy may significantly reduce the firm's
ability to pay its rent to Worldcatch, which would in turn substantially
affect the value of the property at a time when the receivers are trying to
sell to recover creditors' money.
If they decide not to launch legal action against Stoy, the creditors to
Polly Peck and Astra are less likely to recover as much money. If the
litigation takes place, Worldcatch's creditors may suffer.
Mr Barlow said: 'The firm has carefully looked at the Worldcatch appointment
and is satisfied that there was and is still no conflict.'
Coopers is understood to believe that the existing knowledge of potential
litigation, the lengthy timescales involved and the way in which any claims
would be settled means lawsuits against Stoy would not diminish the value of
the Worldcatch property.
Mr Julian Osborne, secretary to the professional ethics committee of the
Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, commenting on the
general principle of the position without knowledge of the specific case,
said there appeared to be a conflict if there was substantial litigation
involved.
