FT  05 MAY 94 / FT Exporter (7): Formalities bring drivers to a halt - Rod
McNeil tests border bureaucracy from the cab of a container truck and
experiences at first hand the formalities that are required when crossing
Europe's frontiers / The trucker's tale
TRANSPORT: to what extent has the single market actually reduced border
paperwork and what are the implications of the opening of the Channle
Tunnel?
Bantering with grizzled truckers in Dover as they registered their mandatory
rest periods, there were plenty of tales of recurring delays and excessive
bureaucracy at various border bottlenecks in central and eastern Europe.
Tom Jones, driving a 10 tonne consignment of dry goods from Rosslare in
Ireland to Innsbruck, Austria, said: 'If Dover took the attitude of the
Poles and the Austrians, this place would be at a standstill in hours, not
days.' Mr Jones was to be my trucking host for the journey into central
Europe to get first-hand experience of border bureaucracy.
We left Dover on a Sunday evening, crossing to Calais and then heading for
the German border at Saarbrucken, via the Reims to Metz highway. The
crossing at Saarbrucken proved, as expected, an uncomplicated affair: a set
of traffic lights, green at the time.
We arrived at the German-Austrian border at Kiefersfelden on Tuesday
morning, only 80 kilometres from the delivery point on the outskirts of
Innsbruck.
Here it was a different story. Documents, five in total, were presented by
Mr Jones to the German customs officer at the entry point. He handed Mr
Jones an additional form, which was subsequently checked, stamped and
initialled on four separate occasions during the 1km border crossing.
Traffic was light and as we approached an Austrian officer sealed our
container within minutes.
The next task was to sort out the paperwork. In a building on the right
side, housing both German and Austrian Customs officers, two tachograph
cards from the previous two days along with the transit documents were
presented to a German officer at a central booth. These cleared and stamped,
Mr Jones approached about ten different counter points, a couple German, the
rest Austrian.
At the first hurdle, German Customs officers insisted on inspecting the
container. Two officers broke off the Austrian seal, put on minutes earlier,
and the original container seal, checked the load and then secured the
container with another seal.
We returned to the building and shuffled down to the next counter. In all,
five or six different officers were presented with the paperwork, which was
variously checked, stamped and returned. Three extra forms were filled out.
At the final counter, Mr Jones completed yet another document detailing the
delivery point in Austria, for calculation and payment of the necessary road
tax.
With these formalities completed, we drove the short distance to the final
barrier, allowing access to the Austrian highway. On presentation of the
forms, we were waved through. In a rare oversight for Austrian Customs, the
diesel level was not checked. A maximum of only 200 litres of fuel may be
imported into Austria duty free.
In all it took about two and a half hours to cross the border from Germany
into Austria - and that was without a queue. We finally arrived at the
customs clearing point at 2.30pm in Hall, just outside Innsbruck. The
container took an hour to unload.
The second leg of my trip was smoother by comparison. Boarding another truck
loaded with empty beer barrels, we left Vienna on Thursday morning destined
for C Budejovice in the Czech Republic, a drive of about three to four
hours.
At the Nagelburg border, the Austrian officers took only five minutes to
clear the truck, stamping the driver's permit allowing access into and out
of Austria.
Driving on to the Czech border point of Hlamky, the load and the paperwork -
one delivery note and a consignment note - were swiftly checked. Neither
appeared to check the driver's tachograph cards.
Taking, in all, 20 minutes to clear, we had time for refreshments at the
Czech border cafe. By 1.40pm we were cruising the short leg through the
Czech Republic to the famous Budweis brewery, less than an hour away.
Talking to the other drivers and hauliers along the way, both journeys were
surprisingly trouble free by normal standards.
Seamus Bradley recounted his experience on a recent trip to Warsaw. Mr
Bradley arrived at the German-Polish Frankfurt-Oder border crossing at
1.00am. Having had his passport and paperwork checked by Polish border
guards, he drove a further 2km and pulled up into the appropriate lane. 'It
was two hours before I moved. Twenty-four hours later I still only had 8
kilometres on the tachograph. During the wait you have got to stay awake,
otherwise the customs guards pass you by.
'The truck left Ireland on Saturday, tipped Thursday in Warsaw at 10am. It
turned one week's work into two weeks' work. You can do Greece and back as
quick as you can do Poland and back'.
Jan Chejlava, director of P&amp;O TransEuropean in Prague, formed in October
1993 to strengthen the company's eastern European presence, argues that much
of the central European region's transit difficulties centre on entering and
leaving the European Union through Germany.
'The main difficulty we experience is crossing the Czech-German border of
the European Union because of customs formalities obliged to be made on the
German border. The worst case in terms of crossing time is 24 hours -
towards the end of the year it can be worse. Normally it takes four to six
hours'.
Mr Chejlava blames insufficient facilities at the border, the road network,
traffic congestion and the restricted hours of forwarding agents on the
German border.
In spite of the problems some truckers have their own way of handling such
problems. For example, one hour into Spain, one driver was stopped by
police. He was breathalysed, the diesel was dipped to check whether he was
'running red' (using agricultural diesel, available for a fraction of the
cost) and his tachograph card was scrutinised.
Found to have run over time, and been speeding, the police confiscated his
keys and demanded payment of a Pounds 2,000 fine. Within three hours that
was reduced to two bottles of Scotch and Pounds 25 cash, with the tachograph
card destroyed.
