FT  27 JAN 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Greece to offer onshore and
offshore concessions
Greece's Public Petroleum Corporation (DEP) plans to offer concessions for
onshore and offshore oil exploration in western Greece later this year.
Blocks in Epirus and the Ionian Sea would be made available to international
bidders after parliament passed a new law on oil exploration and
exploitation, 'probably in late spring', according to Mrs Teresa
Fokianou-Malaveta, the corporation's chairman.
DEP's research department said seismic studies in Epirus produced
encouraging results, while test drilling in the Ionian Sea had established
the existence of oil-bearing levels, she added.
Under production-sharing arrangements included in the new legislation DEP
would have the right to participate with a minority stake in consortia
exploiting oil deposits in Greece.
Meanwhile, a new test drilling is being made by North Aegean Petroleum
Corporation at the Prinos offshore field near Thassos island in the
north-eastern Aegean.
The drilling is the first by NAPC, a Canadian-led consortium, since Greece
and Turkey came to the brink of war in 1987 over conflicting claims to
offshore oil rights in the Aegean. The dispute has prevented NAPC from
exploring for oil east of Thassos.
Production at the Prinos field, situated west of Thassos in Greek coastal
waters, has declined from 26,000 barrels a day in the early 1980s to about
8,000 b/d last year.
However, the introduction of gas re-injection techniques, using natural gas
from the nearby South Kavalla offshore field, has lifted production to
around 12,000 b/d. If successful, the Dollars 5.3m drilling project,
reaching 2,000 metres below sea level, could yield up to 6,000 b/d, Mrs
Fokianou-Malaveta said.
The Greek government last year signed a new six-year production agreement
with NAPC, giving the consortium a more favourable tax arrangement than
previously. The consortium had considered shutting down its operations
because of the political obstacles to exploiting known oil and gas deposits
east of Thassos. It has invested Dollars 700m in Greece since it won the
Prinos concession 20 years ago.
Denison Mines of Canada controls 58 per cent of the consortium. DEP holds 15
per cent, with subsidiaries of three other international oil companies,
Wintershall Greece, Hellenic Overseas Holdings and White Shields Greece,
holding smaller stakes.
