FT  12 APR 94 / Survey of Slovenia (8): Lunch on the family farm - The
tourist industry wants Slovenia reinstated as a holiday destination
Swimming pools, horseback riding, tennis courts - all these and more can be
enjoyed at more than 100 farms open to holiday-makers in Slovenia, writes
Laura Silber.
Take, for example, the Vhrovec family farm, tucked into a hillside in
Ivancna Gorica, in the heart of Slovenia. The farm boasts scenic walks,
horse-drawn carriage rides, or a visit to the nearby 12th century Sticna
monastery. In the cosy dining room, heated by a porcelain stove, young Ms
Damjana Vrhovec offers her guests home-made wine and schnapps before her
mother, Majda, finishes cooking lunch.
Farm tourism has been popular for years. 'We can give visitors whatever they
want - single guests, city families who want to learn about life on a farm,
elderly couples who have come for the scenery and excellent food,' says Mr
Gregor Bogataj, representative for Vas, a co-operative tourist agency
founded by farmers.
Farms dot Slovenia's varied countryside, which sweeps down from the Julian
Alps over valleys and plains to the Adriatic coast. Gorenjska, the Alpine
region, with glacial lakes and evergreen forest, offers outdoor pursuits
from mountaineering to golf. Stajerska, to the east, is renowned for wine,
beer, and its rejuvenating thermal springs. Primorska, hugging 46km of
Adriatic coastline, has haunting karst limestone caves.
But in spite of the magnificent scenery, some in the tourist industry
complain that the country's 100,000 beds are not fully booked except at the
height of the summer season; they want to reinstate Slovenia as a travel
destination for foreign tour operators.
Before the break-up of Yugoslavia, Slovenia was a stop for coach tours en
route from Venice to Vienna. Hotel capacity was filled as groups headed for
holidays in Dubrovnik or other favourite spots on Croatia's Dalmatian coast.
But Slovenia disappeared from the travel brochures after the 10-day war
against the Yugoslav army, followed by independence in June 1991.
It has been difficult to erase those images of violence, or to convince
prospective foreign tourists that the internecine fighting further south is
far away enough for them to be completely safe in Slovenia. Mr Janez
Repansek, an adviser to the government on tourism, says: 'Unfortunately
geography is not most people's strongest subject. Many have trouble locating
Slovenia on the map . . . we still must convince them that Slovenia is no
longer part of former Yugoslavia.' And he adds: 'Even our crime rate is
below the European average.'
In spite of these difficulties, tourism in 1993 earned Dollars 800m in hard
currency - the largest single earner (taking into account private
transactions). Foreigners accounted for Dollars 1.6m out of 5.3m nights last
year, a 25 per cent increase over 1992. Mr Repansek says: 'It is slowly
changing for the better. Foreign guests who come here realise there is
nothing unusual - no war, no soldiers and no refugees. They find they are on
holiday in a normal central European country,' His job is to reassure tour
operators that Slovenia is a high quality product offering good value.
'British tour operators have promised to come back. They say it is not a
question of improving the product - they are waiting for their clients to be
ready to come.'
Meanwhile, plans are under consideration to establish a five-star hotel in
Ljubljana, the capital, which is built on the ruins of the Roman city of
Emona, where the river Ljubljanica flows past baroque spires. Adria, the
national carrier, has resumed daily flights from London.
Tourist officials also smile delightedly at Slovenia's medal-winning
performances at the winter Olympics in Lillehammer. They regard these as the
best promotion for Slovenia's winter sports, where tourists can choose
between the unspoilt Alps, the birch forests of the southern Bela Krajina
region and Lipica, the village where the famous Lippizaner horses were
originally bred.
But if foreigners really want to enjoy Slovenia, the best holiday is on a
farm. The Vrhovec family and dozens of others will be waiting to offer warm
plates of struklji (a Slovene crepe, prepared in some 70 different sweet or
savoury ways), and cellars filled with bottles of home-brewed wine.
