FT  25 FEB 94 / US says Japan 'drag on world economy'
The US yesterday accused Japan of acting as 'a drag on the world economy',
setting the stage for confrontation at Saturday's meeting in Frankfurt of
finance ministers from the Group of Seven leading industrialised nations.
Mr Lloyd Bentsen, US Treasury secretary, called for more action to expand
economic recovery in the G7 countries, particularly in continental Europe
and Japan.
'I'm anxious to learn how Japan intends to create the growth led by domestic
demand needed to cut its external surplus. That surplus clearly is acting as
a drag on the world economy,' he said before leaving for Germany.
Although the G7 meeting had intended to focus principally on questions
surrounding international financial support for Russian economic reform, the
talks could be overshadowed by the US-Japanese argument, which has
intensified since the failure of the two sides to reach agreement on
improving access for US exporters to the Japanese market in their framework
trade talks earlier this month.
Mr Bentsen, who will meet Mr Hirohiso Fujii, Japan's finance minister, at
the weekend, said the US was considering 'a whole myriad of options' in
response to Japan's failure to agree to open its market under the terms of
the framework trade talks.
At Saturday's full G7 meeting, however, the US is likely to focus more on
the macro-economic conditions it believes are a principal determinant of
Japan's trade surplus.
Mr Bentsen is also likely to urge further interest rate cuts to spur
European growth.
Nancy Dunne adds: Market access goals, which Japan refused to accept in
talks with the US, will be set unilaterally by the Clinton administration
under legislation introduced in the House yesterday by the Congressman
Richard Gephardt, the majority leader.
He and other trade 'hawks' have brought forward bills following the failure
of negotiations at the recent meeting in Washington between Mr Clnton and Mr
Morihiro Hosokawa, Japan's prime minister.
Under Mr Gephardt's bill, the Commerce Department will compile an annual
report on market access opportunities for US companies in Japan, based on
industries' competitive position in third countries.
It will define the 'objective criteria' necessary for each industry to gain
access to the Japanese market.
The department will also consult foreign governments, at their request, to
include information on market access opportunities for foreign suppliers in
Japan. The US will try to negotiate with Japan agreements based on the
goals, but if that fails, the unilateral targets can become the basis for
bringing US trade complaints and ultimately sanctions.
