FT  06 JAN 94 / Ten years of know-how won at stroke: VW-GM court case claim
By poaching eight General Motors employees last year, Volkswagen gained
access 'overnight' to a fund of business know-how built up by the US group
over almost 10 years, a Frankfurt court was told yesterday.
If VW had succeeded with its scheme to lure away a further 21 purchasing and
production experts, the result would have been a 'catastrophe' for General
Motors Europe, according to Mr Heinz Wetterkamp, a lawyer representing Adam
Opel, GM's German subsidiary.
Mr Wetterkamp was pleading in the first open-court confrontation between the
rival motor groups since VW's controversial hiring of Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez
de Arriortua, GM's former global purchasing chief, last March.
Opel has claimed VW set out systematically, and in breach of competition
rules, to woo away key GM personnel, and demanded that the seven men who
followed Mr Lopez almost immediately should be suspended from their jobs for
a year.
Mr Jurgen Kicker, VW's lawyer, countered that seven defectors had followed
Mr Lopez of their own free will. The charismatic Basque's 'warriors' had
left the US group because 'people feel helpless and isolated' when their
chief goes, he suggested.
Mr Kicker, who claimed GM had employed psychological pressure to try to
prevent Mr Lopez and at least one of his colleagues from going, said
penalties such as suspension from work could only apply in cases of 'massive
poaching'. Mr Wetterkamp was basing his case on seven people, he said.
However, files before the court contain affidavits from a further 20 Opel
employees who claim to have been approached by Mr Lopez and others. Some
were allegedly offered doubled salaries.
Although yesterday's civil suit is formally unconnected with a continuing
criminal investigation into allegations of document theft and industrial
espionage against Mr Lopez and three of the seven, Mr Wetterkamp wove
details from the two cases together in an apparent bid to persuade the court
that the defections had been carefully plotted.
Mr Lopez had arrived in Germany on March 16. A special aircraft almost
immediately brought in 20 boxes of documents which had earlier been sent to
Spain at Mr Lopez's request. Within days, when his followers started to
arrive, a 'task force' had been set up to file data in computers, GM
documents from the boxes were shredded in VW's private company guesthouse,
and all seven men were promptly installed in new jobs.
'Preparations were so far advanced that they could take jobs immediately,'
Mr Wetterkamp said.
Although Opel had failed in two previous attempts to win temporary
injunctions to have the seven men suspended, company officials said after
the hearing that they were confident of winning this time. The court is to
rule on February 2. It was the first time the full evidence had been taken
into consideration, and the judge had refused VW's appeals that he should
'take the easy route' and dismiss the case on procedural grounds, a
spokesman noted.
