FT  29 MAR 94 / Hurd persists with his unrewarding duties: Philip Stephens
assesses the mood of the foreign secretary at the end of an unwinnable
battle
No, Mr Douglas Hurd is not planning to resign. Nor do his present intentions
include taking advantage of the expected cabinet reshuffle in the summer to
forsake the Foreign Office for a career writing novels or making money in
the City.
The past few weeks have not been easy for the foreign secretary.
It was inevitable after the protracted and unwinnable battle with Britain's
partners over voting rights in an enlarged European Union that colleagues
should speculate that Mr Hurd might be ready to depart. He is after all 64,
has a young family, and not much money.
But barring a rejection by the cabinet this morning of the compromise deal
he negotiated in Greece at the weekend - and for all his public
circumspection Mr Hurd believes that is highly unlikely - he intends to stay
on for some time yet.
His performance in the House of Commons in defence of the new voting system
once Austria, Finland, Norway and Sweden join the EU was that of a
politician who still enjoys playing the game even when he is dealt a bad
hand.
The foreign secretary was clearly defending the indefensible. But he did it
with an aplomb - and a sense of humour - which belied the mess into which Mr
John Major's government has once again plunged itself.
Mr Hurd is said by friends to be deeply dismayed by the fact that the
enlargement of the EU - for long a British priority - has been overshadowed
by the less-than-edifying battle over the rights of minorities to block
decisions.
The entry of four new countries might once have been presented as a triumph.
Instead Mr Hurd will be forced to spend the next two days persuading sullen
backbench Tory MPs that the voting deal is not a sell-out.
The foreign secretary's reputation has not escaped unscathed. His genteel
self-confidence and his insistence that the compromise was one worth having
could not disguise the fact that Britain lost this particular battle.
Colleagues wondered why he could not carry the cabinet with him earlier in
negotiating a less public climbdown. Friends shrugged and said it would not
have been as easy as it might have looked. At one stage there was even a
possibility that Britain might win.
Others said he was irritated by the way Mr Major's habit of indulging the
Tory Euro-sceptics had made it much more difficult to prepare the ground for
a deal which fell short of the government's ambitions.
More generally, Mr Hurd appears frustrated by the failure of the
Conservative party to put last year's rows over the Maastricht treaty behind
it and to come to terms with Britain's place in Europe.
His frustration showed in a speech last week designed to provide a text for
cabinet colleagues and backbench MPs alike in the approach to June's
elections to the European parliament.
Britain was tied irrevocably to the rest of Europe. It was lunatic to argue
over something so obvious. With his eye perhaps on the cabinet's
Euro-sceptics he dismissed as risible the idea Europe could be refashioned
into nothing more than a free trade area.
He voiced fears that more fundamental forces - in the former Communist bloc,
in the US attitude to Nato, in the new roles being assumed by Germany and
France - could jeopardise Britain's international standing.
In his own words: 'I must warn that as a nation we have not yet come to
grips with the new debate . . . Unless we can lift our sights and see more
clearly how the world around us has shifted we shall put at risk Britain's
position in the world.'
What he is looking for now is some clear political water in which to develop
that theme. He wants to bequeath a policy framework within which all but the
extremists in the Tory party can happily work.
It is a formidable agenda but perhaps with one vital flaw. It assumes that
Mr Major's government will survive its expected trouncing in this summer's
mid-term elections without another cataclysmic upheaval.
But the Conservative party could have a new leader by the end of the year.
In those circumstances Mr Hurd would leave to someone else the task of
giving it a coherent foreign policy.
