FT  29 SEP 94 / China's leaders line up for succession
China's ruling Communist Party, the world's largest mass political
organisation, has approved a blueprint aimed at bolstering its hold on power
at a sensitive moment in the transition to a new generation of leaders.
The Central Committee document emphasised the role of President Jiang Zemin
as the 'core' of the leadership and successor to Deng Xiaoping, China's
90-year-old senior leader.
The resolution, adopted by the Central Committee meeting in Beijing,
reflected growing concern about a weakening of central control and a
crumbling of communist authority, especially in rural areas where unrest has
become common.
China's rulers stressed the need to strengthen 'grass-roots organisations'.
This indicated recognition of the party's poor standing among rural dwellers
who account for about 80 per cent of the population of 1.2bn. Party
membership nationwide stands at about 40m.
'The party's grass roots organisations are the foundations of the party's
operations and its combat effectiveness,' the document said.
The four-day plenary session of the 14th Central Committee concluded just
three days before China celebrates, on October 1, the 45th anniversary of
the revolution. It coincided with persistent reports of Mr Deng's failing
health.
China's leadership has been in transition for the past two years. Mr Deng's
expected demise has fuelled worries about the ability of a new generation to
assert its authority.
The central committee document referred to 'all the hazards' the party was
encountering in the new phase. This was an acknowledgment of the
difficulties of managing the transition from a centrally-planned to market
system.
China's leaders, in their call for a re-invigoration of central authority,
revealed deep-seated concerns about emergent regionalism with the growth of
powerful provincial interests and a corresponding loss of authority in
Beijing.
'Our country is currently undergoing extensive and profound social changes,
and this requires our party to do better in upholding and improving
democratic centralism,' the statement said. It was 'necessary to safeguard
central authority, and forcefully implement the party's line, principles and
policies.' The central committee called for a renewed campaign against
corruption. Public confidence has been shaken by the spectacle of greedy
officials prospering from the economic boom.
China's emphasis on a collective rule in the new era exposes official
concerns about a possible leadership vacuum that might follow Mr Deng's
death. The spectre of post-Deng factional strife looms in the minds of
Chinese leaders.
China's leadership session, the first meeting of the more-than-300 Central
Committee members since last year, also coincides with growing worries about
rising prices and dangers of social unrest among the disaffected.
A nervous ruling elite is seeking to arm itself with the necessary weapons
to combat expected turbulence. Strengthening lacklustre party institutions
is part of this process.
