FT  19 OCT 94 / Japan under pressure on Iranian dam: US and Israel oppose
Dollars 1bn funding because of Tehran's alleged terrorist links
Japan has come under pressure from the US and Israel to stop funding a
Dollars 1bn (Pounds 620m) hydroelectric dam in Iran, because of claims that
the Iranian government has terrorist links.
Japan's Foreign Ministry has been urged to decide against disbursing an
overdue second Dollars 460m tranche of a soft loan for the dam, over the
Karun river, south of Tehran. It is the latest of four hydroelectric plants,
an important part of efforts to update an inadequate power supply, the
success of which is crucial to economic reforms.
Criticism of Japan's support for Iran risks embarrassing the Tokyo
government, the world's largest aid donor, less than a month after its
application for permanent membership of the United Nations Security Council.
Japan has based its UN application on its credentials as a supporter of
humanitarian causes across the world.
Diplomatic pressure to stop helping Iran has built up in recent weeks
because the Foreign Ministry is nearing a decision on the loan. The second
tranche was due to have been paid in May, but has been delayed while the
ministry studied its allies' evidence of Iran's terrorist links.
The first tranche, worth Dollars 364m and paid in May 1993, was for
engineering and consultancy costs, while the second is to pay for machinery.
A final tranche is for construction, yet to start. The Japanese government's
approval for the Karun project last year marked a controversial end, against
US opposition, to a 17-year suspension of Japanese aid to Iran. This is
among several subjects on which Japan has started recently to sketch out a
foreign policy line independent of Washington.
Last year's U-turn in Tokyo's Iranian policy, influenced by Mr Kunihiko
Saito, the foreign ministry's bureaucratic chief and a former ambassador to
Iran, is intended to support moderate elements in the Tehran government.
This will help political stability in the Gulf region, on which Japan
depends for more than half its oil supplies, argue the ministry's Middle
East experts. Iran alone provides a mere 8.4 per cent of Japanese oil.
Critics of Japan's support for Iran, including some sections in the ministry
itself, argue that it produces the opposite effect to that intended. They
maintain that President Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, Iran's pragmatic
president, is aware of and unalarmed by CIA reports showing Iranian backing
for the Hizbollah bomb attacks in Buenos Aires and London in July and claims
by Mossad, Israeli intelligence, that aid to Iran is being diverted to
Hamas, the extremist Islamic group.
Moreover, UK intelligence reports earlier this year demonstrated links
between Tehran and the Irish Republican Army, so arousing British concern
over the possible diversion of Japanese aid.
Japan's Foreign Ministry is, however, sensitive to these allegations. It has
at least once since restarting aid to Iran hinted that official loans would
be withdrawn if it found conclusive evidence that Tehran supported
terrorism, built nuclear weapons or expanded its military. Officials do not
deny that the Iranian government's pragmatists and extreme religious groups
are close to each other.
Against that, a ministry official points to encouragingly moderate recent
statements from Tehran that it will not obstruct the Middle East peace
process and that it has shifted its support for North over South Korea to
neutrality between the two.
Whether or not to proceed with the loan remains under study, the official
said.
