FT  25 NOV 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Australia's biggest LNG project
overcomes setbacks - The North West Shelf plant's major expansion is close
after a year of delays
The flies and the gales have descended on this remote coastal settlement in
the Australian north west as spring turns to summer.
The landscape is hard and parched: ridges of shattered red granite with the
occasional gum tree and kangaroo are the only sights provided by nature. But
amid the desolation stands a giant stack of shining tubes topped by bright
orange flares: the North West Shelf liquefied natural gas plant.
Just five years old, the site is the largest resource project of its kind in
Australia, with investment of over Dollars A10bn (Pounds 4.85bn), and it is
about to undergo further expansion after a year of frustrating delays.
The 6m tonne-a-year plant was built in 1989 to service the gas fields which
had earlier been found 125km offshore. Up till now, only one field, North
Rankin, has been operational, producing over 40m cubic metres a day. Part of
the gas is piped to Perth and other domestic consumers. But most of it is
liquefied for export, mainly to Japanese electric utilities.
The plant was expanded from two trains to three in 1992. and over the past
year or so, the bottlenecks in the production lines have been relieved.
Output is now up to 7m tonnes, and will eventually reach 7.5m when the
overhaul is complete. An eighth LNG carrier is being added to the fleet of
seven which ply the 10-day route up to Japan.
However, next January will see the completion of the major engineering feat
that lies behind the plant's next stage of growth: the start-up of
production from the Goodwyn field to the west of Rankin.
Goodwyn was supposed to start last year. But it was found that the piling
tubes which had been driven deep into the ocean floor to support the
platform had buckled, preventing the piles themselves being inserted into 11
of the 16 points that had been prepared. Special jacks had to be designed
and forced through the 4ft diameter tubes to straighten them. The work was
enormously expensive and time-consuming, but it was successful. The piles
were completed and the platform put in place. Most of the repair cost of
Dollars A330m was recovered from insurance.
Engineers now expect Goodwyn to start in January. It has the capacity to
produce 25m cu m of gas a day. But just as valuable is the 60,000 barrels of
condensate which it is expected to produce as well.
The NWS LNG project is a complex joint venture shared equally between six
companies: Woodside, Shell, BHP, Chevron, BP and and a company jointly owned
by Mitsubishi and Mitsui. Since Shell also owns one third of Woodside it is
effectively the first among equals in the partnership.
The confidence with which the owners are expanding the operation is based on
forecasts of steadily rising demand in the Pacific area. But though the
Japanese utilities have been willing to take delivery of additional cargoes
of LNG (especially last summer when exceptional heat boosted demand for air
conditioning) they are not able to absorb all the output. The challenge for
the plant, therefore, is to find additional buyers for the surplus.
So far, one cargo has gone to Korea, and several more to Spain. Woodside
predicts that demand for LNG in the Pacific area will double from about 50m
tonnes a year to around 100m tonnes by early next century. However, there is
a growing number of suppliers in the region, including Malaysia, Brunei and
Indonesia where Bontang, the world's largest LNG plant, is about to undergo
expansion as well.
A further difficulty is that the Karratha plant was originally designed with
Dollars 25-a-barrel oil in view. The fact that the price is now languishing
several dollars below that is putting pressure on the plant's margins, and
delicate negotiations are currently proceeding with the Japanese to
renegotiate the selling price.
According to Mr Cyril Huijsmans, the plant manager, the company is trying to
squeeze Dollars 100m a year in costs out of the operation in order to ease
the pressure on margins. The tightness of the margins also means that the
plant cannot afford to miss a single shipment, each of which is worth
Dollars 10m. So far the regular three-day loading schedule has not been
missed.
There is a degree of caution, therefore, over talk of adding capacity to the
Karratha plant - the site was designed to accommodate two further trains.
Enlarged capacity would require a second pipeline in from the gasfields and
other expensive infrastructure, which would boost the total cost close to
Dollars A1.8bn, according to Mr Bill Brehaut, the technical manager.
The project would also have to firm up more reserves, though with an active
exploration programme afoot and some promising finds already noted, that may
already be happening.
