FT  20 APR 94 / UK Company News: St Ives falls 33% to Pounds 7.1m - Printer
hit by losses on disposal of two non-core businesses
Losses on the disposal of discontinued businesses led St Ives, the UK's
largest independent printer, to yesterday report a 33 per cent contraction
in interim pre-tax profits, despite an improvement at the operating level.
Profits before tax fell to Pounds 7.11m in the 26 weeks to January 28, down
from Pounds 10.5m last time.
The decline came after exceptional costs of Pounds 4.93m - representing
goodwill previously written off to reserves - on the disposal of two
non-core businesses, Talbot Publishing Systems in December and Nelson
Packaging last month.
Earnings per share slipped to 3.02p (7.24p), but the interim dividend is
increased by 27 per cent to 1.9p (1.5p). This is the first increase in the
interim dividend since 1990 and Mr Miles Emley, chairman, said it
represented a move towards 'a more conventional' one third to two thirds
split between the interim and final.
The shares dipped 6p to 400p.
Operating profits increased to Pounds 11.6m (Pounds 9.86m) despite a Pounds
118,000 loss on discontinued activities. Mr Emley described the results as
'a satisfactory outcome in trading conditions which have shown only a patchy
recovery and remain extremely competitive'.
In the group's core magazine printing business, some growth in sales, partly
as a result of increased paginations, and the replacement of low margin work
resulted in firmer margins and an improved performance.
Meanwhile the launch of a number of supplements by national newspaper
publishers has taken up significant printing capacity in the industry as a
whole.
Volumes were flat in the group's book business, although sales in the US
bible market have increased considerably.
The group ended the period with net cash of Pounds 22.5m.
COMMENT
St Ives' underlying results were in line with market expectations. Despite
the chairman's cautious remarks, it is clear that the group is already
benefiting from a modest upturn in volumes. Capacity utilisation in the UK
print plants has edged up to about 80 per cent and overall pre-tax margins
have increased from 10 per cent to 10.7 per cent. Providing this improvement
is sustained, pre-tax profits should climb to about Pounds 25m this year,
producing earnings of about 16.6p. The shares are trading on a lofty
prospective multiple of 24, but are worth holding.
