FT  02 SEP 94 / Survey of Aerospace (8): There's a lull in the life of a
cottage industry - A look at the market for helicopters
The cottage industry of helicopter manufacture has had as much trouble as
the rest of the aerospace industry in recent years. With three-quarters of
all production destined for the military market the fall in weapons
procurement has taken its toll. Particularly so since the US military, long
the most enthusiastic devotees of the helicopter as transport and weapon,
had filled the bulk of their Apache attack programme and were in any case
headed for a lull.
In the civil market, the recession in Europe and the US has taken its toll
on orders, too. Corporate executives cutting staff can hardly be seen
ordering the new executive aerial runabout.
As a result, the helicopter business, which has persisted as a slightly
quirky specialism running at steady if unspectacular volumes from
traditional sites, has experienced the kind of lull, and inevitable
retrenchment, which it had avoided for many years.
But because almost all manufacturers are owned by large conglomerates, there
has not yet been the rationalisation seen in many other aerospace sectors.
There are still seven principal helicopter makers - Eurocopter, Westland and
Agusta in Europe and Bell Textron, Sikorsky, Boeing and McDonnell Douglas in
the US. Even the one which was put up for sale, McDonnell Douglas's
helicopter operation which produces the very successful AH-64 Apache, was
eventually withdrawn from the market due to lack of interest.
Nor is it at all clear that further consolidation is close. One industry
executive points out that while the businesses are individually small they
mostly occupy separate niches. The only company to change hands, Westland,
lost its independence to GKN, the automotive engineering company, rather
than another helicopter maker. If there is to be consolidation of the number
of manufacturers, that may well be as a result of changes in corporate
strategy by the parent companies, rather than conditions in the helicopter
market.
Nonetheless, conditions in the market mean that parent companies and
governments sponsoring helicopter development face some difficult choices.
In Europe, the development of three helicopters is placing great strain on
government budgets.
The Westland-Agusta EH-101 large helicopter has perhaps the safest future.
It has a production contract for 44 anti-submarine warfare naval variants
from the Royal Navy, and looks certain to get a further order for 25 utility
transport versions from the Royal Air Force later this year. The Italian
government is also due to order some, and interest has come from potential
export markets, notably from Saudi Arabia, which is interested in the ASW
variant.
The other two helicopters being designed by European teams face a more
uncertain fate. The NH-90, being designed by the Franco-German Eurocopter
group in collaboration with Italy and the Netherlands, is a smaller utility
helicopter which would transport about 20 troops. There is a market in
replacing ageing Puma and Sea King transporters, but the development costs
are high, and there are several competitors.
The Tiger attack helicopter also addresses a strong market as more armies
move towards the US doctrine of integrated air-land battle, with helicopters
and tanks working in tandem. However, it too faces strong competition from
the Apache and, for armed forces looking for something a little cheaper, the
revamped Bell Cobra Venom with a new glass cockpit made by GEC-Marconi. With
defence budgets stretched both the NH-90 and the Tiger may not make it into
production.
In the US, Boeing will continue to hold the niche for very large helicopters
with the Chinook, not least because the cost of developing an alternative
would be prohibitive. Bell Textron also look likely to keep their strong
position in light helicopters.
But McDonnell Douglas will have to continue to evolve away from its
dependence on the Apache, and Sikorsky cannot be entirely sure of the future
of the next-generation Comanche reconnaissance and attack helicopter. At
present the Comanche has firm political backing, but if the budget squeeze
gets much worse, the Comanche may come under pressure from the Apache.
The V-22 Osprey helicopter-cum-prop-aircraft also has strong backing, but
the future of several of the helicopters, and the fate of their
manufacturers, will rest on procurement decisions in the next few years. In
particular, the race to replace ageing US marine fleets will be important.
In Europe, too, there are several important procurement decisions pending.
Most prominent, and immediate, is the UK's requirement for a Pounds 2bn
programme of 91 attack helicopters. Here the competition is between the
Apache, which would be manufactured under licence by Westland, the AH-1W
Cobra Venom with the GEC-Marconi glass cockpit, the Tiger with British
Aerospace participation, and the South African Rooivalk.
The Apache has long been the front-running favourite with the British Army,
but it is probably also the most expensive helicopter, both in purchase
price and through-life costs. The Cobra Venom is cheaper and the new cockpit
is a great improvement on the old Vietnam veteran version, but it is only a
twin-bladed machine, and its weapons load is thus limited.
The Tiger is also smaller than the Apache, and while it is the newest
technology, it is also relatively expensive and will struggle to carry the
full weapons compliment specified by the ministry of defence. The Rooivalk
is almost certainly the cheapest option to buy, though its avionics may need
such radical updating that it is not really a viable option.
Because the order is one of the largest to be placed for attack helicopters
in the next few years, it will have a significant impact on the market. If
the Apache wins, McDonnell Douglas will have longer to develop future
alternatives. If the Tiger wins, Eurocopter will have made the breakthrough
it has been looking for. The Bell Cobra would give GEC-Marconi an excellent
opportunity to extend its range of glass cockpit avionics, and the Rooivalk
would give South Africa a huge boost in international arms markets.
