FT  05 MAY 94 / Accountancy Column: Industry's cost-cutting pains US firms -
KPMG's attempts to cope with the malaise which still exists in the sector
If accounting firms in the developed world have had a tough time of it so
far in the 1990s, then those in the US have suffered more than most. And if
you were to pick a firm that exemplifies the pain of the past four years or
so, you could hardly do better than KPMG Peat Marwick.
In 1993, Peat reported revenues in the US of roughly Dollars 1.8bn, the same
as it has in each of the past four years (the firm's fiscal year runs to the
end of June.)
In real terms, income has been falling at a time when costs have been rising
steadily. To sustain partners' earnings, the firm has slashed partner
numbers during the period by around 20 per cent, to just under 1,500. (It
started culling partners soon after the 1987 merger between Peat Marwick and
Main Hurdman.)
Peat is not alone, of course. Of the US firms, only Arthur Andersen and, to
a lesser degree, Price Waterhouse, have managed to keep a degree of top-line
growth. The products of the late-1980s mega-mergers have suffered more than
most; Ernst &amp; Young and Deloitte &amp; Touche have also been forced to cut back
partner numbers, though not to the same degree as Peat.
US accountants blamed the malaise for a long time on their country's early
1990s recession. Such claims have sounded increasingly hollow: the US
economy came out of recession more than two years ago, at first fitfully and
more recently with undeniable vigour. But the fortunes of the accounting
firms have not responded as fast. Their fees have become just one more of
the items that US industry, bent on squeezing out every unnecessary cost,
has put under the microscope.
The experience has been a sobering one. Accounting firms spent much of the
1980s talking about becoming more useful to their customers, and less
reliant on compliance products like doing audits and filling in tax returns.
They are still talking about it - but there is little indication that this
approach has reinjected any growth into the accounting business.
The man with the unenviable job of reinventing Peat in the US is Jon
Madonna. Elected chairman in 1990, he has already presided over a painful
downsizing. He could now be set to lead the firm into the next century. His
51st birthday is today, leaving him plenty of time to serve a second
six-year term as chairman (should he be re-elected) before reaching Peat's
retirement age of 60.
According to Madonna, the turning point has come: 'What we went through in
the last few years was a downsizing. Now, it's a growth strategy.'
If he is right - a big 'if' - the rest of the 1990s will be a more pleasant
time for the accounting firms than the first part of the decade.
The starting point is a difficult one. 'We've got productivity issues, we've
got growth issues, we've got profitability issues. We're no different from
any other industry here,' says Madonna.
The US firms are reeling from the effects of cost-cutting already
undertaken, and have yet to rebuild morale. The cost-cutting is unlikely to
be at an end, though.
Technology has revolutionised the way companies and the investment community
collect and analyse financial information. Accountants have long realised
this, and have struggled to reinvent their role as an intermediary in the
information chain: rather than collectors and collaters of financial
information, they have tried to become interpreters and strategisers.
Yet the cost structures of the big US firms suggest that they have not made
the sort of productivity gains that might be expected from this information
revolution.
Since the middle 1980s, the ratio of partners to professional staff - one of
the best indicators of productivity in any professional partnership - has
hardly budged at several of the biggest firms, at around eight professionals
to each partner. Nor has the ratio of non-professional (largely
administrative) staff fallen. Cutting people has at least lifted the average
revenues per partner, though.
'We're not as good as we should be (at measuring productivity),' admits
Madonna. Productivity may be one of the biggest issues facing the
profession, yet it continues to be overshadowed by an obsession with growth.
Reinvigorating the top line is the first objective of all firms.
Peat's response has been to take a strategy common among all accounting
firms in recent years one step further. 'Industry specialisation' has been
the mantra of the profession for at least a decade. Peat has now elevated it
to become a raison d'etre.
By last summer, the firm had, in the US, scrapped its traditional functional
groups - audit, tax, consulting, and so on - and reorganised itself along
industry lines.
Madonna says: 'We're measuring ourselves by market - we will be able to tell
you how much we generate in financial services, for instance.'
That approach enables the firm to reward its staff according to how well
their particular industry group does. Audit staff, the theory runs, will be
more inclined to think creatively about other services that could help a
customer if their own pay is more closely tied to the outcome.
Does fiddling with organisational structure in this way get to the root
problems of the accounting firms? It is hard to argue against the approach:
if the accounting firms find growth in the future, it must come from selling
new services to their customers. Organising around customers, rather than
around their own functional divisions, is a logical step.
Yet on its own, industry specialisation is not the answer. It did not
prevent the problems of the early 1990s, and is unlikely to be a panacea in
the future.
'On the face of it, it seems a good idea. But the world doesn't
compartmentalise that way, it's too dynamic,' says Bruce Marcus, a
consultant on marketing for professional firms. More seriously, he adds,
accounting firms have still not adapted to the competitive era ushered in as
long ago as 1977, when the ban on advert-ising in the US was first lifted.
There are other, more serious management problems that hang over the
accounting firms, notably the partnership structure itself. Having taken the
first steps in the early 1980s to setting up quasi-corporate governance
arrangements, accounting firms have failed to carry the process to its
logical conclusion.
Madonna makes the most of the partnership system, even going so far as to
suggest that the corporate world has moved closer to the partnership
structure, rather than the other way around.
'A lot of corporate America is trying to manage itself as a partnership,' he
says. He suggests it is 'very much in line with the stock option frenzy'
which has seen companies increasingly offering senior employees an equity
interest.
In reality, though, there is still a huge gulf between the consensual style
of a partnership and the standard corporate management structure. Tackling
this issue remains one of the basic challenges that accounting firms have
shied away from.
If there is a model for the accountants to follow, perhaps it is the US
investment banks. Small partnerships until the 1960s in most cases, they
managed the transition to big, public corporations with spectacular success.
The most profitable of them all, Goldman Sachs, remains a partnership. But
in its strong leadership and management structure, it has far more in common
with a public company than an accounting firm.
