FT  17 OCT 94 / Survey of International Telecommunications (14): You can
always switch off - Satellites will provide mobile phone links - everywhere
/ A portable phone that works anywhere worldwide is no longer science
fiction, according to satellite operators. Serious investment lies behind
their dreams of global telecoms
Less than ten years ago, when cellular radio opened in London, hand-held
mobile phones were a novelty. They cost a king's ransom and had most of the
characteristics of a brick (including the nickname), but they represented a
genuine breakthrough.
For the first time anyone with the money could make phone calls from more or
less anywhere - at least, anywhere in range of a base station anyway. Now
another communications breakthrough is about to move those base stations
into the sky so that portable phone users will always be in touch, no matter
where they are throughout the world.
Purists will no doubt argue that luggable mobile telephones existed before
cellular and that you can already make phone calls by satellite worldwide if
you are prepared to carry around a terminal the size of a briefcase.
Neither of these solutions were mass-market products, whereas the new
generation of portable phones are intended for a wide user-base, even if the
cost restricts take-up in the early stages.
Charges, in fact, should not be a big hindrance among potential users:
according to Iridium, front-runner among the satellite phone consortia,
dual-mode handsets will allow users to switch to cheaper land-based services
when possible.
lridium customers can expect to pay Dollars 3 (Pounds 1.80) a minute for
calls, whilst their rivals intend to undercut this figure. Vodafone, a
member of Globalstar, another consortium, says typical charges will
represent only a modest premium to existing cellular tariffs. Indeed, in the
US, Globalstar has announced prices as low as 65 cents - just under Pounds 1
 -a minute.
Six competing consortia have announced plans to offer global telephone
services by means of satellites in low earth orbit ('Leo' satellites) and a
seventh is expected shortly. lridium, led by Motorola, was the pioneer
scheme and has been joined by contenders Globalstar, TRW, Teledesic,
Constellation Communications and Ellipsat.
Rather than compete with established cellular radio operators, the sky-based
systems will collaborate with them, offering them franchises. The UK's
Vodafone group has, for instance, acquired the franchises for Globalstar in
the territories where it is already involved in operating cellular networks.
These include Australia, South Africa, Hong Kong, Sweden, Denmark, Sweden,
Malta, Greece and, of course, the UK.
Gerry Whent, Vodafone chief executive, explains the rationale for this:
'We've always been at the leading edge of mobile telecoms technology and we
regard the Globalstar service as being complementary to the terrestrial
cellular networks that we already operate in a number of countries.
'It will enhance the potential coverage to subscribers in more remote areas
who will use dual-mode handsets capable of using either terrestrial GSM
networks or Globalstar when out of local cellular coverage areas.'
In terms of technology and service offering there are general similarities
between the plans announced so far. Globalstar and lridium will both open
commercially in 1998 and each will also allow their subscribers to use
land-based GSM cellular systems wherever available (and incidentally,
confirming GSM as the de facto global standard for mobile phones).
Iridium services will include voice, data, facsimile and paging. lridium
will employ a 'constellation' of 66 Leo satellites, whilst Globalstar is
based on a constellation of 48 - whereas lridium plans links to pass
international calls between satellites, Globalstar does not, and will rely
on long-distance terrestrial networks.
The scale of investment required - lridium will cost Dollars 3.2bn to build
 -means that costs must be shared between constructors and network
operators. The consortium announced this month that Germany's Vebacom would
take a 10 per cent stake and invest at least Dollars 140m to acquire in
return the northern and western European gateway territories.
In Globalstar, Vodafone has joined nine other international companies and
will contribute Dollars 37.5m in 1994-95 for a stake of around 10 per cent
in the consortium.
Not all potential global satellite operators are newcomers, however. BT and
other partners in Inmarsat, the international consortium providing satcomms
to shipping and airlines, have announced their own hand-held satellite phone
called Inmarsat-P and targeted for introduction by 1998-2000.
Whether all these plans will come to fruition is anyone's guess: some
observers are chary whether the total business to be had can support such
grandiose plans - and they fear charges may need to be raised to protect
terrestrial networks, especially in developing countries. Some nations may
demand a high premium for the tight to establish earth stations, forcing up
charges further.
Some European telecom operators are also privately critical of what they see
as US aims of global domination in satellite communications, as well as 'bad
faith.' Because satellites ignore national boundaries, any service
authorised in the US has, in effect, a world-wide operating licence, and as
long as customers are happy to deal with an operator in America, they can
use their phones wherever they choose. This, they say, gives the US an
unfair advantage.
There is also disagreement over frequency allocations: channels or
frequencies for radio communication are at a premium; a world conference in
1992 set aside radio spectrum in all countries for a new, third-generation
terrestrial mobile phone system.
However, in the US, part of this spectrum has now been allocated to lridium
and other Leo satellite systems, pre-empting its use for other services.
Whilst this may be expedient now, it could also cause problems for the
future development of the terrestrial service. Official talk of a rift is
discounted, however, by David Court, head of the European Radio
Communications Office in Copenhagen: 'We would merely point to a difference
in emphasis between the US and Europe; America is clearly focusing on
satellite services, whereas Europe is more concerned with terrestrial
services,' he says.
The vision of the phone that works everywhere is now within reach, which
must assure the future of personal satellite communication systems. Coupled
with a personal follow-me phone number, the user will stay in touch with the
world wherever he or she roams. Thankfully an on/off switch is also a
standard fitting.
