FT  18 OCT 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Brazilian rain sends coffee
futures lower
Coffee futures rebounded from a sharp setback in volatile trading yesterday,
affected by rainfall that has relieved a long drought in Brazil, the world's
biggest producer.
In London, the January robusta futures contract staged a strong comeback
after losing Dollars 118 at one stage, to close just Dollars 23 lower at
Dollars 3,485 a tonne. This compares with its nearly nine-year high of
Dollars 4,140 on September 22.
New York arabica futures continued the trend, moving sharply lower in early
trading, but then striding back in the afternoon, with the March position up
14.50 cents at 207.25 cents a pound on a wave of buying.
The volatility appeared to reflect uncertainty over whether the rain during
the weekend, and forecasts of more to come during the early part of this
week, would do anything to relieve the pressure on next year's Brazilian
crop. This is expected to be well down following the drought and the two
severe frosts that hit the country in June and July. A report yesterday by
Weather Services, an independent US forecaster, said the recent drought was
worse than the last severe dry spell of 1985.
There was also speculation that an export sugar tax announced by Brazil on
Friday might be followed by a similar tax on coffee. GNI, the London broker,
commented in its daily report: 'Coffee prices are still historically very
high, and the government could well impose a stiff export tax in the very
near future.'
However, Mr Robert MacArthur, head of the Tropical Trader Group at Merrill
Lynch in London, said the price volatility had more to do with traders' own
positions than with any shift in fundamentals.
Indonesia, the world's third largest coffee producer, said it would increase
coffee output to 450,000 tonnes next year and predicted exports at around
300,000 tonnes, Reuter reports from Jakarta.
The prolonged drought this year had affected production for next year.
Production would be 420,000 tonnes this year, down from 460,000 tonnes last
year.
