FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Vehicle Fleet Management (3): The car becomes an
office - Mobile telephones just keep on proliferating
Leaving the office used to mean saying goodbye to phone, fax and computer.
In the last decade, however, technology advances, particularly in data
processing and cellular radio-telephony, have led to the birth of the mobile
office.
The mobile telephone, in particular, has quickly established itself as an
effective business tool in the UK and elsewhere in Europe. Since the
introduction of cellular radio services in Britain in 1985, the number of
subscribers to the two original analogue national networks, Cellnet and
Vodafone, has grown to around 2.1m - or almost a fifth of the total 9.5m
users in Europe.
Most of these subscribers are business users, many of whom started with a
dedicated carphone but have more recently moved to handportable telephones.
Many of these lightweight pocket-sized handsets can also be used in
conjunction with a car-kit which removes the limitations of battery life and
provides better reception.
The clear advantage of hand-portables is that they travel with the user  -
not the vehicle - so they can be used almost anywhere.
Nevertheless, some large fleet buyers have continued to buy dedicated
carphones because of the substantial cost savings available with bulk
equipment purchases.
Over the past 18 months the range of mobile telecommunication equipment and
services has proliferated. In particular, the advent of digital cellular
technology has spawned a second generation of cellular networks in the UK
and Europe, and encouraged the operators of the traditional analogue
networks to repackage their services in a broader range of tariff structures
aimed at different segments of the market.
For example, the two analogue network operators in the UK now offer six
different tariffs. Both have built digital network services based on the
pan-European GSM standard - Vodafone has developed two service offerings,
Metrodigital and Eurodigital on its GSM network.
Although the uptake of these new GSM services has been relatively slow in
the UK where the analogue networks are well-established and provide superior
coverage, elsewhere in Europe, especially Germany, GSM services have grown
rapidly.
The business traveller in particular stands to gain some considerable
advantages from digital services such as GSM.
Digital services provide clearer and more reliable connections which are
also more secure from eavesdropping. By the mid-1990s GSM customers will be
able to travel throughout Europe using the same handset.
In the UK, a second set of digital services based on a sub- set of the GSM
standard dubbed Personal Communications Networks (PCNs) have also appeared.
Mercury One-2-One, the first PC service in Europe, was launched in the UK
last autumn, and Hutchison Microtel plans to launch a rival service this
month.
Elsewhere in Europe, Germany has licensed one PCN operator and France is
licensing another. It remains to be seen whether these services prove
attractive to business travellers in the longer term as PCN services were
originally envisioned as primarily urban services aimed at individual
customers.
Mercury One-2-One, which offers both personal and business tariffs, has a
limited appeal for the moment as its service availability is confined to
London and the south east, although this is being steadily extended.
This fragmentation of the cellular market has added to customers' confusion.
Already some vehicle fleet operators find they are inheriting a haphazard
collection of equipment, service contracts and billing systems.
According to Mercury Mobile Services, an independent service provider, many
corporate users do not know how many mobile phones they have or how they are
being used. To address this problem, MMS offers a 'free mobile
communications audit' and a 'consolidation service' which has been used by
corporate clients ranging from Digital Equipment to Shell, the Automobile
Association and UPS.
However, cellular telephony is not the only communications choice available
to large corporate fleet operators. Some large customers, including local
government and utilities, which only require vehicle-to-vehicle or
vehicle-base communications, have discovered that public access mobile radio
(PAMR) networks such as National Band Three (NB3) in the UK can offer
significant cost advantages.
NB3's network covers 85 per cent of the UK population and now claims more
than 45,000 subscribers ranging from transport, distribution and
construction companies to couriers, construction companies, waste disposal
organisations and security firms.
PAMR networks can also offer highly competitive mobile data services to
customers who require voice and data communications, or just data for
example to log and track fleet vehicles.
As the use of portable fax machines and 'notebook' portable computers has
grown, so too has the demand for mobile data transmission. Not surprisingly,
this can be done in a growing number of ways, for example by using modems
with the existing cellular telephone networks; by using PAMR or private
mobile radio networks; or the services of dedicated mobile data network
operators.
Generally, transmitting data over an analogue cellular system is far more
difficult than over the 'fixed wire' public telephone system. One
increasingly popular alternative is to use dedicated mobile data services
such as the Ram Mobile Data network in the UK which, like most other
dedicated mobile data networks in Europe, is based on Ericsson's Mobitex
technology.
Although mobile data services have generally grown more slowly than
expected, the expansion of mobile computing and the next generation of
portable digital assistants (PDAs) such as Apple's Newton is expected to
lead to growth by the end of the century.
