FT  19 JUL 94 / Cut-price gas bills planned for reliable customers
British Gas aims to cut the prices it charges its best residential customers
during the run-up to the introduction of competition in 1996 in a move that
could also result in bigger bills for millions of other households.
The price differentials between customers are likely to emerge as the
company lifts cross-subsidies. British Gas claims that 2m-3m of its most
profitable domestic customers subsidise many more problem payers and those
who use relatively small amounts of gas.
It is thought that 5m customers might benefit from lower prices, but as many
as 8m households could be hit by increases.
Company officials say the 're-balancing' of costs might occur abruptly if
the government sticks to the present timetable for ending its monopoly over
the sale of gas to 18m households starting in 1996, with full liberalisation
due in 1998.
A delay of six to 12 months in the first phase of competition, which British
Gas has proposed to ensure that its computer systems have been upgraded and
tested before deregulation, would allow it to introduce price changes more
gradually, officials said.
The company might also be able to offer packages to the 2m customers a year
who pay bills late or not at all to persuade them to change their habits.
These could include incentives to pay by direct debit.
Officials say the late payment problem is so large because disconnection
procedures are cumbersome. They also complain that as a result gas bills are
paid last, after electricity.
The company said yesterday it was committed to competition, and wanted to
see the necessary legislation in the Queen's speech this autumn. But it also
wants to ensure that the rebalancing of its cost base is completed before
its monopoly is lifted.
Ofgas, the gas industry regulator, said a rebalancing of costs between
consumers would require its approval. It would also have to take place
within the complex pricing formula set by the regulator - a cap which is
based on the retail price index minus 4 percentage points.
But the regulator confirmed that British Gas can raise prices for different
market segments if it can show it is not recovering the costs of serving
such customers.
British Gas executives say they have little faith in the ability of Ofgas to
prevent independent gas marketers from targeting its best customers, while
avoiding the millions of small customers or problem payers.
Editorial Comment, Page 15
See Lex
