FT  03 AUG 94 / Societies say rate rises threaten recovery
House prices have stabilised after recent falls but the housing market
remains weak and a rise in interest rates would threaten further recovery,
the two largest building societies warn.
Halifax and Nationwide both report that prices rose last month compared with
June, but differ widely on the extent of the increases.
Halifax said prices rose just 0.2 per cent on average to Pounds 63,563, the
second consecutive monthly increase announced by the society, which had
reported price falls in April and May.
Nationwide said prices had risen 1.8 per cent last month, the biggest
monthly rise since May 1991, after a 0.7 per cent fall in June. Mr Brian
Davis, Nationwide's chief executive, warned against reading too much into
one month's figures. He added: 'The trend so far this year has reflected a
quiet market with prices broadly unchanged over the period.'
Nationwide said prices had risen 2.1 per cent during the 12 months to the
end of July to an average Pounds 55,223. Halifax estimated the annual rate
of increase at 1 per cent. Halifax uses a bigger sample than Nationwide and
seasonally adjusts its figures.
Halifax said: 'The recovery in the housing market remains very weak and
further monthly (price) falls are possible.'
Nationwide said that 'increases significantly above the general inflation
rate are unlikely before next year and gains may remain modest compared with
the experience of previous upturns'.
Workload levels in the construction industry have risen for the first time
in more than four years, the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors says
in a survey published today.
Order books of more than 200 quantity surveyors rose by 0.5 per cent during
the three months to the end of June workloads compared with the previous
three months.
Mr Christopher Vickers, the institution's construction industry spokesman,
said: 'We are now seeing the beginnings of a slow but steady upturn in
building activity. If interest rates stay at their current level then we
should begin to see the emergence of a stronger revival in both consumer and
business confidence. This could be undermined by speculation about interest
rate rises.'
