FT  19 NOV 94 / Arts: The future starts to reveal itself - Antony Thorncroft
takes a close look at arts funding, orchestras and the Baroness's successor
The nation's arts companies will be blessed if they expect little when their
cheques arrive from the Arts Council for 1995-1996. Lord Gowrie, council
chairman, said this week that he was not optimistic about persuading Stephen
Dorrell, heritage secretary, to restore the Pounds 3.5m cut in the English
Arts Council's grant made a year ago.
He is resigned to standstill funding and the possibility that some arts
companies will fold. By the end of this financial year the nation's Big Four
 -the Royal Opera, ENO, RSC and the National Theatre - will have combined
deficits of more than Pounds 5m: even getting back the Pounds 3.5m will not
bring financial health to the arts.
But Gowrie warned against public whingeing. As a former arts minister he
could confidently assert that when leading figures mounted their coffee
tables and demanded more subsidy, the political Establishment quickly sided
with the Treasury in keeping arts funding on a tight rein.
David Mellor's success as an arts-loving Treasury secretary in getting a
substantial lift in funding four years ago has proved a liability. The
Treasury regarded it as the final hand-out, but already recession-hit
companies are back with their begging bowls.
The next few months are crucial. By April lottery money will be feeding into
the arts. It is meant for capital projects but companies such as the
National Theatre are forced to spend large chunks of their grant on patching
up the building. If the lottery sorts this out the NT can release money into
new productions and eliminate any 1994-1995 deficit.
*
The orchestras are at last realising that they must change their ways if
they are to maintain a live audience for classical music.
The future starts to reveal itself at the Queen Elizabeth Hall on the South
Bank on November 30 when the London Mozart Players perform Mozart and Haydn
enhanced by a large screen at the back of the hall.
Blitz Vision is simultaneously videoing the concert, and the audience will
see close-ups on screen of the musicians and the conductor Matthias Bamert,
whose cool exterior apparently hides wonderful facial expressions until now
enjoyed only by the players. There will also be sub-titles.
The musicians have been told to ham it up a bit, with plenty of mutual
glances and soft smiles for the screen. They are also expected to improve
their behaviour on stage - less talking and more cohesion in their exits and
entrances.
The South Bank will watch the experiment with interest: it will be expected
to pay for any permanent screen coverage. Next spring the SB is planning to
introduce its own audio guides to concerts.
What with the more relaxed attitude towards dress pioneered by the RPO, a
visit to an orchestral concert will soon be as invigorating as watching Pink
Floyd at Earl's Court.
*
The hunt is on for a successor to Baroness O'Cathain who last week took
fully paid leave of absence as managing director of the Barbican. Bernard
Harty, the City Chamberlain, who has stepped into the breach, is expected to
keep the seat warm for her successor, or rather successors.
The Barbican needs two people, a managing type with arty leanings to run the
place, and an arts director to look after the programming. There should be
no shortage of applicants, with the top job commanding a salary of about
Pounds 100,000 a year, the highest in the arts in the UK, and the deputy
getting around Pounds 70,000.
The head-hunters will be looking at a short, select list. Patrick Deuchar
has made a success of the Royal Albert Hall and must be in the frame, along
with John Tusa, a successful ex-BBC boss. It would be difficult to lure
Brian McMaster away from the Edinburgh Festival, but Genista Mackintosh,
ex-RSC, now National Theatre, has the experience. Ian Horsborough, who runs
the Guildhall School, is on the spot and Anthony Whitworth-Jones might be
prepared to leave Glyndebourne now that the new theatre has opened.
For the arts planning job the successful applicant must be well versed in
classical music, so Paul Findlay, ex-Covent Garden, now RPO, might be
considered, or Ian Ritchie, who has just left Opera North.
Running the Barbican is an odd sort of job. The theatre programming is
handled by the RSC and much of the music by the LSO, the Barbican's house
band. The managing director must be on top of the bars, cafes, parking,
lavatories and general ambience of the place, but must also inspire arts
festivals and give the Barbican an artistic style and cutting edge.
