FT  31 DEC 94 / How To Spend It: The decorator who makes your house look
lived in - War and Peace (Chintz versus Zen)
Tom Parr is chairman of Colefax &amp; Fowler, which perhaps more than any other
decorating company, symbolises the countrified look, the world of chintz and
'humble elegance'. Nobody else is quite so skilled at doing up houses so
they look as if they had been forever thus. His motto could be 'nothing
should look too new or too smart' or else: 'Comfort, comfort, comfort.'
'There are two main approaches to life, living and decorating - what I call
the heart and the head approach. Minimalism or the outright modernist
approach is really about the head, the theory of it, the rationalisation of
it. Whereas what I stand for . . . I think . . . is all heart.
'A decorator is an arranger of rooms and houses and the intention is to make
them more comfortable, more enjoyable for the owners and their friends, to
give them a way of housing their collections and and belongings. In the end
one must arrange the house and the belongings so that they are not only
pleasing to the eye but to all the other senses.
'When I see pictures of minimalist bedrooms I see not a book in sight and
nowhere to put a book down, no belongings to bring comfort to the eye. What
do the people live in them do? I see no pianos, no knitting, no children's
toys, no television sets, no dog baskets. All these things have a place in
life and need to be allowed for. Putting one stool in the middle of a
bathroom and calling it a bathroom seems to me bad decoration. It may please
the eye but what is the point of having a fine room if there is nowhere to
put your martini glass?
'I am reminded of the house of the great American architect Philip Johnson.
Years ago I had lunch with him in the famous glass house he had built for
himself. It was a glass cube with a core in the middle apparently for the
kitchen and other essential workings but when it came to lunch all the
delicious food came from outside, from another nearby kitchen. The house was
a game, a front. It didn't work.
'In a Tom Parr house you would be able to cook and watch the sun go down and
then flop into your comfortable sofa, read a book, watch television. Of
course this takes skill and you must be knowledgeable about fabrics, about
how to light, about proportion and architecture but comfort above all is the
aim.
'Popularly, people think that our approach is only for the rich but it isn't
so. I had a sweet friend who lost all her money and she had to go and live
in a council flat and we made her two rooms very special. The high and
mighty came to play bridge with her there and the rooms made them feel
comfortable.
'When I start on a room the first thing I do is find out how the owners are
going to use the room. Only then do I think about colours and textures and
furniture. I try to give them a background against which they can live their
lives.
'I like to use some of the things they already have and don't like to
re-cover everything and make it look brand new. Old things, shabby things,
offer continuity with the life they had before.
'My own bedroom perfectly sums up my approach - it gives me such joy when I
go back to it. It's got everything I want - a desk, a bed with a hand-made
hair mattress, good lights, a television set, lots of books, a fireplace
that works, pictures that I love.
'The library at Badminton is a room that I love - everything happens there.
There are always lots of people and drinks and dogs and it's so sympathetic
and the people who own it know how to entertain better than anybody else in
the world. Sometimes you make people lovely rooms but they don't know how to
make them work because they don't have generosity of spirit. The people who
live there matter - as a decorator you can only give them the framework -
then it is up to them to bring them to life.'
