FT  06 DEC 94 / Survey of Japanese Industry (14): Education system
criticised - Reform is needed for a more competitive Japan
Mr Masashi Kojima, president of Nippon Telegraph and Telephone, the largest
telecommunications operator, has grave concerns about Japan's
competitiveness in the future global multimedia race.
The underlying problem, he believes, is Japan's education system, which
encourages students to memorise rather than indulge in creative thought, and
is geared to creating disciplined, quality labourers.
Such concerns have been voiced over the past decade as Japanese industry has
caught up with the world and has been forced to compete to stay ahead in the
technology race. The increasing importance of patents has also made
creativity more valuable. A Japanese Nobel prize scientist and resident
researcher at a US university claimed in 1987 that he would not have won the
prize if he were still in Japan.
Education not only affects industry's competitiveness, but also the
country's political system and its role in the international arena. Mr
Ichiro Ozawa, the back-room strategist of the present political realignment,
believes that education is the underlying problem for Japan's system of
government.
In his book Blueprint for Building a New Japan he writes that democracy has
never really taken root in Japan partly because of an education system
designed to stamp out independent thought. He believes the system is too
rigid at school level and and too dull at the university stage.
However, the business world needs to realise that it bears some of the
responsibility for the educational system's 'creativity problem'. In the
1960s, representatives of leading business federations suggested measures
for a partial reform of the national education system to suit their
interests.
The Federation of Employers' Organisations (Nikkeiren), and other business
organisations came up with proposals which were incorporated in an outline
prepared by the government's central education committee. The proposals were
reflected in the government's curriculum. Based on the measures, students
have been divided into five grades to determine which schools on the higher
levels they would advance to, creating pressures for pupils to cram at an
early age.
Another criticism has been that the Japanese system focuses too much on
equality, which threatens to stifle the creativity of talented students.
The Ministry of Education and the country's leading universities have
started to correct this problem and are implementing a programme which
allows high-school students excelling in maths and physics to attend courses
taught by university instructors.
The programme is intended to allow talented pupils to escape the constraints
of the uniform education system and the pressures of the fierce competition
for university entrance exams.
Mr Martin Phillips, head of education services at the British Council in
Tokyo, believes pressures from society as a whole will bring about changes
in the education system. 'The attitudes of the young today are very
different from their parents,' he says.
But conformity is still a virtue and open debate is rare in Japan. A rigid
hierarchy still governs almost every aspect of Japanese life, including
academia, bureaucracy, and politics. In a business world which is no
different and still strongly adheres to such values, individual and creative
thinking may take time to root.
