FT  11 MAR 94 / Second attack hits Heathrow: Mortars fired at airport after
Sinn Fein warns of further 'spectaculars'
The IRA early this morning appeared to have launched a second attack in less
than 36 hours on Heathrow airport after the government conceded that hopes
of an early breakthrough in the search for peace in Northern Ireland had
been killed.
Security services were alerted shortly after midnight when 'incendiaries'
were fired near terminal four. However, an airport official said it appeared
that none had detonated and there had been little damage. There were no
reports of casualties.
Scotland Yard officers later confirmed that three mortar shells were found
in the south-east area of the airport close to terminal four. There were
also reports of two suspicious packages.
The airport's southern runway and a perimeter road were closed.
The attack followed non-specific warnings to the media. Initial reports
indicated that three thuds were heard, but police were unsure of the
location of the launch site.
The London Ambulance Service said it was alerted at 12.11am to 'an act of
aggression' at Heathrow. Ambulances and fire engines were standing by.
The second assault underlined fears in London and Dublin that the republican
movement has rejected the peace initiative.
Both governments were united in their condemnation of Wednesday's attack -
which yesterday led to calls for an inquiry into security operations at
Heathrow - and accepted the likelihood that it signalled rejection by the
republican movement of the peace initiative. Nevertheless Mr John Major, the
prime minister, insisted the search for peace would continue.
Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, described as 'despicable'
remarks made by Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president, in a radio interview in
which he appeared to warn of more possible events like Wednesday's attack on
Heathrow.
Mr Adams said: 'This attack comes in the middle of a stalemate. I would ask
now for John Major to end the stalemate. There are causes of conflict; the
conflict is ongoing. Every so often there will be something spectacular to
remind the outside world.'
Mr Adams' remarks came as an off-duty RUC officer was shot dead last night
in Belfast.
Ministers earlier mounted a joint effort to demonstrate they will not be
knocked off course in attempts to reach a political settlement in the
province.
Mr Major and Mr Albert Reynolds, his Irish counterpart, claimed that the
IRA's latest action and the failure of Sinn Fein to react positively to the
Downing Street declaration would not deter London and Dublin from pressing
on.
At Westminster, Mr Major told MPs the 'unjustifiable' IRA attack would make
'no difference whatsoever' to the search for peace. He said the declaration
set out 'a series of principles upon which we hope and intend to try and
build a permanent peace in Northern Ireland'.
In the Dail, Mr Reynolds attacked the IRA action as 'criminal and
politically naive'.
But both London and Dublin privately accept that the political momentum
which followed December's declaration has largely been lost. They are
resigned to an extended and highly problematical process aimed at
establishing a framework for progress involving the province's
constitutional parties.
Speaking after yesterday's Anglo-Irish conference in London, Sir Patrick
said the first Heathrow attack had shown that the IRA could not make its
case democratically and had again resorted to force.
Sir Patrick stressed that both governments were committed to continuing the
so-called three-stranded political talks process and added: 'There is no
limit to our patience because there is no limit to the advantages that
success in that process will bring'.
He emphasised, however, that the prize of prosperity and peace might lie 'at
the end of a very long road but a road on which neither government is going
to weary of travelling'.
Mr Dick Spring, the Irish foreign minister, in one of the most downbeat
assessments from Dublin on the chances of an end to IRA action, said that
'the credit is running very low, if not totally expired' on the part of
those who had yet to make up their mind on the Downing Street declaration.
Mr Seamus Mallon, deputy leader of the Social Democratic and Labour party,
dismissed the bilateral talks in the province as 'a stopgap' that did not go
to the heart of the problem.
Mr John Taylor, Ulster Unionist MP, came near to calling for the
three-stranded approach to be abandoned.
Security probe, Page 7
Editorial Comment, Page 17
