FT  21 JAN 94 / Property: Los Angeles counts the cost - The LA earthquake is
the latest blow to a US market accustomed to grim news
The earthquake that shook Los Angeles on Monday inflicted an estimated
Dollars 10bn-Dollars 30bn in damage. But early reports indicate that the
city's commercial property sector has suffered relatively lightly.
The damage has been concentrated on infrastructure, apartment buildings and,
to some extent, older shops and office blocks in the suburbs. Modern,
high-quality offices largely escaped damage, partly because they were built
to withstand earthquakes.
In the long run, some property analysts believe that Los Angeles' troubled
commercial property market could, paradoxically, benefit from the
earthquake. 'A lot of apartments, retail and office buildings have been put
out of use (by the earthquake), and this will act to tighten up (reduce
supply) the rest of the market,' says Mr Sol Rabin, of TCW Realty Advisers,
a Los Angeles-based property adviser. Moreover, the construction work
necessary to repair the damage could be a valuable boost for the local
economy.
The Los Angeles property market needs all the help it can get. It is
suffering from a vacancy rate of about 20 per cent for offices, a continuing
haemorrhage of jobs and disinvestment by large property owners.
Yet while the Los Angeles market remains in the doldrums, large parts of the
US property market are starting to climb out of one of the deepest troughs
since the Depression.
Although there is unlikely to be a broadly-based recovery for at least three
more years, the next 12 months will produce some rewards for property
owners, according to Landauer, a US real estate adviser. 'Look for a new
tone of confidence to mark the industry,' it predicts.
Any tonic will be welcome for an industry that has had nothing but bad news
on the economic front in recent years. Defence cuts are likely to result in
the loss of 500,000 jobs by 1997; retail spending continues to be held back
by concern about job security; recession in Japan and Europe is curbing
demand for US goods; and demand for industrial property is weak.
But there is reason for cautious optimism, according to Landauer. It
predicts employment will grow by some 1.5 per cent this year. A gradual
improvement in the economy, combined with a dearth of new commercial
property development, is likely to reduce vacancy rates.
Within the industry liquidity is improving. Falling yields in equity and
bond markets are driving some investors into property in search of higher
returns. Demand is largely fuelled by institutional investors with the
exception of insurance companies, which are finding that new capital
regulations are making property less attractive.
Perhaps the most remarkable recent resurgence of investor interest is that
surrounding the demand for retail investments by so-called 'real estate
investment trusts' (REITs). According to Landauer, the REIT market is
stronger than it has been for more 30 years; the market could grow from
Dollars 15bn in early 1993 to Dollars 100bn in 2000.
Another potential boost could come from foreign investment: some Dollars
2.75bn could be attracted into US real estate in the next year, says
Landauer.
Banks, still smarting from costly property exposures in the late 1980s,
remain cautious about lending to the sector. But, having written down their
bad debts and improved their balance sheets, the banks are now better placed
to resume lending to the sector.
The banks' success will depend on identifying growth areas. Yet, as ever, it
is difficult to generalise about a US market in which conditions within
different regions and different sectors vary markedly.
The office market is still patchy. But Landauer is optimistic the sector
will return to favour with investors. 'Offices will be making the hot
property list within the next three years,' it says.
The fortunes of the office market depend in part on a continuing decline in
construction activity (which would force up prices for existing buildings)
and a return of employment growth. Last year was the best 12-month period
for office take-up since the late 1980s, Landauer says. Net absorption of
office space totalled 60m sq ft, reducing office vacancies by 2 percentage
points to an average of 17 per cent (still above its historical average).
Another decline to 15 per cent is possible by 1995, Landauer says.
But even this level of vacancy rates is unlikely to lead to a big rise in
rents. It will be another four to five years before rents rise to a level
that matches new building costs.
Prospects of a pick-up in offices differ markedly in different parts of the
US, and are largely determined by broader economic trends. For instance,
large-scale jobs cuts have depressed prospects of a turnround in California,
Massachusetts, Maine, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey and Maryland. The
sun belt, by contrast, is performing strongly. The vacancy rate for offices
in Orlando has dropped from 18 per cent two years ago to 14 per cent today.
Job growth has been running at 2.6 per cent over the past year, the result
of initiatives by the state authorities.
At present, offices are still out of favour with investors. The rise of
REITs, which is focused on assets with strong cash flow (from rents), has
excluded offices which tend to have weak operating incomes. As a result, the
investment market is still dominated by tenants and corporate
owner-occupiers with strong knowledge of local markets.
The retail market is still struggling with fundamental problems. Department
stores are suffering from increased competition from discount retailers and
chains of specialist shops. With department stores either consolidating
and/or closing, Landauer warns that as much as a quarter of the regional
mall market could be at risk.
Landauer ranks Seattle, Portland, Honolulu and Orlando among the best-placed
markets. Tulsa, Oklahoma City and New Orleans, where income levels are far
below the national average, showed the weakest potential for growth.
All categories of the industrial market are weak, says Landauer. 'While some
bright spots can be identified, the mass of data is monotonously grey,' it
says. Last year industrial vacancy rates remained high; rents fell; and
while the number of bad loans were reduced for other types of commercial
property, problem loans for industrial properties began to rise.
The residential market is showing strong signs of recovery. House building
has recovered to its 1988 level, a time of frenetic construction; house
prices are rising; mortgage interest rates are low; and investors are
pursuing deals.
The hotel market has bottomed out. A recovery in business travel and tourism
has raised occupancy rates to 67 per cent, a profitable operating level for
the industry.
Overall, Landauer concludes that the property recovery is inching closer.
'To those tough enough and smart enough to have survived the industry's
debacle, rewards are starting to come.'
