FT  14 OCT 94 / Survey of International Standards (7): Perception is
changing - Claire Gooding examines progress in developing countries
In Eritrea a factory is being built that will export equipment for eye
operations worldwide. The enterprise was started by a New Zealander who
developed a cheap, simple, but effective way of treating cataract blindness.
He took his invention where it was most needed, keen that the country that
suffered the problem should also benefit from the earning power of its
solution.
The highest standards of production ensure that the equipment produced by
the Eritreans can be exported all over Africa and wherever else it is
needed.
A true story, but sadly unusual, not least because industrialised countries
tend to think of themselves as having the monopoly on innovation, with
developing countries dismissed as providing shoddy derivatives.
This perception is changing, thanks to widespread adoption of international
standards. Of 107 countries now associated with the International
Organisation for Standardisation (Iso), many are developing countries who
take part in the one-country, one-vote system. Yemen became the hundredth
Iso member in March 1994 and seven more countries have joined since then,
the most recent being Costa Rica and Guyana.
The rapidly growing membership is widening both the scope and the
applications of Iso's energies. Recent members include Belarus and the
Ukraine, with well-developed industrial sectors, and the small island
nations of Fiji and Grenada, where tourism is the principal economic
activity.
The International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) - housed in the same
Geneva site as Iso, and working closely with it - is responsible for
wide-ranging standards in electronics. The IEC has positively encouraged
electrotechnical standardisation in countries that are not yet members. It
has been running a one-year programme to encourage adoption of IEC
standards, to help globalise technology transfer.
IEC forums in such places as Kuala Lumpur, Bangkok and Harare have been set
up to spread the word and make the standards more accessible.
'Many small-scale economies can only grow by exporting goods, and so they
have to be interested in international standards,' says Mr Lawrence Eicher,
Iso secretary-general.
'Iso is a route to technical knowledge transfer because it represents an
international consensus. Such countries don't have the resources to
re-invent the wheel, whether they are using a product internally, or making
it for export. They look for a credible label, so adopting Iso is a route to
international respectability.'
Mr John Hinds, Iso president, also stressed the importance of avoiding a
'cheap and nasty' label, at a World Bank seminar in 1992. 'Exporters in
developing countries may offer highly competitive prices, but they won't
make the sale if their products and commodities don't meet the standards
buyers impose.'
Mr Robert Toth of Toth Associates, a consultant to the World Bank, undertook
a survey of international standards, completed in 1993. In the report
Technical and Business Factors Affecting Electronic Distribution of
Standards, Mr Toth gives examples of the benefits to be gained by partaking
in IECQ, the IEC's certification scheme to assess conformity to standards.
He cites a testing facility in New Delhi set up with aid from the Indian
government, and investment from Germany and the European Union totalling
Dollars 16m.
'Why should the Europeans make such an investment? Because the Indian market
for telecommunications equipment is in excess of Dollars 40bn over the next
10 years,' comments Mr Toth. 'Manufacturers see it as worthwhile to assure
the quality of component parts made by a low-cost producer, India. The parts
are used in equipment sold not only in India but all over the world.
'In India, the technical assistance is having a ripple effect as parts
manufacturers conform to Iso 9000.'
The IEC stresses that its schemes aim to encourage trade, not stifle it or
raise trade barriers masquerading as standards. Yet there are those who take
the latter view, inevitably, according to Anwar El-Tawil, secretary of
Devco, the Iso committee on developing country matters. Devco's job is to
assist developing countries to define and meet their needs in the area of
standardisation. It includes regional officers from Latin America, the
Caribbean, Africa, and east and south-east Asia.
International standards for environmental auditing and eco-labelling,
presently under development by the Iso committee TC 207 should help with
harmonisation. In the meantime, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade's
inquiry points provide information on export rules.
Mr John Kean, Iso's vice-president (technical) is particularly sensitive to
the needs of developing countries. 'If we really truly believe we are going
to give developing countries a fair chance, standards have to be written in
such a way that they can be understood.
'The more clarity we have, the better.'
Mr Kean promotes the idea of 'continual improvements' as espoused by the Iso
approach.
'It's impossible for developing countries to reach new standards in one
jump, but important to get them to buy in to the process.'
As for developing countries contributing to the process of determining
standards, El-Tawil believes they seldom have enough technical expertise to
take part in the formulation.
'It takes resources - travel, finance, and the time of an expert, a key
member of staff - to attend meetings.
'Iso can assist in such cases, but even so, the member bodies may not be
dynamic enough to mobilise industry: the appropriate trade and industry
contacts and relationships have to be in place.'
