FT  28 APR 94 / Markets Report: German rates lower
The prospect of a decisive decoupling of US and European interest rates was
improved yesterday by another generous cut in the German repo rate, writes
Philip Gawith.
The Bundesbank cut the repo by 11 basis points to 5.47 per cent, more than
most commentators had expected. The dollar failed, however, to gain strength
from lower German rates, closing in London at Dollars 1.6727 against the
D-Mark from Dollars 1.6801. It fell to Y102.650 from Y102.925 against the
yen.
Afternoon trade was subdued with most US financial markets closed to honour
the late President Nixon.
Elsewhere the pound held on to the gains it had made on Tuesday, with the
sterling index finishing slightly higher at 80.5 from 80.4. It was half a
cent up against the weaker dollar, closing at Dollars 1.5066 from Dollars
1.5015. Against the D-Mark, it closed slightly weaker at DM2.52 from
DM2.5226.
For the second time this month, the UK money markets were witness to the
fairly rare spectacle of a daily surplus rather than the normal shortage.
The surplus was Pounds 100m.
The Bundesbank's move appears to confirm that futures markets have become
too bearish about the outlook for European interest rates. Mr Nick Parsons,
treasury economist at CIBC, said the aggressive rate cut was 'signalling
that the decoupling of European rates from the US will continue.'
Interest rate sentiment has deteriorated dramatically in recent months. Mr
Parsons notes that the spread between the March 95 euromark contract and the
June 94 contract shrunk from a high of 84 basis points on January 11 to
actually become negative earlier this week. Both contracts finished at 94.80
yesterday.
The CIBC analyst said he attributed the Bundesbank's fairly aggressive
stance on interest rates to a desire to stop the decline in sentiment.
Noting that in each of the last three rate cut cycles, the pace of easing
has accelerated after 18 months, Mr Parsons said this pattern is repeating
itself.
The Bundesbank's first cut in this cycle was in September 1992. He predicts
German three month money, currently at 5.35 per cent, will fall to 4.30 per
cent at the year end. The December euromark contract, by contrast, closed at
94.86, discounting short rates of about 5.15 per cent at the end of year.
While the repo rate fell, call money rates rose sharply to about 6 per cent
from 5.35/5.45 per cent. Traders said the Bundesbank had not delivered the
funds the market had anticipated at the repo.
The D-Mark was slightly firmer in Europe. It closed at FFr3.434 against the
French franc from FFr3.432, and L961.5 against the Italian lira from L958.4.
Apart from a late flurry of activity, the interest rate futures markets were
fairly quiet. Sentiment was improved by the Bundesbank cut, with the June
euromark contract finishing six basis points higher at 94.80.
Traders reported that just before trading closed, a US investment bank had
placed a huge order for 20,000 June contracts.
Mr Richard Phillips, futures analyst at brokers GNI, said the market was
currently characterised by spread-trading, with investors unwilling to take
a longer view. Trade is very volatile, but in a fairly small range.
'The nature of the market is such that the investors are simply not there.
Everybody who plays the market is a trader. Nobody is prepared to take a
directional view,' said Mr Phillips.
Short sterling futures also had a better day. Although volumes were fairly
thin, the June contract closed three basis points firmer at 94.61. The
French market was descibed as 'listless'. The June PIBOR future settled four
basis points firmer at 94.32.
Opinions about the outlook for sterling are mixed after the UK currency
maintained its break above Dollars 1.50 against the dollar.
Mr Tony Norfield, UK treasury economist at ABN-AMRO, said said he was
bullish about sterling. He cited three factors lending support to the pound:
the perception that UK rates were unlikely to fall in the near future; the
sharp cut from the Bundesbank; and scepticism about how fast the Fed will
tighten rates in the US.
'The fundamental buoyancy for sterling is also backed up in a lot of
exchange rate charts,' said Mr Norfield. He predicted that the UK currency
was 'reasonably well set up' for a 1 per cent increase in the next few days.
Others were more sceptical, arguing that sterling strength would evaporate
as soon as the dollar recovered. Mr Neil MacKinnon, chief currency
strategist at Citibank doubts whether sterling can rise above its high for
the year of DM2.6250.
He attributed current sterling strength to the view in the money markets
that 'any chance of an early rate cut is slim, to say the least.' He said
the CBI dropping its call for lower rates was also seen as an important
event.
The surplus in the money markets was attributed to seasonal factors which
see more money flowing in at this time of year. Overnight rates moved in the
1 1/2 - 4 3/4 per cent range.
