FT  12 OCT 94 / VSEL poised to accept BAe offer
The agreed takeover of the submarine maker VSEL by British Aerospace is
likely to be concluded this week. Barring any last minute hitch, VSEL's
board will recommend that its shareholders accept an offer of BAe shares
valuing VSEL at about Pounds 12.50 a share.
GEC, the other potential bidder for the Barrow, Cumbria-based shipbuilding
company, has not said whether it intends to counter BAe's paper offer with
an alternative cash bid. GEC had considered buying VSEL and decided not to
bid.
It is understood that GEC's ownership of the Yarrow shipyard on the Clyde
would provoke competition concerns from the Ministry of Defence. A bid by
BAe, which does not own a yard, is not thought to raise such concerns.
The maximum City observers expect BAe to have offered is three BAe shares
for each VSEL share, though the company may offer slightly less. The deal
will involve increasing the number of BAe shares in issue by a third.
VSEL had a cash pile of Pounds 325m at March 31 this year, about Pounds 240m
of which was the company's own money and the balance advance payments from
the MoD for work in progress. The cash pile equates to 850p a share, of
which the company's own funds account for 640p a share.
The cash pile would significantly reduce BAe's debt at June 30 of Pounds
367m, and the all-share takeover is being viewed by some as a disguised
rights issue.
The deal will strengthen BAe's balance sheet and cut its borrowings.
However, because VSEL has such a large cash pile the deal will also
significantly increase BAe's earnings from the first year. Total Trident
submarine cash profits could exceed Pounds 450m, almost the full cost of the
deal.
BAe has stressed its interest in expanding its expertise in co-ordinating
large defence contracts from aircraft to other systems. A Pounds 2.5bn
contract for the next batch of up to five Trafalgar-class hunter-killer
submarines is due to be awarded in the next 18 months, and the combined
BAe-VSEL team would be a favourite to win.
VSEL has teamed up with Loral, the US electronics company, to bid for the
Trafalgars. But if BAe replaces Loral it could use its systems integration
and electronics skills to help secure the deal.
