FT  03 DEC 94 / Behind Cuban smiles: When the Soviet Union collapsed, Cuba's
'prosperity' vanished overnight. Nicholas Woodsworth walks the streets of
Old Havana and today finds mostly inertia and neglect, decline and breakdown
There is a quiet anger about Mercedes, a smouldering resentment which on
evenings with me she keeps damped down only with rum and cigarettes.
It is the hospital wards she works in, she tells me - the shortage of
medicines and pain-killers, her inability to relieve suffering, the cries
and moans of patients which continue to pursue her long after her shift is
over.
Now, in the little room I have rented in the house of her friends Luis and
Isabel, Mercedes administers her own pain-killer, large gulps of dark,
caramel-tasting Paticruzados rum. Two whimsical, carefree sailors dance
about the label of the bottle. It sits conveniently close, parked on a
bedside table between a cheaply whirring Russian fan and a battered radio
which sprays the hot Havana night with brassy rhythms - salsa, rumba, cha
cha cha.
After a few glasses her gloom lifts, her smooth brown face lightens. She
flirts and laughs a little, shakes her shoulders in time to the music, takes
on the brightness that in a more ordinary time and place would naturally be
hers.
We plan a day at the beach, a walk along the sea front promenade of the
Malecon, ice-cream at La Coppelia in the smart part of town, and Mercedes
seems happy. Her anger, though, I know, is still there, profound and
indelible. It is not just anger over her work, for Fidel Castro's
unwavering, catastrophic vision for her country, for Cuba's years of
hardship and suffering. It is also directed at the outside world, at me.
'You know nothing,' she has already said to me in a brief moment of
unguarded bitterness. 'You tell me things have changed all over the world,
that Cuba is a dinosaur, that things can only change here, too. You tell me
democracy is around the corner. But you do not know Cuba.'
Tonight, though, Mercedes has no fight in her, no room left for debate. Like
most Cubans, she is sick to death of ideology and the politics of state. She
saves her energy for the true politics of Cuba - the strategies of
day-to-day survival, the salvaging of small satisfactions from moral
bankruptcy and material collapse.
She drains her glass, stubs out one of the American cigarettes she likes me
to buy her. 'Toda politica es mentiras,' is all she will say, shaking her
head. All politics is lies. She switches off the radio and stands, swaying a
little with music, drink and fatigue. 'Take me dancing.'
We walk out into the streets of Havana Vieja. Decayed and crumbling, Old
Havana is an eerie, empty quarter at night.
We stumble over rubble and around potholes, under hanging laundry and
through tall, broad arcades built by the Spanish against Cuba's fierce
tropical sun. Here and there are the remnants of an imperial finery financed
by slaves and sugar: an ornate stone church, a baroque opera house, a
pillared convent, a wall of Seville Moorish tiles, and matching pairs of
bronze lions along the tree-lined Prado.
But mostly there is inertia and neglect, decline and breakdown. We walk
gingerly. There is little lighting - electricity is a precious commodity in
Cuba today. Neither, in these still streets, is there much traffic - there
is little petrol to fuel the hulking pre-revolutionary Buicks and Pontiacs,
the tinny post-revolutionary Skodas and Ladas, that lie salt-corroded and
rotting on every corner.
Nor is there any of the business, the exchange, the human transaction that
is normally the heartbeat of a big city's life. Only occasionally in the
gloom do we pass a small boy raising water to an upper-floor apartment with
a bucket and pulley, an old man smoking a fragrant cigar on the cool of a
doorstep.
Old Havana is jammed with tens of thousands of tenement dwellers; but with
nowhere to go, no money to spend, and nothing to spend it on, they remain
indoors, comforted in the blue glow of Cuba's last accessible past-time, the
television soap opera.
'Nada . . . nada . . . nada . . . . ' mutters Mercedes as, one after
another, we pass the meagre window displays of government shops that have
nothing left to sell. I find them pathetic. Mercedes has little sense of
pathos - but a good deal of contempt - for state economic planning that now
fails to provide even the bare minimum needed for survival.
The defiant gesturing continues, Castro's revolutionary avowals persist.
But, as the people of Cuba know to great personal cost, there are no
provisions on any known communist chart or model for the plunge of the last
four years. Even the name given to the post-Soviet age by the Cuban
leadership - the 'Special Period' - indicates its lack of certainty in the
progress of the revolution.
Well might the leaders lack confidence. Before the collapse of the Soviet
Union in 1990, Cuba was consuming Dollars 8bn worth of goods annually, most
of it garnered through special trade-and-aid agreements with the east bloc.
Not only did the Soviet Union, happy with a permanent foothold on the very
doorstep of the enemy camp, purchase Cuban sugar at above-world-market
prices, it also supplied the Caribbean client-state with subsidised oil,
food, machinery, medicines, vehicles, military hardware, technical advice,
and cheap loans.
With the fall of the Soviet Union, it all vanished overnight. The goodwill
dried up, the teachers went home, the agreements were cancelled, the ships
stopped calling in at Havana harbour.
Without foreign exchange, Cuban imports have slowed to a trickle. Without
raw materials, Cuban factories have stopped operating. Without fertilisers
and pesticides, the Cuban sugar industry is floundering. Not only demanding
payment of a Dollars 30bn Cuban debt, Russia has now rejected as a risky
deal even the simplest form of trade - the bartering of oil for sugar. US
refusal to do business with its revolutionary neighbour remains as firm as
ever.
Like an air-filled balloon, Cuba's prosperity - such as it was - has
suddenly blown up in the face of its people, leaving little trace behind.
Cuba has stopped spending money that did not belong to it - the value of
annual consumption has shrunk from the equivalent of Dollars 8bn to Dollars
1bn, with shortage and need everywhere. Not long ago a comprehensive social
safety net, universal health care and high educational standards made Cubans
the envy of the third world. Today they grub about in the wreckage of their
economy, no better off than the African disaster cases they used to assist,
and wonder how long the 'Special Period' can possibly continue.
Two rolls of bread a day, one box of matches a month, one bar of soap a
month, two portions of mince-and-soya paste a month, two pairs of underwear
a year . . . armed with her government-issue ration book, such is the level
of provision Mercedes now manages to obtain through the state. Often not
even these meagre undertakings can be met. Mercedes has not seen soap in the
government shops for three months. 'Mierda de nada,' she whispers, for good
measure.
At the end of the dark street, on the edge of Old Havana, we emerge into a
rare constellation of lights, the Hotel Plaza. No one, of course, manages to
live on the official ration, or on the official economy at all. It is around
the foreigner-frequented hotels that a parallel mechanism - a dollar-based
economy that pervades all sections of Cuban society - can be found in its
rawest, most distorted form.
For Cubans, life is an unending struggle, a daily series of problems which
must be resolved. There is a catch-all verb they apply to any action helping
them overcome their straitened circumstances - it is, simply, resolver, or
find a solution. One can, for example, like my hosts Luis and Isabel,
resolve the question of the spare bedroom by illegally renting it to
tourists. Consuelo down the road from Luis, on the other hand, has found her
own resolution in a supply of black market chickens that do not officially
exist; much to Mercedes' and my satisfaction, she runs a paladar, an illicit
back-room restaurant.
I am glad to have Mercedes by my side as we walk past the hotel entrance.
She is a sort of protection. For a good deal of 'resolving' in this part of
town takes place on the street, and involves separating foreigners from
their dollars. Cubans will go to desperate lengths to get hold of dollars,
for without them there is no meat, fuel, clothing, pharmaceuticals,
electrical goods, household items or much of anything else.
Some of the denizens lurking in the shadows here simply beg. They want soap
for their babies, milk powder for their mothers. I spot one who has already
asked me for the shirt off my back. These are not professional street
hustlers, but students, housewives, fathers, and there is no artfulness to
their approach. It makes their entreaties all the more painful.
Others have something to offer - themselves. Prostitution is now widespread
in Havana, although there is a wide gap between hard core professionals and
those casual young women willing to stay the night after an evening's
entertainment. Part of the problem is that there are many more single women
in Havana than men; over the years conscription for the Angolan war, the
Mariel boat lift, the haemmorrhage of young men to Miami, has made available
young men scarce. A young man with ready money in his pocket is even rarer.
On my first visit to the Plaza I was ambushed by two teenage girls in risque
attire who steered me straight to the bar. Were they after daquiris, pina
coladas, whisky, I wondered? Far from it. They craved the now-unavailable
treats of their childhood. One demanded a glass of milk, the other a gooey,
chocolate-covered marshmallow.
Lounging outside the doors of the Plaza we meet Ramon and Anna, already
acquaintances of mine. Like many of Havana's black marketeers, they are part
of a well organised system of theft and resale that operates in almost every
factory, warehouse, business and shop in Cuba. Ramon sells PPG-5, the
cholesterol-reducing miracle drug, fruit of Fidel's prestige medical
research project. Coincidentally, it commands a high street value for its
effects on male sexual potency. Anna acts as a street lookout for Ramon.
Most societies would judge Ramon and Anna's profession criminal, their
behaviour corrupt. But in an official economy as maladjusted to social needs
as Cuba's, definitions of corruption hardly mean much; what counts for
Cubans is a market-driven alternative that works. From the sidewalk, Ramon
tells me, he makes Dollars 5 to Dollars 10 dollars a day; in a state office
or factory he would not make five dollars a month.
Such a morality is widely accepted. Neither of Mercedes' parents work the
street, but both steal from the state. Her mother, a cigar roller, smuggles
cigars from the factory where she works. Her father, a petrol-tanker driver,
has an agreement with the depot foreman for the falsifying of way-bills. It
is the only way to keep food in the house.
Nor is the administration exempt from such behaviour. Ramon could never ply
his trade without the connivance of the police and his local Committee for
the Defense of the Revolution, the organisation that regulates Cuban life on
a city block-by-block basis. Ramon regularly turns over a percentage of
profits to his CDR chief. In its own interests the regime tolerates a
certain level of black marketeering and petty corruption - it relieves
pressure on the state to provide.
It also relieves Mercedes and me of the task of finding an officially
licensed taxi. Just outside the glow of the Plaza's lights a wheezing,
fly-by-night Moscovitch skulks. We climb in and clatter along the Malecon
sea front, six lanes of deserted city-centre highway, to the 1830 Club.
Through the doors of the dance club lies another world, a brave and shiny
new Cuba in which failure might never have existed.
In a seaside garden of rustling palm trees and well-kept lawns, a crowd sits
scattered around an outdoor dance floor. They are well off, wealthy enough
to spend in an evening what most Cubans earn in six months. They are young.
The men are casual and tanned. They smile a lot. The women are sleek, well
made up, alluring.
This is not exactly the old elite, the senior military, the party
ideologues, the command economy captains who grew up fighting in the
mountains with Fidel Castro. These are their children, the technocratic
class, Cuba's new elite. They work for new joint ventures, in import-export
agencies, the tourist industry. They have access to dollars, to the outside
world, to new ideas.
Mercedes and I sip rum daquiris, wander in the garden, dance to American
disco music. There is a Tropicana-style floor show - all sequins and legs.
Then a fashion show - casual opulence and legs again. More drinks, more
dancing. Mercedes is entranced. Her eyes sparkle, rove over the clothing,
the coloured cocktails, the happy couples.
Returning from the dance floor I meet a small-time Swiss businessman, a
maverick at the far edge of emerging markets. His face is flushed with
achievement - today through his Cuban partner he has purchased yet another
downtown Havana apartment at a rock-bottom price.
Cuba will change fast, he assures me. Already the signs are there, in the
recently-opened private markets for farmer's produce, in a new European
investment fund for Cuba, in rumours of foreign financing for the sugar
industry.
'In two or three years all this unpleasantness between Cuba and the US will
be patched up,' he beams with anticipation. 'Investments will come rolling
in. Then watch real estate prices rocket]'
In the taxi back to Ramon and Isabel's I am perturbed. I am unable to make
the link between this gasping, exhausted city and the self-assured ease of
the 1830 Club. It all seems make-believe, I tell Mercedes.
I am still perturbed back in the room where the little table-fan whirs and
the radio continues pumping hot Latin music into the night. Where will it
end, I ask Mercedes. Surely something good must lie at the end of such hard
times?
The sparkle has left her eyes. 'You still don't understand,' she says
quietly, reluctantly, shaking her head. 'That was not make-believe. That is
the future.
'Do you think because our economy is in ruins the state is in ruins? There
is something that counts more in Cuba than economics. It is political power.
It is as strong as ever, as absolute and privileged as ever.
'The men who run this country see the writing on the wall. They know the old
times are gone forever. But do you think they will surrender their places to
some new, local breed, or to Cubans screaming for their jobs from Miami?'
She pours herself a last glass of Paticruzados. 'Yesterday the men at the
1830 Club were good communists. Tomorrow they will be good capitalists. The
lies will change, but the liars will be the same.'
And what, I ask, will happen to her patients, her neighbours, her
compatriots, the people of Old Havana?
Mercedes downs her glass, shivers, and closes her eyes. She is tired, and
bitter, and has the chronic victim's calm certainty of the future.
'Nothing,' she replies 'the elite shall remain the elite, with all their
power and privilege. The poor of Cuba shall remain the poor.'
She is whispering now, nearly asleep. 'It seems that is the way of the
world. They say we are the last state of our kind on earth. But are we not,
after all, much the same as everyone else?'
