FT  15 OCT 94 / Fashion: High street winners - Lucia van der Post considers
her options for the coming winter
It is a tiring time for fashion victims and for all those who are even now
seriously considering their sartorial options. Decisions, decisions.
Should one be a glamour-babe, teetering about in high-heels, with blonde
peroxide locks and hand-spun waist?
Or what about a more cutesy look - Laura Ashley meets Lolita, all floral
sprigs and little puffed sleeves?
Bella Freud did such a nice line and a fabulous jacket would only set one
back about Pounds 360.
If, on the other hand, you prefer something more exclusive, then Versace is
probably your man. He showed some darling little satin shorts and teemed
them with bra-tops and maribou-trimmed mules. At roughly Pounds 2,000 a
throw you should not have much competition round your way.
Me, I've given up. I am tired of extortionate prices, of a world where 'it's
quite cheap, really - only Pounds 500' comes to seem nearly normal and where
fashion victims will queue (in the cold) for two hours for the privilege of
parting with well over Pounds 100 for one particular pair of shoes. I'm
heading for the high street.
This is the year when the high street has truly come of age. We all know
about Marks and Spencer (even as I write I am sitting in its Pounds 30
charcoal grey mini-kilt teamed with ribbed grey tights that almost every
fashion editor in town has bought and at least one of whom wears it with a
Chanel jacket).
But this winter is a vintage M&amp;S season. The rush is on for the soft and
easy cashmere and wool blazer with the hand-stitching round the collar
(Pounds 95 in navy, black, aubergine, olive green or camel) and the young
are snapping up its A-line skirts at Pounds 20 a time and, for after dark,
short, chenille tunics at Pounds 40.
But M&amp;S is not the only success on the high street. Newcomers to Dorothy
Perkins and Principles, those who have never walked through their doors let
alone been seen clutching one of their tell-tale carrier bags, should put
their snobbisms to one side and take a proper look.
At Dorothy Perkins great efforts have gone into zipping up the ranges and
many a sober suit could be given new life with accessories from its
collection. A silver velvet scarf, for instance, at just Pounds 9.99 slung
around a jacket would add a bit of evening dash. There are up-to-the-minute
pleated skirts at Pounds 20 a time, a fabulous stone micro-fibre quilted
parka for just Pounds 49.99 and nubbly cardigans at prices ranging from
Pounds 25 to Pounds 45.
At Principles there is a great black jacket, slightly waisted with a small
kick-pleat at the back, for just Pounds 135 (bought by at least one of the
fashionable young public relations girls around town), as well as a
wonderful black three-quarter length coat for Pounds 145 and plenty of the
currently fashionable slightly mannish suits to choose from.
The trick is to take plenty of time. Be prepared to sift through things
carefully and there, lurking on the rails, are plenty of bargains to be
found.
One last thing - if you are worrying about what to wear after dark, it's
quite simple really.
At last week's British Fashion Awards dinner in the Natural History Museum,
what were the fashion crowd wearing? What was the choice of the people who
have access to discounts and special deals, and who survey the cream of the
designers' offerings? Black, black and yet more black.
