FT  01 NOV 94 / Technology: Cast in a new strength / A look at a method of
reinforcing ceramics
Clay has been fired into many different objects since ancient times. But
even the loveliest Greek urns were of limited use because ceramics, although
hard, chemically stable and heat resistant, lack toughness. Ancient urns did
not corrode as they lay under the sea or buried on land, but they broke, so
that archaeologists often find them as pieces.
Modern science has improved on the ancient clays, but in manufacturing,
ceramics are still passed over for metals which are rarer and more costly
but stronger.
Aluminium does not oxidise, or rust, under normal conditions. But it can be
oxidised into hard, irregular blobs when it becomes molten, under certain
conditions in a furnace. In aluminium smelters these are sometimes found as
coral-like growths along furnace walls. Furnaces have to be shut down while
the blobs are drilled off. That is the rub: the oxidised aluminium is
transformed into a tough ceramic.
In the 1970s, Marc Newkirk, a young engineer working in his father's
furnace-making business in New England wondered if this natural growth could
be directed to produce the ultra-strong ceramics long sought by science.
Newkirk created the Lanxide Corporation in 1983. Today it makes items for
industries including electronics, steel processing, mining, semiconductors,
sports and automotive. The group is capitalised at Dollars 350m (Pounds
219m) and sales in fiscal 1994 were Dollars 20m. Its partners include Alcan
and Du Pont.
Lanxide's work, presented in Washington recently at a symposium* on
materials, is one of the leading US advances in ceramics.
Newkirk first directed the oxidised aluminium growth through ceramic fibres,
making a ceramic version of fibreglass. He then tried to make blocks of
cheaper reinforcing material such as silicon carbide, placing them next to
the aluminium and heating both. He discovered that the hot aluminium
oxidised into and through the reinforcing material, filling all pores like a
glue.
When cooled, the block of silicon carbide had become a reinforced ceramic,
with particles dispersed throughout, strengthening it uniformly.
Coatings for the reinforced materials were discovered that stopped the
oxidation process at the boundary. These processes opened the way for
large-scale, cheap production of tough ceramic items in very precise shapes.
By varying the reinforcing material and metal (titanium works, too),
'engineered ceramics' can be produced to pre-determined weight and strength.
The second important invention came from a failed experiment, when a Lanxide
inventor heated aluminium next to a ceramic preform in an atmosphere of
nitrogen instead of air. The metal failed to oxidise. Instead it shot
quickly into the adjoining ceramic. This proved to be a remarkably simple
way to make a ceramic-reinforced aluminium.
Among many objects, Lanxide now casts avionics chassis for US military
aircraft in a single piece, which are a third the weight of ordinary
aluminium chassis - the reinforced material is actually heavier, but because
it is stronger, it can be crafted into much smaller components.
Lanxide spins off applications of its core processes into separate
businesses with partners who bring resources and experience.
Alcan of Canada was Lanxide's first important partner, Alanx, makes pumps
and ceramic 'chokes' that link pipes carrying slurry from mines, which the
company says last eight times longer than standard ceramic pipe chokes. In
Japan, Lanxide and Kanematsu formed Klanxide KK, as the focus of future
business there. 'Talks are under way' with possible European partners, adds
Newkirk.
*Seminar sponsored by the Okinaga Foundation and the National Association
for Science, Technology and Society: Penn State University, State College,
Pennsylvania, 16802.
