FT  03 DEC 94 / Travel: Tranquillity and calm in an old imperial city - The
shores of Lake Constance
It is not unusual to find a bible by your bedside in a hotel bedroom, but at
the Rega Park Hotel, in Constance in southern Germany, there was a little
paperback book.
'Dear Reader,' writes hotel manager Karl Heinz Reinheimer in the preface, 'a
hotel is more than just a place to spend the night - it is also a cultural
setting. This claim is one we feel obliged to honour.' And he does it with
this little book of short stories in German and English which he says, in a
PS, he would be happy for us to keep as a souvenir of our stay.
I could not find Herr Reinheimer to congratulate him on his original idea as
well as on his tranquilly furnished and calm hotel, where the only sounds
from my bedroom were the birds in the garden below, a stone's throw from the
shores of Lake Constance.
There cannot be many lakes in the world from which you can safely drink the
water, but this is one of them. In the 1960s a journalist decried its
polluted state and everyone woke up to the fact that something had to be
done. It was. DM2m were spent cleaning it and now the water is not only
drinkable, but home to 35 different types of fish.
Bordered by Switzerland and Austria, the lake is the largest in Germany. The
Rhine flows into the south-east corner (where Switzerland and Austria meet),
and old Imperial cities, castles and monasteries cluster around its shores,
the Swiss Alps glittering in the distance. There are wine and fish
festivals, a Nightgown Carnival where children process through the streets
in nightcaps and long gowns, and at Bregenz, on the eastern tip, opera is
produced on the largest lake-stage in the world.
The biggest town on the lake and the only German one on the south shore is
Constance, a city with medieval buildings, a 19th century lakeside
promenade, and statues depicting the city's legends in just about every
corner. Cyclists have their own lanes and 300,000 a year travel the route
around the lake.
In the early 15th century the historic Council of Constance was held here
and made it the only town in Germany to have elected a pope. In the second
world war, it escaped allied bombing by keeping its lights on at night so
that British and American pilots could not tell if they were flying over
Switzerland or Germany.
Ralf Seuffert, a city guide, told me there were 55,000 registered boats on
the lake - people buy boats instead of cars, he said. Today, there is a
conflict of interests between environmentalists and motor yacht owners, and
as everything has to be discussed between three countries agreement is hard
to reach.
The people of Constance seem to have a relaxed attitude to life, but their
dialect is one even North Germans have difficulty understanding. 'At first
you may think they're not very gentle, maybe angry,' said Ralf. 'In fact
they're just shy and when they open themselves up they're very cordial. They
like to sit by the lake, chat a little, be comfortable and take life
easily.'
The city's history is illustrated in the cloisters of the Steigenberg
Inselhotel, a former Dominican monastery. Here, wall paintings show how the
town was ruled in turn by bishops and merchants, became part of Austria, was
stripped of its privileges by the Austrian Emperor for wanting to be part of
Switzerland and then, thanks to Napoleon, became a Baden town. Count
Zeppelin was born here in 1838, but made his airships in Friedrichshafen on
the other side of the lake.
A controversial memorial to the Count stands by the harbour - its critics
claiming it was not martial enough. Another statue, commissioned last year
by the State Railway, has been equally controversial and officials kept it
secret before putting it up one dark night at the harbour's edge.
It is a revolving, well-endowed lady with a pope in one hand, a king in the
other, and commemorates the 700 prostitutes employed during the Council of
Constance to keep visitors happy.
Just over a mile from the Austrian border, in the south-east corner of the
lake, is the pretty island town of Lindau, linked to the mainland by a
210-yard causeway. A Free Imperial City of the Holy Roman Empire in the 13th
century, it is a bustling holiday resort with tiny specialist shops;
narrow-fronted (there was a tax on the width of a building), pastel-coloured
half-timbered houses, boats chugging in and out of the harbour, a 15th
century town hall with exuberant frescoes, markets, cafes, and flowers
everywhere.
A puzzling thing about the lake-side town of Meersburg is that, according to
the local tourist board, 1.5m tourists a year pour in for a day, but few
stay the night although there are 2,000 beds to choose from.
It is strange because it is a delightful place, built on a steeply wooded
hill. Its immaculate cream-walled, dark red-timbered houses are perfectly
preserved. There is an upper and lower town, cafes along the water's edge,
dancing on the lakeside terrace of Strandhotel Wilder Mann, and the oldest
inhabited castle in Germany.
The 18th century pink and white palace, with a resplendent Hall of Mirrors
and wrought iron staircase, houses a Dornier aircraft museum, one of nine
museums in the town. One of them, a wine museum, was the home of Dr Franz
Mesmer, pioneer of hypnotism (mesmerism), who lived here in the early 19th
century.
The two islands on the lake are a celebration of flowers and vegetables.
Car-free Mainau, four miles from Constance and linked by a causeway to the
shore, was originally owned by 13th century Teutonic knights.
In this century it was given by Prince Wilhelm of Sweden to his son Count
Lennart Bernadotte, now 84, who has transformed it from the wilderness it
had fallen into, to a place of exotic beauty where you can see banana and
citrus trees in a greenhouse which is dismantled in summer, a Palm House
with 1,200 orchids, animal flower statues, and in 16 different gardens,
millions of tulips, daffodils, hyacinths, rhododendrons and roses.
Although the island of Reichenau, three miles long and also linked by a
causeway, was once a religious and cultural centre, it is now known as The
Vegetable Island. On a summer day more than 1,000 sprinklers turn it into an
island of fountains. It produces 18,000 tons of vegetables a year, including
8m cucumbers.
Information: I was a guest of the German Tourist Board, Lufthansa and German
Rail. You can fly to Frankfurt and take the train to Constance or the
nearest airport is Zurich, in Switzerland, 40 miles away.
