FT  31 DEC 94 / Leading Article: Let good times roll
Happy days are here again, although grumpy voters seem hardly to have
noticed. Yet a wonderful opportunity for sustained and increasingly global
economic growth is waiting to be seized.
A year ago, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
thought the economies of its members would grow by 2.1 per cent. In the
forecast released just before Christmas, that had already been increased to
2.8 per cent.
In the case of the US, last year's forecast was for growth of 3.1 per cent,
but this is now expected to reach 3.9 per cent. Europe as a whole has
performed markedly better than expectations: last year's forecast was for
growth of 1.5 per cent, which is now expected to be 2.3 per cent. There is a
particularly big change in Germany, whose GDP was expected to grow by only
0.8 per cent in 1994 and is now forecast to grow by 2.8 per cent. Even
Japan's performance has exceeded expectations: growth was forecast at 0.5
per cent a year ago, but is now expected to reach 1 per cent. Meanwhile,
inflation - as measured by the GDP deflator, the broadest single measure of
inflation - is expected to be a mere 2.1 per cent in the OECD area as a
whole (excluding Turkey). This is, in sum, as close as industrial countries
are ever likely to come to the long-sought grail of non-inflationary growth.
In 1993, OECD countries enjoyed export growth of 8.7 per cent to non-OECD
markets, this being one of the reasons why wide-spread fears that the
recession would turn into a depression came to nothing. Overall, the volume
of world merchandise trade is now forecast by the OECD to grow 8.9 per cent
in 1994, followed by another 8.2 per cent in 1995. The global economy is
becoming increasingly integrated.
The benefits of growth are also increasingly widespread. One intriguing
piece of information provided by the OECD is that by 1993 the exports and
imports of what it calls the Dynamic Asian economies (South Korea, Taiwan.
Singapore, Hong Kong, Malaysia and Thailand) were comparable in size to
those of the US.
US monetary policy
But, like a fragrant ointment, this one also contains several flies.
One is the probability of tighter US monetary policy. US equity markets have
held up surprisingly, given the rise in both short- and long-term interest
rates during 1994. As the Federal Reserve moves to tighten further, will the
price of equities continue to levitate? Another possible effect would be a
sharp reversal of flows of money into the emerging markets. Yet another
could be the long-awaited strengthening of the US dollar. But the latter
would also bring advantages, including a curb on US inflationary pressures,
now threatened by high levels of capacity utilisation.
Another fly is to be found in Europe. Higher short-term interest rates
cannot now be far away in Germany. While perfectly sensible for Germany
itself, any such tightening would be inappropriate for France. Further
exchange rate instability within Europe could not then be ruled out.
The three fattest flies of all, however, are fears of inflation, the state
of public finances and the risks of protectionism.
Inflation fears
Nothing suggests an immediate inflationary resurgence, but the ghost of
inflation past will take many, many years to forget. The decline in bond
markets this year was partly a correction of an earlier speculative bubble.
But it was more than that. Evidence from the UK, Canada and Australia, all
of which offer index-linked government bonds, suggests that there has been
both an increase in real yields and an increase in inflationary
expectations. Moreover, inflationary expectations seem to be almost
universally above announced targets. If monetary authorities were to deliver
on their promises, there could, once again, turn out to have been much
unsound borrowing and lending. If they were not to, the battle for
credibility would have to be refought.
The OECD notes that gross public debt is likely to rise as a percentage of
GDP in nearly all OECD countries between 1993 and 1996. The public sector
deficits are worrying for their effects on real interest rates. But there is
also some risk of a first-world debt crisis. Italy, Canada, Belgium, Sweden
and Greece all have ratios of public sector debt to GDP of close to 100 per
cent, or more. If these countries do not use the recovery to lower debt
ratios, a contagious crisis cannot be ruled out.
The integration of the global economy, for all its potential benefits, also
brings about politically disturbing changes. Global competition is one
reason (though not the most important) for the pervasive insecurity that has
made this such a joyless recovery. There is a risk, for all the success in
creating the World Trade Organisation, that the demagogues of protection
will become irresistible.
The flies are there. Nevertheless, 1995 should be a happy new year, followed
by many more. To ensure this, the recovery must be used to entrench the
conditions for sustainable growth. 1995 will be an ideal year for that.
