FT  10 SEP 94 / Markets Report: Dollar tumbles
The dollar fell over two pfennigs on foreign exchanges yesterday as August
PPI figures in the US renewed market worries about inflation, writes Philip
Gawith.
The 0.6 per cent rise in producer inflation, the largest rise since October
1990, was worse than market expectations. The dollar was sold on fears that
US interest rates would have to rise again, probably causing a fall in US
asset prices.
The dollar fell from DM1.5620 before the figures to a low of DM1.5345 during
New York trading. Against the yen it was more stable, closing at Y99.26
compared to a high before the figures of Y99.62.
Sterling finished higher against the weaker dollar, closing at Dollars
1.5509, up from Dollars 1.54 before the figures. It lost 1 1/2 pfennigs
against the stronger D-Mark, closing at DM2.3914
The D-Mark was generally firmer in Europe after the news, finishing against
the lira at L1,019 from L1,016.
The market's sharp reaction was partly explained by the fact that it had
spent most of the week waiting for the figure.
Mr David Cocker, economist at Chemical Bank in London, commented: 'It brings
back to the attention of the market whether the Fed is tightening quickly
enough to combat inflationary pressures.'
It also renewed attention, he said, on the question of relations between the
White House and the Fed. Clearly President Clinton does not want rates to be
raised before important mid-term congressional elections in November.
When the Fed raised the discount rate on August 16, by 50 basis points to 4
per cent, analysts took the Fed's comments at the time to mean that rates
would not need to be raised at least until November.
Should, however, the market take the PPI, and other indicators, to suggest
that earlier action from the Fed is required, the dollar could be heavily
sold if political constraints are seen as preventing this course. The next
FOMC meeting is on September 27.
Concern about the outlook for US rates spilled over into UK and European
markets with all maturities losing ground. Short sterling suffered a sharp
correction after the large gains on Thursday.
Although there seems little prospect of UK rates rising soon, interest rate
markets will find it difficult to flourish so long as US bonds remain under
a cloud.
The December short sterling contract lost six basis points to close at
93.67. The equivalent euromark contract fell by five basis points to finish
at 94.80.
In the UK money markets, three month sterling LIBOR was unchanged at 5 15/32
per cent. In its daily operations the Bank of England provided UK money
markets with Pounds 246m assistance at established rates, and Pounds 85m
late assistance, after forecasting a Pounds 400m shortage.
Elsewhere, trading in the Swedish krona was volatile, ranging between
SKr4.9255 and SKr4.8910 against the D-Mark. Early weakness flowed from
rating agency Moody's expressing concern about the speed of debt
accumulation.
In Germany Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank president, said the growth of
German M3 - down to an annualised rate of 9.8 per cent in July, from 20 per
cent earlier in the year - had slackened, but was still too high.
