FT  21 MAR 94 / Lord Inchcape - shy but tough shipping chief: Obituary
Lord Inchcape, the former head of Britain's biggest shipping group who has
died at the age of 76, was a shy and undemonstrative man in an industry
which has produced more than its fair share of colourful, extrovert
characters.
He was chairman of Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company (P&amp;O) at
some of its most turbulent times in the 1970s and 1980s, when its
independence came under serious threat. He also ran the trading group which
bears his name.
Kenneth James William Mackay was the third Earl of Inchcape. The link with
P&amp;O dates from the time when his grandfather merged the company with his own
shipping line, British India, and became chairman.
Born two days after Christmas in 1917, he was educated at Eton and
Cambridge, where he read law at Trinity College. After leading an armoured
car squadron in France and Italy during the second world war he returned to
run the family's commodity, shipping, insurance and other interests.
He had a toughly determined approach to business, although his diffidence
gave him a strong dislike of the publicity which developed at times of
crisis. He believed in pragmatism rather than reliance on management
techniques. 'Survival and growth depend to a great deal upon flexibility,'
he said. He became chairman of P&amp;O in 1973 after successfully opposing a
merger with the Bovis property and construction group.
In the event it was P&amp;O which later acquired Bovis in 1974. But P&amp;O then had
to cope with the impact of the oil crisis. In 1978 Lord Inchcape became
chief executive as well as chairman, and initiated a restructuring policy to
ensure P&amp;O's survival after a period of expansion. It sold significant
shipping, oil and property assets to reduce its debt.
After Lord Inchcape, a keen rider, hunter and farmer, had announced his
intention to retire Trafalgar House, also in property and shipping - through
the rival Cunard line - launched a hostile bid in 1983. It was then that the
more assertive and financially experienced Mr Jeffrey (now Lord) Sterling,
already a non-executive director, took over as chairman to mount a defence.
P&amp;O retained its independence and Lord Inchcape stayed as president until
1986.
Lord Inchcape is succeeded by Viscount Glenapp, his eldest son from his
first marriage.
