FT  24 MAR 94 / World Trade News: 'Litany of disasters' for the
international drugs industry
The past year has been the worst in recent memory for the international
drugs industry, the Financial Times World Pharmaceuticals Conference heard
yesterday.
Mr Henry Wendt, chairman of SmithKline Beecham, opened the meeting in London
by reciting a 'litany of disasters', including 'draconian' government
mandated price cuts and/or prescribing restrictions in Italy, Germany, Japan
and other countries.
'Apart from the Gatt agreement, which advances protection of intellectual
property rights, it's hard to think of any good news for the pharmaceutical
industry over the last year,' Mr Wendt said. 'So it's no surprise that sales
and earnings growth is slowing and that many (company) shares have declined
by 30 per cent.'
Much of the industry's nervousness is now focused on the Clinton
administration's proposed US healthcare reforms. 'I have no qualms in
predicting that, come hell or high Whitewater, healthcare legislation will
be signed into law in 1994,' said Mr Toby Moffett, a former congressman who
now runs Strategic Policy, a US health consultancy.
Mr Moffett forecast that the legislation would be a watered-down version of
the original Clinton proposals. But, he warned, 'the politicians will feel
strongly that they need some populist elements to this bill and that means
that slapping down the insurance and pharmaceutical industries will be a
prerequisite to passage'.
The drugs industry had so far 'not been as creative and certainly not as
effective as it could be in getting its message across.'
But Mrs Virginia Bottomley, UK health secretary, delivered a more reassuring
message to the industry in Britain. Delegates were relieved to hear that the
government 'still remains to be convinced' about the merits of compulsory
generic substitution - prescribing cheap unbranded drugs wherever possible.
Her junior colleague, Dr Brian Mawhinney, health minister, had alarmed the
industry last month when he said he wanted to discuss ways of extending
generic substitution with the British Medical Association.
The Japanese Ministry of Health and Welfare was severely criticised for its
cost-cutting methods by Mr Kunio Takeda, president of Takeda Chemical
Industries, Japan's biggest pharmaceuticals company.
The policy of steep price cuts every two years had forced manufacturers to
launch only slightly modified compounds to cut the time and cost involved in
developing new drugs, Mr Takeda said. Such policies would, in the long run,
damage the industry.
'If pharmaceuticals companies were forced to sacrifice themselves (because
of) unfair measures to contain healthcare expenditure, in the long-run (the
policy) would backfire in terms of a deterioration in drug discovery
opportunities,' he said.
Mr Takeda also complained of the ministry's 'closed door' way of
decision-making. Consultation with the industry appeared to be a mere
formality, he said. The ministry is imposing an average 6.6 per cent price
reduction on April 1.
The complaints follow a letter earlier this month sent to the Japanese
ministry by the US Pharmaceutical Manufacturers' Association and the
European Business Council. It objected to the lack of transparency in the
ministry's decisions and argued that changes in policy had been implemented
too quickly.
