FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (10): Dividend rises
comfort London - Equities / Global overview
The first quarter of the year brought the first serious check to the bull
market in UK stocks, which had started in September 1992 when sterling left
the ERM,.
By the close of the quarter, the stock market was looking distinctly
unhappy, having paid dearly for a burst of enthusiasm in January and
struggled through an Easter weekend pregnant with threats of a repeat of the
crash of 1987. As the second quarter opened, UK equity strategists were
still sharply divided on the outlook for the London market.
UK equities were among the weakest global performers, the FT-SE 100 Share
Index returning minus 8.7 per cent for the three months.
In London, as in many other markets, the rot set in at the beginning of
February when the US Federal Reserve tightened monetary policy for the first
time in five years. That move changed perceptions on inflation, which had
been declared formally dead by the UK stock market at the beginning of the
year. It was therefore no surprise that the downswing in UK shares was
heralded, indeed led, by long-dated British government bonds, which peaked
just before the Fed moved.
Heavy daily losses in gilts soon undermined equities and were still doing so
at the end of the quarter. Even those strategists who insist that share
prices are now poised to respond to the increasing indications of recovery
in the domestic economy agree that a stronger bond market is a necessary
basis for an equity upturn.
The debate about inflation, and thus over interest rates has been
sub-divided into debates about whether interest rates can be cut
significantly in Europe if they are being raised in the US. Both the
Bundesbank and the US Federal Reserve have made clear their respective
policies; much of the doubt is over the timing. This is likely to continue
into the second quarter, with the market temperature rising every time the
Bundesbank meets or Mr Alan Greenspan spells out the Fed's views.
The division of views about interest rates will continue to hit London hard,
because, since the turn of the year, strategists and investors have focused
on the chances of a further cut in UK base rates this spring. At first,
these hopes reflected belief that further measures would be taken to
stimulate economic recovery. Now that inflation worries have resurfaced, the
argument is that, with higher taxes in place, the government, facing local
and European elections, will deliver the base rate cut whatever the
inflation risk.
Mr Nicholas Knight, the once bullish but now bearish strategist at Nomura
Research in London, believes that 'base rate will be cut for the wrong (ie
political) reasons, and that this will be the signal to sell UK equities.'
Mr Knight alarmed the market over Easter by predicting that the FT-SE Index
would fall to 2,800 and the Dow Industrial Average to 3,200 in the near
future. The market may have been alarmed, but there was a surprising number
of supporters for his forecast.
Not all market gurus take quite such a dramatic stance, however. Support is
coming from growth in corporate dividends, which, in aggregate, are now 10
per cent up on the year, and in earnings where gains have been more
selective. At Strauss Turnbull, the UK market arm of Societe Generale, Mr
Ian Harnett sees further upside in the second quarter, perhaps to around
FT-SE 3,600, although the second half of the year may be more difficult.
