FT  21 MAR 94 / OECD poised to condemn Pergau dam aid
The Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development is preparing to
criticise publicly the British government's use of aid funds to back the
controversial Malaysian Pergau dam project.
It has completed a report on British aid policy following a critical review
from Finnish and Belgium examiners appointed by its development assistance
committee. A final report will be published next month after a draft copy of
the review was circulated to members for comments.
The OECD has been reluctant to fuel the trade row between the UK and
Malaysia by being drawn publicly into the Pergau controversy but domestic
criticism of British aid policy towards Malaysia in recent weeks has been
sympathetically viewed by OECD aid specialists. The OECD examiners have
identified Pergau as a project that does not readily meet essential criteria
for the granting of aid.
A committee meeting last month, called to consider the British aid
programme, discussed the Pergau controversy and reaffirmed that aid should
be subjected to the full standards of normal assessment and procedures, and
that aid quality should predominate in government decisions. Considerable
credence is given in the OECD to last October's critical report of the
Pergau project by Britain's National Aid Office.
OECD examiners have taken evidence from British officials at the Overseas
Development Administration, which is supposed to manage the UK aid
programme. ODA civil servants objected to the Pergau project but were
overruled by ministers. The OECD is expected to welcome the government's
decision last year to change its aid and trade rules, so that a country as
prosperous as Malaysia could no longer qualify for assistance.
A recent memorandum submitted to the OECD by UK officials defines the aim of
UK aid policy as promotion of sustainable economic development in order to
'improve the quality of life and reduce poverty, suffering, and
deprivation'. The Pergau project predates this decision.
