FT  31 MAR 94 / Ex-minister says Matrix chief deceived him over Iraq exports
Lord Trefgarne, a former trade and defence minister, yesterday told the
arms-to-Iraq inquiry that Mr Paul Henderson, the businessman at the centre
of the Matrix Churchill case, had deceived him about the true purpose of
machine tools exported to Iraq.
Lord Trefgarne's accusation came as Lord Justice Scott's inquiry draws to a
close and threatened further political embarrassment for the government. It
emerged last night that Mr Henderson, who also worked for British
intelligence, may now insist on giving oral evidence to the inquiry.
In his evidence, Lord Trefgarne said he had approved the exports of Matrix
Churchill machine tools to Iraq towards the end of 1989 after being
personally assured by Mr Henderson, the company's managing director, that
they were intended for civilian use.
Lord Trefgarne said: 'I don't think I could have done more than looked him
in the eye and asked him what the machines were intended for. He told me. I
now believe that he deceived me.'
The allegation drew a strong denial from Mr Henderson's solicitor, Mr Kevin
Robinson, who was present at the hearing.
Mr Robinson said: 'Lord Trefgarne's allegation is completely denied. Paul
Henderson has already supplied the Scott inquiry with a truthful account of
the events surrounding his meeting with Lord Trefgarne.'
He added: 'Mr Henderson is confident that the inquiry's report will sustain
his position.'
Officials close to Lord Trefgarne insist his evidence to the inquiry was a
personal initiative.
However, the government is thought to feel it is on the defensive,
particularly following evidence given by Sir Nicholas Lyell, the
attorney-general, which raised fresh questions over whether the prosecution
of the Matrix Churchill case should have gone ahead.
Mr Henderson was declared not guilty of breaching export regulations in
November 1992 after his defence had secured disclosure of official documents
proving he had worked for British intelligence and exported defence-related
machine tools with government knowledge.
The collapse of the Matrix Churchill case caused a political furore and
forced Mr John Major, the prime minister, to set up the Scott inquiry.
Lord Trefgarne was the last of several former and serving ministers to give
evidence in public to the inquiry, which has adjourned until May.
Last night an inquiry official said Mr Henderson would be asked to give
further written evidence in the light of Lord Trefgarne's statement,
although the judge had not decided whether to ask him to give oral evidence.
The Scott Inquiry: special reports and analysis, Page 12
Editorial Comment, Page 21
Observer, Page 21
