FT  12 MAR 94 / Leaving white cliffs for golden sands: The travel trade
needs fewer Britons holidaying abroad
When Ms Adele Biss, chairman of the British Tourist Authority, climbed into
a London taxi recently, she berated the driver because his cab was blue.
'Black taxis, red buses - these are icons,' Ms Biss says. 'Changing them is
like changing the colour of the white cliffs of Dover.'
By promoting red London buses and black cabs abroad, the BTA helped UK
tourism to a record year in 1993. The number of overseas visitors was up 4
per cent to 19.3m. Spending by foreign visitors rose 15 per cent to Pounds
9.1bn. This year visits to Britain by people from overseas are expected to
exceed 20m for the first time.
Unfortunately for the balance of payments, companies which take UK
holidaymakers abroad had an even better 1993. The number of foreign holidays
taken by UK residents rose 8 per cent to 23.5m. The proportion of British
holidaymakers who took holidays of four nights or more in the UK fell to its
lowest level ever - 58 per cent, compared with 70 per cent in 1983.
The travel account deficit of the balance of payments - which includes
business and educational trips as well as holidays - increased to Pounds
3.7bn last year from Pounds 3.4bn in 1992. With the package-tour industry
forecasting that overseas holidays this summer could be as much as 20 per
cent higher than last year, the deficit is likely to increase further.
Little of the blame can be laid at the door of those who bring visitors to
the UK. For a country without reliable sunshine or a substantial ski
industry, the UK has achieved considerable success.
In 1992 the UK was the world's fifth biggest earner of international tourist
revenues after the US, France, Spain, and Italy. In the same year overseas
visitor earnings accounted for 7.3 per cent of the UK's invisible exports
and 3.7 per cent of all exports. If fares paid to UK airlines are included,
the figures rise to 9.2 per cent and 4.6 per cent.
Visitors to the UK are sufficiently impressed to come back. In 1992, 71 per
cent of visitors had been to the UK before. Visitors said heritage,
countryside, arts and entertainment were the main attractions.
Ms Biss says the key to boosting the tourist industry is persuading more UK
residents to take their holidays at home. The industry, she says, cannot
survive on growth from foreign visitors alone.
The difficulty for UK tourism is that it is more fragmented than the
overseas package holiday industry. Three large companies dominate the
overseas holiday business: Thomson, Airtours and Owners Abroad. Each has its
own charter airline. Thomson and Airtours own the UK's two biggest travel
agency chains.
By contrast, a report last year by Coopers and Lybrand, the management
consultants, estimated that the domestic tourist market was made up of
220,000 businesses represented by more than 30 trade organisations. The
largest organisation responsible for domestic tourist marketing is the
English Tourist Board, whose government grant is set to fall from Pounds
13.9m in 1993-94 to Pounds 10m by 1995-96.
Ms Rosemary Astles, Thomson's marketing director, says her company's annual
marketing budget is 'significantly more' than the board's grant.
While foreign visitors come to the UK for history and culture, Britons go
abroad for the sunshine their own country cannot provide. A survey last year
by Lunn Poly found that only 8 per cent of package travellers had any
curiosity about the culture of the countries they planned to visit.
Ms Biss believes more could be done to market UK holidays to the British.
She says she is talking to the travel agency chains about giving greater
priority to domestic holidays.
