FT  06 MAY 94 / Euro election poses crucial challenge for Major
Mr John Major knew it was going to be bad. But it was worse, much worse. The
only question now is whether his divided, demoralised government can pick
itself up before the European elections on June 9.
If it cannot - and there has been nothing in the past few weeks to suggest
it has either the political will or the competence to do so - Mr Major's
premiership may well be over.
His authority is as diminished as that of any prime minister in living
memory. His enemies on the backbenches are already plotting a mid-summer
coup, furtively collecting names for a leadership challenge.
The government had clung to the hope that its traditional supporters would
show some loyalty to the Tory stalwarts who run the town halls. If not, they
might have felt their wallets and heeded the central message of the campaign
 -Conservative councils cost you less. After all, they do.
But instead the once-faithful stayed at home, or worse still, voted Liberal
Democrat. A few even supported Labour. They were much keener to punish the
government for the economic recession, for higher income taxes, for VAT on
fuel, for its incompetence than to save Pounds 50 or so on their council tax
bills.
The middle classes in Kingston-upon-Thames, Sutton and Mole Valley in
Surrey, and Worthing in Sussex joined the skilled working classes of
Basildon, Croydon and Enfield in deserting Mr Major's government. At about
27 per cent, the Conservative share of the vote was the lowest this century
in a nationwide election.
Cabinet ministers who sat last night in television and radio studios had
their excuses ready. It was a mid-term protest vote. The impact of the
economic recovery had yet to be felt. The government has nearly three years
to recover before a general election.
But Mr Major has barely more than a month before he must face the voters in
the elections to the European Parliament and in the Eastleigh by-election.
If last night's results are replicated on June 9, the Conservatives'
representation in the Strasbourg parliament will be all but wiped out. There
are 32 Conservative MEPs now. That number could fall below 10.
The European campaign always promised to be much more difficult than the
local one. The fault line in the Conservative party over Britain's place in
Europe will be impossible to conceal.
Mr Michael Portillo, the Treasury chief secretary, may well regret reopening
the divide at the weekend with his incautious comments about a single
European currency. Many in his party will blame him for the scale of the
local election defeat.
But on past form others will find it hard, if not impossible, to stop
fighting the civil war over Europe. Mr Portillo and his allies on the
Eurosceptic right see salvation in a new, nationalist, Conservative party
which would unshackle Britain from the chains of Brussels.
Never mind that the pro-Europeans in the cabinet and on the Tory backbenches
(and there are still plenty of them) would never stand for it. Never mind
that Mr Michael Heseltine, the most likely successor to the present leader,
is as committed a European as you can find in the Tory party.
Mr Major is being cast as the scapegoat. The word around the bars of
Westminster is that humiliation in the European elections will destroy his
premiership. He has five short weeks to prove his enemies wrong.
