FT  18 OCT 94 / Israel and Jordan agree peace plan: Historic accord is
critical to trade and economic integration
Israel and Jordan initialled a peace treaty yesterday in Amman, the
Jordanian capital, paving the way to normal relations between the two
countries and breaking down economic barriers in the Middle East.
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israeli prime minister, and King Hussein of Jordan settled
disputes over their borders and access to the region's water sources to
achieve the draft treaty. It was initialled by Mr Rabin and Mr Abdul-Salam
al-Majali, the Jordanian prime minister, at Amman's royal guest palace.
Mr Rabin immediately returned to Israel and received unanimous support from
his cabinet for the historic accord.
President Bill Clinton will attend the signing ceremony next Wednesday on
the Jordan-Israel border, marking the formal end of hostility between the
two countries which have fought three wars since 1948.
The treaty, Israel's first formal peace accord with an Arab neighbour since
the Israeli-Egyptian agreement of 1979, requires ratification by both
parliaments.
The agreement is critical for boosting economic integration and trade in the
region. It will put pressure on Syria and Lebanon to intensify peace talks
with Israel, and considerably enhance Mr Rabin's domestic standing.
The treaty will also unlock a range of planned economic projects, including
shared use of trade infrastructure, joint projects in water, energy and
tourism and trade links.
Mr Rabin said the agreement 'will set a cornerstone for a new Middle East in
which peace, development and co-operation will replace animosity, hatred and
war'.
Details of the deal have yet to be released, but Mr Rabin said the two sides
had agreed to a border based on the international boundary between Jordan
and Palestine drawn by the British in 1921, with only minor changes.
Mr Rabin said neither side had lost or won, although Jordanian and Israeli
officials said accepting the 1921 border meant that Israel had given up a
substantial part of the 350 sq km of arid land claimed by Jordan. Israeli
farmers living on part of the land would be able to stay under a leaseback
deal which recognised Jordanian sovereignty.
Israeli officials said Mr Rabin and King Hussein had spoken to President
Clinton yesterday and urged him to attend the signing ceremony. Both leaders
want to support Mr Clinton in maintaining his Democratic majority on Capitol
Hill in the November 8 congressional elections, given his administration's
huge financial and military underwriting of the Middle East peace process.
Mr Clinton was the first leader to hail the draft peace accord, saying: 'At
a time when hatred and extremism and threatening behaviour still stalk the
Middle East, this agreement reminds us that moderation and reason are
prevailing.'
Egypt also said the agreement was a step towards a comprehensive peace
settlement in the Middle East.
Cornerstone for new Middle East, Page 6
Editorial Comment, Page 21
