FT  09 FEB 94 / UK Company News: UES - cut, rolled but far from finished /
State subsidies are still a threat to private steel companies
Red hot and still molten inside, two continuous 'blooms' of newly-made steel
snake their way out of a Pounds 75m casting complex at UES Steels' Aldwarke
works in Rotherham on their way to be cut, rolled and finished.
The continuous caster and related plant, commissioned in 1989, is the most
visible sign of some Pounds 250m of capital spending made by UES since it
was formed in 1986 from the merger of the engineering steel interests of GKN
and the former British Steel Corporation.
The boost to productivity it provides is one reason why Mr David Stone,
managing director of UES Steels, says the company is 'probably the largest
but definitely the leading' European producer of engineering steels -
specialist steels used in forged automotive parts such as crankshafts and
axle beams and in everything from downhole boring to general machining.
Mr Stone is less happy, however, about some of the external factors
affecting the company. 'State subsidies are keeping companies going which
should shut,' he says. 'They are threatening the viability of private
companies which are more efficient.'
In spite of December's Brussels agreement on state subsidies in Europe's
steel industry - which involved Sidenor of Spain, one of UES's competitors -
Mr Stone is not confident that the issue has been resolved. Like many in
British industry he wants the European Commission to show more teeth in
applying the rules banning subsidies, and in particular to prevent further
subsidies being allowed rather than reacting after the event.
For a company such as UES these are not just political debating points: the
subsidies issue is directly relevant to the performance of the company and
the prospects of its employees.
The continued existence of subsidised producers is one reason why prices for
steel scrap - the main raw material for companies such as UES - have risen,
says Mr Stone. 'They can pay more than they need for scrap'.
When UES was forced to cut jobs last year, it blamed unfair competition
caused by subsidies to some of its competitors, along with scrap prices  -
up from about Pounds 50 a tonne to Pounds 90 a tonne in the past 12 months -
and the high cost of electricity in the UK. UES makes its steel by putting
scrap into electric arc furnaces. 'Subsidies, scrap and electricity prices
are absolutely fundamental,' says Mr Stone. The company's Templeborough
steelworks in Rotherham, which closed in November with the loss of 250 jobs,
could be seen as a casualty of the European steel scene, he claims.
As if that was not enough, UES is also embroiled in a trade dispute
involving its exports to the US of leaded bar - steel to which lead is added
to make it more easily machined. This business is normally worth some Pounds
30m a year. It is appealing against anti-dumping and countervailing duties,
which have reduced its US exports of the product by one third.
Then there is the recession in the UK and continental Europe which, along
with overcapacity in the engineering steels sector, has depressed selling
prices. With about 60 per cent of group sales going to the automotive
industry, UES has to deal with powerful customers in a buyers' market.
The result was a pre-tax loss of Pounds 8.3m on sales of Pounds 565m in 1992
at UES Holdings, which groups the steel, forging and other closely-related
interests.
The deficit was the first for the company, and the recession affected all
its businesses. But the steel division in particular is feeling the
pressure, says Mr Stone, and is still trading at a loss. The size of UES,
and its position in the European market, means it is important for the UK
steel industry as a whole, as well as to shareholders in British Steel and
GKN, which own 60.9 per cent and 39.1 per cent respectively in UES Holdings.
The company was by far the biggest of the government-sponsored 'Phoenix'
reorganisations of the steel industry in the mid-1980s, and after the
closures of the past 20 years virtually is the UK engineering steels
industry.
It started shakily, says Mr Stone, but things went well for three years,
with profits peaking at Pounds 67.3m on sales of Pounds 814m in 1989. Since
then, he says, 'things have gone off the boil'.
Not surprisingly, perhaps, the two owners have been taking an increasing
interest in their progeny: in September they amalgamated the UES Holdings
executive committee into its board structure to improve communications with
the businesses. As a result, the company has a part-time non-executive
chairman, Mr Don Ford, but no chief executive - Mr Graham Mackenzie, the
former incumbent, left by mutual agreement when the changes were announced.
If the short-term situation looks difficult for UES Holdings, it does have a
number of things in its favour. As at British Steel itself, there has been a
relentless drive to cut costs.
The workforce has been reduced from more than 11,000 at the end of 1988 to
about 7,000 at the end of last year. As early as 1990, UES grasped the
nettle and closed the Brymbo steel works at Wrexham, with the loss of 1,100
jobs.
Nearly four years later the retrenchment is continuing and 400, mainly
staff, jobs are going in the steels division - about 10 per cent of the
remaining workforce. But Mr Stone says no further cuts are planned.
However, the company has also grown. It has made a string of acquisitions
since 1986, upstream in certain strategically important parts of the scrap
business and downstream in stockholding and in bright bar - a shiny steel
processed from 'black' engineering steel and used in hydraulic and other
applications.
It has a seemingly impregnable hold on the UK engineering steels market,
with a share of about 68 per cent. Its output of about 1.5m tonnes of stee1
from Aldwarke and from the smaller, more specialised steelworks at
Stocksbridge, north-west of Sheffield, is enough to serve a UK market and
leave room to exploit export opportunities.
On the back of the company's investments and cost-efficiency, the outlook Mr
Stone foresees for UES Steels is growth relative to the market, which has a
long way to go to match capacity, he says.
His hope is that weaker players in the European industry will fall by the
wayside, allowing UES to raise its market share even if the amount of steel
it produces does not rise.
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                    FIVE-YEAR RECORD AT UES
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
              External            Pre-tax         Steel      Employees
      sales (Pounds m)            profits    deliveries     (year-end)
                         (loss) (Poundsm)  (000 tonnes)
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
1988               686              52.7          1,818         11,123
1989               814              67.3          1,957         10,708
1990               734              52.5          1,666          9,446
1991               551               1.9          1,213          8,334
1992               565             (8.3)          1,317          8,108
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
