FT  05 DEC 94 / FT Guide to the Week
MONDAY 5
Budapest security summit
Presidents Bill Clinton of the US and Boris Yeltsin of Russia, and Boutros
Boutros Ghali (left), secretary-general of the United Nations, are among
more than 50 world leaders attending the Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe summit in Budapest (to Dec 6).
The session, the culmination of a two-month review conference, is due to
focus on the organisation's future.
Russia is keen to strengthen the CSCE, which includes all European and
Commonwealth of Independent states as well as the US and Canada. However,
divisions among Nato members over Bosnia are likely to overshadow
proceedings.
European Union finance ministers meet in Brussels ahead of the European
Council summit in Essen on Friday and Saturday. Germany, which holds the
rotating EU presidency, will push hard for agreement on Ecu85m (Dollars
108m) balance of payments assistance to Ukraine.
Jacques Delors, outgoing president of the European Commission, will appeal
for support for funding trans-
European networks to improve transport and energy infrastructure. Ministers
are also likely to review currency stability since last year's crisis in the
exchange rate mechanism.
Olympian task:
Greece's socialist government is due to propose controversial legislation on
overhauling Olympic Airways, the loss-making state carrier. A survival plan
agreed with the European Union includes a Dr491bn (Dollars 2bn) debt
write-off, management restructuring and early retirement for at least 1,500
employees. Pilots' privileges, including a day off on their birthdays, are
to be curtailed.
Global phones: The International Marine Satellite Organisation, Inmarsat,
opens a five-day meeting in London to discuss whether it should set up a
global mobile phone network.
Safety at sea: The International Maritime Organisation's Maritime Safety
Committee meets in London to review shipping safety standards in the light
of recent accidents (to Dec 9).
FT Survey: Thailand.
Holidays: Thailand.
TUESDAY 6
Ireland awaits a premier
Bertie Ahern, leader of the Fianna Fail party, will be hoping to be voted
Ireland's prime minister by parliament when it reconvenes today.
Installation of a prime minister should give fresh impetus to the Northern
Ireland peace process.
East European economies face a brighter future, according to a report out
today from the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe. However,
output is still falling in Russia and other members of the Commonwealth of
Independent States.
John Major's UK government faces another testing vote in parliament, this
time on a procedural motion which would allow the opposition Labour party to
challenge the imposition of VAT on domestic heating fuel. The government,
technically in a minority after the suspension of some members, could lose,
but will probably scrape home.
UK economic policy: Last week's UK Budget comes under the scrutiny of the
cross-party House of Commons treasury and civil service committee. MPs will
question Treasury officials on expenditure and taxation, fiscal and monetary
policy in preparation for meetings next week with Jonathan Aitken, the chief
secretary, and Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor.
Saleroom: Christie's in New York is to auction a Maltese Falcon statuette
used as a prop in the 1941 film of the same name, based on Dashiell
Hammett's novel and starring Humphrey Bogart and Mary Astor.
The statuette, one of two made for the film, is expected to raise between
Dollars 30,000 and Dollars 50,000. It is being sold by the estate of actor
William Conrad, star of the 1970s television detective series Cannon, who
received it as a gift from Warner Bros studio chief Jack Warner in the
1960s. The other falcon is owned by a Beverly Hills dentist.
Blue heaven: The International Whaling Commission's whale sanctuary in the
Antarctic is due to come into effect. It covers the feeding grounds of 90
per cent of the world's whale species, including blue, sperm and sei, and
effectively confines whale hunting to part of the Atlantic.
Rugby: The Varsity Match between Oxford and Cambridge is played at
Twickenham in London.
FT Surveys: Swiss Banking and Japanese Industry.
Holidays: Finland (Independence Day), Spain (Constitution Day).
WEDNESDAY 7
Namibia goes to the polls
Namibians begin two days of voting in their first elections since
independence in 1990. Incumbent president Sam Nujoma's South West African
People's Organisation is expected to win comfortably, despite allegations of
corruption from the main opposition Democratic Turnhalle Alliance. Were
Swapo to garner a two-thirds majority, it could make alterations to the
constitution.
UK interest rates:
Kenneth Clarke, chancellor, and Eddie George (left), governor of the Bank of
England, meet to discuss interest rates in the light of last week's Budget
proposals. The arguments for and against a rise in base rates from 5.75 per
cent are finely balanced.
The Bank fears strong economic growth may trigger inflationary pressures.
Analysts believe Mr Clarke will urge delay at least until January to prevent
a pre-Christmas upset to the retail trade and to allow the public to digest
his Budget measures.
Kyrgyzstan and the World Bank co-sponsor a two-day investors' conference in
Paris. The republic, which has been following an International Monetary Fund
programme, has stabilised its currency, the som, and is set to bring
inflation below 1 per cent a month. Western economists are predicting its
economy will expand by 1-2 per cent in the second half of next year.
VSEL bid: Michael Heseltine, UK secretary of state for trade and industry,
has until today to rule on whether bids for the submarine maker VSEL by
British Aerospace and GEC should be referred to the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission. It is thought unlikely that either bid will be referred, leaving
the battle to be fought out in the stockmarket.
Lloyd's of London: The council of the insurance market is expected to
discuss the possibility of forging an out-of-court settlement between
loss-making members and professional agencies being sued for negligence.
Peter Middleton, chief executive, has been testing support for fresh
negotiations after Names rejected in February a deal that would have been
worth about Pounds 900m. All sides agree a deal is in the best interest of
the insurance market. The problem is deciding how much each must concede.
East Timor: The 19th anniversary of the invasion and occupation of the
former Portuguese colony by Indonesia will be marked by protests in
Australia, Britain, Canada, Portugal and the US.
FT Survey: Zimbabwe.
THURSDAY 8
Gatt members ponder WTO
The 125 participants in the eight-year-old Uruguay Round of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade meet in Geneva to set a January 1 start-date
for Gatt's successor, the World Trade Organisation.
Ankara's state security court is due to give its verdict in the treason
trial of eight Kurdish MPs, accused of infringing Turkey's anti-terrorism
laws by maintaining ties with guerrillas of the Kurdistan Workers party
(PKK) and advocating a separate Kurdish state.
Nigeria's constitutional conference in Abuja begins a month's break, six
weeks after it was due to offer draft proposals, before resuming in January.
UK telecoms: Oftel, the regulatory body, publishes a consultation document
on interconnection, concerning the prices BT's competitors have to pay to
use parts of its network.
Saleroom: The Marquess of Cholmondeley is disposing of items from Houghton
Hall, his house in Norfolk, at Christie's in London. Among the highlights
are chairs designed by William Kent and a painting La Lecture de Moliere by
Jean-Francois de Troy, which could top Pounds 5m.
FT Surveys: Business in the Community and Vietnam.
Holidays: Argentina, Austria, Brazil (some states), Chile, Italy, Peru,
Portugal, Spain (Immaculate Conception).
FRIDAY 9
Summit of the Americas
President Bill Clinton hosts the Summit of the Americas (to Dec 10). All the
leaders of the region, with the exception of Cuba's Fidel Castro, foregather
in Miami. The main item on the agenda is trade. Given Mr Clinton's weakness
after the disastrous mid-term elections, many are sceptical that the fine
words expected from the US on the goal of hemispheric economic integration
can be translated into practice.
EU summit: Germany's Chancellor Helmut Kohl hosts the two-day European
Council summit in Essen. The meeting is being billed as a cornerstone of the
German-led strategy to build a 'wider' European Union to include the former
communist countries of central and eastern Europe. Other topics include
measures to boost employment, EU strategy toward North Africa, the crisis in
Bosnia, and efforts to beef up Europol into a European FBI.
Sinn Feinn, the political wing of the IRA, and the British government are
due to begin talks in Belfast, opening a new phase of the Northern Ireland
peace process. They have been deferred from Wednesday at the IRA's request.
Decommissioning of paramilitary arsenals will top the agenda.
Bank of Japan is to release its quarterly Tankan business outlook, the most
authoritative guide to the short term economic outlook. It will appear
against the background of strengthening signs of a recovery.
WEEKEND 10-11
Peace prize ceremony
On Saturday, Israel's prime minister Yitzhak Rabin and foreign minister
Shimon Peres, together with PLO chairman Yassir Arafat, collect the 1994
Nobel Peace Prize in Oslo. The three were awarded this year's controversial
prize in October for their efforts to create peace in the Middle East, but
the extremist Islamic movement has since been seeking to undermine progress
of the accord. This year's Nobel Peace Prize is the first to be shared by
more than two recipients.
Japan's main opposition forces intend to merge into one party (Shinshinto)
on Saturday at a meeting in Yokohama.
Nasreen trial: On Saturday, the trial in absentia of the Bangladeshi
feminist writer Taslima Nasreen is due to begin. She is accused of insulting
Islam in her works. She fled to Sweden in August.
Saleroom: Manhattan Rolls-Royce dealer Michael Schudroff, who is closing
shop and moving to smaller premises in Greenwich, Connecticut, auctions some
50 vehicles, part of his collection of vintage Rolls-Royces, at Sotheby's
New York on Saturday.
Germany's liberal Free Democrats, the junior partner in the ruling
coalition, begin a special congress on Sunday in Gera, Thuringia, to
redefine the party's aims after its poor showing in the recent federal
elections (to Dec 12).
Compiled by Patrick Stiles.
Fax: (+44) (0)171 873 3194.
