FT  06 MAY 94 / Supertram plan relaunched: Promoters seek government funding
for Pounds 112m west Midlands line
Promoters of a Pounds 112m plan for a 'supertram' in the west Midlands
yesterday relaunched their appeal for government funding.
Approval in next November's Budget, however, would still mean a delay of
four years in starting the service.
Centro, the west Midlands passenger transport executive, has formed a joint
venture with two private-sector companies to build a 13-mile tram link
between Wolverhampton and central Birmingham. This would form the first line
in a light rail network eventually expected to cover 125 miles.
The Midland Metro would be the third modern light rail system to be built in
the UK after similar projects in Manchester and Sheffield.
It has been delayed by pressure on government finances which have meant that
the Pounds 102m of public-sector funding has not been sanctioned. Approval
in November would means services could start in 1998, four years later than
originally planned.
The Midlands proposal is not only the furthest advanced of light projects in
the UK; it also involves the greatest transfer of risk to the private sector
and the largest private-sector contribution to a light rail project, said Mr
Bob Tarr, Centro director-general.
Centro's two private-sector partners, the John Laing construction group and
the Italian supplier of rail systems, Ansaldo Trasporti, would put Pounds
9.2m into the project in return for a 23-year operating concession including
a three-year construction period.
Centro is seeking a further Pounds 80m in UK public-sector finance and
Pounds 22m of European Union funds. The UK public-sector contribution will
comprise Pounds 40m of government grant and Pounds 40m raised by local
authority borrowing, though this also requires Treasury approval.
The line between Wolverhampton and Birmingham is expected to carry 15m
passengers in its first year, eventually rising to 18m. Mr Tarr claimed it
would prove 'a gold mine' for the operators.
Trams would run every six minutes and take 35 minutes to travel the complete
line at up to 47mph.
All the operating risks have been transferred to Laing and Ansaldo, the two
companies said. If the project does badly and they pull out, they forfeit a
Pounds 5m deposit to Centro. If 'super profits' are made on the line, a
share will also have to be paid to Centro.
