FT  07 FEB 94 / People: Canadian dark horse for OECD
Don who? The news that Canada's Don Johnston has emerged as the dark horse
in the four-way race to fill the secretary-general's post at the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has caught many
non-Canadians by surprise, writes Bernard Simon.
Johnston is little known beyond Parliament Hill in Ottawa, or the legal
fraternity in Montreal, his home town. But he is undoubtedly both a serious
and a strong contender for the OECD job against Lord Lawson, the former UK
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Lorenz Schomerus, a former chairman of the OECD
trade committee, and the present incumbent, France's Jean-Claude Paye.
Johnston's big advantage is that some powerful OECD members, notably the US,
want a non-European with both a political and an economic background in the
OECD's Paris headquarters. Johnston, aged 57, fits the bill - and he speaks
French. Described by one friend as 'approachable, very principled and very
independent-minded', he is a trained lawyer with a keen interest in
taxation, industrial strategy and development issues.
It was former Canadian prime minister Pierre Trudeau, an old client, who
persuaded him to enter politics in the 1970s. Johnson managed the trust into
which the prime minister had put his personal assets. He went on to hold
several middle-ranking cabinet portfolios until his Liberal Party lost the
1984 general election.
Then he sat on the opposition benches for four years as the Liberals'
finance and external affairs spokesman, but quit politics in 1988 after a
disagreement over the party's policy towards Quebec. He is currently the
party's president, or chief executive, and also sits on the board of BCE,
Canada's biggest public company.
Johnston tried to re-enter politics in the run-up to last year's general
election but he lost a messy battle for the Liberal nomination in his former
upper-crust Montreal constituency.
Last year's setback may turn out to have been a blessing in disguise.
Economics Notebook, Page 22
