FT  02 AUG 94 / Axe wielded by Treasury casts a long shadow: A look at the
departments facing spending cuts
Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade and industry secretary, is not alone.
Several cabinet ministers can expect their departments' spending programmes
to be axed this year if Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, is to carry out
his promise to cut public spending and pave the way for tax cuts before the
next election.
Six Whitehall departments - employment, transport, the two legal
departments, trade and industry, and environment - have recently been
examined in the Treasury's Fundamental Expenditure Reviews, which carry out
a root-and-branch examination of policies.
An additional four departments which were examined last year - social
security, the Home Office, health and education - have recently been put
under the spotlight again to see if more cuts can be made.
And, if all that were not enough, the Treasury has even examined
administrative spending by its own officials to see if savings can be made.
The outcome of some of these reviews has already been trailed. Mr Peter
Lilley, the social security secretary, is almost certain to introduce
reductions in spending on housing benefit and mortgage interest relief in an
effort to cut his department's Pounds 85bn budget. He confirmed earlier this
week that the DSS is to introduce identity cards for benefit recipients to
crack down on an estimated Pounds 5bn of fraud.
Lord MacKay, the Lord Chancellor, will probably be forced to reduce spending
on the administration of the courts and in the legal-aid budget. Some of the
work done by Customs and Excise and the Inland Revenue is also likely to be
merged in a move which could cost hundreds of civil servants' jobs.
In recent months officials at these and other Whitehall departments have put
up a determined battle to ward off these cuts. The DTI pointed out yesterday
that its entire budget has already been reduced to just Pounds 1.4bn by
1996-97. 'Any cuts in our budget are unlikely to have much impact if the
Treasury is looking for sizeable cuts in next year's control total,' said
one official.
Some ministers have also argued that the need for cuts in public spending
could be offset by signs of economic recovery, which will reduce both the
amount of cyclical expenditure incurred by the government and the size of
state borrowing. But rightwing Tory MPs reject these arguments. They
question the determination of Mr Clarke to reduce the projected control
total expenditure of Pounds 263bn in 1995-96. They argue that the reviews of
health and education had little impact on last year's budget. They also say
that some measures, like the reform of invalidity benefit last year, will
only help to reduce spending in the long term.
Tory rightwingers also argue that there must be even more drastic reductions
in social security expenditure, whose budget accounts for nearly a third of
total public spending. They want a concerted move away from universal state
benefits, leaving more people dependent on private-pension provision.
They are concerned too, that the government is backing down from some of its
privatisation plans. Legislation on motorway tolling now looks unlikely to
be introduced in the next session of parliament amid signs that it could be
delayed until after the next election. And the privatisation of the Post
Office is still under threat from a concerted lobby of Tory moderates.
