FT  05 DEC 94 / Feisty fighter for a level playing field: Emma Tucker on the
policy of Karel Van Miert, the EU's reappointed competition commissioner
Of the European Union's 20 commissioners, Karel Van Miert, the feisty
Flemish politician responsible for competition policy, is one who frequently
takes it upon himself to tell the world what Brussels is up to.
Only last week, he triumphantly announced record fines on a price-fixing
cartel for the third time in a year. The cement industry was his latest
target, but whether fighting collusion, blocking a merger, or approving a
state bail-out, his are controversial decisions.
The former socialist MP has been reappointed as competition commissioner,
for a further five years from January. But after his first two years,
industry is asking whether Mr Van Miert is the right man to ensure fair
play.
When Mr Van Miert took over the competition dossier from self-styled
crusader Sir Leon Brittan, many expected his socialist vision to herald a
less rigorous approach.
Some of these early critics have revised their views. 'People have a very
positive view of Mr Van Miert,' says Ms Bernadine Adkins, a Brussels-based
competition lawyer. 'They think he has been very robust and has pursued Sir
Leon Brittan's line.'
Mr Van Miert has aggressively tackled Europe's highly regulated telecoms
sector and reorganised the Commission's merger task force to achieve
speedier decisions.
But aggrieved groups remain, among them private steel makers struggling to
compete without subsidies and consumers still faced with inflated European
airfares.
Mr Zygmunt Tyszkiewicz, secretary general of Unice, the federation of
European industry, wrote earlier this month: 'The essential corollary of
competitiveness - a strict competition policy - is being applied without the
necessary rigour and determination.'
Criticism of Mr Van Miert's 'pragmatic' approach has been most strident in
relation to several vast, and highly political state aid payments, and the
collapse of a joint industry-Commission steel rescue plan - which cut little
capacity but distributed subsidies.
In these cases political considerations took precedence over a strict
application of competition rules. One example was the decision not to
prevent the French government from paying FFr20bn (Pounds 2.4bn) to its
bankrupt national carrier, Air France - a capital injection almost
equivalent to world airlines' entire losses last year, according to Sir
Michael Bishop, chairman of British Midland.
In Northern Ireland, the Commission decided not to block a vast subsidy to
Hualon, a Taiwanese textiles plant, which competitors said would add to
capacity and threaten jobs in an over-supplied sector.
'State aids continue to be authorised too easily by the Commission. . . . to
the detriment of just those companies that have undergone the painful
process of restructuring,' wrote Mr Tyszkiewicz.
Mr Van Miert does not bear sole responsibility for this. Each case goes to
the college of commissioners and airline cases are handled by the transport
commissioner. In cases such as Air France and Hualon, say his supporters, it
would be naive to think that Mr Van Miert could have acted against pressure
from two of the EU's bigger member states.
There are also those who argue that a strict application of state aid rules
would be inappropriate while unemployment in Europe remains high.
'Mr Van Miert's idea of pragmatic competition is a little bit socialist and
dirigiste, but it is also in line with the times,' says Mr John Ratliffe, a
Brussels-based competition lawyer. 'You can imagine the consequences on some
parts of Europe if he just waded in and threw people out of jobs.'
But, says Mr Graham Mason of the Confederation of British Industry:
'Pragmatism might have been the order of the day during the recession, but
when things get better it should most definitely not be.'
It could even damage the internal market, as member states try to sustain
industrial capacity at unrealistic levels, rather than create the conditions
for businesses to adjust to competitive pressures.
A pragmatic approach has also allowed the persistence of contradictions
within state aids policy.
Decisions are affected by 'a combination of sectoral and horizontal
frameworks which lead to different treatments for different industries
without any real justification,' said a competition official.
In the case of Hualon, it was the application of regional development
criteria that allowed Mr Van Miert to bend competition rules to allow the
subsidies to be paid.
A particular cause of complaint are industry agreements covering sectors
such as textiles and cars introduced originally for economic or structural
reasons. 'These are the result of special situations but they seem to be
kept for ever,' said a Commission official.
Another big criticism of competition policy is of the procedures used by
directorate general 4, the Commission's competition unit.
The investigation into the cement cartel, for example, took five years to
complete. The time taken to investigate cartels, and the legal uncertainty
created, upsets reasonable commercial timetables for taking investment
decisions, argues industry.
The Commission has committed itself to investigating cases more quickly.
However, swifter processing of cases can involve a trade-off with legal
certainty. For example, where companies are planning agreements which may
distort competition, the Commission has taken to issuing so-called 'comfort
letters', informal statements to the interested parties of its view on
whether or not the agreement is likely to be judged anti-competitive.
The good thing about comfort letters is that they can be issued quickly.
However, they do not bind the Commission to a final decision, they provide
no immunity from fines should the agreement be challenged, and they are not
binding on national courts.
Mr Van Miert has also been looking at ways of reducing the case load on DG4
officials by devolving some responsibility to national courts. But the
problem with such an approach is that the efficiency of competition
authorities differs considerably between member states and there is a danger
that the law will be applied unevenly.
But while Mr Van Miert's plans for procedural changes have been
well-received by industry, it is on high-profile state aid cases that his
record will be judged.
Mr Van Miert has stressed many times that he does not intend to allow any
further payments to companies that have already benefited from state
subsidies. But a battle is looming. Last month he disagreed in public with
the outgoing Spanish transport commissioner over whether second payments
should be allowed in exceptional circumstances. Mr Marcelino Oreja had said
that state bail-outs could be justified under such circumstances as a
currency devaluation.
This is precisely the case that Iberia, the Spanish national carrier, is
expected to make when it asks the Commission for approval of a second
tranche of capital.
For the sake of the Commission's credibility Mr Van Miert is likely to argue
that a one-time, last-time payment means what it says and not - as
Commission officials joke - one-time, until the next time.
But the stakes are high. The blocking of a capital injection to Iberia could
provide the Commission with the best proof yet that it is taking its
competition duties seriously; for the first time since Europe's skies were
supposedly liberalised, a state-owned, national flag carrier might go
bankrupt and close down.
