FT  18 JUL 94 / World Cup '94: All eyes on the boiling bowl
'It never rains in southern California,' goes the old 1960s song (Beach
Boys? Jan and Dean? Mammas and the Poppas? No matter). That's still true,
but the ground has been shaking a bit of late and these days you can barely
see the San Gabriel mountains from the Rose Bowl even though they cannot be
more than five miles away, Jurek Martin writes from Pasadena.
This lack of natural habitat - glowering, mountainous, wet - may explain
Bulgaria's pathetic performance in the World Cup third-place game on
Saturday. But it was also the setting for the big one - Brazil vs Italy -
just after high noon, Pacific time, yesterday.
There is something of the Roman amphitheatre to the Rose Bowl. Its towers
are faintly Romanesque. Its plain seating, for all of 102,000, offers no
relief from the blazing sun, apart from that afforded the emperor and his
court in air-conditioned sky-boxes.
The emperor this weekend was Alan Rothenberg, head of the World Cup
operation and lord of all soccer in America, though doubtless Fifa's Joao
Havelange claims equal status.
Certainly never before have so many Fifa officials, conspicuous in their
smart blue-and-white striped shirts and ties, been gathered together at one
time before; their principal task seemed to be to whip back into their seats
any reporter daring to seek relief from the sun.
The court consisted of luminaries beyond number: Silvio Berlusconi and half
the Italian government; Henry Kissinger, without whom, possibly, the
tournament would not have come to the US for the first time; and what passes
for glitter in Tinseltown. The senior aristocrat, Pele, was, however, frying
like the rest of us, doing his Brazilian TV commentary.
The World Cup is still pretty big locally - big enough on Saturday, in an
increasingly Latino city, to draw about 95,000 to the Rose Bowl to watch a
match between one country stretching into the Arctic Circle and another
whose location 99.9 per cent of Angelenos would be pushed to define.
Fans of Sweden and Bulgaria may be getting anxious at this stage about the
lack of reporting on the outcome. In journalistic parlance, an account of
the same should be 'broken out' - that is, rendered distinct and separate -
much as the FT renders, for example, OECD country reports into dozens of
vital, component parts. There are reasons for this obfuscation. The correct
one is that nobody cares who finishes third in the World Cup, and many
wonder why the match is played at all. (Fifa announced at the weekend that
it would not be discontinued, so there). The real one is that the Bulgarians
have given so much pleasure that it seems indecent to 'break out' their
worst peformance.
It was a perfectly pleasant and civilised match which featured four goals
but had all the life of a left-over souffle. Curiously, all the goals were
scored by Sweden and all in the first half.
The first and last goals, by Brolin and Andersson, came in the northern
European manner, good headers from accurate crosses. Brolin made the second,
for Mild, with a quickly-taken free kick, and Larsson ambled through a
disconnected defence for the third. If Sweden felt they had something to
prove after their negative approach to their semi-final with Brazil, they
may claim vindication.
But the Bulgars never turned on; even the great Stoichkov found himself
alone in front of Ravelli with a few minutes to go and muffed it. This
inspired great rapport in the waning moments between the Swedish goalie and
the crowd, compensating for any disappointment Ravelli may feel for not
having made the tournament All-Star team.
That honour rightly went to another greybeard, Preud'homme of Belgium. He
may have been beaten three times by Germany but miraculously saved twice
that number and looked a cut above a not wholly distinguished goalkeeping
crew. Only Ravelli, accorded 'honourable mention,' and Mohammed Al Deayea of
Saudi Arabia, otherwise looked the part.
The rest of the list drew no controversy. Nor should it, since Pele and
Bobby Charlton were among the judges. It comprised Jorghino and Marcio
Santos of Brazil in defence, along with Maldini of Italy, Dunga (Brazil),
Balakov (Bulgaria), Hagi (Romania) and Brolin in midfield, and Roberto
Baggio (Italy), Romario (Brazil) and Stoichkov.
Six of them, Baggio's hamstring permitting, were due to play in the final
yesterday and for them, their team-mates and what promised to be the
noisiest and most colourful crowd a World Cup final has ever seen, the Rose
Bowl, heat and smog and all, was a fitting arena.
