FT  09 JUL 94 / Do we want religious toleration?: Truth of the Matter
Fidei Defensor. Defender of the Faith. It has the chivalrous ring of
authentic heritage. Even these new-fangled decimal coins with their angular
shapes and banal names are lent a spurious air of history.
A 20p piece. Huh] Where is our golden ducat, our crown, half-crown or
florin? Where our angel or our guinea? Where is our sovereign? Even the
humble shilling had its history. Fidei Defensor lends a kind of continuity
to the currency between Henry VIII and Charles III. But does it mean
anything?
The faith Henry was defending was the unreformed Roman Catholic Christianity
of the early 16th century. He published a tirade against the Protestant
Christianity which was sweeping through northern Europe and won the Pope's
accolade.
Since, frankly, it has been something of an embarrassment for the head of
the Church of England, which so staunchly rejects Papal claims. Most people
assume it means the duty of the sovereign to defend the established church.
In these more liberal and ecumenical days, of course, The Faith no longer
means the doctrines of one particular Christian denomination. It is far more
likely to mean Christianity as opposed to the 'other faiths' - Islam or
Judaism or Buddhism.
But the future Charles III now wants to broaden the scope of Fidei Defensor
still further to embrace all religious faiths. Defender of Religion is his
preferred role.
The sentiment is fine, well-tuned to the liberal tolerant society we would
like to become. But what, in practice, can it mean?
Parliament can make laws against religious or racial discrimination or -
possibly - against blasphemy (which are incidentally difficult to enforce),
but what can a single person with a royal role do to 'defend' all religions
with conviction and impartiality?
Elizabeth II, our present monarch (may her reign be long and glorious) has
not taken a notably active role in defending the Christian faith of the
Church of England against its enemies, internal or external. True, she sets
a good example by going to church.
However, Elizabeth I was far more pro-active. A doughty scholar and
theologian, she was well up to rebuking prelates in public or preachers in
mid-oration. We are used to smooth prevarication about contentious issues;
Elizabeth would have been robust in her comments on the ordination of women
and forthright with Dr David Jenkins. She would have been scathing, no
doubt, with 'Jews and Infidels'.
Such royal intolerance would be intolerable today. But is tolerance what we
want in Britain? Do we want our head of state to be tolerant of a religion
which demeans and oppresses women? Or one which inflicts 'cruel and
inhumane' punishments in defiance of a UN Declaration of Human Rights? Or
one which issues fatwahs against a British citizen and forces him into
hiding?
Secular humanism is a kind of faith; so is Scientology. Roll up all Moonies.
I wonder what Fidei Defensor could do in Northern Ireland? The essence of
many faiths is their claim to exclusive truth and hostility to other faiths.
How will Religionis Defensor cope with that?
For religions are not like ice creams, different flavours for different
tastes. We may hope for a time - it is centuries away I fear - when there
will be sufficient convergence in the self-understanding of the great faith
traditions for tolerance without compromise to be a real possibility. As
things are, there are seemingly unbridgeable gulfs of both belief and
practice and a growing paranoid fundamentalism.
For the leaders of the different faith communities to have 'access' to the
Crown, as Prince Charles suggests, would no doubt signal publicly that they
are here to stay. But that could be arranged tomorrow by suitable
invitations and no implicit comment on their relative acceptability need be
inferred.
The Establishment of the Church of England is a rather different matter. The
Queen is also 'head of the church', but establishment reaches in intricate
ways into many other areas of public life, into the law and parliament and
education and on into our common rites of passage and the parochial system.
Arguably the crown could abandon that title without unpicking the whole
complex interweaving of church and state.
But if the object of the exercise is to declare an intention to defend the
free exercise of religion in our society she should be doing that as a
matter of principle as head of the church. For the Church of England is
theologically committed to religious toleration; our own Bishops have
frequently been eloquent advocates for the rights of other faith
communities.
In Northern Ireland the Church of Ireland has struggled to bridge the gap
between Roman Catholic and Protestant communities. As head of the church the
Crown is no less free to be the advocate of other communities than it is of
the Church of England.
Disestablishment offers no extra freedom of action to the crown. It is
arguable that it offers the church more than it offers the state -
principally visible freedom to choose and appoint its own bishops and deans.
On the other side it is likely to weaken the monarchy by cutting the last
vestiges of sacral legitimation which the coronation and all the great state
rituals in Westminster Abbey and St Paul's still symbolise for a majority of
the British people.
Messing about with the currency, or the Royal Mail, is deeply unpopular
because, at a gut level, people feel they are organic to our national
identity - veins and arteries to our connectedness. The Queen's head on our
coins and postage stamps says something reassuring to the average person.
Having her as head of the church may serve a similar function - not only for
members of the C of E but for other Christian denominations, other faith
communities and for the large majority who do not want an atheistic, secular
republic.
As Dr Jonathan Sacks, the Chief Rabbi, pointed out, the Establishment of the
C of E is a guarantee for Jews as well as for Sikhs and Moslems that the
state is constitutionally committed to safeguard basic spiritual values and
the common moral decencies to which most religious communities subscribe. If
that is the price we have to pay for the humiliating business of having the
prime minister advise the Queen on the appointments of bishops and deans it
is a price I, for one, am willing to pay.
Hugh Dickinson is Dean of Salisbury.
