FT  29 OCT 94 / Welsh and Scots step up calls for Ulster-style deal
The government is facing growing demands from Welsh and Scottish
nationalists for equal constitutional treatment with Northern Ireland,
including the establishment of devolved assemblies.
Nationalists in both countries see the Ulster peace talks as the trigger for
a campaign to highlight the contradictions between the government's approach
to Northern Ireland and its handling of Scotland and Wales.
Nationalists intend to contrast the government's reluctance to acknowledge
peaceful demands for Scottish and Welsh devolution with its willingness to
negotiate with Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, if the Northern
Ireland ceasefire holds.
Mr Dafydd Wigley, president of Plaid Cymru, the Welsh nationalist party,
yesterday stepped up the campaign at the party's conference in Llandudno,
appealing to Mr John Major to recognise that Ulster and Wales have equal
rights to self-determination.
'In the name of democracy, consistency and political justice, I appeal to
the prime minister to recognise the morally indefensible position of denying
these self-same rights to the people of Wales,' he said.
'If John Major can tell the people of the six counties of Northern Ireland
that if it is their wish, democratically expressed, that they can unite with
the Irish Republic . . . by what token can he deny that self-same degree of
sovereignty to the people of Wales and of Scotland?'
The issue was raised in the Commons on Thursday by Mr Alex Salmond, leader
of the Scottish National party, in a barbed intervention at prime minister's
question time.
Congratulating Mr Major on the apparent success of his Northern Ireland
policy, Mr Salmond pointed out that it hinged on the right of the people of
Northern Ireland to determine their own future.
'For the avoidance of any doubt, will you confirm that you also believe in
the right of self-determination for the Scottish nation?' he asked.
Mr Major, who fell back on claims that devolution would raise taxes,
appeared to have no answer to a line of questioning that promises to become
increasingly embarrassing for the government.
