FT  29 SEP 94 / Lost symbol of economic rebirth in Baltics
The Estonia was until yesterday's disaster a powerful symbol of blossoming
trade and political ties between the Nordic countries and the newly
independent Baltic states.
Sweden and Finland especially have built up economic and political links
with Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania since the three became independent in
1991. They have strongly supported the three in their efforts to remove
Russian troops from their countries and have been the quickest among western
countries to establish joint ventures and other trade connections.
Estline, the company which operated the Estonia, is jointly-owned by the
Swedish shipping company Nordstrom &amp; Thulin and the state-owned Estonian
Shipping Company. It was set up with a 10-year monopoly concession on the
Stockholm-Tallinn route in 1990 as the two sides anticipated a rapid
expansion of links when Moscow's hold over Estonia loosened.
Although passenger and freight demand was initially disappointing, Estline
began to take off two years ago and bought the Estonia early last year as
its prestigious flagship, replacing a smaller ferry. The cost of Dollars 42m
(Pounds 26.5m) was largely financed by the European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development.
The ship's role as a high-profile symbol of Estonia's emerging economy was
reflected in its name and its additional function as a training centre for
the Estonian hotel and restaurant industry.
The growing passenger and freight tonnage using the Estonia was in line with
the fast-growing trade between Sweden and Estonia. Estline passenger numbers
tripled from 91,700 in 1990 to 280,000 last year, prompting the company to
charter a second ship to double its capacity.
At the same time, Swedish exports to Estonia jumped from SKr92m (Pounds
7.7m) in 1991 to SKr850m in the first half of this year alone, while imports
from Estonia reached SKr500m in the first six months of this year, compared
with just SKr60m in all of 1991.
Economic ties between Estonia and Finland have grown even faster, with
Finnish exports to Estonia expected to approach FM3bn (Pounds 375m) this
year, compared with less than FM400m in 1991. At least three Estonian and
two Finnish shipping companies now operate regular services on the 75-mile
Helsinki-Tallinn route.
