FT  29 SEP 94 / Arts: Problem mothers - Cinema
LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD (18)
Ken Loach
BAD BOY BUBBY (18)
Rolf De Heer
SPEED (15)
Jan De Bont
THE RED SQUIRREL (18)
Julio Medem
The seeing-double title of Ken Loach's new film, Ladybird, Ladybird, sets
the mind musing on a question. Are there two different Ken Loaches? They
obviously look and sound identical: the pixie features with finely ruffled
hair and saintly unblinking eyes, the wisp of Midlands in the voice. But the
two men seem to make totally different films.
Ken One makes those ironic, touching social comedies like Riff Raff and
Raining Stones: all about Britain trying to smile through its dole-drums.
Ken Two makes those strident message movies, loud with special pleading and
pamphleteering, like Hidden Agenda and now Ladybird, Ladybird.
K1 is a seducer, K2 is an agitprop rapist. If beguiling and reasoning do not
work, Ken Jekyll turns into Ken Hyde and throws us to the ground, forcing
open our defences. The new film's heroine is Maggie, a quadruple unmarried
mother (four children by different fathers) whose offspring keep being
dragged off into care: even, in one scene, straight from post-natal bliss in
a maternity hospital.
But though she is both neurotic and neglectful - first seen accidentally
imperilling her brood when she locks them in their hostel room shortly
before a fire breaks out - she is not the demon in Loach's drama. That role
is reserved for the social workers: presented without exception as
bureaucratic harpies sticking to the letter of an unfeeling law. Their job
is to be always one step ahead of our heroine, nipping her dreams of
full-time parenthood whenever they look like ripening.
Emotionally, the film is so weighted towards Maggie that the welfare drones
have no chance. She is played with scenery-chewing passion by newcomer
Crissy Rock. A dumpy blonde with sandpaper voice and rumpled face, she looks
permanently as if she has just emerged from a detox clinic. In fact Maggie
has surfaced from something just as bad - life with battering boyfriend Ray
Winston - and is now learning how to batter, emotionally, her own new
boyfriend, a do-gooding Paraguayan refugee called Jorge.
As played by Vladimir Vega, a sweet, drained, soft-spoken presence, Jorge is
the only recognisable human being in the film. But even he wears a Loach
placard round his neck. Ex-freedom fighter in his own country, his function
is to nag us gently, insistently, into equating British welfare bureaucracy
with Latin American totalitarianism. He even has a speech - Loach stops the
film in its tracks so we can listen - about governments needing to create
misery in order to exercise power over their people.
This equation is so outrageous that Loach should be hauled up and hung by
the toes by all the children who have been rescued from genuinely abusive
parents by genuinely concerned social workers.
Instead in Ladybird, Ladybird the cardboard carers are condemned by their
patient voices and needling questionnaires. And mother-earth Maggie is
sanctified by her screaming devotion to her tots and her flair for hurling
invective at social visitors over the tea and biscuits.
That Maggie can be a pain in the neck and a paradigm of bad parenting even
Loach and screenwriter Rona Munro admit. But they do not seem to consider
that a dent in their argument. In a sense they are right. For there is no
argument, dentable or otherwise, in a film like this: you cannot have a
human issues debate without two sides that inhabit a human dimension. In
Ladybird, Ladybird Maggie and her Paraguayan Galahad are presented as flesh
and blood or more than flesh-and-blood. Everyone else is a cipher, or a mark
on Ken Two's well-peppered polemical dartboard.
*
What fine kismet decided that Bad Boy Bubby should open in the same week as
Ladybird, Ladybird? Rolf De Heer's black Australian comedy, honoured with
Silver Lion at last year's Venice Film Festival, is about an emotionally
arrested young man (Nicholas Hope) escaping from decades of house arrest
under a mercilessly 'loving' Mum.
This fat old crone - the sort of mother Loach's Maggie might turn into given
a minor increase in her possessive hysteria - has kept Junior at home as her
pet, her baby, her lover. And home is a surreal, Beckettian hell of grey
walls, mouldering food and free-range cockroaches. Watch Bubby eat one;
watch actor Hope do it for real.
In the absence of caring social workers, all frightened off the planet by
Ken Loach, what can a poor boy do? Murder mother and briefly-returning Dad;
smother them both in clingwrap. Then step into the outside world which not
surprisingly, in this inside-out film from down under, is a kind of wacky
Hades: Streets Of Fire meets Blade Runner. It is scarcely less
claustrophobic than the home our hero has left.
But De Heer has a catchy Candide humour. He is soon staging witty
confrontations between his all-innocent wild child and the special-interest
groups that run planet earth. Bubby brings his perceptual innocence and
untutored morals to the Salvation Army, a grunge rock group, a cerebral
palsy ward. The film turns from horror comedy to satire, and the change is
so deft that we hardly notice when it happens.
*
Speed is a triple-jeopardy thriller about public transport. Mad bomber
Dennis Hopper plants the TNT on a crowded elevator, a city bus and a subway
train - in that order - while SWAT cop Keanu Reeves runs about with the
gloves and pliers and the gale-force warnings.
The long central bus sequence is so suspenseful that you never want it to
end. The vehicle cannot dip below 50 mph or it will explode. Therefore, with
a beautiful female passenger (Sandra Bullock) taking the wheel from the
injured driver, and Reeves ranting instructions at her side, we plough on
through rush-hour traffic and minor obstacles (a pram, a truck, a 50-foot
gap in the raised freeway), sure in our hearts that neither petrol nor
plausibility will run out.
The audience's patience certainly does not. Speed is near-perfect Hollywood
action fare, directed at the double by a Dutchman (ex-cinematographer Jan De
Bont) and scripted by Graham Yost as if under the influence of unnatural
stimulants. If Keanu Reeves is taking over the action hero franchise from
Sly and Arnie, we welcome his fresh, youthful, Zen-buddyist approach.
Bullock is a tough, funny heroine. And Hopper is a natural for mad bomber
roles. That bulbous, smouldering, no-neck head only needs a coat of black
paint and a fuse to terrify unwary commuters into believing it is the real
thing.
Julio Medem's The Red Squirrel is a strange, tiresome fable from Spain. Boy
(suicidal ex-rock singer) meets girl (amnesiac motorbike-crash victim) and
takes her off on a campsite holiday, claiming he is her longtime lover. The
premise is interesting enough to explain why Hollywood optioned the film for
a remake. But nothing that follows is of interest at all. The fey, fidgety
script wanders squirrel-like round the single location, finding and storing
ideas and then seemingly forgetting where it put them. Minor characters
remain minor; there is some silly animal symbolism; and we look back fondly
to Medem's last feature, the daringly surreal Vacas (Cows), wondering where
he buried and forgot the talent that went into that.
