FT  16 NOV 94 / Survey of Derivatives (21): Interest from abroad rises -
Profile of South African Futures Exchange
Like most other aspects of the South African financial system, the country's
derivatives market has come under greatly increased international scrutiny
over the past year. And, as they have done after looking over the stock
market and banks, most international observers come away generally impressed
with the range and sophistication of available products.
The bulk of South Africa's derivatives trading takes place on the South
African Futures Exchange, a Johannesburg-based body that celebrated its
fifth anniversary this year. Since its formation, it has grown from a small
organisation, regarded with some suspicion by local banks and brokers, to a
thriving, and rapidly expanding market.
Indeed, Safex's growth has been so dynamic, that at least one local company
has fallen prey to the same trap that snared companies in the bigger
international markets: banking group Sechold was unable to close its
positions at the end of last year and lost R198m.
However, the exchange has largely shrugged off unfavourable publicity
resulting from the Sechold affair, and the monthly value of futures and
options traded on the exchange has risen from less than R5bn as recently as
1992, to a high of R25bn this year.
The bulk of the trade is done by merchant banks and brokerages, which each
account for around 40 per cent of total business, with the rest taken up by
a mix of individuals and other institutions.
Reflecting the market's steady growth, the number of exchange members has
also expanded steadily and now stands at 82, while the price of a seat on
Safex is now around R130,000, comparing favourably with the start-up price
of R35,000 in 1988 and well up on the low of R4,000 reached in 1991.
By far the bulk of the trade on Safex is in equity futures, based on the
main gold and industrial indices on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE).
Indeed, this market has been so successful that Safex ranks in the top 12
international equity futures markets.
The exchange has also recently made representation to the registrar of
financial institutions to begin trading in individual shares. It plans to
focus initially on five blue-chips, including industrial giant South African
Breweries, and mining houses Anglo American and De Beers.
So far, however, despite heavy government lobbying by Safex members,
permission has not yet been granted and there is a strong constituency among
established brokers on the JSE who are wholly against such innovations. The
plan's detractors charge not only that they are unnecessary because the
shares in question are already relatively liquid, but that there is
inadequate surveillance to prevent front-running.
Undaunted, Safex is pressing ahead while also experimenting with a number of
other instruments. Most notably it is planning to replace its lacklustre
dollar gold price contracts, which have failed to excite interest because of
South Africa's lack of direct access to the global spot markets, with
Krugerrand contracts. These would become the first physically delivered
contracts in the country.
There are plans also to sell commodities futures. Although these have
normally been the first options available in most countries, given the
highly regulated domestic commodities market, they have not yet been
possible to implement in South Africa.
However, because of the government's deregulation programme, the exchange
hopes to begin contracts in potatoes and meat on an experimental basis
shortly.
Other more exotic instruments, including trading in currency and interest
rate futures are also available, but have attracted relatively little
attention. The former instrument will have to wait for the scrapping
probably next year of the financial rand, the investment currency that
foreigners have to use to invest in South Africa.
Even without a wide range of derivatives, however, foreign interest is
already substantial, accounting for some 10 per cent of all trade on Safex.
This year, Safex also formally joined the US-based Futures Industry
Association, highlighting its new international profile.
