FT  15 JUL 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (5): Economic cycle
favours smaller companies as Britons dive in - Overseas investment 3 /
Europe / The continent is just hitting the trough of recession, and interest
rate cuts are still expected
British investors have been pouring money into Europe with gusto so far this
year. The two European privatisation funds from Mercury and Kleinwort Benson
pulled in more than Pounds 1bn between them, as well as a number of smaller
issues.
The economic arguments for investing in Europe at the moment are simple.
Most of Europe is just hitting the trough of recession, and interest-rate
cuts are still expected, which is usually a good environment for stock
market growth. The privatisation programmes in France and Italy are also
attracting interest.
However, so far investors have mostly been disappointed. Upheavals in world
bond markets have had a knock-on effect on European stock markets, among
others, and rate cuts have not been coming as steadily as hoped - but the
consensus is still that Europe offers more attractive prospects than many
other parts of the globe.
Smaller companies have been popular this year, as most European economies
are at the point in the economic cycle when these are most likely to
outperform. There are many specialist European smaller company investment
and unit trusts.
Nigel Sidebottom, investment trust portfolio manager at Gerrard Vivian Gray,
says he has been buying TR European Growth, which specialises in smaller and
medium-sized companies. The trust raised an additional Pounds 60m with a
conversion share issue earlier this year, after trading at a premium for
some time. Fleming European Fledgling has also raised extra cash recently,
and a small new fund, Piper European Smaller Companies, was launched.
Unit trusts in this area include Henderson European Smaller Companies, run
by the same management group as TR European, as well as funds from Baillie
Gifford, Invesco, Schroders and Save &amp; Prosper.
Yields in Europe tend to be low, unless you choose a bond fund, where some
yields can be very high, but capital performance has been poor recently.
Most investors with an international portfolio would want to include a bit
of general exposure to Europe, particularly the mature economies of most of
the EU member countries, as well as Scandinavia and Switzerland. But the
Europe accessible to ordinary private investors is growing all the time. The
adventurous can now look to Poland and Hungary for a more exciting ride, or
to the emerging markets of southern Europe, such as Greece and Portugal.
These are higher-risk areas, but with potentially higher rewards.
The added attraction of investing in a predominantly EC-oriented fund is
that it should be Pepable up to the full annual allowance of Pounds 6,000
per person. But funds like CSFB's Central European Growth fund, and the
Baring Emerging Europe trust, which are invested almost entirely in
unapproved stock markets, are not Pepable at all.
James Higgins, of independent financial advisers Chamberlain de Broe, says
it has been hard to find a good reason to put clients into Europe since most
of them were so disappointed by the Kleinwort European Privatisation issue.
One of the few areas where he has been actively investing new money is
southern Europe, using the Mediterranean investment trust.
James Bevan, a director of BZW Portfolio Management, recommends that more
sophisticated investors optimise the return on their portfolios by looking
at the correlation between different markets.
A high correlation means that markets are likely to respond in similar ways
to prevailing conditions - to hedge your bets, you should invest in markets
with low correlations, so that if one does badly, the others are likely to
do much better. 'Diversity can significantly reduce risks without impairing
anticipated performance,' says Bevan. Countries with low correlations with
the UK include Italy, Denmark, and Sweden, while Switzerland has a high
correlation. Taking other factors into account, BZW portfolios are
overweight in France, Italy, Sweden and the UK, and underweight in
Switzerland. 'We have made a number of changes to our sector and country
allocations in the past month, the effect of which is to adopt a more
defensive portfolio mix while European rate cuts are on hold. This drawing
in of horns is because the outlook for markets is less good.'
BZW favours the banking and pulp and paper sectors in Europe, but is
negative on utilities. This might explain the disappointing response to the
recently-launched Johnson Fry European Utilities split-capital investment
trust, which attracted only Pounds 15m.
Other fund managers achieve good results by ignoring country weightings and
macro-economics, focusing instead on which stocks offer good value and
growth prospects. Fidelity's Anthony Bolton uses this approach for the
Fidelity European Values investment trust, and European unit trust.
