FT  22 NOV 94 / Governors warn Congress on ideology
The ascendant new class of Republican governors have begun warning their
party colleagues in Congress not to pursue an ideological agenda to the
point of undermining their ability to manage their states.
The specific message from a weekend meeting of present and newly-elected
governors in Williamsburg, Virginia, was that the Republican congress should
not be sidetracked by issues such as voluntary prayer in schools, draconian
welfare reform and the constitutional amendment to balance the budget.
Governor Pete Wilson of California said the states 'are not colonies of the
federal government'. Governor John Engler of Michigan put it more bluntly.
'If we don't deal with the economic issues, we'll need more than prayer to
solve our problems.'
Republicans gained 11 governorships in the mid-term elections two weeks ago
and now control 30 of the 50 states and eight of the largest nine, with
Florida the single exception. Republicans are also now in the majority in
about half the state legislatures.
In a joint press conference and in other interviews, several seemed
concerned that so much attention has been focused in the past two weeks on
the legislative agenda promulgated by Congressman Newt Gingrich, likely next
Speaker of the House.
Governor Christie Whitman of New Jersey thought a constitutional amendment
to reintroduce voluntary prayer into schools was a poor idea, while Mr
George W. Bush Jr, governor-elect of Texas, though not opposed to the idea
in principle, objected if it were imposed on his local school districts by
Congress.
Governors Whitman and Wilson also urged the Republican Party not to adopt
strong anti-abortion positions, both in any legislation before Congress and
in framing the 1996 party election platform.
Governors George Voinovich of Ohio and Bill Weld of Massachusetts were
openly nervous that a constitutional amendment to balance the budget might
merely constrain state financial resources further.
Both said that any amendment should contain language freeing the states of
the obligation of enforcing federal programmes for which insufficient funds
were made available.
Governor Tommy Thompson of Wisconsin was critical of Mr Gingrich's notions
on welfare reform, which would severely limit the time spent on public
assistance and which would deny benefits to unmarried teenage mothers, and
their children, who, he has said, might be placed in orphanages.
Mr Thompson expressed a preference for more extensive block grants to states
to administer programmes as they thought best. 'Each of us in our own way
has gone to Washington on bended knee, to get a waiver in order to do
something.' This 'mating dance,' he suggested, should come to an end.
There is nothing new in the Republican desire for greater state autonomy.
President Bill Clinton has often spoken of the states as 'the laboratories
of the nation' and has, not always at the margins, encouraged them to
develop their own social programmes, especially in healthcare.
But the present crop of governors, new and old, have not been reticent in
pointing out that they won office on their own records and ideas, and not by
wholehearted embrace of Mr Gingrich's radical 10-point 'Contract with
America' designed for candidates of the House.
Some of them, including Governors Wilson, Whitman, Weld and Thompson, are
seen either as possibilities for the party's national ticket in 1996 or as
influential in shaping both the ticket and its policies. Control of the
larger states is an immeasurable Republican advantage in the next
presidential election.
Governor Whitman, a rising star since her election last year and her
subsequent implementation of tax-cutting initiatives, said: 'I hope Congress
understands that what got everyone elected this year was fiscal issues.'
