FT  13 MAY 94 / African bank meeting runs into the sands: An AGM with no
agenda that is turning into a slanging match
The African Development Bank sank further into chaos and political intrigue
yesterday as the bank's African and First World owners failed to agree on an
action plan to combat mounting arrears, poor lending policies, and the
disruptive feuds between the bank's president and members of his executive
board.
Donor countries are threatening to hold back the replenishment of the AfDB's
soft-loan arm, the African Development Fund, unless African member
countries, who own two-thirds of the bank, clear arrears totalling Dollars
700m and agree to tighter lending policies.
Donors also want to place limits on the terms of the president and executive
directors to avoid the personality clashes which have paralysed
decision-making at the bank.
Mr Babacar Ndiaye, the bank's Senegalese President, is serving the final
year of his second five-year term, while the longest serving member of the
executive board, Mr Pierre Moussa of Chad, has been there for 19 years.
But a week of negotiations has been unable to produce even a common agenda
for discussion at the AfDB's annual general meeting in Nairobi. As a result,
bank governors, finance ministers and aid officials from more than 70
countries will be leaving the Kenyan capital today without having discussed
matters which impinge on the very survival of the bank.
'The problem of mounting arrears has grown to such proportions that it is
now threatening the financial viability of the institution as a whole,' Mr
Ruud Treffers, the Dutch co-ordinator for the ADF replenishment
negotiations, wrote to the board of governors.
'Some borrowing countries feel that because it is their regional bank, they
can afford to fall back on payments. This cannot be allowed to continue,' Mr
Ismail Mohammed, Egypt's central bank governor, said yesterday.
However, most African governors oppose a resolution presented by
industrialised countries, which own one-third of the AfDB, that would
restrict the bank's lending to Africa's wealthiest governments. A
concessionary window would be made available to the continent's growing list
of impoverished nations.
Mr J Mtonga, Zambia's representative, is against a proposal tabled by
industrialised countries that would rank borrowers by their per capita
incomes and limit access to AfDB loans to the wealthiest countries which
could afford to repay the bank's commerc-ial lending rates. 'I do not want
to see the Balkanisation of Africa,' Mr Mtonga explains.
Perhaps the stricter credit ratings would be more palatable to African
governors if donor countries were prepared to beef up the soft loan fund.
But all indications are that the funds available will be substantially lower
than the Dollars 3.4bn pledged three years ago.
'Donor countries are imposing more conditions for less money. Frankly, we
find this offensive,' said a senior AfDB official, reflecting the African
hurt.
Intimately linked to the problem of arrears, are the poor management and
politically determined lending policies that have damaged the bank's
portfolio. A report conducted by external consultants, chaired by Mr David
Knox, a former vice-president of the World Bank, said staff had been unable
to keep up with the pace of growth in project lending.
Little attention was paid to the quality of loans as opposed to quantity.
Nobody assumed responsibility for overall project management. The
consultants were unable to find a central file on a single project, and the
proliferation of bureaucratic divisions in the bank was 'fertile ground for
buck passing by bank staff,' when problems arose.
The report noted the unequal distribution of credit among Africa's 51
borrowing members. Almost half of the loans, it said, had been awarded to
seven members: Nigeria, Morocco, Egypt, Tunisia, Algeria, Ivory Coast and
Zaire.
Zaire has defaulted on its AfDB debts. It owes Dollars 250m to the bank. The
Ivory Coast is Dollars 42m in arrears. Nigeria also owes Dollars 35m.
Industrial countries want to see a 'time-bound and monitorable' action plan
to improve the lending policies of the bank and other recommendations
contained in the Knox report.
The most intangible problem to be tackled is the question of governance.
Mr Ndiaye is on the warpath with certain north African members of the
executive board, accusing them of interfering with the day-to-day management
of the bank.
Mr Moussa alleges that Mr Ndiaye is an emotional man who takes any criticism
over the running of the bank as a personal insult.
The six non-African executive directors are, for the moment, backing Mr
Ndiaye, hoping he will clear up the administrative mess at the bank before
he completes his second five-year term in 1995.
There will be few supporters, however, for his re-election.
Editorial Comment, Page 17
