FT  28 JUL 94 / AZT cuts risk of HIV being passed to babies, say studies
Transmission from mother to child of HIV, the virus which causes Aids, can
be significantly reduced by giving both AZT, Wellcome's controversial drug,
according to the results of two independent trials to be presented today to
US regulators.
The studies, showing that AZT can cut transmission rates by up to 67.5 per
cent, will be put before the anti-viral drugs advisory committee of the US
Food and Drug Administration, which must decide whether to recommend the
drug for use on infants.
The trials' results are a boost for the reputation of AZT. This was
tarnished following last year's Anglo-French Concorde trial which questioned
the effectiveness of the drug in HIV-positive people who did not have Aids
symptoms.
The larger trial, conducted in the US and France, involved 477 HIV-positive
women, of whom 364 finished the study. About half were given AZT at between
14 and 38 weeks of pregnancy. The drug was also administered intravenously
to the mothers during delivery and to the infants for six weeks after birth.
Of the 180 women given AZT, only 13 of their children were HIV-positive,
compared with 40 children from the 184 mothers who were not given the drug.
Although AZT has a reputation for being toxic, the trial indicated there
were no statistically significant foetal malformations and non-reversible
side-effects. Similar results were shown in a study of 63 women in Los
Angeles.
The trials' conclusions will raise significant public health issues. The
Center for Disease Control, the Atlanta-based US government organisation, is
expected to use next month's Yokohama International Aids conference to
recommend universal, although not mandatory, screening for HIV among
pregnant women.
Conference organisers expect the trials to be the most important and
controversial studies presented there. Health authorities will have to
decide what should be done when HIV-positive women refuse to take AZT,
possibly endangering their unborn children.
Dr Catherine Peckham, professor of paediatric epidemiology at the Institute
of Child Health in London, said: 'This will add pressure for mandatory
screening in the US. These trials are hugely exciting and an important
breakthrough, but it would be wrong to rush through unconsidered policy
changes. Further trials are required to look at the long-term effects of the
drug.'
In the US, about 100,000 women of child-bearing age are HIV-positive and
7,000 HIV-positive infants are born every year. In inner London, one in 390
pregnant mothers is HIV-positive. About 15 per cent of those with the virus
will infect their children.
Cowpeas playing part in Aids fight, Page 14
