FT  22 OCT 94 / IAEA grapples with North Korea accord
The board of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is to meet in
Vienna on Tuesday for a first informal attempt to decide whether and how the
US-North Korean nuclear agreement can be handled within the framework of the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
North Korea plans to remain within the treaty, from which it had previously
threatened to withdraw. But there will be a delay of several years before
the agency can have full access to its nuclear sites and before it can
examine spent fuel to verify how much plutonium the country possesses. This
would put it in non-compliance with the standard treaty agreement, the IAEA
said yesterday.
The agency's belief that North Korea had not disclosed the full size of its
plutonium stockpile and its inability to gain access to two suspected
processing sites sparked the row which led to yesterday's agreement between
Pyongyang and Washington. Neither problem has been resolved in the short
term.
IAEA members are likely eventually to endorse the deal, but this will
require complex legal drafting to ensure the precedent set by North Korea's
non-compliance is insulated from the rest of the non-proliferation treaty
and cannot be repeated.
'We're not oblivious to the wider importance of bringing North Korea into
the world community,' an IAEA spokesman said.
'We're not being doctrinaire, but the fact of life is that our organisation
is the guardian of the integrity of the system of inspection.'
Although the IAEA regards the North Korean case as 'a troublesome
precedent', its director general, Mr Hans Blix, also wants to make the
agreement a success as it does at least involve a North Korean commitment to
halt its present nuclear programme.
Some European countries are likely to have reservations at Tuesday's meeting
about appearing to reward with finance and new technology a country that has
flouted the treaty's rules.
Strict standards have been set in the past as, for example, in the early
1980s when Germany stopped construction of a nuclear reactor that Iran had
already paid for.
The main voices in the non-proliferation treaty remain the US, UK and
Russia. Once they have formed a consensus, other signatories, numbering some
160, would probably fall in line.
