FT  26 JAN 94 / Major hints at softer line over public sector pay: Prime
minister denies deception as Labour presses tax attack
Mr John Major drew back from a confrontation with key groups of
public-sector workers yesterday by signalling that efficiency savings would
allow them to get round the government's cash freeze on its pay bill.
Downing Street officials said politically sensitive groups such as nurses
and doctors could expect the government to meet the recommendations of
independent pay review bodies for rises this year of between 2.5 per cent
and 3 per cent.
The softening in the interpretation of the freeze in the public-sector pay
bill announced in last November's Budget came as Mr Major said he regretted
raising taxes after pledging at the 1992 election to reduce them.
But amid further fierce exchanges in the Commons over the impending tax
increases, the prime minister insisted that the Conservatives had not
deceived voters at the last election.
He said: 'Events have forced us to raise taxes. I regret that. But it is
necessary to raise taxes to make sure that we cut the borrowing requirement
and provide the opportunity for sustained growth with low inflation.'
The prime minister also won unexpected backing from Mr Norman Lamont, the
former chancellor, who said that Labour's spending plans would mean still
higher taxes.
As a threatened Tory rebellion failed to materialise, the Commons last night
rejected an amendment to the Finance Bill that would have blocked the
imposition of value added tax on fuel. The government also secured a
comfortable majority on the overall provisions of the bill. But Mrs Margaret
Beckett, Labour's deputy leader, insisted that 'the biggest tax hike in
British history' marked a 'total deception' that the electorate would not
forget.
Downing Street indicated that the prime minister was 'relaxed' about a
decision by the independent pay review bodies to link their recommendations
to the 2.7 per cent increase that MPs have awarded themselves.
Most Whitehall departments could expect efficiency savings of at least 2 per
cent and perhaps 3 per cent, suggesting that government would be able to
meet most of, if not all, the review bodies' recommendations without
breaching spending targets.
The officials insisted that that did not represent a relaxation of controls
on the pay bill. It was also suggested that while the 1.5m workers covered
by the review bodies could expect rises above the present 1.9 per cent
inflation rate, the other 3m public-sector employees could expect tougher
settlements.
But Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, signalled a marked shift in
presentation. He insisted in the immediate aftermath of the Budget that
savings from improved efficiency in the public sector should be ploughed
back into improved services as well as into higher pay. Last night he
emphasised that he expected 'sensible settlements' from the pay review
bodies.
His stance confirmed that, with the average family due to pay an extra
Pounds 12.50 a week in tax from April, the government has lost the appetite
for a confrontation.
Ministers acknowledged that the latest furore had significantly weakened
their bargaining position.
Labour move against VAT on fuel defeated, Page 8
Public-sector views 'harden' on pay freeze, Page 8
Motorists a target for 'green' taxes, says Major, Page 22
