FT  25 MAR 94 / Ingenuity - The FT Engineering Review (2): Untouched by
human hands - Intelligent machines are a familiar sight on motor production
lines. Now they are expected to turn their 'hands' to the high-speed packing
of food and drink / Robots
A PLATOON of raw recruits drafted in to the French army to pack combat
rations are having to look lively. Up to 10 different menus are needed each
month.
Each ration consists of 18 items ranging from a pack of biscuits and a tin
of meat to purification tablets and a miniature stove. In order to keep the
fighting troops fed, the new recruits have to pack rations at the rate of 24
a minute.
The luckless legionnaires are 13 industrial robots, part of a FFr25m
automated packaging and palletising line built for the army by ABB Robotics.
Three robots unload boxes of goodies from pallets on to a conveyor which
delivers them to the ration packing station.
Here another nine machines, using videos cameras to recognise the right
items, pack them into ration boxes in just 2.5 seconds. The 13 robots stack
the ration boxes on to a pallet for delivery to the barracks. Five different
menus can be put on one pallet to match a barracks' order.
David Marshall, responsible for customer training at ABB Robotics in Milton
Keynes, fervently hopes that the food, drinks and confectionery industry -
including even army rations - will become the next big market for robots.
'The whole robot industry has depended on the automotive industry since day
one. Look at the figures - 80 per cent of the world market for robots is in
the automotive and automotive supply industry. We are looking to the food
industry to perform as well as the automotive industry.'
The reason for his optimism is that industrial robots have become more
attractive to the food industry for packing and handling, particularly in
the light of new health and safety regulations restricting the weight of
loads that can be lifted manually.
They have become faster, reliable, more accurate, and easier to incorporate
into a production line. Better motor control software has allowed ABB, for
example, to squeeze 25 per cent more performance out of the same robot.
Robots are also simpler to program, operate and maintain. And they can lift
bigger loads. They can also be washed down with a hosepipe. And prices are
coming down to a level where paybacks are acceptable to the food industry.
'The food, drink and confectionery industry is surviving on low-cost female
labour. Despite their flexibility, using people to pack those army rations
would have been a nightmare,' says Marshall. Also, the industry is looking
to cut costs. Although robots are flexible and reliable, so far they have
been too slow and too expensive, says Marshall.
But what is good for the food and drinks makers is good for manufacturing
industry. Mike Wilson, marketing manager at Fanuc Robotics in Coventry, says
of the improvements in robot performance: 'Our new ARC Mate welding robot,
for example, is 30 per cent cheaper in real terms than a similar model three
years ago. And it is 20 per cent faster. A spot welding robot can now do one
spot weld every 1.5 seconds.' Ten years ago, says Wilson, it would have
taken three.
Some of the gain has come from the improved mechanical performance of robots
 -faster acceleration and deceleration and better overshoot behaviour. And
some has come from better integration of the robot into the process, says
Wilson. 'The spot welding gun will begin to close before it gets to the
weld, for instance.' The load capacity and accuracy of robots has come on in
leaps and bounds, too. 'The biggest robot we do carries 300kg. That was
unheard of 10 years ago for an electric robot,' says Wilson.
Reliability has also greatly improved, he says. An example is the arc
welding robot. Weld wires occasionally get stuck in the solidified weld pool
at the end of a weld. A few years ago, as the robot moved away it would rip
the welding torch off the arm. Today, says Wilson, 'wire-stick' sensors
prevent this and automatically send a pulse of current down the wire to burn
it free.
A similar example of improved capability is 'scratch start'. If a bead of
silica from the flux gets left on the end of the welding wire, it will not
strike an arc and has to be snipped off manually. Today's robot will sense
this and scratch the tip of the wire along the component to rub the bead
off. It will then go back to the correct place on the weld and start
welding.
Overall, says Wilson, the cost-to-performance ratio of robots today is
considerably better than a few years ago. Most people now buy a robot
'package' which includes some process engineering expertise and an
application software package. 'This avoids a lot of programming and makes
them quicker to install and easier to operate.'
When Vauxhall bought 120 Fanuc welding robots for its new Astra line at the
Ellesmere Port plant a couple of years ago, it handed them on to six
companies building the welding lines. 'We designed a software package for
Vauxhall that would interface the robots with all the hardware and provide
an operator interface. That forced all the line builders to use the robots
in the same way. It made maintenance a lot simpler and saved money. We only
had to write the software once and copy it six times. Each line builder
would have had to develop their own.'
Yet despite the advances in robot technology, Britain has one of the
smallest robot populations of all the industrialised nations, around 7,600,
compared with Germany's 39,000 and Japan's staggering 350,000.
Even the former USSR has more robots per employee in manufacturing industry
than Britain. The problem is the 18 month to two year paybacks demanded in
Britain, says Wilson, compared with as long as five years in Japan. 'It is
very difficult to justify any capital expenditure on an 18 month payback.'
John Dunn is deputy editor of The Engineer
