FT  11 NOV 94 / Cuba and the IMF compare notes: Pascal Fletcher explores the
significance of visits from a much pilloried institution
Cuba has long pilloried the International Monetary Fund as the torch-bearer
of neo-liberal capitalism. It regularly blamed IMF 'shock remedies' for
causing hunger, unemployment and poverty across the Third World, especially
Latin America.
The fact that a senior IMF official should have visited Cuba twice over the
last year is, then, intriguing.
The 'non-official' visits by IMF executive director Mr Jacques de Groote
late last year and early this year do not mean that Cuba, which left the
Fund in the early 1960s, is trying to re-join, at least not yet.
For one thing, the US maintains a blocking objection to Cuban membership as
part of its economic sanctions against Cuba's one-party socialist
government.
But the IMF contacts do reflect an important shift in Cuba's economic policy
since the country was left like an orphan in the world economy after the
disappearance of its protector, the former Soviet Union.
Not only is Cuba trying to beat its recession by implementing reforms the
IMF would not disown, but it is also signalling clearly, perhaps as much
through necessity as conviction, that it wants to come out of the cold and
back into the mainstream of the world economic community.
'Whether we like it or not, (the IMF) is a leading institution in the world
economy and so it is a must for us to know about it,' Mr Raul Amado Blanco,
vice-president of the National Bank of Cuba, the cental bank, said in an
interview.
He said the IMF officials who visited were briefed about Cuba's reform
moves. Cuba learned how the IMF and World Bank had helped other command
economies in eastern Europe and Asia move towards market-oriented policies.
But senior Cuban officials are careful to put limits on the rapprochement
with the IMF and on just how far Cuba intends to go in its reforms.
Mr Amado Blanco said re-joining the Bretton Woods institutions was not being
actively considered. 'We would have to be convinced of the usefulness (of
rejoining). . . whether it would really signify a contribution to our
political and economic policies,' he said.
Cuba's vice-president, Mr Carlos Lage, said Cuba was ready to discuss
economic options with the IMF, the World Bank and anybody else. 'That
doesn't mean we are ready to do what these institutions dictate.'
Nevertheless, the economic reforms being introduced by Cuba would not be out
of place in an IMF or World Bank policy manual. They include cuts in
subsidies to loss-making state companies, selective price increases, farm
reforms, currency reform, decentralisation of decision-making, the
imposition of taxes, moves to control liquidity and an assault on the
yawning budget deficit.
Many of the changes, such as the recent authorisation of public markets for
farm produce and consumer goods, also reflect recommendations made by a team
of Spanish experts led by Spain's former finance minister Mr Carlos
Solchaga.
'Cuba is making a serious structural adjustment effort,' Juan Triana, deputy
director of Havana University's Centre for Studies on the World Economy,
said.
The budget deficit, which in 1993 stood at 4.2bn pesos, has already been
reduced by some 25 per cent this year. The glut of Cuban pesos sluicing
around the economy, estimated at nearly 12bn pesos in circulation at the end
of April, has already been cut by 1.3bn pesos, according to the central
bank.
The moves, also aimed at throttling the black market, have caused a
tightening of the level of pesos in circulation and a fall in the black
market value of one dollar to less than 50 pesos from past lows of more than
100. Putting buying power back into the peso is one of the objectives.
Cuban officials insist the on-going reforms differ from IMF remedies. They
say the state is keeping a dominant, controlling economic role and social
concerns are paramount.
'We have a strategy. . . it's not a strategy of capitalist development. . .
it's a strategy of a planned, socialist economy,' said Mr Lage, who is
viewed as the main architect of Cuba's economic reforms.
He said Cuba would preserve 'the essentials' of its socialist system -
official shorthand for free, universal health, education and other social
services.
At the same time, however, Mr Lage announced Cuba was opening up more of its
economy to foreign investment, namely real estate and sugar production to
foreign investment.
Many foreign economists, however, say Cuba needs to go further, faster. The
IMF's Mr de Groote noted after his November 1993 visit the Cuban authorities
were 'still hesitating over the basic issue of allowing more private
property and individual decision-making in the economy'.
The Spanish team led by Mr Solchaga, in a report in June this year, said
Cuba 'must start to help itself' by moving faster to dismantle rigid
economic structures and opening up more private business opportunities to
Cubans.
Mr Lage hinted the government was working on currency reform, expected to be
the introduction of a convertible peso, and was also considering widening
the legalisation on private, self-employment for Cubans.
Concerns over social unrest, like the unprecedented street disturbances in
Havana on August 5, are undoubtedly giving impetus to the reforms. So too is
the prospect of another record low sugar harvest, the third in a row for
Cuba's sugar-based economy.
Cuba also desperately needs fresh external credits, which have all but dried
up since Paris Club official creditors' rescheduling talks on the
convertible currency debt of more than Dollars 7bn stalled in the second
half of the 1980s.
