FT  07 OCT 94 / Russia's Arctic navy gives Norway a chill
Norway is quietly pressing its Nato partners not to neglect its security at
a time when the strategic importance of Russian forces in the Arctic is
increasing.
Oslo's fear of being left out in the cold has been fuelled by the growing
preoccupation of Nato's south European members with the security threats
posed by Islamic extremism in North Africa and conflict in the Balkans.
Norway's Atlantic Committee - a lobby group supported by the main political
parties - has published a study arguing that Russia's northern fleet, based
in the Arctic, is emerging as much the most important part of the former
Soviet navy.
The Soviet collapse left the main bases of the Baltic and Black Sea fleets
outside Russian territory, and the lamentable state of Russian ships in the
Pacific was highlighted last year when several sailors died of malnutrition.
'The northern fleet appears more than ever before as the largest and most
important of the former Soviet fleets,' the study says.
Mr Ellmann Ellingsen, the committee's secretary-general, believes that once
the Start 2 treaty is implemented, more than half Russia's remaining
strategic nuclear warheads could be based on submarines less than 40 miles
from Norway.
While stressing that the Arctic fleet is well below its cold war peak, Mr
Ellingsen says Russia's tactical submarines have become more active
recently, sailing west of Iceland for the first time in several years.
Both Norway and Turkey have been alarmed by Russia's call for a revision of
the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) treaty so as to increase the amount
of armour it is allowed to keep in the Leningrad and Transcaucasian military
districts.
The Norwegian study says the number of attack helicopters and tactical
aircraft in the Leningrad military district has increased since 1991, as
forces are withdrawn from central Europe. However, the level of aerial
activity remains low.
The study also expresses concern about the aircraft carrier Admiral
Kuznetsov, which is apparently being prepared to carry sophisticated Su-27
fighters. If the carrier's role turns out to be defending the Russian
Arctic, 'this would mean a special challenge to the security of the
neighbouring Nordic states'.
'We fully accept that Russia needs to have defences,' Mr Ellingsen said.
'But we are worried that Norway will be very vulnerable to any change in the
temperature between Washington and Moscow.'
