FT  11 JUL 94 / Management: The retuning of Fiat's engine - The Italian
group's big losses have overshadowed far-reaching changes in its culture
During its 95-year history, Fiat has often behaved as though it were an arm
of the Italian government - a strict hierarchy with diplomatic, commercial
and industrial functions parallel to those of the state, headed by a
patriarchal chairman, Gianni Agnelli.
Over the last few years, however, Fiat, in common with Italy, has been
struggling to change deep-rooted management and working habits. 'Fiat today
is a different Fiat compared with the company of five years ago,' says
Giorgio Garuzzo, chairman of Fiat's three core divisions - cars, commercial
vehicles and agricultural and construction equipment. 'We're not talking
about revolution, because we have never sought to break with the past, but
undoubtedly an evolution of far-reaching importance.'
But as the group starts to recover from last year's record loss, the same
questions are being asked about the 'new Fiat' as about the new Italy: how
deep do these changes go, and will they last?
The first indication that Fiat would attempt to change its culture came in
1989, when the group's blunt-talking chief executive, Cesare Romiti,
presented 200 Fiat managers with a highly critical analysis of the problems
facing the group, which he described as 'sad, laggardly and bureaucratised'.
Fiat Auto was the most obvious culprit. In spite of earlier efforts to
reform the Fiat car business, the group's principal operation was heading
for a new decade with an outdated product line - it was six years since the
launch of the acclaimed Uno in the popular small-car range - and a
reputation for poor quality.
That reputation was not helped by an unspoken assumption within the company
that customers were prepared to compromise on quality if the price was low
enough - a fallacy which was about to be exploded by more efficient Japanese
car manufacturers. Protected from Japanese competition at home, and coddled
by a comparatively buoyant Italian market, Fiat Auto had been able to defer
important decisions.
This was dangerous, not only for the division itself, but for the whole
group. Fiat operates in more than 60 countries and has 15 distinct
activities, including aviation, railway rolling stock, chemicals, publishing
and financial services. But Fiat Auto still accounts for more than half of
group industrial turnover and nearly 70 per cent of group revenues are drawn
from the three principal divisions (cars, trucks, farm and building
equipment). The group's top managers are almost invariably drawn from these
businesses.
Analysts now criticise Fiat Auto for moving too slowly and not anticipating
the inevitable cyclical downturn in the car industry after the years of
plenty. But Garuzzo points out that the company was working gradually on a
change of management strategy from the end of the 1980s.
For example, Fiat started to introduce the 'total quality' concept from 1989
across the group, attempting to change attitudes, reform relationships with
suppliers and involve workers more closely in devising solutions to
production problems. Garuzzo concedes this is 'not a strategy that gives
results overnight', but five years later it has spawned Fiat Auto's first
'integrated factory' at Melfi, in southern Italy, which is producing the new
Punto small car.
Melfi, which came on-stream this year, is one of the main reasons why Fiat
believes the changes introduced over the last five years will stick.
There, Fiat is trying to delegate more responsibility to units of workers
and managers. There is no separate building for central staff and the old
blue-collar/white-collar distinction is abolished: everybody wears the same
overalls, distinguished only by small coloured labels, and decisions are
made by work teams on the factory floor.
'At Melfi, the worker doesn't exist any more' read a recent headline on an
admiring article in Il Sole 24 Ore, Italy's business daily.
Practically, it is easier to establish an integrated factory from scratch -
on a site such as Melfi, where production lines can be mapped out for ease
of access and component suppliers located next door, for example - than
impose it on to a well-established plant such as Turin's Mirafiori,
originally built for a different production strategy.
Garuzzo admits as much: 'Undoubtedly Melfi is a workshop for (the management
strategy), because starting with a greenfield site is always more simple.
There aren't any old concepts and no psychological resistance to overcome.'
Fiat executives believe the enthusiasm of the Melfi workers, who are mostly
in their mid-20s, compared with an average age of 46 at other Fiat
factories, will infuse the whole group. However, Fiat unions claim that
although Melfi's employees - drawn from a region with high unemployment -
were keen on the project at the outset, disillusionment is beginning to set
in as some of their high expectations are confounded.
Melfi is not the only element of the Fiat Auto strategy, however. Parallel
changes in the company's approach to product development are also beginning
to bear fruit. Fiat Auto has long since abandoned the accepted wisdom that
you can introduce new basic models as rarely as once a decade and keep the
range fresh with occasional restyling. At eight to 10 years, Fiat's product
cycle in the mid-1980s was short compared with the industry average, but by
the early 1990s, the changeover period looked sluggish, particularly when
compared with Japanese competitors.
From 1991, the company began working on reducing this renewal cycle to five
to six years. The full impact of this change will be obvious in 1996, by
which time 18 new models should have been launched and the Punto will be one
of the oldest Fiat models still produced.
Alas for Fiat, this heavy investment of time and money coincided with a
reduction in the competitiveness of Italian industry, due partly to high
labour costs. The competitiveness problem was eased in 1992, when the
Italian currency was devalued and the link between wage increases and
inflation cut. But it was at that point that the European car market, and
Italy in particular, slipped further than anyone had predicted.
'We suddenly found ourselves with an extraordinary mix of problems to
manage, issues to face up to and programmes to take forward,' explains
Garuzzo. 'Our basic decision was not to stop any of the programmes which
were going on, because that would have further damaged our competitiveness.'
As a result, as Fiat has been eager to point out, although the group
recorded its largest loss in 1993 - L1,780bn (Pounds 736m) after tax,
extraordinary charges and minority interests - it also devoted a record
L8,900bn to research and development and capital expenditure, much of it to
improving Fiat Auto's sales network in preparation for the launch of new
models.
Meanwhile, the number of employees in the whole group has fallen from more
than 300,000 in 1990 to just over 260,000 in 1993, and in Fiat Auto from
133,000 to 120,000. Cuts in Italy have been eased by government-sponsored
redundancy agreements, while the number of Fiat Auto employees abroad has
increased.
But in spite of the confidence of top Fiat management, Susanna Camusso,
national secretary responsible for Fiat at Fiom, the main Italian
engineering union, believes the cultural changes have not yet permeated
through all levels of the group. 'There are people within Fiat who have
chosen this new culture, but others who still think that the old system was
fine,' she says.
'Companies develop characters like people,' agrees one analyst. 'Sometimes
after the age of 15, or even five years, or six months, there's nothing more
you can do about changing that character.'
As Fiat finally tries to reap the benefits of its painfully implemented
management strategy, it must try to dispel three main concerns.
One is the danger that complacency will again set in as the recession begins
to lift. Garuzzo and his colleagues say the risk of 'decadenza' (decline, or
decay) still exists, 'but this new system of management which increases
everybody's participation should create motivation internally to resist this
trend'. Whether this is true may not become obvious until the next downturn
in the market, by which time it could be too late to amend the strategy.
A second risk is that Fiat's foreign plants - for example in Poland, Turkey
and Brazil - begin to generate the sort of industrial relations problems
which have largely been banished from the main Italian operations. Last
week, for example, Fiat Auto's Polish workers voted to strike to try to
force a 40 per cent pay increase.
Finally, there is the open question of the Fiat succession. Gianni Agnelli
is 73 and Romiti is 71. Last year both of them decided to stay on rather
than handing on the chairmanship to Umberto, Gianni's brother, this summer
as originally planned.
Agnelli argued at the time that the market turmoil, the poor group results
and the fact that Fiat had just launched a complex L5,000bn package of
measures to raise cash meant investors did not want a new hand on the
tiller. Some now believe the real reason was that neither Agnelli nor Romiti
wanted a new chairman and chief executive to claim the credit for Fiat's
recovery.
Certainly there was no hint of impending change at last month's shareholder
assembly, where Agnelli forecast a return to profit for the group this year.
But in a company attempting to eliminate unnecessarily hierarchical
management and to create, in the words of one executive, 'a flat and wide
(management) unit', the dynastic structure of Fiat's top management is
beginning to look increasingly out of date.
