FT  29 OCT 94 / Finance and the Family: Investors are wary - New issues
What price new issues? Despite FT research, published in Thursday's paper,
showing an adequate return from a majority of this year's stock market
debutants, adverse publicity about a small but significant number of new
issues has affected investor sentiment to other flotations.
TLG, the holding company for Thorn Lighting Group, this week became the
latest group to unveil a lower valuation on its shares than previously
foreseen. TLG's valuation of Pounds 205m is more than Pounds 20m below its
expectations just two weeks ago when the pathfinder prospectus was issued.
'They tried to come to the market at 125p a share - 10p higher than the
actual price - but the institutions wouldn't wear it,' said one analyst.
Yet, the FT research - which covered 85 issues between the start of January
and the end of September, excluding investment trusts, investment companies,
demergers and non-UK businesses - showed new issues outperforming the
FT-SE-A All-Share index by 0.8 per cent. Even where new issues
underperformed the market, they often scored better against their sector
indices.
The survey also indicated that the worst-performing stocks were priced
between the back end of 1993 and the first quarter of 1994, a period when
the stock market was riding high and optimism over the scope of the recovery
helped to fuel expectations.
Low interest rates and investor demand for smaller companies geared to the
recovery led many private companies to consider an earlier flotation.
The result was a flood of new issues which ranged widely in quality and were
priced for the most optimistic potential.
'There's no doubt that healthy cynicism has returned again,' says Andrew
Parry, head of UK equities at fund manager Baring Securities. 'The prices
being put on new issues are realistic.'
This view was echoed by several other fund managers - indicating that many
new entrants desiring at least a market rating will now have to earn it.
As if to prove the point, dealing began this week in Filtronic Comtek, which
also saw its valuation expectations reduced when its shares were priced
recently. They are being traded at a 15 per cent premium to their issue
price.
