FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (13): Light industry benefits from
innovative drive
It seems a long time ago now, but back in the late 1980s, a man called
Mikhail Gorbachev was struggling valiantly to shore up the Soviet economy.
He gave enterprises more independence, in the hope they would behave like
western ones, and encouraged them to seek help with re-tooling, particularly
if they were makers of scarce consumer goods.
In Russia, the old dogs of communist industry were reluctant to learn new
tricks. Instead of making better consumer goods, they used their newfound
freedom to splash out on western luxuries as a treat for their workers.
But the Baltic states were a different story. By Soviet standards, they
already had flourishing, innovative light industries - and they jumped at
the opportunity Mr Gorbachev offered them. For this, at least, independent
Estonia has reason to thank Mr Gorbachev.
A typical beneficiary of the Gorbachev innovation drive is Baltika, a
Tallinn company staking out a claim to be the region's leading garments
maker. Three years of consultancy from the UK company Taylor Woodrow helped
the 66-year-old business re-orient its production from the undemanding
Soviet market to the more bracing atmosphere of Scandinavia. With average
daily output of 1,000 jackets and blouses, 2,500 pairs of trousers, and
wages of less than one fifth of the Scandinavian level, Baltika is a useful
sub-contractor for middle-market European clothing chains such as Next and C
&amp; A.
Baltika has two labels of its own - Plus B and Baltman - which it sells at
five stores in Estonia and is now introducing them to Latvia and Lithuania.
While Baltika's own brands accounted for just 20 per cent of output last
year, the hope is to boost that figure to 50 per cent in 1994.
Group turnover, including 13 wholly or partly-owned companies, is also seen
rising impressively, to EEK 200m this year from EEK 135m in 1993. But profit
margins in the embryonic Baltic market are relatively low (about 6 per cent
last year) and as soon as it feels able, the company hopes to launch its own
labels in western Europe.
Another of Tallinn's light-industries is the HTM ski boot factory. Here, a
foreign technology partner of several years' standing - the Austrian-Italian
leisure goods consortium, HTM - took a 90 per cent share in the joint
venture that was created last summer out of Salvo, an Estonian business that
once made helmets and other plastic goods.
With annual production of 400,000 pairs of ski boots, nearly 8 per cent of
total world output, the Estonian plant expects to handle more and more of
HTM's product range - including ski bindings and diving equipment.
Neither Baltika nor HGM makes much use of local raw materials or equipment.
Estonia may be full of ailing textile companies, but the quality is nowhere
near Baltika's requirements and most of its fabric comes from western
Europe. So, too, does the granulated plastic which is the basic raw material
for HTM.
