FT  21 JUN 94 / International Company News: Goodman Fielder predicts
long-term margins growth
Goodman Fielder, the large but ailing Australian foods group, should achieve
'long-term margins on sales of 9 to 10 per cent, across the business,' Mr
Barry Weir, chief executive told shareholders.
In a letter to investors, made public yesterday, Mr Weir said the target had
not been achieved. In the half-year to end-December, for example, GF
recorded sales revenues of ADollars 1.94bn (USDollars 1.49bn), and profits
before interest and tax from continuing operations of ADollars 130.3m for a
group margin of about 6.9 per cent.
But Mr Weir, who took over as chief executive six months ago, rejected the
notion there was a quick solution. He added that the problem could not be
solved simply by the 'straightforward cutting away and disposal of one or
two of our major business groups.
'Our closer analysis shows it is primarily a few specific geographic or
product segments within each major group which drag down overall
performance,' he said.
Mr Weir acknowledged that many industry observers saw GF as a
commodity-based food group - with products such as flour, bread, gelatine
and poultry, placing it at the competitive, lower value-added end of the
industry.
Therefore he acknowledged that making higher margins was more difficult to
achieve.
Mr Weir argued that the group needed to use 'innovative branding and
marketing' as well as concentrating on low-cost production, if it is to move
towards its target margins.
He outlined a four-point plan including:
Further 'non-core assets disposals,' although Mr Weir claims the bulk of
this process is complete;
Organisational restructuring, including integration of milling and baking
operations and moves to improve efficiency on the poultry side;
Encouraging industry rationalisation in particularly competitive areas, such
as baking;
Targeting Asia for long-term expansionary growth. Existing Asian businesses
will be brought under a single regional office, and several new ventures are
being 'evaluated'.
More generally, he added, Goodman was still looking for 'bolt-on'
acquisitions.
Mr Weir's letter follows a series of management departures from the food
group over the past year.
There has also been talk of large disposals or a takeover of the
underperforming group, but to date no suitors have emerged.
Goodman shares stood at ADollars 1.36, just cents off their 52-week low.
