FT  30 DEC 94 / China's foreign minister to visit UK
Mr Qian Qichen, China's foreign minister, will visit the UK next year in
what British officials hope, but do not expect, will mark an improvement in
relations.
News of Mr Qian's proposed visit, which is not expected until the late
spring or summer, came amid expectations of another Sino-British row - this
time over a multi-billion-dollar plan to replace the sewerage systems in
Hong Kong, which the local government says is urgently needed.
China has requested that the Hong Kong government defer plans to start a big
part of the HKDollars 20bn (Pounds 1.67bn) project pending discussions about
its environmental consequences.
The government claims that as stage one of the project - a treatment plant
on Stonecutter's Island - is self-contained and can be completed before Hong
Kong's handover to China in 1997 it does not need Beijing's approval. It may
let contracts this week for construction of the treatment plant.
Mr Qian confirmed his plans to visit the UK to a group of local Hong Kong
politicians visiting the Chinese capital. In a phrase which underlined the
frostiness of bilateral relations he said that China had 'no objection' to a
proposed visit by Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary.
Mr Heseltine is expected to go China in the spring. Last year he was forced
to withdraw from a trade mission to China when, in the middle of a row,
Beijing informed London that he was not welcome.
Mr Qian's planned visit to the UK is one in a regular series of meetings
which Britain and China agreed to as part of their 1991 pact to build a new
airport in Hong Kong, and comes in spite of the very poor atmosphere
surrounding Sino-British relations over Hong Kong. At a meeting earlier this
month in London, British and Chinese negotiators made little headway on
important issues relating to Hong Kong's legal system and the development of
the colony's container port.
On the port, the Hong Kong government appears to be stymied. A proposal from
Beijing this week that the colonial government build the port extension
itself and leave to the post-1997 administration the question of its
ownership has been rejected.
A far more difficult judgment which the government will have to make in the
New Year concerns the colony's court of final appeal. The government says it
is committed to establishing the court - which will be Hong Kong's highest -
before 1997.
In spite of a 1991 agreement with China on the structure of the court,
Beijing has been dragging its feet in approving the agreement in legislative
form. It has had a copy of a draft bill since May.
In the meantime Hong Kong's legal profession has emerged divided on the
government's draft bill. Its representatives in the local parliament have
vowed to oppose the government.
