FT  08 JAN 94 / Woman in the News: Mistress of the 'mot juste' - A deputy
headteacher
Every time she walks into her classroom at Summerhill School, a 900-strong
comprehensive in the West Midlands, Miss Nita Robbins is ready to do battle
 -not with her sometimes unruly pupils, but against the excesses of the UK
government's education policy.
As deputy headteacher, with the responsibility for implementing the national
curriculum at Summerhill, Miss Robbins, 52, has been in the front line. She
has had to make sure that the school is in line with the new curriculum - in
which the government laid out, in 1988, precisely what subjects should be
taught in the schools of England and Wales, and what each subject should
contain. This has brought unprecedented upheaval to classrooms: discipline
has been a casualty, as have 'non-core' subjects such as sociology and
business studies.
Now some of these changes will be put into reverse, following the
government's acceptance this week of the recommendations of Sir Ron Dearing
on reform of the education system. These will cut the time allotted to
curriculum teaching by 20 per cent for 11-14-year-olds and virtually abandon
it for 14-16-year-olds. Miss Robbins says wryly: 'At least this time the
changes should be workable.'
A French teacher, Miss Robbins has taught at Summerhill, at Kingswinford
near Dudley, for 29 years, during which time the area's traditional steel
industry has shrivelled. Most parents of her pupils are self-employed.
In spite of her struggles with the rigidities of the curriculum, she has
managed to raise standards over the past few years, with 60 per cent of
pupils last year gaining the equivalent of five old O-levels - well above
the national average and a notable achievement for a comprehensive in an
industrial area.
She says that, in spite of the difficulties of the past five years, she
still supports the national curriculum in principle. 'There were very
positive effects when the curriculum was introduced in that it gave the
provision of a basic entitlement (to be taught a core of information) to
each pupil. It has also tried to introduce some coherence and progression,
but as we now know from Sir Ron, it failed.'
Her first problem was that the curriculum was installed in fragments. She
circumvented much of this by starting a five-year plan on how the school
would phase in the curriculum.
Rules on science, English and mathematics came first, and these subjects
'tended to hog curriculum time'. Subsidiary subjects had to be squeezed in
when time could be found. Eventually the whole curriculum was fitted into
the school week, but only 'at the expense of the extra dimension of
enrichment which I felt we had before'.
An early casualty was a partly vocational GCSE in 'child development', which
had been popular with pupils interested in careers in nursing or social
services.
Then Miss Robbins and her staff had to find more space to add the elements
that they felt were educationally necessary. For example, a second modern
language was added, although the curriculum only requires one, because they
felt it was important for the children to have a choice. Fitting both German
and French into the timetable meant giving lessons in each language for only
three periods each week, putting pressure on both teachers and pupils.
Another adroit manoeuvre to make the curriculum work involved splitting the
mandatory sex education between biology and religious education. 'We saw it
as a moral issue as well as biological one.'
Now that Sir Ron has freed one day a week to be filled at schools'
discretion, Summerhill may reintroduce its old 'extra dimension' subjects.
First, Miss Robbins must decide what to offer children older than 14, who
will now be covered only by a minimal curriculum, and then sort out the less
flexible timetable for children in the first three years of the school.
'My main job now is to take the fear out of the change,' she says. 'I have
already had the heads of science and technology coming in to see what it
means for them.'
Miss Robbins also has to soothe the unions. Some may still boycott this
year's tests, which are included in the Dearing package. No tests took place
at Summerhill last year. 'The tests didn't accurately or adequately monitor
or assess what was in the curriculum. They simply were not credible.' She
has not seen this year's tests, and is awaiting the unions' next move.
'Teachers' experience of the tests so far has not been a good one.'
She is happy, however, with one government guideline: education secretary Mr
John Patten's call this week that parents take greater responsibility for
their children's behaviour in school. This is vital if Summerhill is to
reduce the number of pupils it suspends from school, in line with Mr
Patten's wishes. 'The reason we're excluding more pupils is because there
are fewer sanctions we can use. We use detentions but sometimes parents
refuse to let their child stay in.'
She agrees with Mr Patten that the cane is 'a dead issue' as a disciplinary
aid. It has not been used at Summerhill for more than a decade, and was only
used at most about three times a term. The school has only ever expelled one
pupil, after three years of disobedience, and the maximum exclusion time
from school is now three days, imposed for serious offences such as swearing
at teachers.
After managing Summerhill through the first three years of the national
curriculum, Miss Robbins made further use of her experience in a nine-month
secondment to industry. She helped IBM, the computer company, run courses,
including on managing change.
Back at Summerhill, caught between a government that still lays down what
most pupils should be taught for 80 per cent of the time and the demoralised
workforce that must teach the curriculum, Miss Robbins, and thousands of
heads and deputies like her, now face a task as difficult as running any
large corporation. She does not intend to shirk it.
'With each child we must remember at all times that they will have only one
bite of the cherry at their education. We need to get it right.'
