FT  29 JUN 94 / Third rail strike begins as Acas negotiations collapse
Railway signal staff began their third 24-hour stoppage last night after
talks between Railtrack and RMT, the main rail union, collapsed.
However, British Rail said trains should be running at about 10 per cent of
their normal level today - the highest figure since the strikes began two
weeks ago.
'We have learnt from the last two strikes how we should be deploying our
resources better,' Railtrack said last night.
Mr David Armstrong, Railtrack's industrial relations director, said he was
very disappointed that no progress had been made after nearly 20 hours of
talks over two days at Acas, the conciliation service.
He disclosed that the company had made a new three-stage self-financing
productivity deal to union negotiators without adding to Railtrack's pay
bill.
This involves a 6 per cent unconsolidated increase in basic pay rates for
signalling staff from 1 July in return for flexible working practices and a
'buy-out' of cash wage payments for a Pounds 200 one-off lump sum payment.
The final deal would involve a long-term settlement of the signalling
staff's grievances. Mr Armstrong stressed no item in the package could be
applied in isolation and that all of them could only be triggered as part of
the whole deal.
In addition, signalling staff have been offered an annual pay rise of 2.5%.
'The RMT was not prepared to grasp the opportunities we offered them,' Mr
Armstrong said. There are no plans for a resumption of negotiations, but Mr
Armstrong said he hoped the RMT would reconsider its position. He added that
Railtrack would be informing signalling staff individually of its pay
proposals.
The RMT's chief negotiator, Mr Vernon Hince, said that 'no further progress'
had been made during the intensive talks. 'We are in the same position as we
were at the beginning,' he said.
He added that Railtrack had still failed to address the union's claim.
Railtrack's three-part pay offer, he said, would mean only a 3 per cent
improvement in earnings for signalling staff in the first instance, and that
could be agreed only if the union had accepted the entire package.
A further 24-hour stoppage is scheduled to take place next Wednesday, July
6. The union's annual conference, which is being held in Liverpool this
week, is expected to decide on whether to escalate the dispute.
More stoppages, however, can be expected after next Wednesday. The main
additions to the services that ran during last Wednesday's stoppage are a
special service running from Paddington through to Plymouth and trains
linking Manchester with Bolton, Preston and Manchester airport.
