FT  03 NOV 94 / Companies 'no longer fear' Labour
Companies are less fearful of the effect a Labour government would have on
business, a survey published today shows.
Ninety corporate treasurers responded to the survey, conducted annually by
Record Treasury Management, an independent company which advises businesses
on currency and other financial risks.
One in five treasurers believed the election of a Labour government would
improve prospects for economic growth, while only 31 per cent believed that
prospects would worsen. Nearly half the sample thought there would be little
difference.
The findings indicate a 'marked shift in attitude', according to Mr Les
Halpin, chief executive of Record.
Previous surveys have shown a bias in favour of Conservative government
policy. Mr Halpin said: 'Most companies no longer fear that Labour will be
severely detrimental to the economy.'
The survey shows that corporate treasurers - the executives who manage
day-to-day financial risks - believe low inflation should be the main
priority for government policy. Fifty three per cent of respondents ranked
low inflation as a priority compared with 40 per cent a year ago.
Fewer treasurers attach priority importance to other objectives such as
reduced unemployment - from 24 per cent last year to 15 per cent - and the
stimulation of demand - down from 14 per cent to 11 per cent.
Although 81 per cent believe that inflation is under control in the short
term, just 16 per cent accept that inflation is under control in the long
term. 'It is taking a long time for them to be convinced that inflation is
under control,' said Mr Halpin.
Most treasurers are pessimistic about interest-rate trends. A total of 90
per cent expect interest rates in the UK to rise over the next year, and 93
per cent expect US rates to go up.
The survey also indicated that there are some grounds for concern about the
use by companies of derivatives - financial instruments whose value is based
at least partly on some underlying asset such as bonds, equities or
commodities. Although nine out of 10 treasurers use derivatives, more than
half of these believe the banks which sell them are not adequately
explaining the risks involved.
Thirty six per cent of respondents said sellers explain derivatives products
'inadequately' and a further 18 per cent 'poorly'.
Derivatives, Page 32
