FT  22 OCT 94 / How to Spend It: The cult spreads
Muji, for many who are within reach of one of its four branches in the UK,
has become a cult shop. It arrived with a formidable reputation from Japan
where, in that land of widespread devotion to the designer label, it had
managed to build itself into a chain of 221 shops all purveying the notion
that a 'look-no-label' (which is what Muji means) range had a chic all its
own.
Of course timing is all and Muji's arrival coincided with the mood for a
simpler, more pared-down approach to living. It became a hit with the young
who loved the fact that it concentrated on needs and seemed to have no
interest in creating wants, that it provided them with the basic essentials
for homes and bedsits and that, above all, simple was not a euphemism for
cheap.
Having found that its shops in London's Great Marlborough Street, Covent
Garden and Glasgow have made a niche for themselves, Muji is now trying to
reach a wider public. This week it opens in Kensington High Street, south
London, where it is going to have to compete with the offerings of some of
the most successful chains - from BhS and Marks and Spencer to Warehouse and
C &amp; A.
To do this Muji has been carefully redefining its ranges over the last 18
months.
The strong yen had made many of its products, innately desirable though they
were, seem expensive by the time they reached the UK. Muji has therefore
been looking at sourcing many of the ranges outside Japan and prices are now
much keener. Bed-linen, which used to come in sizes that did not conform to
British beds, is now being sourced in Europe and will fit European beds.
Clothes are being sized up to new LL and XL sizes to cope with larger
western bodies. Muji's underwear range is already well established (it is
very popular with my own children). Cult items include stationery and
snack-foods. In the Glasgow branch foods such as dried shrimps, seaweed,
chocolate pretzels and butter cookies are among the best-sellers.
The new store opens at 157 Kensington High Street, London W8 today and there
is plenty of new merchandise. Its mail order brochure will be available from
the shop or by ringing 071-494 1197.
