FT  07 APR 94 / China under pressure over HK newsman
China yesterday came under pressure from its own supporters in Hong Kong to
explain why it had sentenced a journalist working for one of the colony's
leading daily newspapers to 12 years in jail.
Earlier this week it emerged that Mr Xi Yang, a Beijing correspondent for
the Ming Pao daily, had been found guilty of 'stealing and spying on state
secrets'.
The sentence came after a trial held in camera, at which Mr Xi was not
represented by a lawyer.
An employee at the People's Bank of China, the central bank, was sentenced
to 15 years' prison for assisting Mr Xi in his work.
The sentence meted out to Mr Xi was seen in Hong Kong as disproportionate to
any he offence he might have committed.
Some observers said it was a classic example of the Chinese adage 'to kill a
chicken to scare a monkey', in other words, to warn Hong Kong's news media
of the limits to inquiry by severely punishing one of their number.
Last summer Mr Xi wrote a series of articles about China's attempt to cool
its economy.
He reported that the People's Bank had sold gold to buy yuan to stabilise
the currency; also, he forecast accurately a rise in short-term interest
rates.
Leading pro-Beijing figures such as Mr Tsang Yok Sing, leader of a
China-funded political party in the colony, and Mr Xu Ximing, publisher of a
pro-Beijing magazine, called on China to prove that Mr Xi was engaged in
anything other than news-gathering.
Mr Xu said the 12-year sentence was too heavy.
Mr Xi had never used the information he got 'in any other way involving
espionage, apart from printing it in the newspaper.'
Mr Xi has been given leave to appeal against the verdict of Beijing's
Intermediate Court.
Mr Kevin Lau, vice-president of Hong Kong's journalists' association, said
the verdict had scared Hong Kong-based journalists who have to travel to
China.
There were no objective criteria for what constituted a secret in China, he
added.
He said that after Hong Kong's return to China in 1997, it will have to
enact laws to protect state secrets.
China's law was 'vague and subject to arbitrary interpretation'.
