FT  23 FEB 94 / Mercedes and Swatch join forces to develop minicar
Mercedes-Benz, the German executive and luxury carmaker, is joining forces
with SMH, the company that saved the Swiss watch industry with the launch of
the Swatch, to develop a small car for city use.
The so-called Swatchmobile has been promoted for several years by Mr
Nicholas Hayek, chairman of SMH (Ste Suisse Microelectronique et
d'Horlogerie), who masterminded the rescue of the Swiss watch industry in
the 1980s.
Prototypes have appeared hitherto as two-seater minicars with a variety of
propulsion units ranging from electric to petrol and hybrid systems.
The German carmaker said that co-operation with SMH held 'promising
possibilities for the development, manufacture and marketing of automobiles
geared particularly to city use'. The board of Daimler-Benz, the
Mercedes-Benz parent company, yesterday approved its car division's plan to
set up a development company with SMH.
The joint venture is expected to be established next month.
A similar joint venture between SMH and Volkswagen, the German volume
carmaker, foundered a year ago when VW withdrew because of pressure from its
sharply rising losses.
Mercedes-Benz said yesterday that it had not been decided whether any car
developed with SMH would be sold under the Mercedes badge, nor whether it
would be sold and marketed through the existing Mercedes-Benz sales network.
Mercedes-Benz's move to enter a joint venture with SMH, whose recent success
has been founded on the production of low-price, high-quality watches as
fashion accessories, marks another dramatic departure from its traditional
area of prestige executive and luxury cars.
In the past 18 months the German carmaker has embarked on a transformation
of its new model development strategy, which is aimed at taking it into
several new segments of the world car market, including small cars, four
wheel drive sports/utility vehicles and multi-purpose vehicles.
It has recently announced plans to build a small, four-passenger car at a
plant in Germany with output of up to 200,000 cars a year and aimed for
launch in 1997.
This model, shown as a concept car, Vision A-93, at several international
motor shows last year, is designed to be smaller than a Volkswagen Golf or a
Ford Escort but considerably longer than the planned Swatchmobile.
Detroit fights back, Page 6
