FT  09 DEC 94 / Art meets gambling - jackpots all round: A Canadian success
story
Many eyebrows were raised last year when the province of Ontario picked an
art gallery in Windsor - a drab, motor industry city just across the US
border from Detroit - as the site of the first casino in Canada's industrial
heartland.
Art patrons were aghast that the gallery, a beacon of culture in a city
dominated by car plants, had agreed to move to the windowless bowels of a
suburban shopping mall. In contrast to the handsome riverfront property
which it occupied for 20 years, the gallery now abuts a bargain department
store.
For their part, the casino's operators were not sure whether the gallery's
red-brick building, which started life as a brewery, suited their purposes.
About CDollars 25m (Pounds 11m) was spent to convert the building into a
casino by, for among other things, installing a large staircase and a
spacious foyer.
But the partnership between gambling and culture is turning out to be a huge
 -and highly profitable - success for both the casino and the art gallery.
The casino, owned by the province but managed by a consortium of US casino
operators, opened last May. With revenues reaching CDollars 46m in October
and expected to total CDollars 350m-CDollars 450m for the first full year of
operation, it claims to be the most profitable casino per square foot in the
world.
'Some casinos would be pleased to have some of our worst days as some of
their best days,' says Mr John O'Brien, president of Windsor Casino, the
operating company owned by Hilton Hotels, Caesar's Palace and Circus-Circus.
Meanwhile, the move to the Devonshire Mall has invigorated the art gallery.
'We're a business,' says Ms Nataley Nagy, the gallery's lively director.
'The time has come for museums to show a little muscle, and this was an
opportunity for us to do that.'
According to Ms Nagy, 'The product remains the same, but we're looking at
different ways to deliver it.' For instance, the gallery is putting bigger
labels on its displays to appeal to a less high-brow mix of visitors.
Attendance has shot up by a third since the gallery opened in its new
premises a year ago. Gifts of paintings and sculptures are at record levels.
The richest irony is that the gallery may have a more secure future than the
casino.
Although the Windsor casino is the first in Ontario, it is just one of
dozens that have sprouted across North America in the past two to three
years. Deficit-strapped regional governments and impoverished Indian
communities have discovered gambling as a rich source of tax revenues.
Ontario and the US states close to Windsor have so far been slow to join the
stampede. With the closest casino about 400 miles away, Mr O'Brien estimates
that about 80 per cent of the money wagered at the Windsor casino's 1,740
slot machines and 68 tables comes from US gamblers.
The neighbouring state of Michigan has so far resisted pressure to reverse
its ban on gambling. But the tide may be overwhelming. After turning down
four previous proposals to legalise casinos, Detroit residents voted in
favour last August.
A month later, the state governor set up a commission to examine the issue
further. Its report is expected early next year. 'Every gaming interest has
a lobbyist in town,' says an official in the governor's office.
Similarly, Ontario - whose social democratic government came to office four
years ago promising to maintain a ban on gambling - agreed this week to
allow an Indian community north of Toronto to build the province's second
casino and is considering bids for casinos in several other cities.
Revenue Properties, a Canadian developer, announced last week that it was
setting up a division to invest in the gambling business.
'The market is large enough to support several casinos in the area,' Mr
O'Brien says. The one challenge is that 'we may have to work a bit harder
and spend a few more dollars from a marketing standpoint.'
Mr O'Brien hopes that Windsor's reputation as a safer city than Detroit and
US visitors' ability to stretch their dollars by gambling in Canadian
currency will keep the crowds coming. On the other hand, some gamblers
grouse about Canada's strict drinking laws, which bar casinos from serving
free drinks at the slot machines and baccarat tables.
However, the Windsor partners are confident enough about the future to plan
to begin construction next spring on a permanent CDollars 375m casino six
blocks east of the art gallery.
The art gallery will probably return to the riverfront property once the
casino moves into its own home. It will return in much better shape than it
left. The province will pay to convert the building back into an art
gallery. Rent paid by the casino during its three-year lease is expected to
provide a CDollars 4m nest egg.
The gallery's president, Mr Ron Ianni, wrote to donors recently that the
dalliance with the casino 'was a unique opportunity for us to build an
endowment fund which . . . we never could have managed, even in 50 years of
fund-raising.'
