FT  16 FEB 94 / Adjusting to the flip-side of inflation
Almighty the dollar may have threatened to be this year, but whatever its
performance against the puny European currencies it has been retreating
during the past few days against a resurgent yen.
The Japanese economy, therefore, faces a renewed threat from deflation, in
which prices on average show persistent declines. Officially Japanese
consumer prices are still crawling up by about 1 per cent a year, but this
may be deceptive, and in any case a determined attempt by the Americans to
force the yen higher in order to attack the Japanese trade surplus would
have negative implications for prices.
In Europe we may also have cause to watch out for a period of deflation in
France. Inflation there is dipping below 2 per cent and broad money,
normally regarded as providing an early warning signal, is running about 4
per cent less than a year ago. Prime minister Mr Edouard Balladur has had to
cope with angry demonstrations from fishermen over seafood deflation, and
the problem could spread inland.
In the UK the government has at times proclaimed the virtues of zero
inflation (although its central target is for a positive inflation rate of
about 2 1/2 per cent). To achieve a long-run zero-inflation objective in a
fluctuating world you would have to accept periods of falling prices to
offset rises at other times. This was the pattern in the 19th century and in
the 1920s and 1930s, when long-run stability was ensured by the gold
standard.
Most of the leading bond markets have backed away in the past few weeks from
the possibility of deflation. Japanese bond yields have jumped more than
half a percentage point since the beginning of the year in the face of the
economic stimulus package. However, even in the more buoyant economies, such
as those of the US and UK, the producer price indices published in the past
few days have shown that inflation is very subdued. For investors (and
company executives) these are unfamiliar conditions and conventional wisdom
may not represent commonsense any more.
We have seen the share prices of British supermarket chains tumbling by 30
per cent over the past year, for instance, against a buoyant stock market
trend. Food price inflation used to pump liquidity into supermarket balance
sheets, because customers paid at the checkouts weeks before the suppliers'
invoices were settled, and premises were not depreciated because, well,
property prices could only go up. But times have changed.
In the absence of a coherent system of current cost accounting, British
companies have tended to apply rapid depreciation rates and high rate of
return targets on new investment to counter the tendency for inflation to
lead to low real rates of return. But with inflation so low, this may mean
that attractive opportunities are being spurned.
In Japan the pressures are even more extreme. As Kleinwort Benson's Tokyo
unit points out in its current strategy quarterly, deflation implies that
Japanese companies are overdepreciating their plants. Their factories will
cost less to replace in future and so their profits are being understated
against a current cost yardstick. Given that depreciation is in present
depressed circumstances much greater than residual net profits in Japan this
is an important point.
However, another question to be asked in the context of a rising yen is
whether it will ever be economically worthwhile to replace many of the
factories in Japan.
A further cut in Japanese short-term interest rates, at present just over 2
per cent, would be a logical response to a renewed upsurge in the yen. The
idea would be to discourage saving and encourage spending.
The curse of deflation, however, is that the real interest rate may remain
quite high even though the nominal interest rate is little more than zero.
Long wave theorists postulate that Japan is directly in the path of the kind
of depression that plagued the US and Europe 60 years ago. In the UK, for
instance, the cost of living was falling at about 5 per cent a year in the
early 1930s so if you had money to spend it made sense to wait until prices
came down.
Japanese consumers of American goods may feel that there is no hurry to buy.
