FT  12 JUL 94 / Italian coalition split over RAI board
The naming of a new management for Italy's state broadcasting organisation,
the RAI, is proving a deeply divisive issue among the coalition partners in
Italy's right-wing government.
The populist Northern League has rejected a list of candidates; and the
speakers of the chamber of deputies and the senate, the two institutional
figures technically responsible for the nominations, have been seen at odds.
The RAI issue was top of the agenda for Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the prime
minister, following his return from the Group of Seven summit in Naples.
The dispute centres on moves by the three main partners in the government
coalition - Mr Berlusconi's Forza Italia, the League and the neo-fascist
MSI/National Alliance - to ensure they all have their own nominees
represented on the board of what continues to be Italy's most influential
media network. This is a classic example of the fights to carve up influence
in a powerful state body which so discredited successive post-war
governments and which Mr Berlusconi himself has sought to avoid.
Thus his own authority is at stake. He does not wish to be seen making too
many concessions to the individual interests of his partners. This explains
his tough stance even at the Naples summit, refusing the call for a special
meeting of his coalition parties.
The one-year-old RAI board was forced to step down on June 30 following the
government's threat to refuse to accept its financial reorganisation plan
and emergency funding. The board, though installed as technicians, were
considered too close to the previous governing parties. But the government
had previously been critical of the RAI's bias against Mr Berlusconi.
Attempts to find a quick replacement have been undermined by the League. Mr
Umberto Bossi, its leader, yesterday repeated his concerns about the way the
nominations were being handled. 'The danger is that once the media are
controlled, this will allow the consolidation of a certain group's power
within the government coalition,' he said in the League's weekly newsletter.
This was a thinly veiled reference to Mr Berlusconi's existing ownership of
the Fininvest media empire, which controls more than 80 per cent of Italy's
commercial television. Mr Bossi yesterday also revealed in the same
newsletter he would shortly be submitting to parliament an anti-trust law
preventing monopolistic positions in the media.
