FT  28 NOV 94 / IMF aid for Russia at risk in row over budget
Resistance by Russia's parliament to tough government budget plans was
threatening the loss of massive foreign aid as an International Monetary
Fund team arrived in Moscow at the weekend for crucial talks.
In the coming weeks the government will face a harsh choice between
placating the parliamentary deputies and losing the chance of aid - which
might total Dollars 13bn (Pounds 8.3bn) for 1995 - or meeting the IMF's
criteria and provoking a confrontation with the Duma, or lower house.
The IMF's team of senior officials is to begin final talks on various forms
of assistance. Officials say the team has tough questions about next year's
budget and is determined to tighten its assumptions and projections. The IMF
does not believe that the projections for tax revenues will be met, nor that
spending can be kept within the forecasts.
However, the government was warned on Friday by leading deputies, including
those from parties that back economic reforms, that even the present budget
proposal was too severe to attract majority support. The Duma voted
overwhelmingly to form a joint parliamentary-government committee to work on
the budget and propose changes, and report back before December 10.
Deputies representing special interests such as the agriculture and defence
industries have been particularly aggressive in demanding much higher
spending than is foreseen.
Mr Mikhail Zadornov, head of the parliamentary budget committee, said the
budget was 'completely unrealistic' in almost every respect: in its
assumptions of the level of tax revenue, of the sale of treasury bills and
on its central innovation to reject any funding from central bank credits,
the main engine of inflation in previous years.
President Boris Yeltsin called together national and regional leaders in the
Kremlin on Saturday to express his apparently full support for the budget.
He claimed that the crisis in the economy was 'close to being overcome' and
said there could be 'no way back to high unchecked inflation'.
Mr Victor Chernomyrdin, the prime minister, gave an even more glowing
prospect - saying that the budget strategy could make '1995 the year of
financial stabilisation, 1996 the year of overcoming economic depression and
1997 the year of steady economic growth'.
The only room for compromise could come if the Duma refrains from
confronting the government and does not pass the budget. In that case, the
government would fund the budget month by month.
Ukraine aid blocked, Page 3
Moscow and Tokyo agree to boost ties, Page 4
Privatisation lures cash to Russia, Page 21
