FT  22 AUG 94 / Jackets come off: The row over the UK net book agreement
For 20 years, Cynthia and Tony Reavell have run a bookshop in Rye, East
Sussex - the kind of shop where visitors browse on rainy afternoons. The
recession made life hard, but they fear the next few years may be even
tougher.
The reason is last week's announcement by Sir Bryan Carsberg, UK
director-general of fair trading, that he was asking the restrictive
practices court (which rules whether agreements between companies are
anti-competitive) to review the net book agreement - the mechanism which
allows publishers to set retail prices of most books and prevent
discounting.
As pressure is growing from some retailers and publishers for the agreement
to be ended, and many bookshops circumvent it, Sir Bryan decided there was
now a strong case for it to be dismantled.
The agreement's demise could lead to the biggest upheaval in the UK book
trade for decades. Opponents, such as Mr Terry Maher, former chairman of
Pentos, the UK's second largest book retailer, say abolishing it would lead
to lower book prices, higher sales and a more vibrant industry.
But Mrs Reavell believes that if the court abolishes the agreement, hundreds
of shops like hers will no longer be able to compete with price-cutting
retail chains. 'It would be pretty disastrous,' she says. 'But we will not
go down without a fight.'
Since it was first signed in 1957, the net book agreement has allowed
publishers to set the retail price of titles they designate 'net' books  -
they currently choose to publish three-quarters of books sold in the UK
within the agreement. A retailer selling a book below the net price would
risk legal action from the publisher.
Such price-setting by producers was outlawed in most product areas by the
Resale Prices Act 1964. But a restrictive practices court ruling in the same
year exempted books from the provisions of the act on the grounds that the
net book agreement operated in the public interest.
The arguments the court used to justify its 1964 ruling are still employed
by the agreement's supporters today. They are based on the notion that books
are 'special', that their cultural and educational value means the number of
bookshops, publishers and titles available must be maximised.
'With the support of the agreement, the UK has possibly the finest and most
competitive retailing structure anywhere in the world,' says Mr Clive
Bradley, chief executive of the Publishers Association, which represents 80
per cent of publishers.
His association, along with the Booksellers Association, which represents 90
per cent of bookshops, offers grim warnings of what would happen if the
agreement were abolished:
Discounting by larger chains and non-specialist bookshops would reduce
profit margins throughout the industry and weaker retailers and publishers
would disappear.
Bookshops would carry narrower ranges, and fewer titles would be published.
Average prices of books would rise. If bestsellers were discounted,
publishers and booksellers would put up the price of other books to recoup
lost margins.
Opponents of the agreement counter such arguments by pointing out that the
book market has changed substantially since 1964. They point to the
consolidation that has occurred in book retailing and publishing. Two
retailers account for almost one-third of consumer book sales: WH Smith,
which runs Waterstones; and Pentos, owner of Dillons, Hatchards and Athena.
Many weaker booksellers and publishers have already disappeared, and those
that are left, which have invested in new technology and improved their
efficiency, are better placed to withstand the end of the agreement.
A still more powerful argument for abandoning the agreement, says Mr Julian
Rivers, Dillons group marketing director, is that allowing booksellers to
compete on price would increase the size of the book market. 'The ability to
discount prices would allow us to market far more effectively, and attract a
lot of people who currently never set foot in bookshops,' he says.
He says the argument that price-cutting on some books would lead to lower
margins (with the knock-on effects of higher prices for other books and
fewer books being published) is invalid, because it assumes little or no
growth in sales. He adds that Dillons' experiments with discounting of
non-net books led to a fourfold or fivefold increase in sales of the titles
involved.
Which side of the argument is right? In the unregulated US book market,
bestsellers are cheaper than in the UK, but the Publishers Association in
London says average book prices are similar to the UK's. Moreover, the
association says, not as many new titles are published in the US - fewer
than 60,000 in 1992, compared with 78,000 in the UK. Opponents of the net
book agreement suggest too many titles are published in the UK, often of
poor quality.
Whether or not the restrictive practices court rules against the agreement -
its decision could be more than a year away - there are signs that the
arrangement is already unravelling.
Bargain bookstores are proliferating, including those which specialise in
discounted non-net books and end-of-line titles, and retail outlets operated
by book clubs, whose membership structure means they are not subject to the
net book agreement. US-style warehouse clubs such as Costco are using
similar methods to discount books.
The commitment of large publishers may also be waning. Reed, the UK's third
biggest, withdrew from the agreement in 1991, and Mr Maher, the veteran
campaigner against the agreement, predicts other large groups will follow
before the end of the year.
The breakdown of the agreement would make the ruling of the restrictive
practices court less relevant, and would remove the cosy certainties of the
book industry during recent decades. But if that leads to a period of faster
growth in the book selling industry, visitors to Rye - and other small towns
 -would still have somewhere to spend rainy afternoons.
