FT  10 DEC 94 / Books: War crimes and other injustices - Did five countries
collude to execute an innocent man?
THE DEMJANJUK AFFAIR: THE RISE AND FALL OF A SHOW-TRIAL by Yoram Sheftel
Gollancz Pounds 18.99, 379 pages
This book reads like one of those paperback courtroom thrillers you devour
on long-haul flights. It has fast cars, beautiful girls, unfair judges and
dishonest prosecutors involved in an international cover-up and, at the end
of the day, our plucky defense lawyer and his innocent client triumph
against overwhelming odds.
But, for all its page-turning and sometimes frankly tacky style, The
Demjanjuk Affair tells a true and important story. Written by Yoram Sheftel,
the defense lawyer in the case the book describes, it is the tale of how, in
one of the most publicised war crimes trials of the decade, Israel very
nearly executed the wrong man.
In 1986 John Demjanjuk, an retired auto-worker living in Cleveland, was
extradited to Israel to be tried on charges that he was a Ukrainian guard at
the Treblinka concentration camp, known as 'Ivan the Terrible' for the
sadistic pleasure he took in abusing prisoners. Demjanjuk was imprisoned in
Jerusalem for seven years and found guilty and sentenced to death before an
overwhelming body of evidence - discovered by the defence only late in the
case - compelled the Israeli Supreme court to overturn the verdict and allow
him to return home.
Sheftel leads readers on a racy romp through the twists and turns of this
tale - which includes the suspicious suicide of one of his partners,
rummaging through garbage cans outside the US Department of Justice for
concealed evidence, and trips to Warsaw and the Crimea - but he ends with a
damningly serious conclusion.
Sheftel contends that Demjanjuk was not merely the victim of a sad case of
mistaken identity. Instead, by the end of the book, Sheftel has concluded
that 'Not only was the wrong man put on trial; the whole affair began with a
despicable plot, an international conspiracy of five countries - the Soviet
Union, Poland, the United States, Germany and Israel.'
Sheftel argues, and subsequent decisions by American courts overturning the
initial extradition of Demjanjuk have supported this view, that the Office
of Special Investigations, the branch of the US Justice Department
established to investigate war criminals living in America, knew all along
that Demjanjuk was not 'Ivan the Terrible.' But the OSI, according to
Sheftel, concealed exonerating evidence from the defence (these are the
documents discovered in the DC trash bins) because of its overpowering
desire to secure a conviction.
He accuses Poland, Germany and the Soviet Union of going along with the
American plot and concealing documents in their own possession which would
also have helped to prove that Demjanjuk was the wrong Ivan. But Sheftel
reserves special venom for what he calls the 'Israeli establishment.' In its
eagerness to 'conduct a special 'Israeli-style' show-trial, to teach Israeli
children the story of the Holocaust,' Sheftel argues that the Israeli
criminal justice system very nearly 'murdered' an innocent man and debased
the memory of the Holocaust.
These are serious charges, but Sheftel backs them up with a wealth of
evidence, and they have been broadly endorsed by rulings in American and
Israeli courts. It is this miscarriage of justice - which Sheftel, with huge
arrogance but an equal measure of justification, compares to the Dreyfuss
Affair - that makes The Demjanjuk Affair an important book.
Some readers might disregard this book's powerful message in their distaste
for its tone. Sheftel has made no effort to adopt a dispassionate, objective
stance. His 'beautiful, new, dazzling white Porsche 924' appears four times
in the first 25 pages, his mother's Yiddish sayings pop up repeatedly and
cliches, especially those involving fire, seem to hold a magnetic appeal.
But for all his unabashed self-promotion - Sheftel admits this was the case
of his career and takes an unholy delight in the humiliation of his
opponents - he tells a story worth reading. If I were ever unfairly accused
of a serious crime I would want this courageous egoist to be my lawyer.
