FT  07 SEP 94 / Asthma 'strikes 1,000 workers a year'
Asthma is an increasingly serious occupational illness, with more than 1,000
workers developing the disease every year in Britain, scientists from the
Health and Safety Executive told the British Association meeting in
Loughborough, Leicestershire.
The executive unveiled a twofold strategy for fighting occupational asthma:
new guidance for employers to control 'sensitisers' that cause the disease,
coupled with research to develop tests for quick diagnosis in the workplace.
Dr Andrew Curran, a senior scientist on the executive, said exposure to
sensitisers at work was causing asthma in increasing numbers of people who
had never suffered in childhood.
A survey by the executive found 1,000 new cases a year, but this understated
the true extent of the problem, he said.
Asthma results from a combination of genetic susceptibility and
environmental exposure.
For reasons that scientists do not understand, it is becoming more common
among the general population as well as in the workplace.
'Occupational asthma doesn't just cause a bit of a wheeze and a cough,' Dr
Curran said.
'It can be completely debilitating, causing a significant reduction in the
quality of life in those who suffer from it, and in extreme cases it has
been known to cause death.'
Some 200 different substances are known to cause occupational asthma. They
fall into two broad categories, according to Dr Curran.
One type of sensitiser consists of large molecules and organic dust
particles. Workers in food-processing and farming are particularly
vulnerable to these.
Prawn-processing plants are a notorious case.
High-pressure water jets, used to separate the meat from the shells, create
an aerosol of tiny meat particles which enter the lungs. Up to 30 per cent
of the workforce may succumb to asthma.
The second category of sensitiser consists of small chemical molecules.
These include isocyanates used in spray paints, acid anhydrides used by the
electronics industry in curing epoxy resins, and fumes from soldering.
Asthma caused by breathing in small molecules is relatively difficult to
diagnose and is the main subject of the executive's research.
Dr Curran and colleagues have developed a test that identifies changes in
the cells of asthmatic patients when exposed to sensitiser chemicals.
'Speedy diagnosis is extremely important,' said Dr Mike Topping, a health
policy specialist with the executive. If sensitive workers could be removed
quickly from harmful exposures, permanent lung damage might be avoided, he
said.
