FT  09 NOV 94 / Yeltsin recalls elder statesman of reform
President Boris Yeltsin of Russia yesterday named Professor Yevgeny Yasin,
the elder statesman of Russian reform, as the new economics minister.
As he did so, Mr Lewis Preston, president of the World Bank, declared after
meeting most leading members of the administration: 'I don't think there is
any change in the reform effort.' He was referring to the hectic and
contradictory shifts in the cabinet over the past few days - which are set
to continue.
Prof Yasin will work under Mr Anatoly Chubais, new first deputy prime
minister for the economy and finance. Prof Yasin has in the past five years
lost the talents of the young economists who formed the first wave of
reformers while keeping open his lines of communication with successive
governments, industrialists and latterly Mr Yeltsin, to whom he was an
adviser
He takes one of the two posts vacated by Mr Alexander Shokhin, who resigned
as deputy prime minister and economics minister last Friday in protest
against lack of consultations over the naming of a new finance minister.
Though Prof Yasin is generally admired for his openness of mind to reformist
ideas and his ability to steer clear of the backroom brawls, which
characterise much of Russian political life, he has acquired that reputation
by sticking to analysis and academic work and is not expected to emerge as a
political heavyweight. However, his appointment at the economics ministry,
heading a generally reformist team, will support Mr Chubais in his efforts
to open up the securities market and complete the second stage of
privatisation.
Mr Preston underscored his optimistic assessment by saying that Mr Vladimir
Panskov, the new finance minister, told him he supported the tough budget
strategy adopted by the cabinet - after expressing only lukewarm support
immediately after his appointment.
The budget strategy, which calls for massive support from the international
financial institutions to bring inflation down to 1 per cent a month by the
end of next year, will soon be sent to the state Duma (lower house) for a
difficult ratification process.
However, asked if he thought President Yeltsin fully supported the budget,
Mr Preston replied: 'The prime minister and the deputy premier (Mr Chubais)
reaffirmed their strong support. I had no chance to visit with President
Yeltsin and the issue did not come up.'
Mr Yeltsin's moves in naming both conservative and reformist figures to his
cabinet over the past two weeks are expected to continue - with question
marks remaining over three ministers who are strongly opposed by an apparent
majority in the Duma. These are General Pavel Grachev, the defence minister
who is due to address the Duma on Friday, General Victor Yerin, the interior
minister, and Mr Andrei Kozyrev, the foreign minister. The two generals are
thought to be particularly vulnerable.
