FT  17 OCT 94 / Letters to the Editor: Right to livelihood, not 'pristine
poverty'
Sir, The World Bank's Tim Cullen ('Sleepless and irritable in suburbia',
October 10) mocks the position of those who seek to halt the World Bank's
support of socially and environmentally destructive projects, in particular
large dams. 'This group', claims Cullen, 'would like the bank to steer clear
of any activities that challenge the right of people to live in pristine
poverty. . .'. Presumably Cullen counts among the members of 'this group'
International Rivers Network - author of the recently released Manibeli
Declaration. This calls for a moratorium on World Bank-funding of large dams
pending a comprehensive review of the costs and benefits of its past dam
projects - and the more than 2,000 organisations from 44 countries who have
endorsed the declaration.
Cullen arrogantly dismisses the misery caused by the Bank's large dam
programme, saying merely that people 'may have to be resettled'. In reality,
about 10m people have been directly displaced by World Bank-supported dams
over the past 50 years. More enlightened employees of the Bank admit that
dam displacement takes part on a massive scale and tears apart poor, but
often self-sufficient, communities, robbing them of their land and jobs, and
increasing rates of malnourishment, sickness and death.
At stake is not people's right to live in 'pristine poverty', but their
right not to have their cultures, self-respect and livelihoods destroyed.
Large infrastructure projects, says Cullen, merely 'have the potential to
cause environmental damage': in the real world, Bank-funded dams have
destroyed hundreds of rivers, wiped out riverine and coastal fisheries, and
drowned huge areas of fertile farmland and diverse forests.
If the World Bank were, as Cullen claims, really concerned about the
well-being of the billions of people without access to electricity or clean
water, it would not be promoting uneconomic and technically flawed dam
projects which have in most cases failed to support rural water supply or
electrification programmes. The World Bank's own 'self-critical reports'
which Cullen boasts of (and which the Bank invariably ignores) show that its
large irrigation projects have been stunningly inefficient, and have had
serious environmental side effects. A 1991 World Bank study revealed that in
almost half of the irrigation projects surveyed, crop production had
actually fallen after project construction.
Patrick McCully,
campaigns director,
Nantiya Tangwisutijit,
research associate,
International Rivers Network,
1847 Berkeley Way,
Berkeley, California 94703, US
