FT  08 APR 94 / Ukraine faces confusion after elections
Ukrainians return to the polls on Sunday for the final round of their first
post-Soviet parliamentary elections. Judging by the first round of voting
last month, turnout will be high despite the fact that precious little
clarity is likely to result from the effort.
The voting threatens to usher in a disorderly mix of opposing factions to
replace the old guard of red barons and factory bosses.
As in the first round, there will be sharp regional divisions between
roughly equal blocs of opposing western nationalists and eastern communists
and support for a large non-aligned, amorphous centre. The two most likely
results, according to a western diplomat in Kiev, are 'a leftist majority if
the independents ally with them, or you'll have a Poland with 35 different
parties and an absolutely incoherent picture'.
As no obvious coalitions have yet begun to form, the composition of the new
parliament could be a recipe for legislative deadlock on critical issues,
from nuclear weapons and market reforms to alignments with Russia and the
west. Of the 79 MPs who have already won their seats outright, their
political orientations break down into neat thirds: 27 Communists and
Socialist victors from Russian-oriented east Ukraine; 24 national-democrats
and market reformers from west Ukraine; and 28 non-aligned independents.
In choosing among the more than 700 candidates competing this weekend to
fill the 450-seat parliament, Ukrainians will be faced with very different
choices. In the west, nationalist-democrats, who strongly support Ukrainian
statehood as a part of Europe proper, are largely competing against each
other. The handful of ultra-nationalist contenders are more preoccupied with
creating a centralised, unified state for 'Ukrainians only' than with the
economy.
In the east and centre, communists, who would like to resurrect the old
Soviet Union, are running against pro-Russian centrists supporting economic
union of the Moscow-led Commonwealth of Independent States. In 12 districts
within the ailing coal mining region of Donetsk, communists are directly
competing against one another. The regionalisation of politics is a measure
of the lack of a national vision. 'There is no clear national consensus and
(President Leonid) Kravchuk has provided no leadership on this,' said the
western diplomat.
Nevertheless, the continued surprise of these elections has been the large
voter turnout. This has made it probably impossible for Mr Kravchuk to
declare the elections invalid and rule by presidential decree, as he has
said he wanted to.
After the parliament is elected, the main issue on the national agenda will
be whether early presidential elections will take place in June as agreed,
or if the unpopular Mr Kravchuk will be successful in his attempt to
postpone them and stay in power to 1996.
