FT  16 FEB 94 / International Company News: Grand patron exits from
boardroom drama - Andre Rousselet's resignation from Canal Plus ends an era
Mr Andre Rousselet will today mark the end of an era when he formally offers
his resignation as chairman of Canal Plus, the dynamic French television
company that he founded 10 years ago, to a board meeting at its modernist
headquarters beside the River Seine in Paris.
Last Thursday afternoon, Mr Rousselet, 72, attended another board meeting at
Havas, the powerful leisure group where he was once chairman and which is
the largest shareholder in Canal Plus. He stormed out of that meeting to
announce his resignation from Havas's board in protest against its decision
to merge its Canal Plus stake with those of Generale des Eaux, the French
utilities group, and Societe Generale, the bank.
However, the sub-plot to the boardroom drama, and the real reason for Mr
Rousselet's departure, is his long-running feud with France Telecom, which
has for years been trying to use Canal Plus as a pawn in its own media
strategy. France Telecom plans to take a minority stake in Havas thereby
posing a serious threat to Mr Rousselet's vision of Canal Plus as an
independent force in European media arena.
Canal Plus faces the challenge of trying to repair its relationship with its
largest shareholders at a critical time when profits are under pressure and
it is renegotiating its franchise with the French government. The next few
months will be decisive in determining whether it can cling on to its
independence and fulfil its international aspirations - without Mr
Rousselet.
Mr Rousselet is a grand patron who had complete control over his company.
His charm is legendary - as is his temper. He has considerable political
clout thanks to Mr Francois Mitterrand, the socialist president who is a
close friend and regular golfing partner. The success of Canal Plus's
original pay-TV channel enabled Mr Rousselet to turn the company into a
stock market star and to establish himself as a force on the European media
scene.
His chosen successor is Mr Pierre Lescure, 48, a former radio reporter who
is Canal Plus's chief executive. He has for some time been regarded as Mr
Rousselet's heir apparent and has a high profile in French media circles:
not least as a former boyfriend of the actress, Ms Catherine Deneuve. If the
board backs his candidature Mr Lescure will today be endorsed as chairman
and will then have to get to grips with Canal Plus's problems.
At the top of the new chairman's agenda will be the negotiations for Canal
Plus's new pay-TV franchise. The existing franchise, which expires at the
end of the year, was agreed before Canal Plus's launch when no one, not even
Mr Rousselet, realised how successful it would be. The new agreement will
undoubtedly be more onerous particularly in the level of Canal Plus's
support for France's heavily loss-making cable television network.
The government is pressing Canal Plus to invest about FFr450m (Dollars
76.3m) in cable TV. The company has argued that it can not afford such a
heavy investment at a time when profits are declining. It has warned of a
fall in net profits to about FFr1bn for 1994 from FFr1.2bn in 1993.
Yet Canal Plus's room for manoeuvre in the negotiations could be constrained
by the extended power of its main shareholders. Last week's deal means that
Havas, Generale des Eaux and Societe Generale collectively control 48.7 per
cent of the company thereby scuppering Mr Rousselet's old divide-and-rule
approach to investor relations.
Generale des Eaux has substantial investments in French cable: as has France
Telecom, which is about to take a minority stake in Havas thereby becoming
its main multimedia partner.
These companies might prefer Canal Plus to comply with the government by
increasing its support for the cable system.
Similarly, France Telecom seems set to exert more influence over Canal
Plus's choice of technology. It has repeatedly clashed with Mr Rousselet
over his insistence that Canal Plus should be free to choose its own
satellite and decoding technology. His departure, coupled with the extension
of Havas's influence through the formation of the concert party, clears the
way for France Telecom to have a direct say in Canal Plus's future.
This raises the risk that Canal Plus will, as Mr Rousselet feared, be
relegated to a junior role as a bit-part player in the multimedia strategies
of Havas, France Telecom and Generale des Eaux rather than defining its own
niche in the international market place.
Mr Rousselet had attempted to avert such a scenario by bringing
international investors into Canal Plus thereby curbing the power of its
French shareholders. He is believed to have held talks with Time Warner, the
US media group. But his plan was thwarted last Thursday by the creation of
the Havas concert party.
