FT  29 JUN 94 / Tory MPs call for VAT review
Tory backbenchers said the chancellor should take advantage of the increased
room for manoeuvre which the revised forecast had given him to consider tax
cuts in his Budget in November.
There was strong support in particular for scrapping the proposed increase
to 17.5 per cent in the rate of value added tax imposed on domestic fuel.
Some MPs also urged Mr Kenneth Clarke to reduce the tax burden on
pensioners.
Mr David Shaw, vice-chairman of the Tory backbench finance committee, called
for a 'slight' Pounds 1bn-Pounds 3bn easing of the tax burden and urged Mr
Clarke to consider both pegging VAT on fuel at 8 per cent and raising
personal allowances.
Other Conservatives were more cautious. Mr Charles Hendry, MP for High Peak,
said his top priority was making it clear the government was 'taking no
risks' on the economy. One senior right-winger said there was no scope for
tax cuts at all.
For Labour, Mr Gordon Brown, shadow chancellor, said that in spite of Mr
Clarke's 'complacency', millions of people were seeing their living
standards fall even before the Pounds 7bn of tax rises that were still to
come.
'Despite all today's boasting, Mr Clarke cannot even promise to halt next
April's doubling of VAT on fuel,' he said.
The forecasts make the Treasury look rather more optimistic than the City
about the underlying inflation outlook in the fourth quarter of 1995. The
City is expecting 3.2 per cent; the Treasury 2.75 per cent.
Mr Andrew Britton of the National Institute of Economic and Social Research,
a member of the Treasury's so-called panel of 'wise men' who advise the
chancellor, said: 'Some of the things which have slowed down inflation are
not likely to continue.'
Similarly, former 'wise man' Mr Andrew Sentance of the London Business
School said Treasury inflation forecasts 'have tended to be an expression of
what they would like to see, as well as what they expect to happen'. In his
view, the Treasury has underestimated the extent to which the tightening in
the labour market and increases in indirect taxes will affect earnings and
thus prices.
Mr Bill Martin of UBS, who has consistently warned that the recovery will
swiftly lead to inflation and a balance of payments crisis, pointed to the
Treasury's poor record in forecasting events such as the late-1980s Lawson
boom or the early 1990s recession. And Professor Wynne Godley of Cambridge
University said: 'This forecast doesn't give any grounds at all for a tax
cut.' Consumption is already on the high side, he argues, and a
demand-inflating tax cut would put further pressure on the balance of
payments.
