FT  19 FEB 94 / Books: Peace in the making
GAZA FIRST:
THE SECRET NORWAY CHANNEL TO PEACE BETWEEN ISRAEL AND THE PLO
by Jane Corbin Bloomsbury Pounds 15.99, 213 pages
Rarely is a journalist's coup quite so comprehensive as the one scored last
September by Jane Corbin. Within hours of Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's prime
minister, and Yassir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation
Organisation, shaking hands on the lawn of the White House, Corbin's account
of the secret negotiations which led to the deal was being screened by BBC
Panorama.
She has now attempted to flesh out her inevitably rather impressionistic
account with a more detailed narrative. The format, however, is similar and
the book has the accelerating pace of a political thriller.
The cast of characters - the Norwegian expediters, the Israeli amateurs and
later the professionals, and the senior PLO figures - occupy centre stage.
Their personal chemistry, swings of emotion, suspicions, eating habits,
dress styles and largely successful attempts to avoid media attention are
minutely chronicled.
So Terje Rod Larsen ( 'dresses with casual insouciance') and Mona Juul
('something wild and mysterious about her') are the Norwegian 'golden
couple' at the heart of the negotiations who sometimes exchange
'surreptitious glances of dismay'. Abu Ala is 'the Palestinian banker,
though no terrorist himself', who flies into occasional rages and must
always be given the biggest bedroom, while Uri Savir, the leading Israeli
negotiator, on his second day in Norway wanders about in jeans and T-shirt
asking: 'Where am I? Who am I? What am I doing here?'.
There is rather less detail on the actual substance of the negotiations, in
part because the process is continuing, but also because of the ambiguity
required by both sides in order in order to clinch an agreement which could
be sold to their domestic constituencies. Mutual recognition by Israel and
the PLO, implicit since the Madrid conference in 1991, was the explicit
achievement of the Oslo agreement. All the really contentious issues, such
as the future of Israeli settlements, the status of Jerusalem, and the right
of Palestinian refugees to return to their own state, have been shelved.
The resolution of those problems will depend on people who did not benefit
from the unique atmosphere created at the Norway meetings. Arafat is now
back at the centre of world attention, but also subject to greater
international scrutiny, while the deeply cautious Rabin is juggling his
every word against the stability of his coalition government.
The sudden death last month of Johan Joergen Holst, the Norwegian foreign
minister, tragically illustrated the enormous physical and emotional strains
imposed on his small team. They emerge as the true heroes. The others have
yet to prove that they are as selflessly and courageously committed to a
just and lasting peace.
