FT  05 MAR 94 / Finance and the Family: Warranties under fire - OFT to start
inquiry
The high street can be a dangerous place for consumers who do not read the
small print and ask the right questions. Two forms of insurance sold
commonly by high street retailers were criticised by the Office of Fair
Trading and the Consumers' Association this week.
The OFT is to investigate the sale of extended warranties - insurance
policies sold with electrical goods which cover breakdowns after the
appliance's initial guarantee has expired. This follows complaints by a
Labour MP, Nigel Griffiths, that shops were hard-selling their own
warranties to customers without telling them about much cheaper warranties
from manufacturers. Some shops' warranties were said to be three times as
expensive as the manufacturer's version.
The OFT also will be looking at whether stores make clear what is excluded
by the warranties, such as accidental damage and cosmetic faults which do
not affect function.
Retailers argue that their policies are often more comprehensive: for
example, allowing replacement in some cases while the maker's warranty would
cover only repair. This, however, does not explain why consumers are not
given all the information and allowed to make a free choice.
Shoppers often are put under pressure from sales staff - who can earn hefty
commissions - to take out a warranty at the point of sale but, in fact, you
have a month after buying the product during which you can still take out a
warranty.
The Consumers' Association says that warranties are poor value in many
cases. The increasing reliability of electrical appliances means that many
never need repairs and, even when they do, paying for these as and when
necessary could work out cheaper.
Another sharp practice under threat is the inertia selling of credit
insurance - also known as payment protection insurance - tied to loan or
credit card agreements. This is supposed to cover repayments if the borrower
becomes unemployed or cannot work through ill-health.
A report this month in the Consumers Association magazine Which? attacks
credit insurance as over-priced and full of exclusions. It has often been
sold by inertia - borrowers have to tick a box or delete a paragraph of
small print if they do not want it. Naturally, many fail to spot this.
Which? says the premiums add an average 65 per cent to the cost of credit.
The OFT asked lenders to end inertia selling by the beginning of this year,
but not everyone has complied. Now, the office is threatening to review the
credit licence of any lender found still to be using inertia selling after
the end of this month.
As the practice is not actually illegal, however, consumers can do little if
they discover too late that they have had credit insurance foisted on them.
The contract is binding. The only exception is if, on checking the small
print, you discover that your situation is excluded: for example, if you are
unemployed, retired, or on a short-term contract.
If you come across inertia selling of this type of insurance, contact your
local trading standards office or the OFT.
