FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (3): Financiers take the long view - The economy
of mainland China risks overheating, raising questions about debt levels and
its ability to meet payments. But the prospects of the world's largest
nation are too important to ignore and financiers are being remarkably
pragmatic over credit cover requests by China's suppliers / Market Profile /
China
Financing Chinese projects and capital goods imports has become a priority
for export credit agencies (ECAs) whose support is critical for would-be
exporters to this major growth market.
With a 14 per cent rise in gross national product in the first half of 1993,
and similar levels of growth expected in 1994, ECAs and banks are well aware
that the Chinese economy risks overheating. They are watching carefully to
see if payments can be kept under control, given that they estimate China's
international debt at Dollars 70bn-Dollars 80bn and they are further
concerned by a lack of clarity in local debt data.
But few banks shied away from the Chinese market in 1993 due to concerns
about the future. 'With a population of 1.2bn people it is a market you have
to look at very seriously,' says David Moleshead, head of export finance at
Banque Paribas in London.
Exporters' enthusiasm has not been dampened by fears of overheating; by the
slowdown in contract awards which followed the appointment last June of
vice-premier Zhu Rongji to control economic policy; nor by the concern of
the International Union of Credit and Investment (Berne Union) ECAs over
Chinese demands for export credit at below consensus rates.
Beijing has consistently called for interest rates of around 5 per cent on
insured credits, well below the prevailing OECD consensus rate, currently
6.85 per cent. Banks and ECAs report offering interest rates of 5 per cent
and below to secure contracts. This is despite the call of the Berne Union
in October to cease providing sub-consensus export credits.
For all this, the scope for Chinese contracts makes the market extremely
attractive to a wide variety of exporters. Forfaiters (specialist providers
of trade finance) and other trade financiers report, for example, that
margins can be very attractive and demand is high as exporters shop around
for credit.
Letters of credit (l/cs) account for more than two-thirds of all
international transactions. The prevailing view is summed up by a leading
official of a leading European ECA: 'We are totally open for China; demand
for cover is heavy and we are trying to meet all the demand we can.'
Belgium's OND, for example, plans to double its ceiling for Chinese cover to
BFr60bn, despite its resistance to providing sub-consensus credit. Agencies
from Canada to Italy have adopted a similar line, arguing that lending must
return to consensus rates - but only when all Berne Union members and the
Chinese reach formal agreement.
Even more rigid ECAs, such as the UK's Export Credits Guarantee Department
(ECGD), are following this line on China. This pragmatism has produced a
climate of intense competition for Chinese contracts, exploited by Beijing
in recent months by demanding interest rates as low as 4.5 per cent.
Beijing has built low-cost credit into its trading system: Chinese companies
whose contracts are financed from international loans repayable at rates
over 5 per cent must pay a 35 per cent tax. Lower paper interest rates 'do
not necessarily cost much in lost profits', a European banker argues. 'The
contractor just hides the difference in his price. The Chinese know this, as
they understand the consensus.'
To some extent the explosion in Chinese demand for credit has compensated
exporters and trade financiers for the loss of other major markets. Italy,
for example, has seen its credit-driven business with Algeria, Iran and the
ex-Soviet Union collapse under payments pressure. In response, it has
focused more export credit support through Sezione Speciale per
l'Assicurazione del Credito all'Exportazione (SACE) on new markets,
particularly by China.
These, for example, recently backed loans worth Dollars 74.12m for the
Urumqi ammonia plant, arranged in Hong Kong by Credito Italiano and China
Development Finance, and a Dollars 25.19m loan from the same bank  - also
for China Petrochemical International Company (Sinopec) - to part-finance
the Lanzhou urea plant under construction by Technimont. The Urumqi
development has also secured British soft funding.
The UK government has partly sought to counter rising political tensions
over Hong Kong with a concerted campaign to build Chinese trade. But this,
in any case, is a central element in the export drive promoted by Minister
for Trade, Richard Needham. China is a leading member of the UK's group of
so-called 'amber markets', which have been allocated increased ECGD cover
and lower premiums in recent budgets.
The UK export community lobbied hard for additional credit support to be
converted into major contracts - notably the Guangzhou metro scheme,
targeted for support from the third in the series of UK/China soft loan
agreements. In the event, German companies signed the main Guanzhou metro
contracts during a visit to Beijing in November by Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
British companies may still pick up some orders from the scheme, but another
project must now be agreed for the UK soft loan facility.
ECA and other forms of conventional financing look set to remain the norm
for most projects. However, in a market as big and risky as China there are
limits to just how much capacity exists for big ticket project financing.
Limited-recourse and non-recourse project financing offer an alternative
route.
For smaller contracts, China is a growing market for forfaiters, specialist
providers of non-recourse finance. For major projects build-operate-transfer
(BOT) techniques have made their entry, pioneered by the Hong Kong
entrepreneur Gordon Wu. BOT based projects allow the international promoter
to arrange financing and secure repayments from income streams generated by
the project, which the promoter generates for an agreed period prior to
handing it over to the appropriate authority.
In markets like China, where high growth rates contribute to a pressing need
for infrastructure but financing from conventional ECA routes is limited,
BOT-based projects could play an increasingly important role. This was
recognised by the authorities in Guandong province, with whom Mr Wu's
Hopewell Holdings launched its BOT programme. Hopewell established a track
record with two power plants at Shajiao and is continuing with the Dollars
1.2bn super-highway running 123 km from Canton to Shenzhen, bordering Hong
Kong.
China's coastal regions have been the focus of development and continue to
attract most financing, not least due to the perception that Shanghai,
Guangdong and other centres are most creditworthy. China differs vastly from
its smaller neighbours, but for short-term business l/c confirmation rates
are now very similar. European banks report accepting 180-day Chinese, Hong
Kong and Taiwanese l/cs all at confirmation rates of 1.5 per mille.
Hong Kong has suffered a downgrading of its risk-rating due to growing
political tension in the run-up to 1997. In December, Moody's Investor
Service downgraded the rating of Hong Kong's Mass Transit Railway
Corporation (MTRC) from A1 to Aa2. MTRC is a major borrower, with strong
cashflow and an annual financing need of around HKDollars 1.2bn.
MTRC's HKDollars -denominated debt was downgraded, Moody's said, because
'China is likely to go through a period of uncertainty. This could affect
political stability in Hong Kong.'
For project financing, Hong Kong remains a more attractive prospect than
China. Lending maturities are much longer than for the People's Republic.
Bankers note that loans for Hopewell's Shajiao-C power plant carry only 7.5
years' maturity, while the Black Point power plant financing, arranged
during the same period, has 19 years' maturity.
Macau looks set to attract substantial project financing in the run-up to
1999, when sovereignty over the Portuguese colony reverts to China.
This handover has avoided the conflicts which dog Chinese/Hong Kong
relations. Among schemes in the pipeline are a new airport, ferry terminal,
transport links to Guangdong and Zhuhai and the Dollars 1.4bn Nam Van Lakes
(also known as Praia Grande) project, increasing Macau peninsula's land mass
by 20 per cent on completion in 1999. Nam Van Lakes is to be part-financed
from syndicated loans.
Taiwan has a very strong liquid position with foreign reserves of more than
Dollars 80bn. The majority of project-based borrowing is on-shore. Most l/cs
are unconfirmed and a substantial amount of trade is account-based.
