FT  02 JUL 94 / Minding Your Own Business: A wild time in the garden
Everything in the garden is rosy at the wildflower centre - providing the
owners do not look at their bank balance too often.
'More often than not it's in the red, but when we feel down in the dumps we
just consider our quality of life,' said 36-year-old ecologist Peter
Loosley.
Loosley and his partner Anne Starling, the founder of Natural Surroundings,
the Centre for Wildlife Gardening and Conservation, describe their
Norfolk-based business as 'the largest wildlife gardening centre in
Britain'.
It is set in eight tucked-away acres near the small town of Holt in the
north of the county. On a fine summer's day 'idyllic' accurately describes
the setting, in the valley of the river Glaven.
In winter however the site loses some of its appeal. On a day when the
biting north-east winds are roaring in from Greenland, even the soothing
chimes of the clock at Glandford church, one of two visible on the skyline,
do little to compensate for the harshness of the surroundings.
'We came here in February 1989, when I joined Anne part-time, and soon found
it to be an absolutely ideal base - better than our wildest dreams,' said
Loosley, who continued with his job as a countryside ranger for the North
Norfolk District Council until he left his job to form a full-time business
partnership with Anne in early 1990.
'We realised it was going to be a slog and that things would be bleak in
winter. But we didn't really anticipate how dire it would be in the long
dark months - that's when the bank account dips deep into the red,' Loosley
said.
Sometimes the pair think they are mad to stick at their task, which after
nearly 5 1/2 years turns over only Pounds 44,000 and provides a meagre
living for the two. 'Fortunately we are both single,' said Starling. 'But
even with the amount of idealism we retain, we find it tough when we realise
that with good qualifications in our mid-30s and usually working a seven-day
week, we still find it hard to make ends meet.'
This year, in a determined effort to have enough money to take a holiday if
either of them desires one, the partners are employing no part-time staff.
'We are doing everything ourselves this summer to try and build up a little
spare cash,' Starling said.
The decision means very long days, frequently followed by one or both of
them giving an evening class or a talk to a local organisation.
The labours involved in running the centre include caring for three pet
goats, creating a new section of the centre every year, tending to the
demonstration plots, mowing and general maintenance, caring for the two
acres of wildflower meadows, conducting guided tours, and working in the
nursery.
'Our work has a high educational content,' Loosley said. 'For example,
visitors sometimes ask why we mow meadows, but that is the way they were
always cultivated. They were intended to provide at least one crop of hay.
'But in attempting to recreate them, the skill lies in knowing when to mow,
and also when to plant additional species that will add to the variety and
richness of the meadow.'
Starling and Loosley have more than 130 wildflower species at the centre. As
the soil was virgin and unsprayed they reckon up to 80 species were there
before they arrived. They now import 50 varieties and propagate well over
100 species of wildflower plant - and also produce their own seed from
plants in their wildflower nursery.
'Above all, the people coming here want to know how to create wildflower
meadows on parts of their land, and it's one of the hardest things to
achieve,' Loosley said.
Starling and Loosley charge for entry to the centre and also for any talks
they give. Three quarters of their turnover - Pounds 33,000 - comes from
sales of plants, entry fees and shop takings. They also undertake a limited
amount of contracting work and Starling has designed three local wildlife
gardens that she still tends once a fortnight. They have a Pounds 5,000
outstanding loan from Anne's father and an overdraft facility of Pounds
7,000 that they rely on heavily in winter.
If the partners have any regrets over a lifestyle that is, they admit, just
what they wanted, it is that they feel the local community has not supported
them financially as much as they might have wished.
'We have a wonderful landlord in the estate owner, Robin Combe. Initially he
gave us two years rent free. Now he takes five per cent of turnover,'
Starling said. 'Despite trying hard, we failed at the outset to get any sort
of grant or sponsorship, which we accepted. But we find it hard to accept
that many local people don't know we are here and what we do. We really are
dependent on people visiting us from all over the country and spreading the
word.'
Fortunately this is happening. Every summer the partners find they have an
increasing number of repeat visits, which is one reason they try to extend
their activities every spring.
But there is still the problem of the winter. Much of last winter was spent
producing their first mail order catalogue. It has sections on wild flower
plants and seeds, native trees and shrubs, cottage garden plants, wild
flower meadow seed mixtures, pond plants, and naturalists' equipment and
books. Most of the items are available all year round.
'The signs are quite hopeful,' Loosley said. 'Things are building up, even
if financially it is still very hard. This is a business based on a good
deal of idealism, designed with the community in mind and with a strong
educational element.
'Sometimes we feel we are not pushy enough. But whatever happens we are here
to stay.' Natural Surroundings Centre for Wildlife Gardening and
Conservation. Bayfield Estate, Bayfield, Holt, Norfolk NR25 7JN. Tel:
0263-711091.
