FT  18 MAY 94 / Arts: Holt and Messaien - Concerts
In a pair of concerts at the Queen Elizabeth Hall, Mark Wigglesworth and his
crack Premiere Ensemble have been playing with orchestral arrangements - not
in the transcription sense, but with seating and placing. Their first
concert included Simon Holt's new Minotaur Games, for which the band was
divided into almost exactly matching halves. For the late Olivier Messiaen's
expansive Des Canyons aux etoiles on Monday, it rose in a pyramid five tiers
high, with glittering percussion at the top - but also at port and
starboard, down below.
In Des Canyons . . . the impact of the tiered band was terrific: forceful,
lucid, all the pungent orchestral colours sharply distinct. Messiaen's
inspiration came from an early 1970s visit to the brilliant desert-scapes of
Utah - especially Bryce Canyon, Cedar Breaks and Zion Park, which earned the
three most sumptuous movements here. For their short but ultra-sweet
episodes, the relatively small string-group sang out with ultra-vibrato. As
always the pianist Yvonne Loriod, Messiaen's widow, was scrupulously
faithful and articulate in the main solo role, without 'personal' nuances
and yet with penetrating expression. Richard Bissill's brave, skilful French
horn almost matched her.
Why was I so uninvolved? Des Canyons . . ., an hour and three-quarters long
without any natural interval, was preceded by a London premiere of
more-or-less posthumous Messiaen - a brief tribute to his publisher on his
90th birthday, for piano and string quartet. That does what Canyons did:
recycle familiar Messiaen tropes in a new sequence, with some more
birdcalls.
The recent 'Piece', however, is dense and dramatic for its three or so
minutes. Canyons, despite some incisive writing, stretches out its length
indulgently and interminably. To believe it you need to be a rapt devotee.
It was delightful to read that its 9th movement would feature 'slow and
strong lambs, being contrasted to short and fast lambs in ascending
sequences'; but then curiously dampening to recognise a mere typo for
'iambs' (as in 'iambic pentameter').
Holt's Minoan exercise, the centrepiece of a projected 'triology' (sic),
came with no notes but the composer's brief, clumsy recounting of the
Theseus myth. No clue to how, exactly, his 15-minute Minotaur Games might
latch on to it. The music hinted perhaps at a search, a confrontation, a
headlong flight, and at a deeper level some nameless erotic scenario - there
were eldritch howls and whimpers. But Holt's scoring is so insistently
opaque in the low-middle (viola) register that we lost trace of any harmonic
movement: the thing just sat there, emitting baleful cries, defying us to
guess where it was meant to be going.
