FT  03 SEP 94 / Girls just wanna be number one: John Authers on why the
female of the species is top of the class in the UK
North London Collegiate, the girls' school whose pupils this year scored
better in GCSE exams than any other independent school's, was once proud of
its cookery and needlework lessons. Not any more. Its old cookery room has
been converted for craft, design and technology.
The move highlights a transformation in the aspirations and confidence of
girls' schools. Not only are more girls studying traditional boys' subjects
 -they are beating them across the board. 'Girls overtook boys at GCSE level
(the main exams for 16-year-olds in England and Wales) a few years ago, and
it would not surprise me if they've now overtaken at A-level as well,' says
Mrs Joan Clanchy, headmistress at North London Collegiate.
The figures support her claim. League tables, which rank schools by exam
performance, have shown girls' schools persistently matching and even
beating better resourced boys' schools.
Complete figures for the state sector's performance in this year's public
exams will not be available until November. But yesterday's GCSE rankings
for independent schools showed girls' schools occupying 18 of the top 20
places. At North London Collegiate, 81.5 per cent of all the GCSEs taken
resulted in the top 'A' or 'A-star' grades.
Similarly, last week's A-level result league tables for independent schools
showed sharp improvements by girls' schools - notably boarding schools.
Malvern Girls' College rose to 13th, from an average over the past five
years of 42nd, while Roedean improved to 27th from 96th.
League table rankings such as these are helping girls' schools beat off
fresh competition for pupils from the many boys' schools that opened their
doors to girls in the 1980s.
Mrs Ann Longley, headmistress of Roedean, said: 'The facts show single-sex
girls' schools are doing an excellent job. Girls would not choose to stay if
they were not enjoying the single-sex environment and feeling fulfilled.'
Single-sex education is coming back into vogue and is even being
reintroduced in some schools. From this autumn, for example, Shenfield High,
a mixed school in Essex, is responding to parents' demands by teaching its
boys and girls in separate classes. Other state schools are considering
doing the same.
But this league table evidence may not be the vindication of single-sex
education for girls it at first seems to be. Girls appear to be doing better
whatever school they attend. Over the past decade, girls' examination
results have improved far faster than boys' at all levels of education from
the age of 16.
According to the Department for Education, in 1992, 45 per cent of girls
passed five GCSEs at grade C or above (equivalent to a pass in the old
O-level), while 38 per cent of boys reached the same standard. That suggests
girls' schools may do best in league tables simply because they have more
girls.
The disparity between the two sexes has been widening for the past decade.
The introduction of GCSEs in 1988, with a greater emphasis on coursework
than O-levels, may have benefited girls who, educationists agree, tend to be
more disciplined in their study than boys at the age of 16.
Mr Vivian Anthony, secretary of the Headmasters' Conference, which
represents the most prestigious boys and co-educational schools, says that
at GCSE level boys 'are much more likely than girls to decide they don't
care'.
A more profound reason for girls' growing success from 16 is that they have
become more ambitious in the past two decades about careers. Government
estimates suggest that 40.1 per cent of 18-year-old girls will attempt 'A'
levels next year, against about 33.6 per cent of boys. That represents a
wider disparity than in 1992, when the respective figures were 31 per cent
and 26 per cent; 10 years ago the equivalent figures were 22.3 per cent and
21.1 per cent.
More women are also going to university. Government figures this week showed
women accounted for 49.5 per cent of higher education graduates last year,
up from 43 per cent a decade ago.
Female graduates even tend to be more employable than men, with only 8.2 per
cent of them unemployed by the end of their year of graduation, against
12.25 per cent of men.
Mrs Gillian Shephard, education secretary, says the increase in the number
of women in higher education has helped 'ensure that the potential of over
half the population is fully realised'.
According to the Equal Opportunities Commission, the figures are indicative
of how women's aspirations and expectations of themselves at last equal
those of men.
Mrs Clanchy, of North London Collegiate, believes girls lack the complacency
of boys. Her experience is that boys with a GCSE in French will describe
themselves as 'fluent', while girls will say they have 'a little French'.
The rise of the female in Britain's schools has not, however, been uniform.
Science and technology continue to be perceived as feminine 'no-go areas'.
Women are outnumbered by five to one in university engineering and
technology courses, and by four to one in mathematics degrees.
Girls' schools, which used to reinforce gender stereotypes by teaching
cooking, now see their role as challenging them by encouraging girls to take
an interest in these 'masculine preserves'.
Mr Declan O'Neill, development director of Malvern Girls' College, says:
'There was a time when there was a stereotyped image of girls' boarding
schools as qualified finishing or art schools. I'm glad to say league tables
have disproved that. Now parents are most interested if they think their
daughter can do well in science.'
