FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (22):
Potentially large market in the longer term - Like so much pioneering
technology, the first generation of these small devices has largely failed
to meet user-expectations - but a wave of improved products is on the
horizon / Tom Foremski highlights advances in personal digital assistants
Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs) and personal communicators represent the
next big computer market, and for some industry observers, possibly the last
of the potentially large market categories for computers.
These small computer devices represent the logical progression of computer
technologies as they move from the desktop, to portable computers, to the
lap-top and finally to the so called palm-top. But like much pioneering
technology, the first generation of these devices have so far failed to meet
user expectations.
However, there are encouraging signs that the second generation of products
will overcome some of the problems.
Apple Computer was the first to coin the term 'PDA' which is rapidly turning
into a generic name for small computers with communications capabilities.
Tandy, which sells the Zoomer, sometimes uses the term 'personal information
assistant,' while IBM and AT&amp;T prefer the term 'personal communicator.'
They all describe a small computer that can be comfortably held in the hand
or slipped into a jacket pocket, with a touch-sensitive screen with a pen or
stylus input device and wireless communications capabilities for sending and
receiving electronic mail or faxes and transferring files to a desktop
computer.
A typical PDA will include software that consists of a word processor, a
diary for scheduling appointments, and a database to store information such
as phone numbers and addresses.
The first PDAs to hit the market were the Apple Newton MessagePad, Tandy's
Zoomer and AT&amp;T's Eo Communicator. Each has taken a slightly different
approach but all are united by the fact that their sales have been far short
of stellar.
The Newton MessagePad represents the most ambitious technology. It includes
sophisticated handwriting recognition software that turns the 'digital ink'
that is written by the user with a special stylus, into computer text. While
the handwriting recognition technology is state-of-the-art and works better
than most previous handwriting recognition technologies, its performance has
not impressed most users.
The handwriting recognition of the Newton fails to recognise many words,
resulting in a sometimes comical re-interpretation of the users words, as
satirised recently in the Doonesbury comic strip.
The Newton also has problems with foreign languages, especially German where
average word lengths are 10 characters instead of the six characters average
for English words. Newton has also been faulted for its communications links
which do not perform as well as expected.
The Tandy Zoomer, also marketed as the Z-7000 by Casio, has avoided, to a
large degree, the quagmire of handwriting recognition. It cannot recognise
cursive writing but it does have a very limited ability to recognise printed
characters. It prefers to store images of the user's notes instead of
performing the difficult handwriting interpretation.
The AT&amp;T Eo Personal Communicator packs more technology into its sleek box
than Newton or Zoomer, but it is twice the price. Unlike the others, it
includes a 20-megabyte hard drive that allows it to store much more
information. But it suffers from a short battery life - about two hours -
and you really need to upgrade the machine's memory to use its fax and
e-mail communications features.
All the leading PDAs have been criticised for being too slow and they all
use different operating systems which makes it difficult to produce a decent
number of software applications.
The Newton has its own proprietary operating systems, the Zoomer uses the
Geos software from GeoWorks, and the Eo device uses the PenPoint operating
system.
This multiplicity of operating systems makes life difficult for software
developers. They have to try to guess which device will sell enough units to
create a large enough potential market to justify the expense of
applications development. And without sufficient quantities of third-party
software, the PDAs face a limited appeal.
Despite the initial problems that have beset the first-generation PDAs, the
second generation devices promise improvements and new features that will
make them more useable and hopefully will fulfil the large unit sales
expectations of market researchers.
Apple, for example, is redesigning the Newton to add better communications
capabilities, and an improved operating system. Handwriting recognition is
also improved but, in what is an admission of a less-than-perfect system,
the next Newton will have the option to store images of a user's notes
without converting the handwriting to computer text.
AT&amp;T, stung by the disappointing sales of the Eo Communicator, is
redesigning the system, lowering the price and making it more of a mobile
telephone with computer features.
Other leading computer companies are also planning PDA introductions. Compaq
Computer, Motorola, IBM, and Sony are just a few of the big companies that
will introduce PDA-type devices later this year.
IBM's plans include a variety of PDAs designed for specific tasks, such as
one model equipped with voice recognition for dictating documents and using
a pen-input device for editing. Another IBM PDA is designed for e-mail
communications, allowing users to hear messages spoken in a
computer-generated voice and to dictate a response.
PDAs could benefit greatly from a standard user interface. General Magic, a
Silicon Valley-based company, earlier this year unveiled its Magic Cap user
interface which is specifically designed for PDA devices with communications
capabilities. The Magic Cap interface features a tiny graphical user
interface using a buildings metaphor. Users navigate through the systems to
reach different applications by choosing different types of buildings such
as a post office, for example, to send messages.
Magic Cap is designed to work with on-line services such as Compuserve or
AmericaOnline and specialised on-line services that use the companion
Telescript technology. Because of the small storage capabilities of PDAs,
on-line services are becoming a key factor in the success of PDAs. They will
offer data storage services to PDA customers and also carry e-mail and
faxes.
AT&amp;T recently announced its PersonaLink on-line service that will support
PDAs, and Apple's eWorld on-line service will support Newton users.
It is said that you can always recognise the pioneers by the arrows in their
backs and although the first generation of PDAs collected a fair number of
arrows, it is only a matter of time before the next generations become
ubiquitous and useful devices.
