FT  03 MAY 94 / Roche in Dollars 5.3bn agreed bid for Syntex
Roche of Switzerland is making a Dollars 5.3bn (Pounds 3.6bn) agreed cash
bid for Syntex, a struggling US drugs company, to create a group ranking
fourth in the world pharmaceuticals sales league.
The deal would mark the first big takeover in the international
pharmaceuticals industry since the merger wave of the late 1980s that
created Bristol-Myers Squibb and SmithKline Beecham.
The agreed bid, at Dollars 24 a share, is cash-rich Roche's third big
acquisition in the past four years. As well as catapulting the Basle-based
group from tenth position in world sales, it would also lift it from
fifteenth to sixth in the crucial US market.
The offer represents a premium of 59 per cent over Syntex's closing price on
Friday of Dollars 15 1/8 . It values the company at about 14 times its
forecast earnings of Dollars 386m in the year to July 1994, broadly
commensurate with other US drug companies.
The move by Roche, the world's most highly valued pharmaceuticals group in
terms of market capitalisation, reflects growing pressures on drug companies
to introduce greater economies of scale and wider product ranges. That is to
offset rising product development costs and the squeeze by governments on
drug prices.
Syntex's market value had plunged by more than Dollars 8bn since the
beginning of 1992 as it faced the expiry of patents on its market leading
anti-inflammatory drug Naprosyn and the lack of new blockbuster products to
replace it in the near term.
Last year, Syntex had net income of Dollars 287m after Dollars 320m in
pre-tax restructuring charges and in the three months to January 31, it
reported a 20 per cent decline in net earnings, to Dollars 95.8m.
Falling sales have put pressure on cashflow at the US company, which has
struggled to maintain a high dividend while supporting a research and
development budget that last year ran at 19 per cent of sales - high by
industry standards. As a Panama-registered company, it has benefited in the
past from a low tax rate.
Mr Paul Freiman, Syntex chairman, said: 'Given the speed of changes in the
industry and a radically different competitive situation, we ultimately felt
the need to align with a strong global partner.'
At their peak, annual sales of Naprosyn, used in the treatment of rheumatoid
arthritis, reached Dollars 1bn.
Mr Fritz Gerber, chairman of Roche, said Syntex's substantial ethical
business and its leadership in drugs for treating pain and inflammation
'would ideally complement the portfolio of Roche and add a further centre of
excellence to the Roche group'.
Both groups emphasised that Syntex would benefit from Roche's strong
presence in markets outside the US.
Roche, which rose to world prominence in the late 1960s with its Valium and
Librium tranquillisers, is still strong in central nervous system drugs as
well as in anti-infectives and drugs for cancer treatment, dermatology and
Aids.
Bucking the global trend of declining profit growth in the industry, Roche
last year boosted its net income 29 per cent to SFr2.48bn (Pounds 1.18bn) on
sales of SFr14.3bn, of which SFr7.8bn came from drugs.
