FT  18 MAR 94 / Survey of Poland (33): Taste of bitter competition to come -
Breweries
When Heineken recently announced its agreement to invest Dollars 40m in
Poland's Zywiec brewery it drew attention to a lively industrial sector
which is making efforts to adapt to the challenges of a free market economy.
At present the industry, which produces around 14m hectolitres a year to
satisfy local drinkers' 40 litres per capita annual consumption, is heavily
protected by tariffs. But leading managers, such as Adam Loewe from Zywiec
and Pawel Sudol at the recently privatised Poznan brewery, know that their
companies have a few years at most to modernise before they come face to
face with competition from more efficient western European brewers.
Competition will intensify when customs barriers come down, in conformity
with Poland's association agreement with the European Union.
Brewers have had a taste of what is to come from a group of Australians led
by Tony Oates, formerly Alan Bond's finance manager, who in 1991 established
a Dollars 200,000 joint venture with two brewing companies in Gdansk and
Elblag, in northern Poland. The resulting modernisation and expansion
brought output up to 1.8m hectolitres last year.
Higher output has been coupled with aggressive marketing which has seen the
Australian-owned beer encroach on the Silesian market. Silesia is the
beer-swilling mining and heavy industrial part of southern Poland which is
the home of state-owned brewers such as Tychy and Zabrze as well as Zywiec.
Zywiec, a listed brewery, had already responded to the challenge by
developing an advertising campaign designed by J Walter Thompson seeking to
change the drink's image and aiming it at the prosperous young. It is more
expensive than other brands giving it a higher profit margin. It also
developed a nation-wide distribution organisation modelled on the methods of
companies like Coca-Cola.
However, the decision by the independent-minded Mr Loewe of Zywiec to enter
into the alliance with Heineken which gives the Dutch company a 25 per cent
share, showed that even Zywiec with its 8 per cent market share and
relatively strong profits, felt that time was running out.
In contrast, management at Okocim, the other listed brewery, found last
month to its surprise that Brau und Brunnen, a leading German brewery, had
secretly been buying up its equity and announced that it controlled a 25 per
cent share. The German decision was taken last year after it dropped plans
to build a new brewery near Brzeg in southern Poland at a cost of DM145m
(Dollars 82m).
Foreign investment elsewhere in the industry has been delayed by a ban on
sales of state-owned breweries to foreign companies. This has led to delays
in privatisation of the sector which saw a sale early in 1992 of 30 per cent
of the Koszalin brewery to Holsten, another German company. This was
followed by a hiatus which ended last autumn with the sale of the Poznan
brewery to a local investor.
Next in line is Ringnes, the Norwegian brewer, which is hoping to purchase
the ailing Warka brewery.
