FT  21 JUL 94 / International Company News: USAir faces heavy loss despite
improved quarter
USAir, the struggling US carrier in which British Airways holds a 24.6 per
cent stake, yesterday reported a small increase in net profits, to Dollars
13.8m from Dollars 5.8m, in its second quarter. However, it still looks set
to end the year with heavy losses.
The company operates mainly in the north-east of the US, where it faces
tough competition from Continental Airlines, Southwest Airlines and other
low-cost carriers making inroads to its markets. Earlier this year, it had
to slash fares to win back passengers.
Yesterday USAir said its low-fare strategy had been vindicated, because the
increase in passenger numbers had more than outweighed the effect of lower
fares. Total revenues rose by 3.5 per cent, to Dollars 1.72bn from Dollars
1.69bn.
The airline also said its attempts to increase productivity had succeeded in
cutting operating costs per available seat mile - the standard industry
measure of unit costs - from 11.12 cents to 10.87 cents.
However, the second quarter is traditionally USAir's best because of
seasonal factors, and it acknowledged that its cost levels were still far
too high to enable it show a profit for the year as whole. In the first
quarter, the airline lost Dollars 196.7m, and warned that its full-year
losses would be even worse than last year's Dollars 349m.
British Airways has invested nearly Dollars 400m in USAir, and was due to
invest another Dollars 450m between now and 1988. However, in March it
announced it would not commit any more funds to the US airline until it
improved its financial performance.
Last month, USAir announced it would seek to take Dollars 1bn a year out of
operating costs by 1996 through a combination of efficiency improvements and
cuts in labour costs. However, it has yet to reach an agreement with its
unions about how the labour savings are to be achieved.
USAir has indicated it has enough cash to take it into next year. However,
it is six years since the airline made a profit, and it is widely regarded
by industry analysts as one of the two large US airlines least likely to
survive another wave of bankruptcies. The other is Trans World Airlines.
After preferred dividends, losses per share were 0.9 cents compared with 23
cents last time. For the first six months, net losses rose from Dollars
55.2m to Dollars 182.8m, excluding the effect of accounting changes.
