FT  18 FEB 94 / Glaxo passes the Pounds 1bn barrier
Powerful growth in the US for Glaxo, Europe's biggest pharmaceuticals
company, outweighed troubles in continental markets and took first-half
pre-tax profits past Pounds 1bn for the first time.
Turnover rose by 22 per cent to Pounds 2.8bn from Pounds 2.3bn, helped by a
strengthening of the dollar. Pre-tax profits rose 22 per cent to Pounds 1bn
from Pounds 819m.
With the dollar effect stripped out, growth rates in turnover and at the
pre-tax level were about 15 per cent.
Sir Richard Sykes, chief executive, also confirmed that the company intended
to cement one or more US alliances by the end of the year. In an attack on
the effects of the purchase last year by Merck, the biggest US drugs
company, of Medco, one of its customers, Sir Richard, said that the US
pharmaceuticals business would only be fair if drugs buyers had a free
choice of suppliers.
'We understand what needs to be done,' he said. Glaxo's search for partners
would include looking at distribution companies as well as other drugs
makers.
The dividend was raised 29 per cent to 9p, from 7p, near the top of
analysts' forecasts. The company has a policy of paying out about a third of
the year's dividend at the interim stage. The share price rose 22p to 697p.
The company's ulcer drug, Zantac, consolidated its position as the world's
biggest selling prescription medicine with 5 per cent sales growth, in
constant currency terms, to Pounds 1.2bn.
The effects of European health spending controls made themselves felt, and
Zantac sales fell in Germany, Italy and the UK. Sir Richard said he believed
these market would 'turn around'.
Spending on research and development continued to rise sharply, up 24 per
cent in the first six months to Pounds 417m. In March the company will open
its Pounds 700m research and development centre in Hertfordshire.
The company's net cash climbed from Pounds 1.5bn in December 1992 to Pounds
2.01bn. But falling interest rates meant that investment income fell from
Pounds 79m to Pounds 73m.
Earnings per share rose 21 per cent to 23.4p from 19.4p. In American
Depository Receipt (ADR) terms, the form in which the shares are held in the
US, earnings rose 3 per cent to 70 cents, affected by currency translation.
Lex, Page 18; Results, Page 20; Counterfeit drugs, Page 8
