FT  05 MAR 94 / Motoring: Two pretty Japanese models
This is a tale of two new coupes, both pretty and Japanese. One of them is
unique, as it breaks Marshall's Law of Car Selection which says that, when
you buy a coupe, you always pay more for less.
The new Toyota Celica GT, which goes on sale in Britain next week, is not
the unique one. This two-door, sporting four-seater, with a hatch opening on
to a boot of sensible size, costs Pounds 20,617; this makes it Pounds 3,000
dearer than a similarly-engined, although larger and roomier, Carina E GTi
five-door. But - and this is what matters - it really does look a million
dollars.
The surprise newcomer is Honda's Civic coupe. Priced from Pounds 10,450
upwards, it is cheaper and just a little more powerful than its saloon
equivalent. The coupe was conceived and styled in Honda's Californian
research facility and, like the Accord Coupe and Aerodeck Estate also sold
in Britain, is built in the US.
Profit-chasing by motor insurers, the activities of car criminals and
tougher speed limit enforcement did nothing for sales of high-performance
sports in Britain last year; they fell by 6 per cent. But Toyota GB is
confident that the latest, sixth-generation Celica GT - the first of the
line appeared 21 years ago - will have as much showroom appeal as its
predecessors.
The Celica GT shares a market niche with a lot of rivals, including the Audi
2.8 and BMW 320i coupes, Ford Probe, Honda Prelude, Mazda MX-3 and MX-6,
Rover 220 Turbo coupe and Vauxhall Calibra.
Unquestionably, Toyota's string of world rally driver championships with
Celicas in the past five years will attract some buyers. But many will put
more weight on its styling - a family resemblance to the stunning new Supra
is clear to see - plus its top-rate build quality and Toyota's reputation
for reliability.
The Honda Civic coupe is aimed at buyers whose ambitions and resources are
more modest. Mechanically, it is closely related to the Civic saloon and
hatchback, which are favoured in the main by older motorists. Honda hopes
the coupe will attract young buyers - it expects many of them to be women -
into its dealerships.
People who buy Hondas tend to get hooked on the marque and have one after
another. Honda is banking on the coupe, which a cynic might call a sheep in
wolf's clothing, to start the process much earlier.
Toyota makes it plain that the Celica GT is a purpose-designed coupe, not a
two-door version of a saloon. A re-worked engine with 10 per cent more power
makes it faster (a claimed 139mph/224kph maximum) than the last model. This
is, of course, just for test tracks. A new Celica I drove in Portugal the
other day struck me, above all, as a civilised sports car.
On rough roads, the wide tyres did not thump or bang unduly; the engine made
lovely noises when accelerating hard but motorway cruising was quiet; and
the Celica handled and held the road well enough to flatter the skill of an
averagely competent driver.
It comes with all the usual kit: driver's side air bag; anti-lock brakes;
powered steering, sun roof, windows and mirrors; and a good security system.
A five-speed gearbox is the only transmission available and air-conditioning
is an optional extra. On the Isle of Man, where I sampled the Civic coupe,
there are no speed limits away from the urban areas. But, apart from the
smoothly-surfaced and potentially very fast TT racing circuit, Manx roads
seem to have changed little since the horse and cart era.
The whole time I was there, it rained so, while I cannot talk from
experience about the Civic coupe's performance, I can vouch for its
sure-footedness.
I thought it a charming car, easy to drive yet with spirited responses. It
has power steering as standard and can be had with automatic transmission at
extra cost, although a driver's side air bag or anti-lock brakes are not
available.
I could see a two-pedal Civic coupe captivating many women drivers who came
to the conclusion long ago that gear-shifting was tiresome and unnecessary.
At the same time the young will enjoy the finger-light, five-speed gearbox
of this affordable, occasional four-seater.
Honda executives think the Civic coupe could become a cult car of 1994.
I think they may be right.
