FT  30 AUG 94 / Cheap ride on trial: Proposals to close loopholes in the
UK's legal aid system
The spectacle of apparently wealthy people being granted legal aid to fight
UK court cases and then running up bills of thousands, if not millions, of
pounds to be met from the public purse is sparking controversy inside, as
well as outside, the legal profession.
Last week the Law Society, the UK's professional body for solicitors,
proposed ways of closing loopholes in legal aid rules enabling the wealthy
to claim state support.
Its move follows a number of controversial cases, notably that of Dr Jawad
Hashim, the Iraqi businessman who, despite owning six luxury homes, has so
far received Pounds 4m in legal aid for his civil court battle with his
former employer, the Arab Monetary Fund, economic watchdog for the Arab
League. The AMF successfully claimed Dr Hashim embezzled Pounds 33m
belonging to the fund.
The government's Benefits Agency, which assesses legal aid claims,
disregards disputed assets when deciding if applicants need financial help -
and the size of the AMF's claim against Dr Hashim meant most of his assets
were disputed.
Legal aid given to many of the City's fallen heroes in criminal cases has
also provoked criticism. Where they have been declared bankrupt - though
their lifestyle may be supported by friends or relations - they have
qualified for legal aid.
Given the size and complexity of many fraud trials, the sums involved can be
large. At the weekend, legal aid in the trial of Roger Levitt the financier
sentenced to 180-hours of community service for fraudulent trading, plus
three co-defendants, was confirmed by government law officers as having
exceeded Pounds 2m.
Mr Wallace Duncan Smith, the former City banker jailed for fraud this year,
set a record for the amount of public money spent simply on accountants for
his defence - Pounds 350,000.
The trial of Kevin and Ian Maxwell, scheduled for early next year, looks
likely to produce a total legal aid bill running into seven figures.
Defence lawyers insist defendants in criminal trials have to be given the
resources to prepare their cases - and that bankrupt bankers should be
treated in the same way as the less well off. They add that because a
personal contribution is often demanded even when legal aid is granted, the
system is not a 'free ride'.
But such arguments are hard to sustain amid the controversy over recent cuts
at the other end of the legal aid spectrum. Anxious to control the fast
growing legal aid budget - expected to increase by 15 per cent to Pounds
1.4bn this year - Lord McKay, the Lord Chancellor, has restricted
eligibility for some of the poorest applicants, leaving many, say his
critics, without access to the law.
Cuts have fallen hardest on the 'green form' scheme which provides two hours
of free legal advice for relatively straightforward civil cases such as
family disputes - the type of action in which those on low incomes are most
likely to be involved. While people earning up to Pounds 145 a week used to
be able to use the scheme, that limit has been cut to Pounds 70.
Mr Russell Wallman, head of professional policy at the Law society, says the
contrasting treatment of the poorest applicants and the apparently wealthy
makes legal aid arrangements seem a 'racket'. Mr Charles Elly, Law Society
president, says: 'Government cuts have meant that many people living only
just above the poverty line are no longer able to afford legal aid. That
makes it particularly galling to see many apparently wealthy individuals
getting legal aid through loopholes in the rules.'
The society suggests the legal aid system should be reformed to take more
account of applicants' lifestyles, and increase pressure on the seemingly
affluent to explain all income sources. Mr Wallman suggests those relying on
wealthy relatives and friends should have to use some of these resources to
fund their legal costs. Implementing this approach, he says, would not be
easy. Could a friend who, for example, takes an applicant to a restaurant be
expected also to pay his legal bills? But in principle it would be no less
harsh than denying legal aid to those falling just outside the current
eligibility limits.
A more practical measure proposed by the Law Society, which could be
implemented fairly quickly, is to take account of the value of applicants'
homes when assessing their eligibility. The society does not suggest people
should have to vacate modest homes to fund litigation. But it does not see
why someone with substantial equity in a home should not have that taken
into account.
The society suggests a ceiling on the amount of equity that should be
disregarded - perhaps in the range of Pounds 100,000-Pounds 150,000. 'If
that means somebody has to move somewhere more modest, I don't think that is
unreasonable,' says Mr Wallman.
In civil actions, as in the Hashim case, the Law Society says it should be
possible for legal fees to be paid out of the funds at stake. This would
reverse the practice of disregarding disputed assets. The society also urges
the courts to make standard the practice of releasing money to pay legal
fees when imposing freezing orders on assets.
The society argues the financial savings via its proposals could be
significant, even though the number of applicants affected would be in the
hundreds or low thousands. 'The money saved would be in the tens, rather
than hundreds, of millions of pounds,' says Mr Wallman. Such sums could help
many applicants at the bottom of the income scale.
The Law Society's proposals have been submitted to the Lord Chancellor.
Though the society has clashed with Lord McKay over the latter's attempts to
curb the legal aid budget, there are signs that their thinking is now more
in line: law officers have hinted in Parliament they see the case for
reforming legal aid rules affecting the better off.
For the government, anxious to control public spending, the Law Society's
proposals have one big attraction: ending the controversy over payouts to
the well-off would make it politically easier to curb growth in the overall
legal aid budget.
