FT  20 AUG 94 / Arts: Music wallowing in seductive eroticism - Voluptuous
paintings, sensuous music and sex on the Fringe as the Edinburgh Festival
enters its second week / Sex and religion are essential ingredients in
Chabrier's 'Briseis'
In recent years the Edinburgh festival has specialised in digging out the
bits and pieces of the opera repertoire that are tucked away in the
appendices of history books. Forgotten operas, unfinished operas, fragments
of operas, the festival has unearthed them all. A headless torso, like
Chabrier's Briseis, is its speciality.
Like any hopeful seeking attention, Briseis comes with a recommendation from
a friend of the family: Richard Strauss, no less, conducted the first staged
performance in Berlin in 1899. A production followed in Paris a few months
later, but never in Britain, and not often anywhere else. It is hard to see
how there could be. Chabrier left only four scenes, which do not advance
beyond setting up the central dilemma of the plot.
The story is taken from Goethe's ballad The Bride of Corinth, but Chabrier
and his librettists contrived to make it look like any other French opera
from the end of the 19th century. Sex and religion are the essential
ingredients. Combine them, as Massenet observed, and you have good
box-office. At the point where Chabrier laid down his pen, a little over an
hour into the opera, the titular heroine is heading off over the dunes,
condemned to be a 'virgin in eternity', just like Massenet's Thais.
Given that she and her boyfriend Hylas have just been drenched in a
60-minute outpouring of music saturated in sensuality, that seems like
wishful thinking. Wagner knew to set the love music of Tristan und Isolde a
world apart. Although Chabrier has absorbed much of that opera's heady
atmosphere, he does not know when to stop. One highly-charged passage of
throbbing phrases sounds particularly erotic, until one realises that it
accompanies a man of God praying to the words, 'Jesus, have pity on a woman
who is about to die'.
In short, there is not much theatrical grip here. What exists of Briseis is
best heard in the concert-hall, where one can wallow in the seductive
eroticism of its music without worrying about what has happened to the
drama. This is what Edinburgh offered with a concert performance at the
Usher Hall on Thursday, conducted with splendid elan by Jean Yves Ossonce
and played with plausibly sumptuous sonorities by the BBC Scottish Symphony
Orchestra.
Joan Rodgers and Mark Padmore were the two lovers, her soprano sweet and
pure, his tenor rather white-toned in the early music style, though it was
good of him to learn such a rare piece at short notice. Kathryn Harries sang
the dying mother, who gloats outrageously when she discovers that she can
win a reprieve from Christ by committing her daughter to eternal virginity -
a Mephistophelean pact, if ever there was one. Simon Keenlyside's Christian
was vocally more persuasive than Michael George's heathen Olympian.
The opera was preceded by a group of other Chabrier bon-bons - Espana as the
showpiece opener, the Ode a la musique, and La Sulamite, a choral scene
taken from the Song of Songs, which climaxes in a Bacchic finale replete
with pulsating orchestra and orgiastic yelping. Having him as a composer of
the year will be fun, if nothing else.
Sponsored by the Friends of the Edinburgh International Festival
