FT  14 NOV 94 / Leading Article: Brisk start for Mr Kohl
Germany's coalition has made a business-like start to the new legislative
period by rapidly completing talks on a new government programme ahead of
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's planned re-election by parliament tomorrow. The
sharp decline in the coalition's majority to only 10 seats from 134 before
last month's election has resulted in a welcome reduction in the propensity
for squabbling between Mr Kohl's conservatives and the liberal Free
Democrats.
In its efforts to present an image of unity, the coalition has glossed over
some divisive issues in areas such as law and order and extending
citizenship to foreign residents. That leaves a risk of future conflict
open. However, in its general prescriptions for streamlining government,
lowering the tax burden and increasing incentives for employment, the
coalition is pointing in the right direction.
Policy proclamations are one thing, but delivery is another. The true test
of the government's mettle will be whether Mr Kohl shows not only the will
but also the capacity to improve Germany's economic structure and increase
its decision-making role on the international stage. In both areas,
reflecting his weakened domestic position and the complexity of post-cold
war politics in Europe, the chancellor will be fighting against adverse
circumstances.
On the international front, Mr Kohl's re-election comes at a particularly
difficult time. The US move to stop enforcing the United Nations arms
embargo against Bosnia will severely strain Europe's efforts to maintain a
consensus on the conflict in former Yugoslavia. The chancellor's need to
take greater account of the opposition Social Democrats will constrain
Germany's ability to play a fuller part in European defence arrangements, in
spite of the lifting of constitutional hurdles on deployment of troops
outside Nato.
Growing disarray
Having carved out a niche in history for accomplishing German unification,
Mr Kohl would like to leave the chancellorship in 1998 as the man who
brought about a matching unification of Europe. However, growing disarray in
France over European policies, as well as scepticism in Germany about wider
supranational European decision-making, may force Mr Kohl to trim his sails.
Foreign affairs played little part either in the election campaign or in the
past three weeks' coalition negotiations. It is on its domestic record,
above all on its handling of the economy, that Mr Kohl's coalition will
stand or fall. Necessary budgetary consolidation has been achieved so far
mainly through tax increases rather than spending reductions, making fresh
cuts in public expenditure a priority for the next four years.
Painful decisions
The Free Democrats have successfully pressed for a commitment to phase out
next year's 7.5 per cent tax surcharge as soon as possible, and to reassess
it annually. However, if it is to achieve the conditions for tax cuts, the
government will have to prepare the electorate for painful decisions on
pruning spending, above all on social security. In view of the Social
Democrats' strong position in the Lander (federal states), the government
will need a large measure of SPD compliance to carry out such policies.
Budgetary control will be a less onerous task if - as the Bonn finance
ministry is assuming - real economic growth continues during the next three
years at this year's rate of 2.5 to 3 per cent. However, a combination of
this year's 2 percentage point rise in long-term interest rates and next
year's sharp tax increases may make 1995 growth less buoyant than the
government is at present forecasting. Depending on the need for more
budgetary rigour, the Social Democrats may eventually try to engineer formal
entry into the government, in a grand coalition with the Christian
Democrats, as the price for supporting Mr Kohl's economic policies.
Unlike the apparent situation in President Bill Clinton's US, in Germany the
economy will continue to shape governmental fortunes. It will also determine
whether Mr Kohl can, during the next four years, realise his goal of big
steps forward in European integration at the 1996 EU inter-governmental
conference - or whether he has to settle for something rather less
ambitious.
