FT  19 MAR 94 / S African police armed Zulus, says inquiry head: Three
leading officers are suspended by de Klerk
Senior South African police officers helped supply weapons to the Zulu-based
Inkatha Freedom party, according to evidence published yesterday by a
judicial commission of inquiry.
The report by the prestigious Goldstone Commission is the clearest
suggestion yet of security force involvement in political violence and
appears to support longstanding allegations by the African National Congress
that a 'third force' is involved in the bloodshed between itself and
Inkatha.
The report said a special police unit was involved in the manufacture and
smuggling of weapons to Inkatha and that Lt-Gen Basie Smit, police force No
2, Maj-Gen Krappies Engelbrecht, head of police intelligence, and Maj-Gen
Johan le Roux, another senior police officer, had been aware of the unit's
existence.
President F W de Klerk said the three men had been suspended and an
international task force would investigate their case.
The report by the commission, headed by Judge Richard Goldstone, alleged
that senior police officers had been involved in arms supplies to Inkatha
since 1990. In 1992, the so-called Inkathagate scandal, involving government
funding to Inkatha, rocked the government of President de Klerk. At that
time, he claimed he was unaware of the funding and insisted all improper
links between Pretoria and Inkatha had been severed.
President de Klerk announced a purge of the senior ranks of the police force
in late 1992 and appointed a respected officer of the South African Defence
Force to conduct an inquiry into security force involvement in violence. The
results of that inquiry were never published and its recommendations were
never made known.
Yesterday's report said the men were involved in the manufacture of homemade
weapons in the East Rand townships near Johannesburg which have seen some of
the worst violence since political unrest increased dramatically four years
ago.
Meanwhile, in a move likely to increase the potential for further political
violence, Zulu king Goodwill Zwelethini held a public meeting at Ulundi,
capital of the Kwa Zulu black homeland, to call on his supporters to boycott
April's all-race elections.
He urged them to fight to defend the sovereignty of the Zulu nation, which
he said was under threat. 'I call on all Zulus to fulfil their sacred duty
to defend our freedom,' he said.
