FT  26 OCT 94 / Russian oil spill threatens disaster in Arctic
A burning oil slick spilling from a pipeline in the northern Russian
province of Komi is threatening to create an environmental disaster in the
fragile Arctic.
Komi officials asked Moscow for help in dealing with the spill yesterday,
estimating that 200,000 barrels of oil had escaped. But Mr Bill White, the
US deputy energy secretary, said a US company at the site had estimated the
spill at 2m barrels, nearly eight times the size of the Exxon Valdez
disaster in Alaska.
Another western company had measured the slick at 1 metre deep and 12 metres
wide, stretching for 6-7 miles.
'It is a significant spill, whether it be 100,000 barrels or 2m or somewhere
in between. The fact is the Arctic environment heals a lot more slowly than
other environments,' Mr White said.
The oil slick is reported to have built up from leaks in a 47km pipeline run
by Komineft, a Russian oil production association. The leak is believed to
have begun in February, but had been retained by an earth dam.
After heavy rains early this month, the dam burst, spilling oil into the
Kolva River, which runs indirectly into the Pechora River and thence to the
Barents Sea. US officials say the slick was probably set on fire in an
attempt to contain it.
The US Department of Energy yesterday released a video of the leak showing
furiously flaming oil flowing down a river with snowy banks.
The Komi Republic is one of the richest of Russia's oil provinces, but its
government only advised the Moscow disaster centre yesterday, after news of
the spill was published in the US.
Russian government officials said last night the spill was under control and
that environmentalists' claims were alarmist. The pipeline breach had been
repaired and a team of experts had been flown out to complete the clean-up.
But the delay in releasing information about the accident is reminiscent of
Soviet-era secrecy, when details about disasters were regularly suppressed.
The region is of interest to western oil companies seeking to exploit the
nearby Timan-Pechora basin.
Vast areas of ecologically fragile Russian tundra have been churned up by
decades of exploration or turned into polluted bogs by oil from leaking
pipes and production platforms.
The latest accident is not an isolated incident in a country where
production at all costs has been the rule for decades. Much of the oil will
probably spread into the surrounding marshlands sodden with heavy autumn
rains.
