FT  30 JUN 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Peanut power could beef up
South American forage - A wild legume that offers a wide range of benefits
to farmers on the savannas
A wild peanut, used in parts of South America as a forage for animals, may
play an important role in raising the productivity of pasture land, and also
help to protect the continent's disappearing forests.
Scientists at the Colombia-based Cali International Centre for Tropical
Agriculture, a research station, say that when the wild peanut is planted
with improved grasses on acidic savanna land, it sharply increases the
productivity of the land.
Indigenous to Brazil, the wild peanut is called Arachis Pintoi, and looks
like a clover with yellow flowers. It has edible pods similar to the common
peanut. Scientists describe it as a perennial legume, or forage peanut
legume, which is unusually versatile.
'It's a vigorous pioneer,' says Mr Myles Fisher, a Ciat scientist, '. . . it
tolerates infertile, acid soils, produces lots of seeds and withstands heavy
grazing.'
The grazing quality of this peanut legume is now attracting the interest of
farmers on the vast savanna lands of South America, which cover more
than200m hectares, about the area under crops in sub-Saharan Africa.
In Colombia's Eastern Plains, seeds of the legume were given to several
farmers in late 1992. Results were dramatic. Cows grazed on a land where the
legume was growing with improved grasses gained more than 400kg in a year,
compared with only 30kg on native grasses. Milk production was also higher
when the legume was planted.
'This grass-legume pasture is more productive than any other combination we
have tried', says Mr Carlos Lascano, a ruminant nutritionist at Ciat.
Peanut legumes help to improve the soil's fertility by recycling large
amounts of nutrients between plants and soil, 'which, in turn maintains
productive pastures', says Mr Gerard Ketter-Grein, a tropical pastures
agronomist.
Cattle like the taste of an improved grass-legume and eat more of it than
they eat of a grass-only pasture.
Savanna farmers producing beef and milk and with good access to markets are
expected to gain most from planting the peanut legume. Scientists believe
that it may help to rejuvenate lost agricultural land, bringing it back into
production, and ease the pressure for cutting forests.
Farmers with unproductive savanna lands that provide only a meagre income
often move into forest areas to chop down trees and give themselves more
land for pasture. More productive savannas may help to prevent this.
'If we can stabilise pastures at a high level of productivity', says Mr
Peter Jones, an agricultural geographer at Ciat. 'There will be no incentive
for people to cut more forest. And let's face it, cutting a few hectares of
Amazon forest is no fun'.
Tempted by the prospect of more productive pastures, however, some farmers
may still resort to chopping down more forest to increase their land
holdings.
While legislation to protect forests exists in most South American
countries, it goes often unenforced. Mr Jones believes that if the economy
of the savannas is improved, 'there would be a better chance of
enforcement'.
The peanut legume has other qualities that farmers find attractive. It
absorbs nitrogen from the air and this acts as a free fertiliser, says soil
specialist Mr Richard Thomas. He estimates that it effectively provides
between 40kg and 80kg of nitrogen a hectare a year.
By using the legume, savanna farmers are therefore able to further improve
their profitability by reducing purchases of nitrogen fertiliser.
By spreading on grassland like a clover, the legume helps to control weeds.
And it is 'a highly nutritious forage for animals', says Mr Peter Kerridge,
leader of Ciat's tropical forages programme.
Farmers could face problems, however, getting hold of the seeds. Mr John
Ferguson, an agronomist, points out that although arachis pintoi has been
used in Australia for more than 10 years, under the name Amarillo, there is
little seed production in Colombia. A small Bolivian company, SEFO, is
exporting seeds of the legume to other South American countries.
The peanut legume is now being used by coffee farmers, not least because it
substitutes for nitrogen fertiliser, which has to be purchased. 'In coffee
plantations on the Colombian hillsides, arachis pintoi cuts fertiliser costs
and improves weed control', says Mr Senen Suarez of Cenicafe, Colombia's
coffee research centre.
