FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (9): Super modern but still super
conservative - Commercial banking profile, Hansapank
The view from Hannes Tamjaru's office at Hansapank, Estonia's second largest
and most profitable private commercial bank, encompasses the onion domes and
spires of Tallinn's historic city centre and the nodding cranes in the
harbour from whence the city gains its wealth.
The bank which started as a subsidiary of Tartu bank, one of eight banks
closed by the central bank in a demonstration of its close monitoring of the
fledgling banking system, began as an independent institution in January
1992.
The youth of the institution is matched by that of its 250 staff. Their
average age is 25. This reflects the determination of Mr Tamjaru and his
eight partner-shareholders, not to employ anyone with experience in the
previous state banking system, and to concentrate resources heavily in two
directions - staff training and state of the art computerisation.
The banking hall is super-modern and functional. The larger Estonian
companies and wealthy individuals who make up the target-customer base are
received by senior management in a top floor foyer lined with elegant nude
statues. You could be in Scandinavia, not a former Soviet republic.
The bank may be super modern, but it is also super conservative - 'our
capital adequacy ratio, based on BIS standards, is 18/19 per cent, and is
growing through retention of profits. But if we are cautious lenders it is
partly because we have cautious borrowers,' Mr Tamjaru notes. 'Most of our
lending finances working capital. So far, there is little long-term capital
project financing and in any case the banking system is still too small. The
total balance sheets of all the 23 private banks put together is around
EEK5,000m, while the total equity base is only EEK450m, around Dollars 40m.
'As the central bank limits loans to any single customer to 50 per cent of a
bank's equity, all the banks taken together could not raise more than
Dollars 20m for an investment project. At our bank, we limit such loans to
20 per cent,' he adds.
This means that big investment projects, like developing the new container
port at Muuga, modernising and reducing pollution in the shale oil, cement
and other industries or modernising telecommunications, is beyond the local
banks.
In 1992, the European bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) stepped
into finance emergency oil shipments and ensure diversification of supply
away from traditional Soviet sources. It works closely with the Estonian
Investment Bank, in which it is a shareholder alongside the Nordic
investment bank and the Bank of Estonia.
Sumitomo bank of Japan is playing an important role in financing port
modernisation. The International Finance Corporation has also announced its
first investment of Dollars 10m in a Dollars 44m modernisation of the Kunda
cement factory.
Thus far, however, the presence of foreign commercial banks in the small
domestic market of only 1.6m people is limited to the odd representative
office. Given the balanced budget and the automaticity of the currency board
system, there is no deficit financing to spur the development of a money
market, although the Bank of Estonia has started to issue certificates of
deposit which are sold at auction with interest rates close to D-mark rates
on international markets.
The short-term nature of the bulk of deposits is another reason why bank
lending is conservative and liquidity high. At Hansapank, foreign exchange
and fee income is currently higher than interest income, although the high
spread between current 9.25 per cent yearly deposit rates and the 19.5 per
cent average lending rate ensures a 14-16 per cent spread 'which means good
business,' notes Mr Tamjaru.
But lending is expected to pick up sharply this year - 'the quality of the
entrepreneurs coming to us for money is rising all the time. We have been
saying for a year that the economy has been growing much more rapidly than
shown by the official statistics. New entrepreneurs, not privatisation, are
the real movers behind economic growth.
'Business know-how is developing quickly, success is shining on our
customers,' he adds with a grin.
