FT  20 JAN 94 / Laos starts to wake up to its energetic neighbours - How
south-east Asia's poorest country is being caught up in the region's growth
A casual glance at the national accounts of Laos might give the impression
the country is in sub-Saharan Africa rather than south-east Asia.
Laos imports twice as much as it exports; it is dependent on the assistance
of the International Monetary Fund and other foreign donors; and it is one
of the poorest countries in the world, with an annual per capita gross
domestic product of about Dollars 230 (Pounds 154). Total GDP is Dollars 1bn
a year, less than the turnover of a large corporation in neighbouring
Thailand.
Laos's 4.4m inhabitants are known more for their charm than their
industriousness. Lao rice farmers have a reputation in this dynamic region
for lying down, closing their eyes and listening to their crops growing in
fertile paddy fields.
In towns such as Luang Prabang, Morris Minors and 40-year-old Mercedes
Benzes share the streets with more recent arrivals from Japan. In the
capital, Vientiane, stallholders in the market are trying to sell
old-fashioned Soviet cameras and hi-fi systems as well as Japanese
refrigerators.
Laos, however, is changing fast. Even if it wanted to, this once forgotten
corner of Indo-china could hardly escape the effects of the frenzied
economic growth across its borders in China, Thailand and Vietnam.
Landlocked Laos is already a commercial crossroads of sorts. It levies a
Dollars 1,300 transit fee for new luxury cars - the Toyota Lexus is the
latest favourite - on their way to the tycoons of China's Yunnan province
from ports in the Gulf of Thailand.
In the past such trade was hindered by the difficulty of crossing the Mekong
river, the appalling state of Laos's roads, and the uneasy relationship
between Thailand and the communist government of the Lao People's
Revolutionary party.
These days Thai-Lao relations are much improved, Australia has built the
first bridge across the lower Mekong near Vientiane - a Dollars 30m
structure due to open in April - and other donors are financing construction
of the road to China.
Even the building work is a novelty in a country where 85 per cent of the
population depend on subsistence agriculture and have to forage for food in
the forests if their crops are damaged by drought.
Abandoned by the disintegrating Soviet Union in the 1980s, Laos's socialist
rulers (they have forsaken the communist label and dropped the hammer and
sickle from the flag) have encouraged foreign investment as well as foreign
aid. The 'New Economic Mechanism' is the Lao code phrase for capitalism.
As in Laos's long-time ally Vietnam, the ruling party is in an ideological
vacuum. Officially, the government of Mr Khamtay Siphandon says that the
one-party system will stay for ever. State radio blares out the officially
approved news from street corners.
The increasingly prosperous inhabitants of Vientiane, however, watch Thai
television broadcasts (Thai and Lao languages are similar) or programmes
beamed by satellite from Star TV in Hong Kong. They want to learn English
and they go to discotheques.
The government is concerned about the social, environmental and political
dangers of foreign - especially Thai - influence and economic
liberalisation. It has therefore moved cautiously, but it has moved
nonetheless.
Moribund state companies are being privatised or closed. Sensing that the
inaccessibility of Laos and its small population make it a relatively
unattractive prospect for investors, the government has gone further than
its neighbours and allowed 100 per cent foreign ownership of companies.
Clothing produced in more than 50 new factories has overtaken
hydroelectricity as the country's main export, although there are plans for
foreign investors to build hundreds of millions of dollars worth of new
dams, increase electricity output 10-fold and sell 1,500MW to Thailand by
the end of the decade.
Timber processing is also thriving. Hunt Oil and Enterprise Oil are
searching for oil and gas. Newmont of the US and CRA Exploration of
Australia are looking for gold. Shinawatra of Thailand has won a Dollars 63m
contract to install telephone networks and a satellite earth station.
Tourism is increasing. Some former refugees, Lao-Americans and
Lao-Australians, are returning as investors.
Foreign investment, much of it from other Asian countries such as Taiwan,
Singapore and Thailand, is still pouring in at a rate of some Dollars 150m a
year, and the economy is growing rapidly: 7 per cent in 1992 and about the
same again in 1993. In these two important respects, the statistics show
that Laos is a poor country in south-east Asia rather than a poor country in
Africa.
