FT  13 APR 94 / World Trade News: Back to basics in US clothes
US frustration in trying to enter Japan's markets for its high-technology
products, from cellular phones to cars, has confirmed suspicions that
whatever the merits of the products themselves, the Japanese prefer to buy
Japanese.
But when it comes to a somewhat less high-tech product, American brands have
increasingly won the heart of Japanese consumers.
After years of being shunned as drab and of poor quality, American clothes
are back in style in trendy Tokyo streets.
Last year the value of US apparel imports surged 55 per cent to Dollars
729.5m (Pounds 499.6m) from Dollars 472m in 1992, according to the Japan
Textile Import Union. Compared with five years ago, their value has risen
fivefold.
The popularity of US-made clothes has been helped by Japan's recession,
which has encouraged a taste for cheaper products that offer value for
money. For Japanese consumers accustomed to Dollars 100 price tags on
T-shirts at prestige-conscious department stores and boutiques, a US-made
version at one-fifth the price is a tempting alternative.
But at the same time the growing appetite for American fashion reflects a
spreading change in lifestyles and values that is affecting Japanese buying
patterns.
'Since the burst of Japan's economic bubble, there has been a growing trend
to return to basics,' says Mr Kazutoshi Yokota, editor-in-chief of Ryukoh
Tsushin fashion magazine.
Amid the sobering atmosphere of the country's economic downturn, consumers
turned away from the flashy styles that appealed to their nouveau riche
frame of mind and began endorsing basic, casual, even grungey clothes.
One beneficiary of Japan's renewed interest in American styles, has been LL
Bean, the US company that specialises in outdoor wear.
In the period from March, 1993 to February of this year, LL Bean's two shops
in Tokyo made sales of about Y2.4bn (Pounds 15.8m), double their original
forecast. The company, which is opening another outlet in September, expects
sales to rise to about Y3.5bn this year.
To its surprise LL Bean found that its clothes appeal not only to people in
their 30s and 40s, as it initially expected, but to all age groups from
teenagers up to those in their 70s.
Mr Yokota says US designers who are becoming popular in Japan learnt a
valuable lesson when the US recession forced them to move production
overseas, cut costs and offer quality designs at affordable prices. As a
result, their cost performance is among the highest in the world, he says.
