FT  16 APR 94 / Former Soviet states bow to Moscow
Russia yesterday stamped its authority over the other 11 members of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, winning formal approval for its role as
peace-keeper and guardian of the CIS borders. At a CIS summit chaired by
President Boris Yeltsin, Moscow's influence was reasserted in a series of
landmark economic and political decisions which capitalised on the smaller
republics' keenness to re-establish severed links and gain access to Russian
markets.
Russia won formal control of most of the Black Sea Fleet, over which it has
quarreled bitterly with Ukraine, and persuaded Kiev to associate itself with
the 'economic union' that links all 12 CIS states.
The decision to grant Russia at least 80 per cent of the fleet, with a final
division to be agreed in 10 days, follows several days of escalating
tension, with each side accusing the other of seizing naval installations by
force.
In a separate indication of Russia's increasing self-assertiveness,
diplomats in Brussels said they no longer expected Moscow to join the
Partnership for Peace arrangement proposed by Nato in the near future.
Russia had earlier indicated willingness to sign up next week, but its
attitude has cooled since the Nato air strikes against the Bosnian Serbs,
which were carried out without consulting Moscow.
Mr Pavel Grachev, Russian defence minister, said yesterday he now regretted
his earlier enthusiasm for the Partnership for Peace idea.
Nato diplomats said the latest Russian moves confirmed their impression that
President Yeltsin was now keener on consolidating influence in neighbouring
republics than on building fresh links with the west.
Summing up yesterday's CIS accords, Mr Yeltsin said: 'These steps should not
be the end, but the beginning of economic integration.'
In a vivid illustration of Russia's dominant position, the Central Asian
states as well as Georgia and Armenia agreed formally that Russian troops
should police their borders together with their own forces.
Ukraine and Moldova have also signed a memorandum which goes in that
direction.
All agreed Russia should send peacekeeping forces to Abkhazia, the breakaway
region of Georgia, and they urged the United Nations to bless the idea as
soon as possible. They said the CIS might proceed unilaterally with a
peace-keeping operation if UN approval was not forthcoming.
In a further symbol of Moscow's authority, it was agreed that Russia remain
chairman of the CIS for the rest of the year rather than switching chairs
after six months, as has been the rule.
The CIS leaders agreed on an Interstate Economic Commission to inject some
discipline into the plethora of agreements signed yesterday and at previous
meetings, aimed at integration of their economies. These included agreements
gradually to lower customs barriers with the eventual aim of creating a
customs union.
Mr Yeltsin, who appeared fitter after a trip to Spain, warmly commended the
economic union signed between Belarus and Russia earlier this week.
