FT  10 MAY 94 / Gas proposals aim to open up market: De-regulation plans set
out / Standing charge to be capped until 1997
The government and Ofgas, the industry regulator, yesterday offered their
vision of how the domestic market of 18m households will be opened to
competition from 1996.
The long-delayed document covers a wide range of areas which need to be
addressed before a final 'framework for competition' emerges. These include
measures to 'avoid unacceptably sharp (price) changes for particular groups
of consumers'.
Other key issues are the safe operation of the system, the obligation to
supply and the future role of Ofgas in overseeing energy efficiency schemes.
Mr Tim Eggar, energy minister, yesterday went to some lengths to emphasise
that de-regulation should lead to lower prices. But one reason for the delay
in publishing the report was fears that wide price variations could emerge
as competition was phased in and the 'hidden subsidies' of present pricing
policies were gradually removed.
Consumer groups had warned that under present arrangements consumers of
small amounts of gas are in effect subsidised by households which are large
users. They feared that the removal of such 'cross-subsidies' would lead to
price variations which would tend to penalise the less well-off.
The document notes that British Gas's costing systems are not set up in a
way which would allow the 'cross-subsidies to be readily identified'. But it
says most of these subsidies appear to be in the transport side of the
business.
'The fact that this sector of the market will continue to be regulated will
allow the pace of adjustment to be carefully controlled,' it says.
The report acknowledges that 'some continuing regulation may be appropriate
in the developing competitive market, at any rate in the transitional years'
in order to avoid any sharp price rises.
The report's authors say it is unlikely that any transition would extend
beyond 1998, when the full market is due to be opened to competition.
One of the main ways in which price rises will be limited is through the
standing charge which all consumers pay. The report says this will remain
subject to a cap at least until 1997.
In addition it is expected that British Gas tariffs will not rise by more
than the rate of inflation in the transition period between 1996 and 1998.
Ms Clare Spottiswoode, Ofgas director-general, pointed out, however, that
the introduction of more 'cost-reflective' transportation tariffs would
affect a relatively small number of consumers. She added that any price
increases would take place within the 'retail price index minus 4 per cent
(points)' pricing formula under which British Gas charges are now fixed.
New entrants will have to deliver the same standards of service as British
Gas in areas such as debts and disconnections. But the proposals are weaker
for delivery of services to the old and disabled, about 900,000 of whom have
their special needs recorded on a 'gas care register'. The Pounds 23m which
British Gas estimates it costs each year to run the programme are recovered
through a cross-subsidy from all consumers.
The obligation on British Gas would initially apply to new entrants as well,
but the authors say it may eventually be phased out if 'attractively priced'
services aimed specifically at older or disabled customers emerge along with
competition.
The safety implications of introducing competition are to be the subject of
a study by the Health and Safety Executive. But the authors suggest that
British Gas's transportation and storage business continues to have prime
responsibility for overseeing the safe operation of the system and for
responding to emergencies.
The authors also hope that innovative packages will emerge to encourage
energy efficiency. They say parliament should consider changing the law to
allow gas suppliers to provide total energy packages, such as fuel-efficient
boilers, along with the gas supply.
Ms Spottiswoode has been particularly critical of energy efficiency schemes
put forward by the Energy Savings Trust, which require subsidies from gas
consumers. But the document suggests that parliament reconsiders her role
and whether it is appropriate for the regulator to have the powers to raise
such funds.
It is not clear from the document whether the proposed framework leaves a
level playing field in which British Gas can compete equally with new
competitors without being picked clean. Although the newcomers will have to
take on many of British Gas's obligations, it seems that British Gas will be
more level than others.
The reference to a 'responsible party' to hold the gas system together when
all else fails seems to point to a special role for British Gas. It (or
another company) would get compensated for providing stand-in services,
although whether by affected customers, some bonding arrangement or
insurance is open for debate.
Competition and Choice in the Gas Market. The Library, Ofgas, 130 Wilton
Road, London SW1V 1LQ. 071 828 0898.
