FT  25 JUL 94 / Mouse determined to get bear off its back: John Lloyd
reports from Tallinn on how tiny Estonia is trying to settle differences
with its giant neighbour
Asked if he thinks the Russian troops will leave his country by the deadline
date of August 31, Estonia's president says: 'I think they will go on the
32nd of August.' By which the quixotic Mr Lennart Meri means the troops will
not be pushed, but will go, a view widely held in the tiny country jammed
against the Baltic Sea by a vast state whose most visible politicians employ
a barrage of fearsomely chauvinistic rhetoric.
'Look, they will go,' says Ms Riina Kionka, head of policy planning at the
foreign ministry. And, though the Russian defence ministry said last
Thursday that it would stop the steady pull-out, Mr Raul Malk, Estonian
chief negotiator with the Russians, said on Friday that 'our information is
that it is still going on'.
Everything about these negotiations is small - the number of troops, the
size of Estonia itself (1.6m people) and the issues which divide the two
sides. It is, however, large in that it is taken by the world's leading
states as a symbol of Russia's willingness to abide by a declared intent to
withdraw; to face down domestic nationalist pressures; and to recognise, in
actions if not yet in words, that the Soviet occupation of the three Baltic
states in 1940 and their post-war absorption into the USSR was an act of
illegal occupation.
After the last round of talks, between Mr Malk and the Russian deputy
foreign minister, Mr Vitaly Churkin, in Helsinki last week, the differences
on the military issue - according to the Estonian minister  - narrowed to
three. Two of these concerned the time required to leave the submarine base
at Paldiski and whether Estonian or Russian troops guard it. The third, the
most touchy, concerns the payment of pensions to, and continue residence of,
some 10,000 former Soviet officers now in Estonia.
The main problem with the pensioners is that some officers, according to Mr
Malk, are former or even present KGB officers 'who have taken active part in
organisations which are hostile to the Estonian state'. The Estonians will
not pay them pensions, in part because they are too young, and more
important because they believe many of them to be a fifth column in their
midst. 'It would be better for the Russians to take them out now because, if
they stayed, sooner or later some of them will be called to trial for crimes
against Estonia,' said Mr Malk.
Mr Churkin - among the most famed of Russia's diplomats because of his
shuttle diplomacy as his country's main negotiator with the Bosnian Serbs -
appeared on Russian television on Saturday evening to say that he hoped the
Estonian side would 'reconsider its position' before a meeting between the
two countries' presidents, mooted by Mr Boris Yeltsin two weeks ago but as
yet not fixed. 'It is up to them to ask,' says Mr Meri, 'and they have not
asked yet.'
Even if, as seems likely, the troop pull-out is agreed, two other issues
remain. The Estonians claim two thin slices of Russian territory  - the area
around Ivangorod, opposite the Estonian town of Narva in the north-east; and
the area around Pskov in the south-east. These, they claim, were recognised
as part of Estonia in the 1920 Estonian-USSR Treaty of Tartu. And since
present-day Estonia has affirmed its succession from the inter-war republic
and Russia has claimed to be the inheritor of Soviet treaties, its terms
must be recognised. the more so since the claim to these pieces of land is
enshrined in the new Estonian constitution.
Second, as Mr Malk stresses, Estonia wants a formal recognition by Russia
that the Soviet occupation was illegal and the acts of murder and
deportation criminal. Says Mr Meri: 'I think Russia wants to forget its own
history. I see no reason why Russia should admit its guilt before the
Czechs, the Poles and others and not before our small nation.'
Ms Kionka admits that the inscribing of territorial claims puts Estonian
politicians 'between a rock and a hard place', between the commitment to and
the desire of the people for a restitution, and a Russia which has
unilaterally strengthened the border. Compromises are possible, however, one
being to sign a treaty recognising the pre-war Tartu treaty borders and then
immediately conclude a new treaty redrawing them along the present line. But
that would take trust and goodwill.
Relations between the elephant and the mouse will depend on the willingness
and ability of the 500,000-plus Russian speakers in Estonia to become
citizens of the new state; and the continued existence in power of a Russian
government more interested in being an accepted member of the international
community than in re-asserting empire.
At present, says Ms Kionka, some 40,000 Russians have applied to leave the
country and 60,000 have applied for citizenship. The main qualification for
the latter is a language test described as simple: proficiency in basic
conversation and residence of at least two years. 'The main problem', says
Ms Kionka, 'is with Russians who live in all-Russian communities and never
naturally speak Estonian.'
What Estonians see as Russian great-power attitudes towards Estonia have
been on display in the past few weeks. Mr Yeltsin said at the Group of Seven
summit in Naples that troops would not be withdrawn on August 31 - a
statement repeated last week by General Pavel Grachev, defence minister,
while negotiations were going on. In an interview in Izvestiya, General
Alexander Lebed, commander of the 14th Army and the most popular military
man, warned Estonia that it was in too weak a position to argue.
Estonia is the economic success story of the former Soviet Union. It has a
stable currency (the kroon) pegged to the D-Mark; gross national product
growth of around 5 per cent; low inflation; trade largely re-oriented to the
west; and obvious signs of enrichment, especially in Tallinn. This, it
seems, will be the larger determinant: the attraction for Russian-Estonians
to pledge loyalty and an example which Russia should wish to emulate rather
than to trust. In spite of the rhetoric of tension, Estonia expects reality
to improve.
