FT  28 MAY 94 / Arafat's Jerusalem plan sparks rumpus
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organisation have begun a battle of
words over the most sensitive element of their conflict: the future of
Jerusalem, claimed by both sides as their capital.
The final status of the city, united under Israeli rule when Arab East
Jerusalem was captured by Israeli troops in the 1967 Six Day War, is
intended to be resolved in negotiations due to begin in about two years'
time.
But a draft Palestinian constitution, published this week with the appparent
approval of Mr Yassir Arafat, the PLO chairman, proclaims that 'Jerusalem is
the capital of Palestine.' Mr Arafat's aides have been saying for several
weeks that the chairman intends to visit the city during his trip to
newly-autonomous Jericho next month, and lead a prayer march to the Temple
Mount in Jerusalem's Old City.
When Mr Arafat's plans to visit the city were first publicised, aides to
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin indicated privately that there would be no
government opposition. But the city's mayor, Mr Ehud Olmert, who is also a
Knesset member from the right-wing Likud opposition, has threatened to bring
500,000 demonstrators into the streets to ensure Mr Arafat is kept out of
town. Mr Rabin now appears to have registered the symbolic significance of a
triumphant Arafat-led procession through the city. On Wednesday, he convened
a meeting in his office of senior ministers and police, army and security
chiefs, to discuss PLO attempts to focus attention on Jerusalem and assert
Palestinian rights in the eastern half of the city, where more than 150,000
Palestinians reside. Mr Moshe Shahal, the minister of police, intimated
after the meeting that Mr Arafat was unlikely to receive an Israeli
government invitation to visit.
In a speech yesterday, Mr Rabin declared that Israel would block any PLO
effort to set up official institutions in Jerusalem. 'All the Palestinian
self-government centres will be in Jericho,' he said, 'as we and they have
agreed and committed ourselves to in writing." No official date has yet been
set for Mr Arafat's trip.
