FT  01 MAR 94 / Indian budget goes for growth amid worries over borrowing
Mr Manmohan Singh, the Indian finance minister, announced measures to
liberalise the economy and promote growth yesterday, improving
convertibility of the rupee and cutting interest rates, customs duties and
taxes.
But the reforms, set out in the annual budget speech, were overshadowed by
an admission that government borrowings have soared in the past year far
above targets - to levels at which they are prompting some observers to
voice fears about the country's economic stability.
Mr Singh disclosed that because of lower than expected tax and customs
revenues and higher than anticipated spending on subsidies and other items,
the fiscal deficit for the year to the end of March would be about 7.3 per
cent of gross domestic product, compared with a target of 4.7 per cent. The
target for the new year starting in April is to be 6 per cent.
The budget was widely seen as relying on increased economic activity to
bring higher government revenues and so eventually cut public borrowing. Mr
Singh admitted as much in his speech, saying the risks he was taking were
prudent.
Industrialists publicly hailed the steps taken to encourage growth, but
expressed fears about the fiscal deficit and disappointment at the lack of
bold deregulatory initiatives. The Bombay stock exchange 30-share index
closed 50.37 points up on the day at 4,287.98.
Mr Singh was presenting his fourth budget since the government took office
in 1991 and responded to a balance of payments crisis by embarking on
India's most extensive economic reforms since independence.
He expressed concern about the fiscal deficit and pledged to 'return to the
path of fiscal rectitude'. He also promised to continue with pro-market
reform and promoting trade and investment.
The rupee, already convertible for trade dealings, is also to be made freely
exchangeable on the current account. Restrictions remain on capital
transactions involving the sale and purchase of assets.
Mr Singh's other specific proposals include a cut in the maximum rate of
customs duty from 85 per cent to 65 per cent, a reduction in the maximum
rate of corporate tax including surcharges from 65 per cent to 55 per cent,
and a cut in income taxes.
Inflation risk, Page 7
