FT  17 MAY 94 / Survey of World Forest Products  (3): Green lobby focuses on
logging practices - Management of trees has become a hot topic
Axel Springer, the big German publishing house, sent its paper suppliers a
detailed questionnaire late last year, requesting information on their
forestry practices.
In March, two UK paper companies cancelled pulp contracts with MacMillan
Bloedel, the Canadian forest products group, after environmental groups
threatened to organise consumer boycotts in protest at 'clear-cut' logging
in British Columbia. Incidents like these confirm that forest management has
become a hot topic, with increasingly tangible commercial consequences.
Companies that cannot demonstrate 'good' techniques are facing the threat of
customer boycotts. In Nordic countries and North America, the issue of which
trees to cut and how to cut them now grabs more headlines than pollution by
pulp and paper mills, the industry's traditional environmental bugbear.
Concern has arisen because of fears that logging is systematically
destroying biodiversity, in contravention of the Rio environmental accords
of 1992. It is not just a question of whether replanting exceeds harvesting
levels. It is also about protecting old trees, animal species, soil quality
and unique environments. In Sweden, for example, as many as 200 species are
thought to be threatened because of the impact of conventional forestry
practices.
Environmental pressures to protect forests have helped push lumber prices to
record levels in recent years. The volume of timber sold by US government
agencies has shrunk from 12.5bn board feet in 1987 to an estimated 4.5bn
board feet this year. The impact has been most keenly felt in the US
north-west, where efforts to protect the spotted owl have halted logging in
federally-owned forests.
The Clinton administration promised last year to relax the curbs. The
administration proposed a compromise in late April, which would allow
limited logging in the area - provided the plan does not become bogged down
in the courts by forestry companies or environmentalists, both of which are
unhappy with some of its contents.
Environmental groups have identified the main villain as clear-cutting,
which involves completely clearing large areas of forest land with little or
no heed to fauna and flora. Greenpeace in Germany has led the way in Europe
by insisting on an end to the practice - a demand which has led to the
actions of companies like Axel Springer.
One result is that forestry conservation, cultivation and felling methods
are coming under scrutiny as never before. This is forcing changes to
traditional forestry practices and leading to a more active role by
governments.
Many Nordic forest companies insist they no longer clear-cut, although, in
most instances, neither have they gone so far as to adopt the practice of
'thinning' that many environmentalists advocate.
Companies in Scandinavia and North America have instead opted for a
compromise - reducing the size of clear-cut areas, allowing some trees to
remain standing, building fewer logging roads and restricting felling around
rivers and lakes, which are favoured wildlife habitats.
Juhani Pyykkonen, a forestry manager with United Paper Mills, one of
Finland's biggest forestry groups, says the company now cuts a maximum of 10
hectares at one go - and between 2 and 4 per cent of the trees are left
standing.
UPM has phased out chemical treatment and ploughing; stopped planting
non-indigenous pines; started using biodegradable vegetable oils to
lubricate forest machines; and placed more emphasis on natural regeneration
(seeding not planting). Increased resources are also being put into
education, so that forest managers can recognise sensitive environments and
adapt their harvesting methods accordingly.
Not for the first time, the industry feels that it is unfairly under
assault. But there is no doubt that it is feeling the pressure.
Sweden is discussing an international forestry certification system with the
Worldwide Fund for Nature. Similar moves are afoot in Canada, including
independent audits of individual companies' forestry practices.
Governments, too, are doing their bit - though not always to the liking of
the forestry industry or its employees.
Sweden introduced a new forestry law at the start of the year, to give equal
priority to production and environmental goals. Finland has just announced
proposals which will double the amount of protected 'wilderness forest' to
600,000 hectares, as part of its nature conservation programme.
British Columbia's social-democrat government has promised to expand the
province's protected park and wilderness areas to 12 per cent of the
province, from about 8 per cent now. Although the industry has signed on to
that target, strong disagreements remain on precisely which pieces of land
should be barred from resource development.
A storm has also erupted in BC over suggestions by a government commission
that the 12 per cent target be augmented by large tracts of 'regionally
significant land', such as corridors between existing parks, covering about
8 per cent of the province.
More than 20,000 loggers showed their displeasure at a rally in Victoria,
the provincial capital, in March. Such protests appear to have cooled the
government's ardour for setting aside protected areas.
'New knowledge from research, demands from customers and new legislation are
the main forces promoting the development of environmentally sound forestry
practices,' says Jan Remrod, managing director of the Swedish Pulp and Paper
Association. But he stresses that the process carries a cost.
Besides time spent on planning and education, it is estimated that the
restrictions will cut long-term harvest levels in affected areas by 10 per
cent. That may be a cost that the bigger companies can absorb. But for the
small private farmers who dominate forest ownership in Sweden and Finland,
it is another matter.
Companies and governments alike appear to be nearing the point where
environmental friendliness in the forests may have to take a back seat for a
while to commercial and political realities.
