FT  03 MAY 94 / Palestinians to have right to set up stock market
Palestinians preparing for self-government in the Gaza Strip and West Bank
enclave of Jericho will have the right to establish a stock market, issue
bonds, create an embryonic central bank and work towards a trade surplus
with Israel, Israeli officials said yesterday.
Although the economic accord signed between Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organisation last week makes no reference to a stock market or
Palestinian bonds, Israeli officials said they were implicit in the
agreement.
Mr Avi Ben-Basat, head of research at the Bank of Israel, said yesterday the
incoming Palestinian Interim Self-Governing Authority could establish a
stock exchange which would be governed by a securities authority similar to
Israel's. Palestinians, foreigners and Israeli citizens would be able to
invest.
Under the economic protocol, Palestinians will create a Palestinian Monetary
Authority(PMA) responsible for licensing, supervising and inspecting banks;
determining the liquidity requirements on all deposits held by banks
operating in the self-rule areas; managing foreign exchange reserves and
foreign currency transactions.
The agreement says the PMA will also have the power to regulate and
supervise capital activities in the self-rule areas including the licensing
of capital market institutions, finance companies and investment funds.
Mr Basat said these provisions implicitly allowed for a stock exchange
although he said he thought the Palestinians would first build up a money
market.
Mr Basat said the new trade policy of the accord, which allows Palestinians
to import directly and boost exports, could eliminate the current Dollars
300m trade deficit with Israel, possibly creating a trade surplus with
Israel leaving the self-rule areas with an excess of Israeli shekels which
would remain the legal tender.
Under the accord the PMA has the right to convert excess Israeli shekels
into foreign currency at the Bank of Israel according to a mutually agreed
annual estimate of the flow of goods and services between Israel and the
self-rule areas.
Mr Basat said this, combined with exports to the rest of the world, foreign
aid and loans, could lead the Palestinian self-government to accumulate
foreign currency reserves which could back significant bond issues.
Palestinian and other Arab nationals would be the most likely investors.
Mr Basat said the monetary authority was not a central bank because
Palestinians would not be allowed yet to issue their own currency.
