FT  02 NOV 94 / London Stock Exchange: Airways rebounds
Having underperformed the market by close on 5 per cent over the past month,
British Airways rebounded 8 1/2 to 361 1/2 p as enthusiam for the shares
built up ahead of the group's traffic flows results for October, due
Thursday.
After traffic growth of 7.3 per cent in September, most analysts are
expecting a significant slowdown for the latest month as BA moves into
slower seasonal trading. Best bets among the major houses point to an
October traffic gain of between 4 and 5 per cent.
At all events the shares traded in a turnover of 4m, helped by stories that
a big US house - possibly Goldman Sachs - was recommending clients to buy a
portfolio of airline stocks with a heavy European weighting, including KLM
and BA.
Leading stores group Marks and Spencer was sold in early trading following
news that the head of its US arm had quit the company. Although Brooks
Brothers represents a very small part of M&amp;S profits, there were concerns
that the resignation foreshadowed a general withdrawal from the US. Some
particularly bearish analysts saw signs that UK retailers were unable to
operate successfully overseas. M&amp;S receded 4 before rallying with the market
to close a net penny up at 416p.
Elsewhere in the sector, Storehouse was also weaker, with turnover heavy at
above 8m shares and the stock slipping 2 to 217p.
Dixons was actively traded, with dealers saying that the 3.5m turnover
represented a strong two-way pull on the stock. The shares declined 4 1/2 to
192p, with Smith New Court believed to have been putting the sell argument.
Tobacco and insurance conglomerate BAT Industries initially fell 9 in
reaction to the launch of a class action lawsuit in Florida against leading
tobacco manufacturers. Analysts said that the Florida tobacco action being
certified as a class action posed more liability danger than previous
tobacco lawsuits.
However, the shares received broker support - Lehman Brothers recommended
them ahead of third-quarter figures due today - and they ended the day only
2 lower at 437p.
Wellcome, the pharmaceuticals group, retreated 7 to 632p following a
television news report which cast a shadow over Septrin, a product to which
Wellcome contributes.
Bank shares were firmer, with the UK sector boosted by news that the Lehman
Brothers strategy team has included it as one of its most attractive
sectors.
Royal Bank of Scotland, which ran up 9 to 449p yesterday, was one of
Lehman's favoured UK banking stocks.
Standard Chartered dipped 7 to 286p after James Capel, the agency broker,
was said to have placed 1.5m shares. Another leading broking house was said
to have recommended a switch out of Standard and into HSBC.
Royal Insurance easily outpaced the rest of the composite insurance sector,
having been given a strong push by BZW, whose insurance team recently
visited Royal's US operations.
BZW insisted that the shares were 'some 20 per cent undervalued'. It said
that the outlook for Royal's US operations was considerably more promising
and a convergence to industry average returns would imply a turnround of
some Dollars 150m per annum in pre-tax profits. By the close, Royal shares
were 7 higher at 299p.
There was no let-up in the chase to buy the utilities, with the recs posting
further big gains on the prospects of bumper special dividends and sharp
profits increases when the interim reporting season gets under way in
December.
Water stocks were boosted by higher than expected interims from Thames
Water, although profit-taking left the latter a shade off at 531 1/2 p.
In the recs, East Midland jumped 35 to 721p as the market became
increasingly excited about the prospect of another special dividend post the
sell-off of the National Grid. Other recs to move higher included Eastern,
25 1/2 ahead at 821 1/2 p, and Manweb, 23 stronger at 830p.
A press report that Eurotunnel faces a potentially heavy bill for local
authority rates pushed the Units 4 lower to 231p in very thin trading
conditions. The company is said to be seeking government help to soften a
rates assessment of Pounds 42m by Folkestone County Council. The assessment
compares with forecast revenue by the company for this year of around Pounds
37m.
Media conglomerate Pearson improved 8 to 642p as SG Warburg reiterated its
positive recommendation.
Other statistics, Page 41
