FT  26 MAR 94 / Arts: Conceptual wit well realised - It all depends on how
you look at Markus Raetz's work
Markus Raetz is a Swiss artist, now in his 50s, who has exhibited widely
abroad except in Britain. He is a conceptualist, which is to say that the
informing conceit or idea is what gives his work its imaginative force.
Content before form, as it were: except that without the form, the concept
must hang unresolved in the artist's mind. 'Oh, I see', we always say, as we
take the point.
It is a matter of emphasis, balance, discretion. The conceptual may be in
essence a literary form, with the idea conceived first, and only then
demonstrated or expressed. But, as with all art, even literary art, it is
still the way it is done that counts. And even literary art should change
and grow, and turn in unforeseen directions in the process of the doing.
The great strength of Raetz as an artist lies in the lightness and delicacy
of his conceptual wit, and the complementary lightness of his touch in the
physical resolution and presentation of his ideas. He is unprescriptive,
undidactic, unpolemical, which is in refreshing contrast to the usual
tedious run of right-minded practice within the genre. He spells nothing
out, leaving the work to spring its gentle surprises on us, in our own good
time. We approach his things quizzically, intrigued, and often do not see at
all until we turn to go away.
His central theme is that of metamorphosis, of material and image alike
transformed, to be taken now in this way, now that. 'Ceci' in the mirror
becomes 'Cela'. He draws with twigs, not in the sense of using them as tools
for making marks, but as the drawn line itself, with each set of twigs
combined in the depiction of the particular image.
First we see and read a line upon the wall: then we recognise it in its
physical aspect as a twig, an object in real space, albeit in low relief.
Only then does the image register. As often as not, it is the simple naked
female torso, as it might be Daphne in the grove, and her breasts and thighs
picked out by the gentlest curve and fork of half-a-dozen bits of wood.
In one particular relief-tableau, Raetz takes the principle of fragmented
resolution to a characteristic extreme. Scattered neatly along the wall, so
it seems, is but an arbitrary collection of twigs, and no less arbitrarily
curved and bent and forked. We look up at it puzzled, and at the blue oval
painted alongside, at the plain glass in front of it and the mirror high in
the angle of the wall. Only as we move away to one side do we see, out of
the corner of the eye, that that same torso now shows itself in the mirror,
as its linear elements fly together in the oblique perspective. So, caught
again, back we go in front of it for another look: and as the image falls
apart again, so finally we catch its ghost reflection in the blue oval and
its matching glass.
Not everything is on the wall, nor done by mirrors, and often to walk around
the object is enough. So it is that a still-life sculpture of a large bottle
and small glass suddenly turns itself into, well, a large glass and a small
bottle. A man in a hat turns into a rabbit - or the other way about. Mickey
Mouse comes and goes. A white pipe puffs out blue smoke, turns upside down
and back again, and now puffs white smoke out of blue. It all depends on how
you look at it.
The charm of such work, and the natural interest and entertainment it
affords, is undeniable. Its profundity as art is more questionable. For
beyond the conceptual wit and its delicate ingenuity of expression, what
more does it offer than the hoary old truism - things are not always what
they seem? In the very easiness of its attraction lies its limitation, which
holds true of all conceptualism since old Duchamp stuck his urinal on the
wall and called it Art. Raetz asks us to look at his tricks, at his sleight
of eye and mind, at his delicatesse, which is all very well and honestly
done, but at last, where there is even only tacit explanation, there is no
ambiguity. The difference is between the mere conjuror and the magician
Raetz still might be - were he only to stand away a little from the
mechanics, however lightly stated, and give them room to work their own
magic. 'Ah', we say as, amused, we turn away, 'now I see how he does it.'
Markus Raetz: Serpentine Gallery, Kensington Gardens W2, until April 24,
then on to Geneva; sponsored by the Fondation Nestle pour l'Art, with
support from the Swiss Association of Private Collectors, Banque Bruxelles
Lambert (Suisse), the Swiss Cultural Fund, and Fountains, Lancaster Terrace.
