FT  27 AUG 94 / Girls' schools graduate up A-level exam league table
Girls' schools have risen sharply in the A-level examination rankings of
independent schools published in today's Financial Times.
Schools believe that parents' choice of where they send their children is
being affected by the A-level league tables, now in their third year of
widespread publication.
Girls' boarding schools showed the strongest improvement, with Downe House,
near Newbury, Berkshire, rising to eighth place from an average over the
previous five years of 59th.
Other impressive performances by boarding schools came from Malvern Girls'
College (13th, up from an average of 42nd), Badminton (19th from 76th) and
Roedean (27th from 96th).
Girls' day schools also improved on last year. Five members of the Girls'
Public Day School Trust, a network of schools which aims to charge
relatively low fees, were in the top 50 - South Hampstead, Notting Hill &amp;
Ealing, Brighton &amp; Hove, Wimbledon and Oxford High Schools. The top girls'
school, for the second year running, was North London Collegiate, a
selective day school.
The results are likely to sustain the recent recovery in demand for
single-sex girls' education. Girls' schools had seemed to be under serious
threat during the 1980s when many boys' boarding schools, which usually have
greater resources, were going co-educational either completely or just in
the sixth form. At the end of last term Felixstowe College, a large girls'
boarding school in Suffolk, closed because of declining rolls.
Mr Declan O'Neill, development officer for Malvern Girls' College, said
publication of league tables had encouraged parents to look at his school.
In particular, many were concerned girls would perform better in the
sciences in a single-sex school.
In university entrance, boys outnumber girls by six to one on engineering
and technology courses and three to one in mathematics. However, Downe
House, Malvern and Roedean reported that maths had been their most popular
subject and girls had moved on to science degrees.
Mrs Ann Longley, headmistress of Roedean, said that competition from
boarding schools with mixed sixth forms had dwindled.
A-level domination, Page 6
Britain's top independent schools, Weekend XIV &amp; XV
