FT  23 APR 94 / Sport: Waiting for sunshine in Ulster - Cricket / David Owen
visits a Northern Ireland club looking ahead to the season
Down at the ground overlooking scenic Lough Foyle the turf squelches
underfoot. The Rising Sun cricket club in Greysteel is one of many ordinary
pub and village teams which will face a damp start to the new season this
afternoon.
'You found it under the water then?' jokes Jim Moore, the Rising Sun's
owner, at the bar later. When not pulling pints, Moore doubles up as a
left-handed all-rounder.
But the Rising Sun is no ordinary pub. And Greysteel, a parish of 3,000
people straddling the main road from Londonderry to Limavady on Ulster's
north coast, is no ordinary village.
It was here six months ago on the night of October 30 that loyalist
terrorists burst through the door just after 10pm and fired indiscriminately
on customers. They killed seven - five Roman Catholics and two protestants.
Greysteel is not one of those places where your choice of pub depends on
what side of the sectarian divide you come. The Rising Sun was and remains a
mixed bar.
One of the victims was Moore's octogenarian father, a former opening batsman
for the club. Another was a stalwart of the local pub league.
As a handful of customers discusses the idiosyncracies of the local
steak-houses and studies the card for the 2.15 at Newmarket on Ceefax, it
seems hard to believe this unremarkable red-brick building could be the
scene of such carnage.
But as Moore proudly exhibits the refurbished lounge, complete with dance
floor, cricket club meeting room and electronic door lock, it begins to sink
in. 'They were standing right here just inside the door,' says one customer
in suit and tie. Another patron with tattooed forearms points out the corner
where he and others dived for cover.
If the government's version of events is to be believed, the upsurge in
violence culminating with this attack prompted a panicky secret message from
Provisional IRA leaders three days later. The message said: 'The country
could be at the point of no return.'
That a club playing such an archetypically English game exists at all in a
village where an estimated nine out of 10 inhabitants are nationalist is, at
first glance, surprising.
Those unfamiliar with the complexities of the so-called 'troubles' might
expect all Roman Catholics to run a mile from the national sport of what the
IRA regards as an occupying power and to stick to the traditional Irish
sports of gaelic football and hurling.
In fact this largely apolitical region has enjoyed playing cricket since at
least the turn of the century. 'I could show you a picture of the Greysteel
team in 1901 with their bowler hats and things,' says one local. 'People in
this part of the country play games in any form without thinking about the
undertones or the overtones.'
From the second world war onwards, this taste for cricket was reinforced by
the strong military presence in nearby Ballykelly and Eglinton.
'In peacetime the soldiers were well accepted,' says one Greysteel resident.
'They were seen as people who helped the commercial life of the village.'
By the time the 'troubles' began in 1969, the game was entrenched. 'It is
natural for people around here to play because their fathers played with the
military men,' said one local cricketer. The present team is about
three-quarters nationalist.
That the club is preparing for the new season as busily as the rain permits
in the wake of last autumn's atrocity is a testament to the tenacity of the
province's war-weary inhabitants and a small symbol of hope for the future.
Some of the teams the Rising Sun will face in section three of the North
West League will be exclusively Protestant 'You can't live in the past,'
says Moore in explanation of the club's determination to go on.
Liam O'Hara, a lawyer and opening batsman who captained the club in its
finest hour - its 1991 North West Junior Cup victory - talks over a pint of
Guinness of the 'subtle accommodations' which sportsmen in the area are
prepared to make.
'A man who plays cricket in order to spend time away from the wife and to
drink five or six pints in the evening is not a man who is going to fight
anybody,' he says. 'There could be subtle accommodations in every area of
life if there weren't so many flag-waving politicians with vested interests.
The people who play sport in general and cricket in particular don't have
any strong political views.'
This may be true in Greysteel in 1994, but it was not always so. A history
of Waringstown cricket club, one of Northern Ireland's finest, notes that
Charles Stewart Parnell was said to have led the nationalist side in the
home rule struggle of the 1880s and 1890s 'in much the same way he had
formerly led the County Wicklow XI'.
