FT  17 MAY 94 / Riva sets its sights on new steel target
Riva, the private Italian steelmaker, has joined forces with German and
Italian steelmakers to bid for the special steels division of Ilva, Italy's
state-owned steel company, only days after dropping its offer for Eko Stahl,
the east German manufacturer.
Fried Krupp of Germany and the Italian companies Riva, Falck and Tadfin,
lodged a bid last week for Acciai Speciali Terni, one of two main Ilva
divisions to be privatised.
News of Riva's decision to abandon its offer for Eko Stahl emerged on Friday
and the Italian company has refused all comment on why it broke off
negotiations with Germany's Treuhand privatisation agency.
In a statement issued yesterday by Lazard and Morgan Grenfell Italia, which
are advising the Italo-German bid for AST, the members of the consortium
promised 'a long-term commitment' to the state-owned company.
Iri, the Italian state holding company, is also reported to be considering
offers from Steno Marcegaglia of Italy and the French-owned Ugine, and two
separate bids for the flat steel division of Ilva.
The Treuhand, meanwhile, is looking for a new buyer for Eko Stahl. It has
been trying to sell the company for three years and the European Commission
had approved a DM813m (Dollars 487m) German government subsidised
modernisation plan provided privatisation was complete by June 30 this year.
The agency has wanted to modernise the plant by integrating its steelmaking
and its steel processing operations. That would involve building a new hot
rolling mill. At present, Eko Stahl ships its slabs for hot rolling to
plants in western Germany. These are then returned and cold rolled.
Eko Stahl and the Treuhand have struggled to find credible ways in the past
few years to sell the plant. One plan involved converting the site into a
large modern mini-mill to melt scrap metal. This would have allowed them to
close the last two working blast furnaces, but would have involved heavy job
losses.
Even with steelmaking retained on the site, the modernisation plan - which
would save 3,000 jobs until the end of they year and guarantee 1,700 until
2004 - is viewed with scepticism by the industry
Mr Ken Iversen, chairman of Nucor, a large integrated mini-mill operation
based in North Carolina, has his doubts. 'In terms of efficiency, the
management might just about get away with it with these large numbers. But I
am not so sure,' he said. 'It would be difficult to save lots of jobs and
have efficiency at the same time.'
Eko Stahl employed more than 12,000 before German reunification in 1990.
