FT  17 OCT 94 / Molyneaux backs further peace talks
Mr James Molyneaux, the leader of the Ulster Unionist party, has endorsed
the prospect of negotiations between Sinn Fein and the British government.
Amid clear indications that London will drop its insistence that an IRA
ceasefire should be declared 'permanent', Mr Molyneaux said yesterday that
negotiations between the British government and Irish nationalists would be
a 'very, very important development'.
The move came as the Irish government prepared in the light of the IRA and
loyalist ceasefires to end a state of emergency that has existed in the
republic since 1939.
The UUP leader, speaking for the first time since the declaration last week
of the loyalist ceasefire, said he did not see the word 'permanent' as an
essential obstacle.
Instead he told the BBC that the start of negotiations 'will mean that Her
Majesty's government will be represented by intermediate-rank civil servants
with a mix of intelligence officers to verify, to obtain from the IRA
assurances . . . that their command structure has been disbanded'.
His comments come amid strong expectations that Mr John Major will announce
his government's readiness to initiate talks on the constitutional future of
Northern Ireland in the next two weeks.
A decision on such talks could be taken by the cabinet's Northern Ireland
committee later this week. There is speculation that the government will
make its intentions clear before a Commons debate on Ulster expected on
October 26.
Mr Molyneaux made clear yesterday that he did not expect the UUP to hold
talks with Mr Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein leader.
Asked whether he would shake Mr Adams' hand, he replied: 'I don't quite see
that happening for a long time because I don't see that we're going to be in
the same company.' The remarks implied that Mr Molyneaux would like to see
the peace process restricted to bilateral London-Sinn Fein talks.
Speaking to the UUP conference at Carrickfergus on Saturday Mr Molyneaux
also restated his party's misgivings about the peace process.
He attacked as 'unworkable' the principle that nothing is agreed until
everything is agreed.
The republic's move to scrap the state of emergency, introduced in the
second world war to deal with IRA activities, was described yesterday by Mr
Dick Spring, the Irish deputy premier, as 'a powerful and symbolic way of
saying that the national emergency is ended, and that a national nightmare
is over'.
Mr Spring told a meeting in Cork he would table proposals to revoke the 1976
Emergency Powers Act, introduced following the IRA murder in Dublin of
British ambassador Christopher Ewart-Biggs and reinforcing earlier emergency
powers, which allows the detention of terrorist suspects for a week without
being charged.
In the wake of the loyalist ceasefire Mr Martin MacGuinness of Sinn Fein
raised the prospect of an early meeting with Mr David Ervine, representative
of the loyalist paramilitaries.
Editorial comment, Page 29
