FT  17 SEP 94 / FT Guide for the Serious Investor (12): A slice of the cake
 -Business angels / Many can offer past experience, but they will expect
much in return
Business angels are wealthy individuals who appear in answer to the prayers
of small businesses, bearing large amounts of money to invest and expertise
to help the business expand.
They may sound heaven-sent, but most expect rewards in distinctly earthly
form - an annual return of 20 per cent or more on their investment, and, in
some cases, a job.
Small companies, particularly in the start-up phase, are notoriously risky
investments. Many fail in the first few years, and even the survivors often
struggle to break even. But there are a few roses among the thorns - and
investors hope that the business they pick will be one of the few which
thrive and grow, possibly blossoming into a stock market-quoted company.
The unique attraction of angel-style investment is the opportunity to take a
hands-on role in the company - many angels have run their own businesses and
want to put their experience to good use - but there are also those who
contribute more as sleeping partners.
The UK is thought to lag far behind the US in terms of business-angel
activity, but a recent study by a PhD student at Oxford concluded that the
business-angel market in the UK might be larger than previous estimates
suggested. The angels were also richer - a third of those surveyed had a net
worth of more than Pounds 1m - and on average invested more than previously
thought.
Patrick Coveney carried out the study in collaboration with Hamish
Stevenson, of Venture Capital Report, a monthly publication which aims to
match would-be angels with suitable projects. The survey gathered material
from more than 500 experienced or potential angels.
The researchers identified six distinct types of business angel:
Virgin angels: individuals with funds available, who have yet to find a
suitable proposal;
Latent angels: rich individuals who have made angel investments, but not in
the last three years;
Wealth-maximising angels: rich individuals and experienced businessmen who
invest in several businesses, to try to better the returns of the stock
market;
Entrepreneur angels: very rich, very entrepreneurial people who back a
number of businesses for both the fun of it and as a better option than the
stock market;
Career-seeking angels: less well-off individuals who invest in a business to
generate an income or job for themselves; and
Corporate angels: companies which make numerous large Angel-type
investments.
Virgin angels formed more than a third of the survey, pointing to the need
for more help in taking the plunge with the first investment.
Until now, two things have hampered the development of a thriving
business-angel sector: the difficulty businesses and potential angels face
in finding suitable partners, and the lack of tax incentives. Progress is
now being made on both these fronts, with the tax incentives of the
Enterprise Investment Scheme (see below) and the launch of a growing number
of business introduction services *.
The latest arrival on the scene is the high-tech 'computer dating' approach
of Enterprise Adventure, with its VentureList national database. Others
include specialist agencies, divisions of training and enterprise councils
(Tecs), and accountancy firms with a history of making introductions.
The cost to investors of using the different services varies, from Pounds
300 for an annual subscription to Venture Capital Report or Pounds 500 for a
year's access to Venturelist; to less than Pounds 50 for membership of a
smaller agency, or free access to some services. Most also charge a success
fee when a deal is arranged.
* The British Venture Capital Association publishes a directory of business
introduction services. For a free copy, telephone 071 240-3846. Other
contacts: Enterprise Adventure (0483 458111); Venture Capital Report (0491
579999).
