FT  13 AUG 94 / Nice man - but he had to go: Truth of the Matter - Why the
vicar who only believed in 'God' was sacked
At one time we would have put the Rev Anthony Freeman, vicar of St Mark's
Church, Staplefield, in West Sussex, on the rack and then burned him to
death unless he recanted.
The formidable Dr Keating, of Eton college, had his methods too. A boy who
admitted he was having doubts about the Holy Trinity was told: 'Boy, you
will believe in the Holy Trinity by 3 o'clock this afternoon or I will beat
you until you do.'
In these milder times we just stop paying those accounted heretical. But is
it the monstrous attack on freedom of speech it has been made out to be?
What else can you do with an amiable parson who pops up in his pulpit one
Sunday and says to the faithful: 'Sorry, folks, um, I don't quite know how
to put this, but that He / She / It Out There to Whom we've been beaming our
prayers all these centuries, well, um, He? She? It? isn't out there after
all.
'It is just empty space. The only possible recipient of all that love and
adoration and all those fervid prayers is right here - yes, um, in our own
tummies.'
So he must go. His bishop has said so. But he is a lovely vicar. Paradigm
and paragon of Christian benevolence. Not a peep of criticism of Freeman or
his ministry has crept into the press, which generally salivates over
dismembered priests.
It is a crying shame. And it is not as if the Church is awash with cuddly
and innocent vicars. Cruel and tyrannical bishop, intolerant prelate come
forth]
Enter from the right, the Right (very Right) Reverend Eric Kemp, Bishop of
Chichester, now nearly 80, long past the age when more complacent bishops
have retired. He is the prime and unpopular mover (or remover) in this small
but intriguing ecclesiastical drama which has made headline news and
prime-time TV. Kemp has decided, as he is legally entitled to, that he will
not have parsons, however amiable, who happen not to believe in God.
But here the plot thickens. This thoroughly non-turbulent priest is not an
atheist - so he claims. He does believe in 'God' - the quotes are essential
if clarity is to be retained. But he has come to the conclusion, first
advocated by Don Cupitt, a fellow of a Cambridge College, that by 'God' we
are not referring to a supernatural transcendent Being other than ourselves,
but rather to all those human aspirations, ideals and moral values which are
in some sense 'higher' than ourselves.
'God' is a human construct. On to the blank screen of the universe we
project our own image of beauty, truth and goodness, the noblest image of
ourselves we can conceive. To speak of that image as an objective personal
Agency or autonomous Being is, and has been, a useful expedient in the early
ages of religion. But a more sophisticated age now realises that to believe
It really is 'out there', independently of the projection of the human mind,
is to treat a metaphor as literal fact.
If I say 'my love is a red rose', I will not take kindly to friends who give
me a greenfly spray as a wedding present. On this view 'God' is a
compendious metaphor for all the religious instincts of human beings. So
Freeman still believes in 'God' but not in God.
Bishop Kemp will have none of it. And, in spite of his chauvinist
intransigence over the ordination of women, I fear he is right in this case.
Don Cupitt and Freeman and the 'Sea of Faith' group have (in my view) sold
the pass, chucked out the baby with the bathwater and severed the spinal
cord of Christian faith. Those innocent little quotation marks are
profoundly important.
Their basic proposition is attractive to any thoughtful person trying to
make rational sense of religious belief. There is something hauntingly
incomprehensible about an invisible, intangible and ultimately unknowable
Transcendent Being. The paradoxes of human discourse about God present human
intelligence with almost intolerable perplexity.
St Augustine saw that 1,500 years ago. There can be no literal discourse
about God, only pointers towards Him. (Or Her or It.) Theologians use
analogue or metaphor, the mystics poetry and visionary language, knowing
perfectly well that it is not, and cannot be, literal.
But, unlike Freeman, traditional theology believes that these metaphors are
not mistakes but essential for any discourse about a Divine Being who in his
own inner essence is not part of the space-time continuum we inhabit.
So, if a meteorite were to hit this planet and reduce it and us to fizzing
gas 'God' would cease to exist; his light would go out with the destruction
of the human projector. But, on the other hand, if the whole cosmos got
folded up into a black hole and vanished up its own fundament, God would
still be God.
Why is the issue so important - important enough to sack a kind and popular
priest? Because the heart of authentic religious experience is at stake. The
central religious experience is an encounter with a Divine Being who is
Other.
It is possible to enter into a relationship with that Other which has two
centres. This Other is experienced by the human ego as One in whom reside
transcendent Beauty and Truth and the mysterious quality of the Holy. But
also the Other is another 'I' to whom I can say 'Thou' and who can address
me from his own autonomous personal Being with a responding 'thou'.
In the course of the transactions between these two personal foci a
relationship of intense exchange begins to take place. The strange visionary
poetry of the mystics is the only barely adequate language which begins to
describe this spiritual experience. But essential to it is this quality of
personal love and trust - a sense that there is One who makes a promise to
the human spirit.
Of all the issues at stake in this drama that seems to me to be one which is
of key significance. God is a God who makes promises to me and keeps them.
Nothing located inside me or inside the human community can serve that
purpose. A metaphor cannot make a promise.
But a lot of other orthodox Christian beliefs get scrubbed as well.
Creation, Redemption, Incarnation, Atonement, Resurrection and Eternal Life
get the chop. No institution committed to teaching and upholding those
doctrines can continue to employ a teacher who denies them all, or declares
them to be no more than significant fairy tales.
Now it is quite possible that Freeman is right and the tradition of catholic
Christianity is wrong. But he really should not feel aggrieved if the church
which is committed to those beliefs decides it can no longer employ him in
order to undermine its basic doctrines. The fact that a lot of his
congregation agree with him does not make it any better; it just proves he
is a charming and persuasive chap.
Underlying this rather sad story is a much deeper issue, of which Freeman
and his friends may be a symptom. There is no doubt that the formulations of
traditional Christian Doctrine do need radical restructuring. The New Age
cults are speaking to a widespread spiritual hunger which is not being
addressed by mainstream catholic or evangelical Christianity. They emphasise
the 'god within', the divine in nature, the earth mother, the organic
continuum from inanimate rocks to the highest spiritual being. They see
institutional Christianity as the enemy of that new mystical awareness.
The restructuring of Christian doctrine will have to respond to that hunger.
But it must also preserve a philosophical and intellectual rigour which
Freeman and the New Age cults both lack.
Hugh Dickinson is Dean of Salisbury.
