FT  27 JUN 94 / Business Travel: Variety of voyages to Vietnam - The choice
of carriers is increasing rapidly
British Airways has become the latest international airline to begin
negotiations for flights to Vietnam. The fast-growing Vietnamese economy and
expanding tourism industry are making it an increasingly attractive
destination for air freight and passenger services.
BA hopes to start flying twice a week between London and Ho Chi Minh City,
the southern commercial centre, in the first half of next year. The flights
may go via Hong Kong, rather than more directly through Bangkok, to fit in
with BA's other flight schedules.
Air France, Lufthansa and KLM (all using combination Boeing-747s for both
passengers and cargo) already fly between western Europe and Vietnam, while
Vietnam Airlines, the national carrier, begins flights to Berlin and Paris
via Dubai in July. Several Asian airlines fly to Vietnam, while Gulf Air and
Emirates from Abu Dhabi and Dubai are expected to start flying there soon.
US airlines are also negotiating with Vietnamese and US authorities for
traffic rights. There are 1m ethnic Vietnamese living in the US, and travel
between the two countries is increasing following President Bill Clinton's
decision in February to lift the US economic embargo against Vietnam.
Vietnam's communist government is liberalising its air transport system,
along with the rest of the economy. Foreign airlines will be able to issue
their own tickets in Vietnam - previously only three airlines were allowed
to do so, and the rest had to refer customers to Vietnam Airlines. The
government also plans to end subsidies for Vietnamese citizens on domestic
flights - locals pay less than half the fare charged to foreigners.
Other opportunities have also arisen for airlines. Air France is leasing,
with crews, Airbuses and ATR propeller aircraft to Vietnam Airlines for
domestic and international flights. And there are plans to improve the main
airports. The government says Tan Son Nhat, the busiest airport, needs
Dollars 1.8bn worth of upgrading in the next two decades.
