FT  18 MAR 94 / Survey of Poland (35): Where the bison roam free - Bronwen
Maddox visits an unspoiled wilderness where wildlife abounds
The long, scuffed tracks in the snow between the trees give some warning.
But it is still a shock when the black, shaggy bulk of a bison, one of the
largest and rarest wild creatures in Europe, emerges out of the forest
shadows at the roadside.
Poland's environment contains some of Europe's extremes: Silesian filth in
the south-west, and undisturbed wilderness in the east.
The government is keen for the wilder regions to attract tourism. But while
Polish environmentalists are worried about the impact of development, so far
the remoter regions remain astonishingly unspoiled.
Two hours east from Warsaw, the road becomes entangled in the Biebrzy
marshes - 100 kilometres of peat bog, the largest in Europe.
Naturalists recite its catalogue of wildlife with reverence: 36 species of
fish and 235 species of birds, which make it a stopping point on the
north-south migration routes.
When it floods in the spring, it becomes half land, half water; horses
become stranded trying to cross it, people resort to dinghies, and only the
marshes' 400 wild moose, with huge, splayed hooves, can venture across
safely.
The real heart of the Polish wilderness, however, is still further east.
The Bialowieza, Europe's last primeval forest, is a dark, ungroomed tangle
of oak and ash, straddling the border with Belarus.
For years the region has been a twilight zone of half-forgotten villages
connected by potholed roads. The ethnic and religious homogeneity of much of
Poland yields to a central European medley; the small Ukrainian and Belarus
communities are marked by the domed spires and double-barred crosses of
Orthodox churches.
The region's isolation has helped preserve species rare elsewhere.
Golden-beaked eagles crouch in the grass over dead chickens, while wild boar
gouge troughs in the snow looking for nuts, and the deeper forest recesses
conceal lynx and wolves.
But the undisputed pride of the forest is the bison, coaxed back from near
extinction after the war, when only six were left alive. The forests,
formerly hunting grounds for aristocrats, were protected as a nature reserve
under communism.
After careful breeding, there are now 251 bison roaming the forests in
dozen-strong bands, 37 in compounds at the forest's centre, and another 300
on the Belorus side of the border.
Taller and slimmer than the North American buffalo, their heads are larger
and thrust further forward. Adult males weigh up to 1,000 kilos, with
foot-long pointed horns. 'They have a wild temper - there is no possibility
of a person touching them,' say the foresters.
Mr Zbigniew Krasinski, head of bison research at the reserve, says: 'We are
looking for signs of problems because the genetic pool is so small, such as
a drop in fertility or physical deformation. But so far we have found none.'
Poaching is a concern - hunters do not attack the bison directly, but their
snares entangle the animals' muzzles and hooves.
So is the antagonism of farmers bordering the forest, whose crops are
regularly raided by adventurous herds.
But one of the reserve's most controversial tasks is keeping down the
numbers - the bison, which mainly eat grass, also strip the bark from ash
and oak.
The reserve exports as many bison as it can to other regions of Poland and
abroad.
However, it still must shoot several dozen a year to keep the population
stable. The staff 'pick the ones with defects - those which are weaker, or
were late calves, or limp', says Mr Krasinski.
Bialowieza has rejected the route taken by other Polish reserves in the
north-east and south-east where hunters are permitted to pay to shoot the
bison for sport.
According to Mr Krasinski, the right to shoot a large bison with impressive
horns - 'a gold model' animal - fetches about DM11,000 (Dollars 6,250).
'Maybe shooting would be profitable but there is a strong lobby of
environmentalists who say 'not in the Bialowieza - you can't shoot the king
of forest in his castle',' says Mr Krasinski.
That decision leaves the reserve with slender finances. It enjoyed 100,000
visitors a year before 1989, mainly large expeditions from state factories,
but now receives only 60,000, of which only 5,000 come from outside Poland.
The foresters are sanguine, however. 'We don't want mass tourism here', says
Mr Krasinski. 'Sure, money is a problem, but somehow we always manage.'
