FT  10 NOV 94 / Demirel raises stakes in tense regional game: Project means
Turkish hand on Syrian and Iraqi water supply
When Turkey's President Suleyman Demirel inaugurated a key new stage in the
country's gigantic hydroelectric and irrigation project yesterday, he also
raised the stakes in an increasingly tense game of regional power politics.
Turkey is water-rich, but its Arab neighbours are desperately short of it;
strategists warn that the question of water is becoming a more explosive
Middle East issue than that of oil.
The South-east Anatolia Project, known by its Turkish acronym Gap, is a
complex of 22 dams on the Euphrates and Tigris rivers. As well as developing
a remote and neglected corner of Turkey, it also represents a Turkish hand
on the water supply of Syria and Iraq.
With yesterday's inauguration of the first stage of the 26.4km Sanliurfa
irrigation tunnel, 30 cu m a second of water will begin flowing from the
huge Ataturk Dam through a mountain range to the arid Harran Plain to
irrigate nearly 500,000 hectares of land.
Gap is a dream come true for Mr Demirel, a hydrological engineer called the
'king of dams' and one of the project's prime movers in the 1960s. Gap's
huge size (the Ataturk Dam is the world's fifth largest and the Sanliurfa
tunnel is the longest of its kind) is a potent affirmation of national
pride.
Mr Demirel said at yesterday's ceremony attended by 2,000 people: 'We have
many more projects (for the region). We now know that we are able to carry
them out alone.'
Gap is being designed and built almost entirely by Turkish companies. Turkey
is also financing most of the Dollars 32bn (Pounds 20bn) cost alone, since
multilateral lenders refused to support the project. Still, the Gap project
is expected to add more than Dollars 1bn a year to Turkey's Dollars 170bn
GDP.
Once it is fully operational early in the next century, Gap will irrigate
land twice the area of Belgium. The Harran Plain, site of some of the
earliest civilisations, has fertile soils but lacks abundant water.
Critics complain the project will increase the power of feudal landlords,
and fear the government is underestimating its environmental costs. Further,
water running off the plain into tributaries is likely to become polluted
with pesticides, fertilisers and salts and become unsuitable for use further
downstream.
The plain will produce cash crops such as cotton and soyabeans. They will be
processed in nearby cities, creating jobs and raising incomes for the
country's most depressed region. Officials hope it will bring stability to a
region wracked by 10 years of fighting between government forces and
guerrillas of the separatist Kurdistan Workers' party (PKK).
But for Syria and Iraq, which depend heavily on the Euphrates, Gap is a
nightmare. Each cubic metre of water poured on to the Harran Plain
represents a roughly equal reduction in the Euphrates' flow.
Before the first dams were completed in the late 1980s, the Euphrates
carried 856m cu m of water across the Syrian border every second. In 1987
Turkey promised Syria a stable flow of 500 cu m a second. If worst-case
scenarios are borne out, pre-Gap flows further downstream into Iraq could be
cut by more than 80 per cent in the next 40 years.
Turkey gave Syria and Iraq no role in Gap's development and has never
reached an agreement with them over sharing the waters of the Euphrates and
Tigris. International lenders such as the World Bank refuse to back Gap.
Thus, Turkey has had to postpone or scale back projects. Building Gap is
straining government finances and fuelling inflation of more than 100 per
cent.
Syria is not satisfied with Turkey's unilateral 1987 commitment to supply
500 cu m of water a second. It has chosen to press Ankara for a water deal
by supporting the PKK. Turkish security forces are spending more than
Dollars 7bn a year to fight the PKK in the Kurdish south-east.
Mr Dogul Ergil, a political scientist at Ankara University and adviser to
the Gap administration, says: 'Turkey proposed a philosophy of mutual use,
to consume water where there is less evaporation and cultivate land where
the soils are most fertile, and share the fruits'.
But 'our neighbours are dictatorships and it is not in the nature of
dictatorships to co-operate.'
Optimists hope water may yet bring peace rather than conflict. Already Gap
is shifting the region's strategic balance towards Turkey. But like many
Turkish officials, Mr Ergil strenuously denies Gap is anything more than a
development project: 'Turkey has never thought of using it as an instrument
to manipulate our southern neighbours.'
