FT  08 NOV 94 / Arts: Passion from Cole - Theatre
That Stephanie Cole is a superb actress should be news to no-one. True,
there are moments during A Passionate Woman, Kay Mellor's new comedy, when
it surprises us that she is quite so good at bringing to life Betty
Derbyshire (nee Wilson). Betty, the menopausal Yorkshire wife of Donald and
doting mother of Mark, is so affected by the prospect of losing her only son
on his wedding day that she retires to the attic, where she is visited by
the ghost of Craze, her one true love. To make such a character funny is one
thing; to make her touching is something else. But Cole succeeds in both,
and she also prepares us, stroke by subtle stroke, for the Romantic heroism
which Betty finally attains.
After the attic, Betty takes to the roof; and then . . . Mellor has
constructed her play so deftly that we cannot guess what Betty will do.
Still, as the play does end, we may recall how far Mellor, in only two
hours, has brought Betty since the start - when she climbed up into the
attic and announced to us 'I've been to the new Asda.' What's more, it turns
out her chat about Asda was not irrelevant, for in Act Two she tells her
husband of the moment, in Asda, that she stopped her in her tracks - when
she saw her hand, unrecognisably aged, and yet recognisable because it bore
her wedding-ring.
This terrain has already been charted by Alan Ayckbourn. In A Woman in Mind,
Ayckbourn showed a middle-aged woman who similarly withdraws from her
household, moving not to the attic but to the garden. She too is haunted by
spectral figures. A Woman in Mind is a more daring playthan A Passionate
Woman, which at times is rather more light than its subject. Yet this does
not make Betty the less realBetty's pain in relinquishing her son - or
rather, in Act One, her refusal to consider the matter - is acute; and more
acute is the way she retreats to the one brief time in her life when she
discovered her passionate inner self.
Most acute of all is the way that Betty's mind keeps flickering between one
subject and another. Cole's timing is such that she can make us laugh at
lines that hardly seem funny in themselves, and can turn a more obviously
'funny' line ('I have to be careful with cheese, because it tends to put on
weight with me') into something cherishable.
Neil Morrissey (as son Mark), Alfred Lynch (as husband Donald), and James
Gaddas (as bien-aime Craze) all make fine contributions. Patrick Connellan's
two-sided house-top set is splendid. Ned Sherrin directs. The pacing, and
comic/poignant fluctuations of tone, are remarkably finely tuned. At two or
three moments (no more) I thought that a line had been wrongly weighted -
but in each case, I later discovered that the weighting of the line had in
fact prepared me for the way the play was to develop.
Comedy Theatre, London SW1
