FT  13 DEC 94 / Management (The Growing Business): Banking on the ombudsman
 -Alison Smith on the extension of a complaints scheme to small firms
The greatest pleasure, as described by Charles Lamb, the essayist, was
'doing a good action by stealth and having it found out by accident'.
This approach is less desirable when the ability to do the good action
depends to a large extent on publicity.
It is therefore unfortunate that the extension of the banking ombudsman
scheme to any complaints from small businesses as well as those from
personal customers has had such a low profile.
The report from the banking ombudsman for 1993-94, published last week,
marked the first time that the scheme has separated complaints made about
banks' behaviour by business customers from those made by personal account
users.
Sole traders, partners and unincorporated companies have been able to have
their complaints heard by the ombudsman since the scheme first started in
1986.
But only since January last year has the scope been extended to limited
companies which have an annual turnover of up to Pounds 1m. The ombudsman
can only take up complaints after banks' internal procedures for addressing
grievances have been exhausted. It is therefore really only this year that
the extension has had much impact.
Some small business groups had hoped that businesses which already had
access to the ombudsman might also come forward with their grievances. But
since the new new role has gained little coverage such businesses have not
been encouraged to air their views.
Despite the lack of publicity, the report revealed that more than 1,700
complaints to the ombudsman related to business - about one in five of the
total 8,700 complaints received in the year to the end of September.
This is an increase of about five per cent on the proportion they
represented in the previous year's report.
Laurence Shurman, the ombudsman, expects the number to rise gradually, as
the business dimension to the scheme becomes better-established. 'It takes a
while for things to pick up,' he says.
At the same time, he believes there will be fewer cases reaching the
ombudsman as banks show themselves increasingly ready to resolve business
complaints.
This is, he believes, partly because business customers often have more
leverage with the banks than do the personal customers.
'Where a complaint relates to a very modest personal account there is less
room for profit. But where a bank is hoping to profit from a business that
complains, it may decide that even if it doesn't agree in this particular
instance, it makes good commercial sense to go along with it.'
Nonetheless, the ombudsman does not rely heavily on this possibility where
small businesses are involved.
Shurman instead has called for the voluntary code of banking practice to be
extended to small businesses.
It is therefore uncertain whether they would welcome any extension of the
code, which will not be issued in a revised form again until 1997.
Shurman may have to demonstrate the advantages that have followed from the
extension of his own role to small businesses, if an extension of the code
is to occur.
John Parsons, chairman of the Confedertion of British Industry's small
companies panel, says anecdotal evidence suggests there has been no major
impact. Even so, he is clear that the move is worthwhile.
'If you're running a growing business and you have a complaint against a
bank, you may well not have the resources to deal with it yourself,' hesays.
'But businesses ought to be more aware of the scheme.'
