FT  06 MAY 94 / Survey of The Channel Tunnel (4): Volume could treble by
1996 - British Rail expects a boom in freight traffic
The opening of the tunnel creates enormous opportunities for rail freight
transport in the UK.
With few freight journeys economical at distances of less than 300 miles,
the land-locked British rail network has in the past been unable to compete
with road.
The completion of an undersea rail link with France changes all that. The
10,000 miles of British railway track will be joined to the mainland
European network of 150,000 miles.
Transit times of just 26 hours between Manchester and Stuttgart and of only
30 hours between London and Milan should now be achievable.
'The opening of the Channel tunnel will give us a very large railway to
sell,' said Mr Ian Brown, managing director of Railfreight Distribution
(RfD), the British Railways' freight arm responsible for container and other
shipments to the Continent.
Freight is expected to take up an important chunk of the 50 per cent of
tunnel capacity which has been booked by the national railway companies. It
is also forecast to account for a large part of Eurotunnel's revenues from
running shuttle trains between Folkestone and Calais.
RfD hopes that the opening of the tunnel will increase current train freight
volumes from 2m tonnes a year to 6.5m tonnes within two years and 9m tonnes
by about 2000. At present railborne freight, which goes by train ferry from
Dover to Dunkirk or by lift-on, lift-off container ship between Harwich and
Zeebrugge, accounts for just 7 per cent of cross-Channel shipments by
container, closed rail wagon or lorry.
RfD hopes to develop its container business and conventional bulkier
shipments of cargoes such as steel, paper and wood products and white goods.
It has contracted to carry Ford vehicle components to Spain and completed
Rover cars in specially built double-decker wagons to Italy.
Success will depend, to a large degree, on RfD persuading potential
customers that it can provide a high standard of service. Many shippers have
given up on BR in the past because of the unreliability of its freight
deliveries.
An important advantage of road transport is that the driver stays with his
truck to ensure that the cargo reaches its destination on time and in good
condition.
To overcome this suspicion RfD has promoted the creation of three joint
venture companies in which road hauliers and shippers also have a
shareholding. Combined Transport (CTL), Allied Continental Intermodal (ACI)
and Unilog will sell freight capacity to hauliers and freight forwarders.
Increasing rail freight traffic will also involve a change in attitudes in
the UK towards what is known as intermodal or combined traffic, the shipment
of goods by more than one means of transport, in this case road and rail.
Because of the long distances involved in mainland Europe, intermodal
traffic is much more widely established on the Continent.
Apart from containers, it can take three main forms: piggyback shipments
which involve standard truck trailers being carried on specially designed
low platform rail wagons; swap bodies which are effectively truck trailers
without the wheels; and roll-on/roll off transport where the complete road
vehicle, including the tractor unit and cab, are loaded on to the train.
Intermodal shipments within Europe rose to 20.1bn tonne/kilometres in 1993
from 19.1bn the year before and 15.4bn in 1988, according to the
International Union of Rail-Road Transport (UIRR), which groups 17 companies
throughout Europe.
The European Commission is keen to promote the increased use of intermodal
shipments to relieve pressure on busy transport corridors, to reduce exhaust
emissions by trucks and to increase road safety. It has enabled combined
transport operators to claim financial support from their national
governments for investment in equipment.
Some continental European governments have granted concessions on road tax
for vehicles involved in combined transport activities.
Germany, for example, has given 100 per cent refunds for vehicles which
carry out a specified number of journeys in a year.
The UK meanwhile is raising the weight restriction on trucks serving
regional rail terminals from 38 to 44 tonnes.
But despite the continuing growth of intermodal shipments, the UIRR is
concerned at what it sees as a bias towards roads in the European Union's
policy of liberalising transport.
With the exception of Switzerland and Austria, which are not EU members but
which are keen to get lorries off their roads and on to rail, no country has
made satisfactory efforts to promote intermodal transport, it said in its
1993 annual report.
That further investment in intermodal capacity is needed was confirmed by a
study by consultants AT Kearney. This revealed that a shortage of road/rail
terminal capacity and the lack of a standard loading gauge (which determines
the width and height of wagons) on Europe's railways were constraints on
growth.
On many journeys combined transport could compete with road on price but on
average road/rail journeys were slower than those made solely by road.
Intermodal shipments travelled at an average of 37 kilometres/hour while
road shipments went at 69 km/hour, the survey found.
Improvements in the quality of the service, more active marketing and the
creation of a standard loading gauge could lead to a trebling of intermodal
shipments, which were just 4 per cent of total shipments at the time of the
survey.
The cost of introducing a standard loading gauge would be enormous, as RfD
has found with work involved in upgrading just a small part of the British
network. Modifying even a limited number of routes from the Channel tunnel
to the Midlands, the north west of England and Scotland to what is known as
the Berne gauge would cost more than Pounds 3bn, it has calculated.
RfD has compromised by designing a new fleet of low-platform wagons, which
avoid the need for a full-scale conversion to the Berne gauge, and by
renewing bridges on key routes.
Even so, its total investment in preparing for the Channel tunnel has
amounted to Pounds 450m.
This has created a freight network which links into nine regional freight
terminals which are owned by the railways as well as a number of privately
owned terminals which are currently being developed.
If all goes well RfD hopes to have six trains a day travelling through the
tunnel this summer rising to 16 trains each way by the spring of 1995.
Britain would then be finally plugged into the European rail freight
network.
