FT  18 OCT 94 / International Company News: Deterioration continues at Roche
Sales of Roche, the Basle-based healthcare and fine chemicals group,
continued to deteriorate in the third quarter, falling 4.7 per cent to
SFr3.4bn (Dollars 2.63bn).
Roche, which is in the process of completing a Dollars 5.3bn acquisition of
the US pharmaceuticals group Syntex, also said yesterday that it would make
a SFr230m provision against this year's pre-tax profit for a restructuring
of its pharmaceuticals division. Some 5,000 jobs would be eliminated, mainly
in the US.
However, Roche said it still expected 1994 net income 'to show a further
rise' over last year's SFr2.48bn.
The rise of the Swiss franc continued to dampen revenues. Expressed in local
currencies, total sales in the nine months to September 30 were up 6 per
cent. In Swiss franc terms, they were flat at SFr10.7bn.
The group said it 'felt the impact' of health cost containment measures
taken by governments in several countries. Sales in the pharmaceuticals
division, which turned downward in the second quarter, fell 4.3 per cent in
the third quarter to SFr1.85bn.
However, it said pharmaceuticals sales in local currencies grew
significantly faster than the average for its sector in most leading
countries, due to its strong position in the hospital market.
The vitamins and fine chemicals division achieved a volume increase in spite
of competition from low-cost suppliers from the Asia-Pacific region. Sales
were down 7 per cent in the quarter at SFr780m.
Sales of the diagnostics division fell 10.8 per cent in the third quarter to
SFr380m, reflecting closure of some unprofitable laboratories and changes in
customer payment policies. Two new applications of Roche's polymerase chain
reaction technology, for detecting the hepatitis-C virus and mycobacterium
tuberculosis, have been well received.
The flavours and fragrances division bucked the group trend, achieving a 4.7
per cent rise in third-quarter sales to SFr375m. The group cited strong
sales of flavours in the US and a general recovery of fragrance sales.
