FT  06 MAY 94 / Survey of The Channel Tunnel (18): Many unanswered queries -
Regions / Kent waits in hope and foreboding
Kent is looking forward to the opening and full operation of the tunnel with
a curious mix of fear and hope, foreboding and enthusiasm.
The contrasting views come from different parts of the county and are based
on the varying impact the project will have on local jobs and economic
prospects.
The days when the opening of the tunnel was regarded locally as an automatic
boost to jobs and a panacea for many of the county's problems have long
disappeared. The last few years have been too painful, particularly in north
and east Kent, and too many unanswered questions were raised during the
tunnel's construction.
In 1987, the first estimates of the Kent Impact Study suggested that an
additional 9,600 to 12,900 jobs might be created by the tunnel and its
related infrastructure, but following the impact of recession this was
revised sharply down in 1991 to 2,000.
There were several contributory reasons for this dramatic decline apart from
the recession, including much greater job losses than expected among the
ferry operators at Dover, Folkestone and Ramsgate, and among customs
officers and freight forwarding agents following the introduction of the
European single market.
Even these modest benefits are likely to be concentrated of specific areas
such as Ashford and not on more peripheral areas of north and east Kent like
Swale (Sheppey and Sittingbourne) and Thanet (Margate and Broadstairs),
where additional employment is most needed. There remains a view that the
tunnel could create a corridor of affluence from the coast to London,
leaving the remaining areas out in the cold.
The extended recession has also meant that few developments have been made
before the opening. It was only when the initial breakthrough of the service
tunnel was achieved in December, 1990, that completion became accepted as
certain, but economic circumstances then delayed many of the necessary
infrastructure improvements.
The three areas with a good supply of development sites are Dartford,
Maidstone/Malling and Ashford. These straddle the main tunnel transport
corridor and are potentially the most attractive locations for new economic
activity.
Ashford, an historic market town, has been earmarked as a growth centre and
a great deal of infrastructure including new roads and business parks has
been put in place, but even here the situation remains blurred and progress
has been frustratingly slow.
Potential inward investors have been reluctant to commit themselves until a
decision is reached by the government and British Rail on the line of the
fast rail link serving the tunnel. There are three possible routes at
Ashford under discussion, central and southern ones that would go through
the Pounds 50m international passenger station under construction in the
town centre, and a northerly one that would bypass it.
Choice of the northerly route parallel to the M20 motorway would be a big
economic blow according to local civic leaders as it would mean fewer trains
would stop at the station. A decision is imminent and the outcome is
regarded as crucial to the full development of Ashford as a growth centre
with its spin-off effects for the rest of east Kent.
Outside the affluent corridor occupied by Canterbury, with its tourism and
retailing strengths, Maidstone, the county's administrative centre, and
Ashford, the impact of the tunnel remains problematic, certainly in the next
year or two. The 1991 impact study suggested that new employment
opportunities would be generated from 1996, including in areas like east
Kent, and that these would be enhanced by the construction of the
international rail link by the turn of the century.
In the meantime, the most deprived parts of east and north Kent have banded
together to form the east Kent initiative to push for help. The first key
objective was achieved last year with the granting of assisted area status
and the acknowledgment by government of the area's problems. Aid from both
Whitehall and from Brussels, particularly for Thanet which has full
development area status, should ensure that training and infrastructure
grants are forthcoming to attract more inward investment.
Hardest hit of all by the completion of the tunnel has been Dover, by far
the biggest cross-channel ferry port. The combination of the tunnel and the
single European market has led to the loss of around 6,000 jobs in the
district.
There is an assumption that when the tunnel is fully operational it might
attract up to 50 per cent of the tourist car business and perhaps 25 per
cent of the freight business. Nevertheless, ferry operators and the Dover
harbour authorities remain bullish about long term prospects, but they admit
that the ferries will have to continue to slim down in order to remain fully
competitive.
