FT  13 JUN 94 / Major attacked as Tory campaign truce ends
Sharp divisions in the Conservative party over Europe and Mr John Major's
leadership re-emerged last night as the government braced itself for its
worst defeat in a nationwide election since the second world war.
Amid predictions that the Conservatives would hold on to at most half of its
32 seats in the European parliament, Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary,
signalled the start of a concerted cabinet operation to shore up Mr Major's
premiership.
The Labour party, confident of winning more than two-thirds of the 84
British seats in the Strasbourg assembly, claimed that the election outcome
marked the beginning of the end of the Conservatives' 15-year grip on power.
Mr Paddy Ashdown's Liberal Democrats predicted they would win their first
seats ever in the parliament, but opinion polls suggested that the surge in
support for the party earlier this year had been checked by a rise in the
Labour vote.
Mr Hurd, who strongly defended Mr Major's strategy in the European campaign,
said it would be 'absolutely crazy' for the Conservatives to think about
changing leader for the second time in four years. He told BBC Radio: 'We
have someone whom I believe to be an excellent prime minister.'
That view was echoed by Sir Norman Fowler, the party chairman, and Mrs
Virginia Bottomley, the health secretary, as the cabinet prepared for a
backlash from disgruntled MPs when they return to Westminster tomorrow after
the Whitsun recess.
Characterising the European elections as the low point in the government's
fortunes, Sir Norman held out the prospect that strengthening economic
recovery would pave the way for tax cuts well before the general election
due by mid-1997.
But hopes that the party's warring factions would maintain the fragile truce
which held during the European campaign were shattered by outspoken
criticism of Mr Major from both the right and left.
From the right the prime minister faced calls for a radical reshaping of the
government's domestic policies combined with a toughening of the sceptical
approach to Europe which featured in the campaign.
Rightwing members of the executive of the backbench 1922 committee called
for another round of deep cuts during this summer's public spending
negotiations to open the possibility of tax cuts in the November Budget.
Leading Euro-sceptics echoed a weekend call from Mr Norman Lamont, the
former chancellor, for Mr Major to give a firm commitment that a
Conservative government would not participate in a single European currency.
But ministers on the centre-left of the party privately echoed sharp
criticism of the prime minister from its pro-European wing. In a warning
that Mr Major would depend crucially on their support if he was challenged
for the leadership, the pro-Europeans warned he must stop 'appeasing' the
Tory Euro-sceptics.
Jobs policy to dominate Labour leadership poll, Page 24
