FT  30 APR 94 / Arts: Camus cult hits France - An unfinished novel has
prompted a reappraisal of this author's work
When the police trawled around the wreckage of the sports car in which
Albert Camus met his death in 1960, they found his diary, a copy of Othello,
a book by Nietzsche and the first draft of an autobiographical novel about
his boyhood.
The manuscript was littered with crossed-out words, missing phrases and
spelling mistakes and Camus's widow, fearful that it would damage the
already diminished reputation of her husband, refused to release it. Last
month this unfinished work was finally published, 34 years after the death
of its author, and it has become an instant best-seller.
In the first fortnight alone, 125,000 copies of Le Premier Homme were sold
and the publisher, Gallimard, is now rushing out a second edition. The
forlorn face of Camus, with his Montgomery Clift looks and method actor
poses, stares soulfully from the pages of the French press and from posters
plastered across the bookshops.
'There's something of a Camus cult in France at the moment,' says Antoine de
Gaudemar, arts editor of Liberation, the liberal-left daily. 'He's always
been popular with young readers. But it's only relatively recently that his
work has been reassessed by the critics. The success of Le Premier is
incredible. We've never seen anything quite like it.'
The excitement over the book is in stark contrast to the status accorded
Albert Camus's work at the time of his death. By then, his literary fortunes
were at their nadir. He had been lionised by the Paris intelligentsia when
his first novel, L'Etranger, was published in the mid-1940s, but he soon
fell foul of fellow existentialists Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir,
then the titans of the intellectual scene.
Their backgrounds were very different from that of Camus, the son of a
working class family brought up in the slums of Algiers. The acid entries in
de Beauvoir's biographies suggest that he was a little too arriviste for her
taste.
'I think Camus was going through a crisis caused by the feeling that his
golden age was drawing to a close,' she said, when describing him flouncing
out of a party after a row with Sartre. 'His good luck had gone to his head.
He thought there were no limits to what he could do.' The final straw came
when Camus refused to join their opposition to French colonial rule in North
Africa, the critical issue for the fashionable French left in the late
1950s. He also drew unwelcome attention to the fascism that had followed in
the wake of the French and Russian revolutions: the 'Prometheanism' that
degenerated into 'Caesarism'.
By then, Camus's work had also fallen from favour on the wider literary
scene. His stark, moralistic approach was at odds with the more stylised,
newly fashionable nouveau roman of Nathalie Sarraute and Alain
Robbe-Grillet: even winning the 1957 Nobel Prize for literature was not
enough to rehabilitate him.
'At the time of his death Camus was a real bete noire for the French left,'
says Florence Noiville, a journalist with Le Monde. 'His work was also
regarded poorly in academic circles. It looked as though he was finished.'
Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, Camus's literary stock remained low.
It was not until the 1980s that the tide began turning back in his favour
when a number of French academics started to reappraise his work. Florence
Noiville suspects that Camus's star rose again because of the political
changes in the post-Cold War era. 'The issues, like the Algerian War, that
turned people against him in his lifetime, now seem a long way off,' she
says. 'And his old critics on the left have lost credibility.'
Now it is his old foes, Sartre and de Beauvoir, who have fallen from grace.
Antoine de Gaudemar is convinced that Camus's ascent is connected to their
fading fortunes. 'Whenever their currency goes down, Camus's comes back up,'
he says. 'It can't be entirely coincidental.' He also believes that Camus's
ascetic style and unrelentingly pessimistic plots strike a chord with
contemporary readers. 'There's an ethical aspect to his writing that's very
appealing,' he says. 'It's a style that's difficult to find elsewhere as so
many modern French novelists are still locked in the nouveau roman mould.'
The publication of Le Premier Homme has set the seal on Camus's newfound
success. The book, which only runs to 144 pages and retains all the errors
and omissions of the original manuscript, paints a poignant picture of his
poverty-stricken childhood in Algiers. 'It's a beautiful piece of writing,'
says Noiville. 'It shows us a vivid, more humane side of Camus that we
haven't seen before.'
Will foreign readers be as tolerant of the flaws and failings of Le Premier
Homme as the author's new-found fans in France? The publishing industry
seems to think so. Gallimard has received offers for the 16 different
translations of Albert Camus's last, albeit incomplete work.
