FT  31 DEC 94 / Scalfaro rules out snap poll: Italian president's decision
to try to form new government angers Berlusconi
President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro yesterday ruled out a snap election and
committed himself to finding a new government, albeit of brief duration.
The president announced his decision after consulting political leaders and
institutional figures following resignation of the Berlusconi government.
Under Italy's constitution, President Scalfaro has the power to dissolve
parliament and appoint prime ministers. His decision is a snub to Mr Silvio
Berlusconi, the outgoing premier, who has insisted on an election in March
or April. The move is likely to make their already difficult relationship
even more tense.
President Scalfaro said his consultations had revealed 'a manifestly clear
conclusion: a majority of the chamber of deputies and the senate were
against immediate elections'.
His use of the word 'immediate' was significant. This underscored his belief
that it will be difficult to avoid elections soon. But it also emphasised
his determination to avoid Italy going to the polls with Mr Berlusconi
heading a caretaker government that had neither the authority nor the time
to tackle Italy's public finances and tidy up the country's imperfect
electoral laws.
President Scalfaro will begin a second round of consultations with the heads
of parliamentary groups on January 3. Within a week, he would then hope to
be in a position to see whether there was sufficient support for a
government headed by an independent premier. This government would have a
limited mandate centred round preparing the country for fresh elections.
With the present parliament a mere eight months old, President Scalfaro is
reluctant to dissolve it so soon. He is in particular concerned by the
plight of the lira on the foreign exchanges and by the unresolved conflict
of interest between Mr Berlusconi's role as a politician and his ownership
of the Fininvest media and business empire.
The defection of the populist Northern League from Mr Berlusconi's
right-wing coalition has provided the opportunity for the president to say a
majority in both houses are against a quick election. And President Scalfaro
clearly interprets this majority as the will of parliament.
In contrast Mr Berlusconi continues to claim that he was given a mandate to
govern that remains valid. If its validity is questioned, says the media
magnate turned politician, then the electorate must immediately decide.
Mr Berlusconi is backed by his main ally, the neo-fascist MSI/National
Alliance and two minor partners, the Christian Democratic Centre (the
right-wing Christian Democrat rump) and the Reformists of Mr Marco Pannella.
Judging by his recent behaviour, Mr Berlusconi will do his best to discredit
President Scalfaro's efforts to postpone a spring election. Any delay in
holding elections is likely to lead to a loss of a sympathy vote for the
ousted premier. He also risks being deprived of his hegemony over the
television channels by tough new regulations on political coverage.
Mr Berlusconi has become increasingly belligerent as his options have
narrowed. As long as he is in the political limelight and is backed by the
votes of his Forza Italia movement, he stands a better chance of defending
himself against the corruption investigations of Milan magistrates and
protecting his television interests.
Equally he seems to have realised that having jumped into politics from
business, he cannot easily return to his Fininvest empire. Fininvest itself
is now run by a professional manager who is drastically restructuring to
reduce debt.
Euromercato sale hitch, Page 9
