FT  30 SEP 94 / Survey of World Economy and Finance - The World's Economies
 -Eastern Europe (49): Painful legacy of the past - Russia and the former
Soviet Union states
The former Soviet states have suffered, and are still suffering, a series of
external and internal shocks more serious and crushing than any developed
country has had to withstand since the second world war. They are reeling
under these shocks: their economies - with the exception of the three small
Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania - are still plunging because
of them. There are signs, especially in Russia, of improvements, but not yet
of sustained recovery.
These shocks were: the steady degradation of the Soviet economic system,
already evident in the early 1980s and made worse by the misconceived
economic reforms of Mikhail Gorbachev; the steady drop in energy -
especially oil - output, which continues; the ending of the Comecon trading
bloc in 1990; the multiple declarations of national independence at the end
of 1991 which exacerbated the already-evident breaking of industrial and
economic links between the 15 Soviet republics; the creation of separate
currencies, forced on most republics by Russia's decision to make the rouble
a national currency; the ending or curtailing of Russian energy and other
subsidies to the other republics; and the inability or unwillingness of the
new national elites to introduce market economic institutions and practices,
even as they can no longer depend on the old collective institutions.
These have been common in one form or another to all of the states: in some
cases, they have been exacerbated by civil wars - affecting all three of the
transcaucasian states of Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia; Tajikistan in
Central Asia; the transdnestrian region of Moldova; and the north Caucasian
republics of Russia, especially Chechnya. In these states and regions,
economies have been ruined for a decade or more. Each has to cope with
hundreds of thousands of refugees, and the state or regional governments are
largely overwhelmed with day-to-day crises, unable to plan or rebuild.
Even in those states which conflict has not touched, the shocks described
above have been numbing in their effects. Industrial output in the most
developed states - Russia, Ukraine, Belarus - has plunged by at least a half
(on official figures, which are unreliable: nevertheless the trend is clear
and is dramatic). Inflation is endemic - and where curbed, as it is in
Russia and has been in Ukraine - the drop in its levels is achieved by
simple axeing of government commitments and programmes which include paying
workers their wages.
There are signs of change. The Baltic states, which now dislike the reminder
that they are 'former Soviet' republics, have wholly (Estonia) or partially
(Lithuania) succeeded in stabilising their economies and have begun the road
towards integration into the European Union which their leaderships have
unambiguously identified as their main goal. In Estonia's case, this was
achieved by text book 'shock therapy' - indexing the kroon to the D-Mark
overnight two years ago, and rendering it illegal to issue credits to fund a
budget deficit. The tiny state now has the highest growth levels in Europe -
though its economy was already the richest of the former Soviet states and
it had relatively little heavy industry.
Russia is the critical case. When, in spring of 1994, the government agreed
with the IMF to bring inflation down to 7 per cent a month this year and to
keep the budget deficit under 10 per cent of GNP in return for the Dollars
1.5bn second tranche of the systemic transformation facility, it seemed a
commitment which would never stand the test of time and of the pressures of
the manifold lobbies which have in the past derailed efforts - including
those of Yegor Gaidar, the former acting prime minister - to keep the
economy on track.
However, as of early September, the government has kept to its pledge -
bringing inflation down from more than 20 per cent a month in January to
under 5 per cent in July, and claiming to be running a budget deficit of
under 10 per cent on an annualised basis. Encouraged by these signs of
monetary stability, foreign portfolio investment in the Russian
privatisation process is climbing very sharply.
This impressive feat - which has reversed the conventional view of Victor
Chernomyrdin, the prime minister, from being one of a barely-altered Soviet
'red director' to a politician determined to institute market reforms - has
not been achieved without pain, nor is it seen as having definitively
shifted the Russian economy on to a reform path.
The government has cut down heavily on credits, but this has meant that
workers have not been paid, investment has been postponed and debts between
the enterprises have rocketed to vast levels. At the same time, there is
little sign of large-scale strategic investment, either by Russian companies
or by foreigners - though the large corporations are increasingly making at
least token investment, while ABB Brown Boveri, the power engineering
company, has taken a (still all but unique) decision to locate much of its
production in eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
Russia thus hovers between the past and the future, with no unambiguous sign
that it is prepared to move one way or the other.
The size of Russia, and its virtual monopoly of oil and gas production,
means that all other republics are hugely dependent upon it. This fact of
life has impressed itself on the elites of Ukraine and Belarus, the two
other Slav states, and they have now produced a political leadership anxious
for close ties with Russia and for a continuation of supplies of cheap
energy.
Ukraine's inability to grasp the nettle of reform initially appeared to mean
stability - but in the past year has seen the country's economy sink rapidly
to the point where much of industry is idle at least part of the time, the
currency is chronically prone to inflation and the vast Donbass coal region
sinks under debt.
For the IMF and for the World Bank, the success of reforms in the former
Soviet states is critical to their strategic choices of how reforms should
be conducted elsewhere. Both institutions, especially the Fund, have been
heavily criticised for offering an 'off-the-shelf' prescription emphasising
monetary stability and budgetary discipline: but the critics have yet to
propose a convincing alternative and the Fund has been strengthened by the
acceptance by the Chernomyrdin government of its strategy for this year, and
its success so far in carrying it through.
The reform process here remains the most important in the world: and it
remains among the most uncertain.
