FT  07 MAY 94 / Cut lace binds two countries closer together
A ribbon of Calais lace stretched between two high-speed trains was cut by
the heads of state of Britain and France yesterday to mark the official
opening of the Channel tunnel.
The Queen and President Francois Mitterrand stepped off the trains which had
brought them to Calais from their respective capitals to mark the end of 200
years of on-off plans and seven years of tough and often dangerous
tunnelling.
The Pounds 10bn project forms the first man-made link between the two
nations. The cost of the project, one of the largest and most ambitious
engineering feats undertaken, has risen to double the original estimates.
In Britain the day had begun with the official opening by the Queen of the
Waterloo international terminal. The Queen then boarded a train for the
32-mile trip through the tunnel. The Eurostar train also carried Mr John
Major, a host of other ministers and rail officials.
The whole journey including the start through Kent took 1 hr 45 mins. The
train increased its speed as it swooped into the tunnel at Folkestone. Apart
from the darkened tunnel walls flashing past at up to 100mph, the 30-minute
journey through the tunnel itself was marked only by a slight increase in
noise from the air conditioning system.
On arrival at the Calais terminal, the Eurostar train nosed up to its
counterpart which had brought President Mitterrand and French dignitaries. A
French military band struck up before the ribbon cutting.
President Mitterrand had set off from Paris for the ceremony after
inaugurating a new rail terminal at Gare du Nord Station. The train carrying
him and prime minister Edouard Balladur was decked with French and British
flags.
The French president, the son of a railway stationmaster, said in a
newspaper interview that the tunnel helped 'anchor the construction of
Europe', bringing it forward 'more than any speeches'.
Speaking at Calais, President Mitterrand said he felt 'very emotional and
proud'. He added: 'After two centuries of dreams, today is the conclusion.'
He said the tunnel was one of the century's most prestigious endeavours. Its
opening would strengthen the European Union and the creation of a single
market.
President Mitterrand praised Lady Thatcher for her part in sanctioning the
building of the tunnel when prime minister. Lady Thatcher, sitting in the
front row among hundreds of dignitaries, smiled as she was singled out.
The Queen, noting that yesterday was the first time that British and French
heads of state had met without travelling by boat or aircraft, said the
tunnel demonstrated the strength of relations between the two countries.
Speaking in French to an audience of more than 1,000 guests, the Queen
referred to the 'violent fluctuations' in Anglo-French relations through the
ages. But the tunnel, she said, was an example of 'a successful combination
of French elan and British pragmatism'.
She congratulated the engineers and entrepreneurs who had built it, saying
that they had 'rejoined what nature had separated for some 40m years'.
After lunch, the Queen travelled back through the tunnel on board Le
Shuttle, one of the trains that will carry cars between Paris and London in
three hours. She was joined in her Rolls Royce Phantom VI by the French
president.
At Folkestone, Eurotunnel co-chairman Sir Alastair Morton told the two heads
of state: 'It is my proud honour and privilege to confirm that the Channel
tunnel is built and ready for service.
'In a year or two the journey you have both just made will be an everyday
experience for millions of people.'
But Sir Alastair said people must not forget the 10 people who had died
working on the project.
Mr Denis Filer, president of the Engineering Council, said: 'Our
congratulations go to the engineers of all disciplines who have accomplished
what must be rated as one of the world's greatest engineering achievements.
It is a proud day for British engineering.'
The tunnel system was today closed to the public - once again returned its
recent ritual of continuous safety testing.
A start-up date for passenger services has yet to be set. Freight trains may
start using the tunnel as early as next week if safety clearance is obtained
 -but passenger services will probably have to wait until July.
