FT  14 MAR 94 / The joke's over, says Hartlepool
Today on radio, television and poster sites Hartlepool starts a fightback
against decades of jokes.
Since the townspeople allegedly hanged a monkey - mistaken for a Frenchman -
in the Napoleonic Wars this north-east community has suffered a poor
reputation.
When work was plentiful in its steelworks, shipyards and docks Hartlepool
could be indifferent to this image. But from 1963, when it lost its last
shipyard, dramatic decline started in its heavy industrial backbone and
unemployment rose. Hartlepool, said Mr Ron Norman, chairman of the Teesside
Development Corporation, was 'the first town to go over the edge'.
Now its promotional bodies see tourists and inward investors in light
industry as crucial to economic well-being. To attract them, the borough
council today mounts a four-year, Pounds 600,000 campaign funded mainly by
the government-backed City Challenge urban regeneration scheme.
The campaign slogan, Hartlepool - The Future is Here, will be promoted
nationally on Classic FM and in regional media.
Between 1970 and 1992 the town, with a working-age population of less than
40,000, lost nearly 12,000 industrial jobs. Cream gateau manufacturing
employs more people than British Steel. One man in four is jobless.
Yet research identified the town's image problem as a continuing association
with dirty heavy industry. Mr Barry Keel, borough economic development
director, said inward investors selected sites by deleting the least
favoured from their list. 'That's why a negative image is very important,'
he said.
It matters for Hartlepool's tourist drive too. The government-funded
Teesside Development Corporation forecasts more than 1m visitors a year for
the town's marina, built from derelict dockland.
The marina includes housing, shopping and a pseudo-18th century fishing
village built around the dry dock of the defunct Gray's shipyard.
The Napoleonic frigate HMS Trincomalee, the second-oldest floating warship,
will move to the dry dock as an attraction next year.
Mr Jackie Cannon, one of 13 shipwrights working on the Trincomalee, said
that the marina was once a local joke. 'People thought, who'll come there?
But I can see people coming here now,' he said.
Teesside Development Corporation estimates public and private-sector
investment in the marina will reach Pounds 170m.
