FT  26 NOV 94 / Halifax and Leeds to form bank: Building societies' merger
will create company with assets of Pounds 90bn
The Halifax and the Leeds, two of the UK's largest building societies, have
agreed to merge and convert into a fully-fledged bank and a public limited
company.
The deal is a significant move in the restructuring of the personal
financial services industry. If it goes ahead, it will create the
third-largest high street bank, with about Pounds 90bn in assets and a
quarter of new mortgages.
Mr Jon Foulds, Halifax chairman, said the societies had 'the opportunity to
create a Yorkshire based world-class alternative to the clearing banks',
which would continue to focus on savings, mortgages and insurance.
In contrast to traditional society mergers, members will not benefit from a
bonus distribution of funds if the merger is approved. But they will later
get shares in the new company.
At today's stock market values, the combined organisation would have a
market capitalisation of Pounds 8bn-Pounds 9bn, which would mean shares
worth between Pounds 500 and Pounds 1,000 on average for members.
Under the merger, the Halifax will take over the Leeds, with the 10m members
of both societies voting on the deal in spring 1995. Then, if members
approve in a second vote, the enlarged group will convert itself to a plc
with a full banking licence.
The new organisation will keep the Halifax name, chairman, chief executive
and head office. Five non-executive directors and two executive directors
from the Leeds board will join the Halifax board, and some of Leeds' product
names - such as the Liquid Gold savings account - will be retained.
At its annual general meeting this year, the Halifax said it was seeking a
merger with another society. The Leeds had been intending to merge with the
National &amp; Provincial building society but talks were called off in October
1993. It has been without a chief executive since February 1993, when Mr
Mike Blackburn left to become chief executive of the Halifax.
The deal must overcome several regulatory and legal hurdles in order to
succeed. These include a decision by the Department of Trade and Industry
about whether the merger should be referred to the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission.
The two societies have about 20 per cent of outstanding UK mortgage balances
and about 24 per cent of new mortgage business. They are no longer offering
new customers the opportunity to become members by opening savings accounts.
New investors will be offered non-voting deposit accounts.
The conversion would represent the largest single extension of share
ownership in the UK. It would be the first such move since Abbey National
converted to plc status in July 1989.
Rival financial services executives were divided yesterday about the impact
of the merger on competition. Some societies argued they would benefit more
from the removal of Leeds, the fifth-largest society, as a separate presence
than they would lose from Halifax becoming even larger. It is already almost
twice the size of the next largest, Nationwide Building Society.
Nonetheless, the deal may encourage other societies to press ahead with
mergers. And it is likely to reignite interest in coverting to plc status
and to intensify the search for cost savings.
The overlap between the 1,100 branches of the two societies has already led
to fears of job losses among their 27,000 or so staff, although the
societies said they expected job losses to found through natural wastage.
Inequality in the society wedding, Page 11
London stocks, Page 17
Lex, Page 22
