FT  10 NOV 94 / UK Company News: Former tipster makes his mark - Carlisle's
reconstruction comes as no surprise
The transformation of Carlisle from a small financial services company into
an ambitious property investment company has caused little surprise, as it
carried the classic hallmark of its main shareholder, entrepreneur Mr Nigel
Wray.
The former tipster, who bought the Fleet Street Letter for Pounds 7,500 and
transformed it into the multi-million pound concern that eventually became
Carlton Communications, has had enormous success reconstructing shell
companies.
In 1988, his newsletter group Chartsearch launched a successful bid for
Burford, a fledgling USM-traded property group.
It has since been transformed into a Pounds 270m-capitalised group which
owns the Trocadero and a Pounds 100m prime portfolio acquired from Ladbroke
in February.
Mr Wray is hoping to do the same with Carlisle, a company he has known since
the mid-1980s, when he acquired a large holding in its former incarnation,
Somportex. Its primary business at the time was Slush Puppy. He sold the
bulk of his shares in 1987, but repurchased 33 per cent of Carlisle in
January at a substantially lower price.
Mr Wray's love of small companies dates from his days as a trainee fund
manager with Singer &amp; Friedlander.
After his success with Fleet Street Letter in the early 1980s, he launched a
spate of takeovers, including a bid for Singer 10 years after he left it as
a trainee.
He has managed to keep on good terms with his investments, and retains
directorships and small shareholdings in both Singer and Carlton.
His other main investment is a 13.5 per cent stake in The People's Phone,
the independent cellular phone service provider, which now has 180,000
subscribers and should make profits of Pounds 8m this year.
Mr Wray sees himself as an investor in people. He has focused on basic
businesses and backs managements in which he feels confident.
'My job is to make sure that I have got the right chief executive, that he's
doing his job well, and that he's got the optimum conditions in which to
work,' he said.
Property is a business he likes. At Burford he found a company run by
ambitious chief executive and fellow Mill Hill old boy Mr Nick Leslau.
His aim was to establish a conservatively financed group that could focus on
investing in problem properties, producing a reasonable rental stream but
requiring intensive management.
In the case of Carlisle, he is backing Mr Jonathan Harris, who worked his
way up from office boy to senior partner at property agency Pepper Angliss &amp;
Yarwood, Carlisle's only operating business.
Mr Harris, Carlisle's chief executive, has spent the last four years trying
to reverse the actions of a previous management which took the group into
stockbroking and Welsh gold mining, with disastrous results. He is finally
in a position to move forward.
'Carlisle's strategy is to acquire properties whose value can be enhanced by
intensive management', said Mr Wray, echoing the old policy of Burford.
He is keen that Carlisle should build up investment in Mayfair, funding
purchases through trading out existing properties and, if the market will
support it, new equity.
Carlisle's timing has not been immaculate. An earlier deal, involving the
purchase of some small properties from Burford, was blocked by the Stock
Exchange because the holding company did not have a three-year track record.
Carlisle's share price at the time was about 30p, compared with Tuesday's
closing price of 22 3/4 p. However, Mr Wray himself has fared better, having
bought in at 11p. Following the placement, his shareholding will be diluted
to 17.7 per cent, but he maintains that he is there for the long term. 'I
like the stock market, but when I look back, it is only the investments that
I've had for five or 10 years that count,' he said.
