FT  28 JUN 94 / Business and the Law: A question of costs - Julian Lew says
a Lords' decision could mean fewer arbitrations in England
A recent decision by England's Law Lords may have undermined London's
attraction to the international business community as a venue for
international arbitration.
Concern about unwarranted interference by the English courts in arbitration
proceedings will inevitably make many English and foreign lawyers think very
carefully before choosing London as the place of arbitration in disputes
arising out of international contracts.
English law has long been a significant export from the UK. International
contracts of all kinds involving parties from different countries are often
subjected to English law.
Particularly in the emerging markets of the Far East, English law is chosen
to regulate construction, agency and distribution, intellectual property,
joint venture, investment and finance contracts.
English law is chosen because the parties feel it is intrinsically the most
appropriate system for their particular problem. This may be because the
parties cannot agree to use either of their national legal systems but
accept English law as a neutral body of law.
They choose English law not because it is that much better than many other
national laws, but because it is a commercial, well-developed, tried and
trusted system; because the English language is the main international
trading language; and because there is a large reservoir of experienced and
able English lawyers.
French law, Swiss law and New York law, however, are equally highly regarded
around the world, and are also often considered suitable for regulating
international contracts.
Due to Britain's trading eminence last century and early this century,
London became, and remains, a centre for many forms of arbitration,
particularly those involving maritime and commodity issues.
One of the factors that made England a popular arbitration venue was the
fact that English law and the courts supported arbitration proceedings to a
greater degree than in many other countries.
But whether due to arrogance or conservativeness, English law fell behind
the times and more and more international arbitrations went to other
countries, notably to Switzerland, France and the US.
The movement of arbitration away from England in the 1970s was a direct
result of the interference of the English courts which allowed the parties
to abuse the case-stated procedure, giving the courts an opportunity to
review decisions of arbitrators.
After a clamour from lawyers and some business circles, the 1979 Arbitration
Act was passed. This only partially redressed the situation. The power of
the English courts to review decisions of arbitrators was greatly curtailed
and limited to important questions of law, having wider application than for
any one particular case.
Moreover, in international matters, except in traditional London maritime,
commodity and insurance arbitrations, the parties were permitted to agree in
the arbitration agreement to exclude judicial review of the award.
Nevertheless, English law is now out of step with most other arbitration
systems.
There is one underlying intention behind every arbitration agreement: to
exclude the jurisdiction of national courts in favour of an arbitral
tribunal. While speed and low expenses do not always result from a resort to
arbitration, the ability to have an arbitrator with knowledge and experience
of a particular commercial sector, and a degree of privacy and
confidentiality of the dispute and the procedure, are the main reasons why
parties favour arbitration.
But arbitration cannot occur in a vacuum: the agreement of the parties to
submit to arbitration, support for the procedure, and enforcement of the
award will always be needed from national courts.
The question is the extent to which national courts should, practically,
supervise and control arbitration proceedings.
In many countries, this dividing line has often become blurred. It is
difficult to tell a national court judge that he has and should exercise no
jurisdiction over an arbitration amd expect him to accept that.
Hence, when a cogent argument is made that justice necessitates the
intervention of the court (even though the real aim is to avoid or frustrate
arbitration proceedings), the court will be reluctant not to attempt to
provide the justice sought. When this occurs, it is done with a parochialism
which reflects national law and procedure, and ignores that fact that the
parties come from different systems.
This problem was well illustrated by the recent House of Lords decision in
the Ken-Ren case*. This was a typical international arbitration, between a
Kenyan claimant and defendants from Belgium and Austria.
The claimant was insolvent but the arbitration was being funded by the
Kenyan government. A tactic to avoid litigation in England has always been
to seek security for costs from the foreigner. This is to tie in with the
general rule in England that the loser pays the winner's costs  - a rule
which does not exist in most other countries. In international arbitration
it is a power that is sometimes, but not invariably, exercised by
arbitrators.
English law gives the courts the power to order security for costs in
arbitration; arbitrators only have that power if expressly agreed by the
parties. The House of Lords decided, by a majority of 3:2, that in certain
circumstances, and very exceptionally, the English courts could intervene in
an international arbitration and require a claimant to put up funds as
security for costs merely because that arbitration is taking place in
England.
This decision was based, primarily, on a belief that, if arbitration occurs
in England, it must be subject not only to the supervision and control of
English courts, but ultimately also to English procedural rules.
The particular characteristics of the Ken-Ren case are of secondary
importance. What is crucial is the fact that by their approach the Law Lords
have placed a disincentive to parties to come to arbitration in England.
Why should parties who come to England due to its neutrality, geographic
convenience, and local legal expertise be subject to the inconvenience, and
sometimes idiosyncracies, of certain English procedures.
If arbitration is directed away from London, Britain's invisible earnings
will suffer and the influence of English law on commercial transactions
generally in other corners of the world may be affected.
If security for costs is to be allowed at all (and there are divergent
views) it is the arbitrator rather than the court that should decide the
issue.
This issue will feature prominently over the coming months in the debate
over the development of a new arbitration law in the UK. The international
arbitration community will watch with interest. For the moment it is
probable that the effect of the recent House of Lords' decision will be to
persuade foreign lawyers and parties to locate their arbitrations elsewhere.
The author is a partner of Coudert Brothers, the international law firm, and
Head of School of International Arbitrations at the Centre for Commercial
Law Studies, Queen Mary and Westfield College, University of London.
*Coppee-Lavalin SA; and Voest-Alpine Aktiengesselschaft v Ken-Ren Chemicals
and Fertilizers (in liquidation in Kenya).
