FT  29 OCT 94 / Economic Diary: Forward events
TOMORROW: Middle East/North Africa economic summit in Casablanca (until
November 1). 50th anniversary meeting of the International Civil Aviation
Organisation in Chicago.
MONDAY: Monthly digest of statistics (October). Economic trends (October).
M0 figures (October-provisional). US personal income and spending
(September). European Union foreign ministers meet in Luxembourg.
TUESDAY: Advance energy statistics (September). Bank of England quarterly
bulletin (third quarter). US NAPM index; construction spending (September).
Mediterranean environment ministers conference in Tunis. Interim results
from BP and Thames Water.
WEDNESDAY: All Saints and All Souls' Day - European institutions closed for
holiday (until November 2). Overseas travel and tourism (August). UK
official reserves (October). Banks registered in UK consolidated external
claims (June). US leading indicators; factory orders (September). Bosnian
republican and federation parliaments to meet. Senior officials of
Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation forum (APEC) meet in Jakarta. IAEA
meeting in Vienna. Financial markets in Singapore closed for holiday.
Interims from BAT Industries.
THURSDAY: Details of employment, unemployment, earnings, prices and other
indicators. Major British banking groups' quarterly analysis of lending
(third quarter). Full monetary statistics (including bank and building
society balance sheets, bill turnover statistics, lending secured on
dwellings, official operations in the money market, sterling certificates of
deposit and sterling commercial paper (September). US new home sales
(September). Financial Times holds conference 'Corporate Risk Management and
the International Insurance Industry' in London. Boots results. London Film
Festival opens.
FRIDAY: Housing starts and completions (September). Insolvency statistics
(third quarter). Company winding up and bankruptcy petition statistics. US
unemployment data. Franco-African summit in Biarritz.
