FT  21 APR 94 / Arts: Jansons and the London Philharmonic - Concert
Even now the final act of the London orchestras' drama has not been played
out. By failing to follow through its policy on creating a super-orchestra,
the Arts Council has contrived to leave one of the London orchestras without
a principal conductor.
The choice was essentially between the Philharmonia and the London
Philharmonic. In the belief that either one or the other would get the money
(but not both) Mariss Jansons signalled his willingness to be principal
conductor of the former while still principal guest conductor with the
latter. But even a two-way bet is not guaranteed to win, when it is the Arts
Council spinning the roulette wheel.
Both orchestras were reprieved and Jansons had to make a choice. Doubtless
because he was already in post at the London Philharmonic, he decided to
stay there, leaving the Philharmonia without a successor to its departing
music director, Giuseppe Sinopoli. The orchestra had been unanimous in its
support for Jansons and has not identified any other conductor with whom it
wants such a close relationship.
Jansons's first concert at the Royal Festival Hall since details of the
backstage wrangling leaked out was a vivid example of why two orchestras
should be fighting over him. During the past decade he has consistently
shown that he can get razor-sharp playing out of his orchestras and the
London Philharmonic will prosper if it can continue to hold on to him.
Although he is no 18th-century specialist, his Mozart is worth a hearing. A
polished Symphony No 41 before Christmas was followed on Tuesday by a
sparkling Symphony No 40. The clarity that he gets is remarkable, every
inner part in the finale crystal clear. No doubt Mozart was intended to be
the link with Schnittke's (K)ein Sommernachtstraum, a piece of classical
pastiche that quickly turns sour with sarcasm. As in Shostakovich, the
humour is delivered with a Soviet-style iron fist.
The Schnittke demands a huge orchestra, which was on hand because of
Strauss's Don Quixote after the interval. This is a flamboyant score very
much after Jansons's heart. The performance was one of heightened contrasts,
speeds and colours all more extreme than usual. It is easy to imagine the
swashbuckling Jansons charging at windmills, while the eloquent cellist
Heinrich Schiff looked after Quixote's idealistic dreaming and sensitivity.
Where Straussians like Karajan and Kempe used to blend the orchestra into a
homogenous whole, Jansons separates out the sounds to reveal countless
details, missing only the autumnal warmth of the final pages. Ironic that
Strauss in his 30s was already so sentimental. Jansons has turned 50 and is
still a man of action.
Sponsored by the London Philharmonic's Corporate Members
