FT  25 JAN 94 / UK Company News: Sorting the debt from the equity - FRS 4
takes effect in June. Andrew Jack looks at the ramifications
Mr David Tweedie, chairman of the Accounting Standards Board, did not
receive many Christmas cards from merchant bankers this year. His latest
salvo of regulations on the presentation of capital instruments have stoked
their ire.
From year-ends after June 22, British company accounts will have to comply
with the board's fourth Financial Reporting Standard (FRS 4), which
transforms the way in which instruments are classified between debt and
equity.
'There will be lots of people in the banks late at night with wet towels
around their heads trying to work out the loopholes in the proposals,' says
Mr Tweedie.
The so-called 'financial engineering' departments in banks and corporate
finance houses made a substantial living during the late 1980s in creating
devices designed to favourably bend accounting rules.
The aim was in part to create instruments that met the legal definition of
equity, hence keeping gearing low, diverting analysts' attention from high
levels of borrowing and reducing the risk of breaching banking covenants.
The result was an increasingly bizarre, tortuous and lengthy series of
capital instruments developed by different houses, such as convertible
capital bonds, deep discount bonds and repackaged perpetual debt.
Take the 1991 accounts of Ratners. The company requires a densely-written
three-page note to describe five classes of non-equity shares in issue such
as auction market preferred shares, with allotments shown at their nominal
values.
FRS 4 was issued by the board last month, almost unaltered from its draft
form as Financial Reporting Exposure Draft 3 (Fred 3) in December 1992. Its
effect will be to curtail the advantages of many of these instruments.
The standard introduces for the first time the concept of 'non-equity'
interests within shareholders' funds on the balance sheet, to distinguish
equity from instruments which have a restricted right to dividends or are
redeemable. The same distinction applies to minority interests.
It requires capital instruments to be classified as liabilities if they
contain an obligation to transfer cash or other resources. Convertible debt
should be included in liabilities until it is converted.
Liabilities themselves should be classified as current or non-current
according to their strict contractual maturity, except where the same lender
is committed to refinance the debt on the same terms.
Mr Peter Holgate, technical partner with Coopers &amp; Lybrand, says: 'FRS 4 has
struck a very good balance in getting things in the right place. It is quite
a coherent set of principles.'
A number of companies have already fallen in line with the new requirements.
The 1992 Coats Viyella accounts show capital and reserves and shareholders'
funds on the balance sheet split between equity and non-equity, and include
redeemable convertible preference shares under long-term creditors.
Both Redland and Tesco now disclose their convertible capital bonds on the
face of the balance sheet as liabilities, while Attwoods also treats its
guaranteed convertible redeemable preference shares as liabilities.
Since last month's final version of the standard emerged, Mr Andrew Lennard,
the project director for FRS 4 and now assistant technical director of the
board, says: 'It's been remarkably quiet. It is quite clear that people are
moving in the right direction.'
However, that does not mean that there will not yet be ructions. A
substantial number of companies will need to implement significant change to
comply with the new requirements.
According to a recent sur-vey of 415 companies by Company Reporting, the
Edinburgh-based monitor of accounts, one quarter showed evidence of capital
instruments.
BICC's 1992 accounts show an apparent balance sheet total of Pounds 724m,
but this includes a convertible capital bond of Pounds 177m. This will have
to be treated as a liability and deducted under FRS 4. So will Pounds 18m in
minority interests guaranteed by the parent company.
Thorn EMI's balance sheet total is Pounds 719m. But this includes in
minority interests Pounds 132m of auction preferred stock and Pounds 103m of
shares guaranteed by the parent, both of which will have to be reclassified
as non-equity under FRS 4.
Other companies still continuing to include convertible capital bonds in
their balance sheet totals are British Airways and Reckitt &amp; Coleman.
Mr Holgate says: 'It is surprising how many quirks are developing in
practice.' He highlights instances such as the new requirement to restate
and spread the issue costs of instruments over their terms which are
concerning companies.
But he argues that the greatest change will come in companies being required
under FRS 4 to reclassify commercial paper in most circumstances as
short-term debt. That was a reform that a number opposed in the draft
standard, but on which the board remained firm.
The question is how far the financial engineering industry will kotow to the
new capital instrument requirements, particularly as the costs of raising
money begin to increase again with recovery.
