FT  24 JUN 94 / Plea deal with CPS attacked by judge
A judge yesterday described two men involved in a counterfeit currency
racket as 'two of the luckiest men in England' when they escaped long jail
sentences after a plea bargaining deal with the Crown.
Judge Owen Stable QC attacked the Crown Prosecution Service for
'incompetence' and 'lack of professionalism' over the deal which allowed Mr
Timothy Murphy and Mr Bruno Longy to be charged with an offence with a
maximum two-year sentence.
He told Snaresbrook Crown Court that they should have faced a more serious
charge which carries a maximum 10-year prison sentence.
The pair had been arrested when they attempted to hand over 70,000 fake US
dollars to undercover police for Pounds 8,750.
Because of the deal, the judge could only jail Mr Murphy, who has 17
previous convictions for robbery and violence, for 21 months, and Mr Longy,
a man of previous good character, for 15 months.
Mr Murphy, of Dagenham, Essex, and Mr Longy, of Ryde, Isle of Wight, both
pleaded guilty to possession of fake dollars.
Judge Stable said they should have been charged with possessing them with
intent to pass them to another, knowing the notes were counterfeit.
If that had been the case, Mr Murphy would have been jailed for seven years
and Mr Longy five.
Mr Murphy has already spent nine months in custody on remand - the
equivalent of a 20-month jail sentence - and will be free within weeks.
The judge said he wanted to bring to the attention of Mrs Barbara Mills,
director of public prosecutions, 'how woefully the department over which she
presides has bungled this case from first to last'.
He added that undercover police involved in infiltrating the counterfeiters
following a tip-off from American secret service agencies had put their
lives at risk.
Judge Stable first attacked the Crown Prosecution Service on Wednesday when
he said: 'There has been the most gross amount of bargaining going on behind
the scenes and I end up in the most totally unrealistic position.'
He adjourned the case until today to go through the case papers.
