FT  26 OCT 94 / Heathrow tunnel collapse delays work a month
Work on the collapsed section of tunnel under Terminal Three at Heathrow
airport, London, is unlikely to resume for at least a month, BAA, the
airport operator said yesterday.
A preliminary investigation into the causes of the collapse, which has
brought traffic chaos around the airport, is expected to take 10 days.
Balfour Beatty, and BAA, will take up to three more weeks to decide what
action can be taken.
BAA said that although travellers might have difficulties getting to
Heathrow, the tunnel workings posed no threat to the operations of the
airport or the airlines using it.
The controversial 'new Austrian tunnelling method' is being used on only two
short sections, where stations are being built at the two terminal
complexes. Conventional boring methods are being used under runways and for
the rest of the 4 1/2 -mile tunnel.
The problems at Heathrow started on Friday when earth began slipping into
the tunnel near the Terminal Three car park during construction of the
Pounds 300m Heathrow express rail link to Paddington station.
Work has also been suspended on parts of the Jubilee Line extension to
London Underground where the Austrian method was being used. The
suspensions, at London Bridge and Waterloo, are likely to continue at least
until the findings of the preliminary investigation at Heathrow are known.
Concrete has been pumped into the collapsed section of the tunnel to
stabilise the ground and the office building above it, which was being used
as project headquarters for the tunnelling. BAA said the area was '95 per
cent stable'. Most of the multi-storey car park at Terminal Three, closed on
Friday, reopened yesterday.
The investigation team will be led by Mr David Williams, technical director
of BAA, and will involve three groups of consultants, Mott MacDonald,
Geoconsult and Ove Arup. BAA said: 'We won't be starting work for another
month on the site but work is continuing elsewhere,' Work at Heathrow
started in April. Tunnelling is still in its early stages with 180 metres
dug in the central area and work just starting north of the airport.
Work is due to be carried out from four sites at the airport but has yet to
start at the Terminal Four station, where the Austrian method will also be
used.
