FT  08 NOV 94 / Policy rift tests Polish coalition: Partners' differences
emerge over speed of privatisation programme
Differences over privatisation policies are threatening to undermine
Poland's governing coalition, which is made up of the former communist Left
Democratic Alliance (SLD) and the Polish Peasant party (PSL), led by Mr
Waldemar Pawlak, prime minister, who begins a two-day visit to London today.
The row centres on Mr Bogdan Pek, a PSL deputy and the head of the Sejm's
(parliament's) privatisation committee. His SLD colleagues plan to replace
him at a meeting today in a move signalling the need to speed up the
disposal of state enterprises.
The SLD is supported in its drive against Mr Pek by the opposition Freedom
Union (UW), which made up the bulk of the last non-communist,
Solidarity-rooted, government led by Ms Hanna Suchocka. This raises the
prospect of a future switch from the present alliance with the PSL,
unthinkable a year ago when the government came to power. The move also
gives the SLD, which fears the PSL is beginning to dominate the coalition,
the chance to use the threat of political realignment to gain more of a say
over policy.
A meeting of the SLD leadership at the weekend confirmed that the present
coalition, which enjoys a comfortable parliamentary majority, should be
maintained but that government policies lacked co-ordination and a clear
strategy. The two parliamentary caucuses are due to meet on November 15 to
thrash out differences.
In a related development, local councillors in Warsaw from the SLD and the
UW have combined to elect Mr Marcin Swiecicki from the UW as the city's
president in the face of opposition from the PSL.
Mr Pek, an accountant from Krakow, has outspokenly criticised the
privatisation policies of former governments and has come to symbolise
opposition to the process as a whole. Indeed, he is against the sale of
sectors such as the tobacco industry, as planned by Mr Wieslaw Kaczmarek,
the SLD privatisation minister.
Mr Pek, like Mr Pawlak, is also deeply suspicious of the country's
long-delayed mass privatisation programme. This involves the transfer of 444
state companies to private ownership through 15 or so closed-end investment
funds whose shares are to be distributed to the population at large at a
nominal fee.
Yesterday, Mr Kaczmarek, warned that continuing delays in implementing the
programme meant that 4,000bn zlotys (Pounds 100m) of revenues from the sale
of fund shares, written into next year's budget, could be jeopardised.
