FT  07 JUL 94 / Technology: From socialism to free enterprise - Clive
Cookson on the forthcoming flotation of the British Technology Group
The British Technology Group, whose roots lie in socialism and state
intervention, is set to take the final step towards free enterprise:
flotation on the London Stock Exchange.
Its business - managing intellectual property rights through the licensing
of patents and know-how - is unlike any other quoted company. The BTG
portfolio includes 1,400 individual technologies and 10,000 patents and
patent applications, ranging from drugs to plastic processing, from crop
protection to magnetic resonance imaging.
BTG is a direct descendant of the National Research Development Corporation
and the National Enterprise Board, founded by Labour governments in 1949 and
1974 respectively to support the commercialisation of British research in
the UK. It was privatised in 1992, in the face of opposition from some
university scientists who feared that as a private company BTG would neglect
their long-term interests in the search for profits.
The government decided then, on the advice of its advisers Price Waterhouse,
that flotation was not the right way to privatise BTG. One reason, according
to a recent National Audit Office report, was that 'the company's
specialised activities, combined with a declining performance and
unpredictable environment, meant the sale would not have a wide appeal'.
BTG was sold instead to a management-led consortium of staff, financial
institutions and universities, for Pounds 27.8m.
Now the management, led by Ian Harvey, chief executive since 1985, and Jack
Leonard, who became chairman last year, has decided that the group's
progress over the two years since privatisation justifies a share sale 'as
soon as market conditions improve'. That could be late this year or - more
likely - next year. Kleinwort Benson, the merchant bank, has been appointed
to advise on the flotation.
The main reason for floating, according to Rusi Kathoke, BTG finance
director, is that high interest rates at the time of privatisation left the
company with an unhealthily narrow capital base. The company aims to raise
Pounds 15m to Pounds 20m, primarily to help fund greater international
exploitation of its
portfolio.
Valuing BTG will be difficult because there are no comparable quoted
companies in the UK or elsewhere and BTG's financial record is patchy. The
most recent results, for the year to 31 March 1994, show pre-tax profits of
Pounds 4.16m on turnover of Pounds 29m, following losses of Pounds 3.89m in
1992-93 and Pounds 3.11m in 1991-92. However the 1994-95 results will be
less good because the last of BTG's money-spinning patents for pyrethrin
insecticides expires this year.
Discounted cash flow analysis, applying different risk factors to BTG's
various income streams, suggests a market valuation in the region of Pounds
50m.
BTG has been adjusting to the expiry of the patents on cephalosporin
antibiotics and pyrethrins, which were its main sources of revenue in the
past. That leaves magnetic resonance imaging as the biggest single income
source; all sales of MRI scanners anywhere in the world will yield royalty
income until 2002.
Since privatisation BTG has become more focused, Harvey says. 'Our business
is the management of intellectual property. We are not a venture capital
company and we are not consultants. We look for and acquire technology with
commercial potential; if necessary we put our own funds into developing it.
We then patent it in world markets and grant non-exclusive licences for its
exploitation,' he says.
UK universities and research establishments are the group's traditional
source of technology. Until 1986 they were obliged to put the exploitation
of publicly funded research in BTG's hands, and many continue to do so
voluntarily.
Since losing its monopoly hold on UK state-funded research, BTG has
developed new technology sources: companies, particularly in the US, such as
ITT and Johnson &amp; Johnson; and overseas universities including Amsterdam and
Princeton. Harvey insists that BTG's global expansion will leave it better
placed to serve the long-term interests of UK academic researchers.
BTG has identified a 'top 12' from the 1,400 individual technologies in its
portfolio, which it expects to provide the best commercial returns over the
next 15 years. One is Torotrak. Others include natural pesticides to follow
up the pyrethrins, anti-cancer drugs, a plastic injection moulding technique
called Scortec, non-woven textiles and dental cements.
