FT  20 JUL 94 / World Trade News: Japan calls for silicon wafers consortium
Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Miti) has called for a
global research consortium to bring together leading manufacturers of
silicon wafers to develop advanced materials for use in the production of
semiconductor chips.
Nine Japanese silicon wafer makers plus Wacker Chemitronics, part of
Germany's Hoechst group, and MEMC Electronic Materials, a US subsidiary of
Huls of Germany, are involved in discussions about forming the consortium.
The companies together have a 90 per cent share of the world market for
silicon wafers - thin mirror-like platters of finely-tooled silicon on to
which miniature electronic circuits are etched and then diced into
semiconductor chips.
Japanese makers together have about 70 per cent of the silicon wafer market,
with Shinetsu Semiconductor alone holding a 28 per cent market share.
Several companies have dropped out of wafer manufacturing over the past few
years in the face of high research and capital costs and fierce competition
on prices.
Miti is considering putting up 70 per cent of the estimated Y18bn (Pounds
117m) in research and development costs for the consortium, with the balance
to be paid by the participating companies.
The plan has yet to receive final approval. 'It is one of several research
projects that Miti is considering,' said Roger McDaniel, chief executive of
MEMC.
'The proposal is in the preliminary stages,' he added, 'but if it goes ahead
and the conditions are acceptable, then we would be interested in
participating.'
Companies joining the proposed consortium are expected to provide personnel,
technology and some of the funds for the joint effort.
The wafer research project would be the first of its kind in which the
Japanese ministry has provided funding to an international group of
companies in the semiconductor industry.
The proposal is to develop, over a period of about seven years, wafers that
are twice the size of those in use in the semiconductor industry today. At
present, the largest wafers in use are 200mm in diameter and the industry is
in the midst of debating what size the next generation of wafers should be.
The Miti project is aimed at the next-but-one generation of wafer
technology. The size of wafers keeps increasing as the semiconductor
industry develops more sophisticated and larger chips.
However, increasing the size of silicon wafers is an expensive proposition
involving considerable investment in tooling, and technology development.
'There is a limit to what the companies can achieve with their own R&amp;D
funds,' a Miti official said.
The wafer market, at about Y400bn worldwide, is much smaller than the
semiconductor market, which is approaching Dollars 100bn, but Miti expects
it to expand to as much as Y1,000bn by 2010.
