FT  10 MAY 94 / Mandela ends journey from prison to power
Mr Nelson Mandela yesterday completed his journey from prison to the
presidency when South Africa's newly elected parliament chose him as the
country's first black head of state.
The characteristic sounds and symbols of Africa echoed through the
legislative chamber. Women ululated with joy from the African National
Congress benches and a traditional Thembu praise singer, clad in skins and
beads, chanted the new president's honour. Erstwhile rivals embraced and
apartheid's former defenders saluted their new chief. Men and women
convicted of treason swore an oath of loyalty to the new state.
Mr Mandela stood hand on heart as a military band played 'Die Stem' (The
Voice), anthem of apartheid South Africa. A white policeman saluted as the
same band played the liberation hymn, 'Nkosi sikele i'Afrika' (God bless
Africa). Both are now official anthems.
Mr Ronnie Kasrils, newly elected ANC member of parliament once known as the
scarlet pimpernel for his efforts to elude the law, spoke for many when he
said of the spectacle: 'I have to keep pinching myself.'
Shares on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange rose 2.5 per cent as political
euphoria dominated market sentiment.
For the day at least, old enmities were set aside. Mr Mandela appeared
delighted to spot Inkatha leader Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi in the chamber,
and crossed the floor to embrace him. He also went out of his way to greet
General Constand Viljoen, leader of the rightwing Freedom Front, and Pan
Africanist Congress leader Mr Clarence Makwethu.
The government of national unity neared completion with the announcement of
six ministers from the outgoing National party government. Mr Pik Botha,
former foreign minister, becomes minister of mineral and energy affairs, Mr
Roelf Meyer, chief constitutional negotiator, was named minister of
provincial affairs and constitutional development, and Dawie de Villiers,
Cape NP leader, was appointed minister of environment.
Mr Mandela made his first public address as president from the spot where in
February 1990 he spoke after his release from 27 years in jail. He told
thousands outside Cape Town city hall: 'Today we are entering a new era.
Today we celebrate not the victory of a party but a victory for all the
people of South Africa.
'We place our vision of a new constitutional order on the table not as
conquerors, prescribing to the conquered. We speak as fellow citizens to
heal the wounds of the past with the intent of constructing a new order
based on justice for all."
Mr Mandela pledged a social order 'which respects completely the culture,
language and religious rights of all sections of our society and the
fundamental rights of the individual'.
They're all in this together, Page 17
