FT  21 JUL 94 / International Company News: Pfizer warns profits may not
match analysts' hopes - Prescription sales boost results of US drugs groups
A warning from Pfizer that this year's profits would fail to match many
analysts' estimates clouded what was otherwise a moderately positive set of
second-quarter figures yesterday from some of the leading US drugs groups.
All the companies reporting yesterday showed double-digit gains in sales of
prescription drugs in the US, with overseas sales growth generally lower due
to regulation on prices in Europe and a weaker dollar.
The US gains mainly stemmed from new products and reflected higher volumes,
with prices remaining under pressure.
Mr Henry McKinnell, Pfizer's chief financial officer, warned that the
company's earnings per share for 1994 would come 'toward the bottom' of the
range of market expecta-tions, which stand at Dollars 4.10 to Dollars 4.25.
The warning follows the issue of a new patent in the US to Bayer, the German
pharmaceuticals group, which will require Pfizer to pay higher royalties on
its biggest-selling product, the cardiovascular drug Procardia XL.
Pfizer said the effect was to reduce pre-tax profits by Dollars 18m in the
second quarter, with the full-year cost put at Dollars 36m. These figures
represent the company's expected higher royalty payments to Bayer, offset
partly by lower royalties it will have to pay to its US partner, Alza, on
the drug.
Sales of Procardia XL also dropped 9 per cent during the quarter from a year
before, though the company blamed this mainly on short-term inventory
adjustments by wholesalers.
Despite this, sales during the period were 10 per cent higher than the year
before, driven by a 16 per cent increase in US pharmaceuticals sales. The
growth was driven by a range of new products, with sales of four - Zoloft,
Zithromax, Norvasc and Cardura - growing in aggregate by 59 per cent to
account for a third of total drug sales in the period.
Merck, the US's biggest drugs group, recorded a 10 per cent growth in sales
of human and animal health products from a year before. Adding in sales of
Medco Containment Services, the drugs distributor it acquired last year,
sales growth was 18 per cent.
The company's after-tax profits grew at the slower rate of 10 per cent,
though, due to the lower margins on Medco's business compared to Merck's
traditional operations.
Mr Raymond Gilmartin, who recently took over as Merck's chief executive and
will become chairman in November, said the company had seen 'strong unit
volume gains' during the period.
Sales of Mevacor, a cholesterol-lowering agent, fell on competition from
rival products, along with a group of other longer-established products.
This was countered by volume gains for a range of newer drugs, the company
said.
Bristol-Myers Squibb's sales growth during the quarter was driven by a 12
per cent increase in drugs sales, with Capoten, its largest-selling product,
advancing by 7 per cent despite increasing competition.
Consumer product sales, meanwhile, grew by only 1 per cent, while
nutritional product revenues fell 1 per cent.
The company also warned it could face an additional charge to profits
stemming from breast implant claims against it. The charge could arise due
to the number of women who have opted out of an global industry-wide
settlement reached in March, requiring the company to settle claims
individually.
Bristol-Myers said it did not yet know what the claims would be, but added
it 'could have a material impact on the company's results for the year'.
Bristol-Myers, like other drugs groups with manufacturing operations in
Puerto Rico, also reported a higher tax charge due to the phasing-out of tax
allowances in the US. This had pushed the effective income tax rate up to
nearly 30 per cent from 26 per cent a year before, it said.
A 26 per cent increase in US drugs sales, to Dollars 541m, was the main
factor behind sales growth of 10.6 per cent at Johnson &amp; Johnson during the
second quarter.
Total drugs sales grew by 17 per cent to Dollars 1.31bn, while sales of
consumer products rose 7 per cent to Dollars 1.27bn and professional
products increased 8 per cent to Dollars 1.34bn.
US pharmaceuticals sales growth was led by two new products, Risperdal, a
treatment for schizophrenia, and Propulsid, a gastro-intestinal drug, said
Mr Ralph Larsen, chairman and chief executive.
Schering-Plough also benefitted from stronger US prescription drugs sales,
with revenues from Claritin, an antihistamine, topping quarterly sales of
Dollars 100m for the first time.
