FT  23 AUG 94 / Arts: Superb cast for Rossini's 'Semiramide' - David Murray
finds singing ranging from the excellent to the electrifying in De Ana's
production at the Pesaro festival
At Pesaro, the Rossini Opera Festival sprang into full glory on Sunday with
a Semiramide of unusual breadth and much splendour. Where Dario Fo's
exuberant version of the 'dramma giocoso' L'Italiana in Algeri was adorned
by its sopranos but slightly foxed by another singer or two, Hugo De Ana's
grand staging of the uncut 'melodramma tragico' provides an arena for
Rossini singing that ranges from the excellent to the electrifying.
Aficionados with money and leisure might note that it is repeated tonight,
Thursday and Sunday. On the first night in the Palazzo del Sport - re-named
the 'Palafestival' for the occasion - the house was large but not quite
full. The production is a revival from two years back, after all, though
with almost entirely new personnel, and not counting the interval,
Semiramide takes about four hours uncut: not a prospect to be viewed
lightly.
This time it can be viewed with excited anticipation. Semiramide was the
last opera Rossini wrote in Italy, and the one for which he stretched his
'conservative' skills to sumptuous limits. It is a grandiose model of
symmetry and balance, despite its shocking events - near-incest, betrayal
and murder. In the interests of both economy and its most striking vocal
episodes, it is usually trimmed hard; but Philip Gossett and Alberto Zedda,
the Fondazione Rossini editors, would argue that nothing less than the
complete score can reveal Rossini's mastery of the largest scale.
The essential thing is to have the right singers, who must nowadays be
near-freakish in their command of early 19th-century technique and feeling.
Rossini's long, leisurely periods need and expect spectacular vocal display
as highlights, no less to illuminate the drama than to show off star voices.
At Pesaro we have it all. Roger Norrington conducts the Stuttgart Radio
Symphony vitally as well as stylishly: he finds a musical thrust even in
passages which might seem datedly conventional, and with his tingling
support his star singers rise to great heights.
The plot of Semiramide is a twisted echo of the Agamemnon story. Semiramide
is the Clytemnestra-figure, Assur her guilty partner in uxoricide, young
Arsace (a breeches-role) the new Orestes who comes both to avenge his father
Nino - whose ghostly utterances are formidably delivered by Riccardo Ferrari
 -and to risk succumbing unawares to his mother. None of this has the
unsentimental clarity of the Greeks; on the contrary, the principals express
themselves in wild bravura roulades, such as only deep-dyed Rossinians can
deliver with conviction.
Cecilia Gasdia, a great Pesaro regular, does that as Semiramide.
White-faced, greedy-fingered and at last desperate, she passes from elegant
calculation to full-cry despair, and her nuances in all these fireworks
command our sympathy and amazement. Arsace and his cruel fate are incarnated
by Martine Dupuy with an extraordinary range of vocal colour, from
submissive sweetness to hackle-grabbing eruptions.
The third member of a memorable trio is the American Rockwell Blake as the
extraneous character Idreno, who vainly loves the extraneous Azema (Ornella
Bonomelli, modestly warm and charming). By modern standards, Idreno gets
some of Rossini's most impossibly virtuoso tenor-writing; Blake is dry-ish
but clean and glisteningly metallic, with swift, mercurial, dazzlingly
accurate flashes. Can any other modern tenor come close to that? Less
spectacular but soundly committed, the Assur of the baritone Michele Pertusi
(sole survivor, I think, from the 1992 cast) grows powerfully toward his
last tortured moments.
De Ana's production is sharper by a long way than his recent Rossini for
Covent Garden, Mose in Egitto. There, handsome tableaux were dully
compromised by flaccid dramatic effects; here, his aesthetic contrivances
for the choruses - especially all the photogenic stuff with spears -
reinforce the tense relations between the 'heroes' but leave them to get on
with them in nakedly personal style. De Ana takes fullest advantage of the
P. del S's reach, the better to emphasise the lonely centrality of the
principals.
Warmly if extravagantly recommended, then, to those with a devoted interest
in Rossini's opere serie. The night before we had his Stabat Mater recreated
almost as potently by Gianluigi Gelmetti with the same orchestra, choruses
from Prague and Warsaw and two passionate soloists. The soprano Anna
Caterina Antonacci and the warm, faultlessly intelligent bass Roberto
Scandiuzzi carried all before them. The others  - tenor Marcello Giordani
and contralto Gloria Scalchi - were just routinely lusty; but we heard
enough to be persuaded that Rossini's 'conservative' Italian idiom rewards
any amount of attention.
Semiramide production sponsored by the Banco Popolare dell'Adriatico.
Festival tickets: tel. 01039-721-33184; fax 30979
