FT  01 JUN 94 / European Elections: Bavaria's bogeymen in retreat - The
far-right's main hope lies in a low turnout on polling day
On the side of a shabby truck parked under the medieval clock on the town
hall in Munich's Marienplatz a poster was tacked up with a picture of a
miserable looking cow in the German national colours.
Sucking away at its udders were 11 other member states of the European
Union, and the slogan simply said: Stop It]
As the tape-recorded strains of a brass band faded away from the speakers,
Mr Wolfgang Huttl, Bavarian chairman of the far-right Republicans and
candidate for the European parliament, warmed to his theme.
'We have had a belly-full of paying for Europe and the rest of the world,'
he shouts.
He has to shout, because his speech is being drowned out by a barrage of
whistles and cat-calls from an audience dominated by political opponents
from the left and the far-left, and a handful of bemused-looking tourists.
The only supporters seem to be a few caricatures of heavy bodyguards
surrounding the truck, and a handful of elderly sympathisers at the front.
Munich is home base for the Republicans and their leader, Mr Franz
Schonhuber, and Bavaria is the state where the far-right bogeymen of German
politics shocked the political establishment by winning almost 15 per cent
of the vote in the last European elections.
Five years later, and they seem to be having a lot more trouble getting
their message across.
The rhetoric is anti-European integration and solidly nationalist. Yet the
party really has no proper European election programme, apart from
opposition to the Maastricht treaty and Germany's hefty net contributions to
the EU budget. Between the lines, the real theme is anti-foreigner and
anti-immigration.
Mr Schonhuber's hopes of exploiting the issue as successfully again have
been hit by two factors: all the main political parties have successfully
negotiated a constitutional compromise, which has radically reduced the
number of asylum-seekers flooding into the country; and at the same time his
party has been tarred with the brush of violent attacks on foreigners.
'The overall number of foreigners is too great, that is the impression of
the people,' says Mr Hermann Regensburger, state secretary in the Bavarian
interior ministry. 'There are pressures on the housing market and in the
labour market. There are sometimes more than 50 per cent foreign children in
individual schools.'
Since the asylum compromise came into effect last July, however, the monthly
numbers of asylum seekers have dropped by more than 60 per cent. Now there
is no automatic right to asylum in Germany if the applicant has come from a
country classified as having no political persecution, or if he or she has
passed through a third country on the way.
'The Republicans are fighting their campaign primarily on the theme of
foreigners, mixed with the theme of law and order,' says Mr Regensburger.
'When the call comes: 'Foreigners out]' they always get big applause. But
the people have realised now that the big parties are capable of acting. The
situation has got considerably better, both in reality, and in the mood.'
Ms Renate Schmidt, the leader of the Social Democratic party (SPD) in
Bavaria, is not inclined to underestimate the threat yet. 'There is a lot of
support for the Reps amongst people who are discontented,' she says. 'Many
are on social assistance, unemployed or homeless. The discontented used to
drift left, and now they are drifting right. It is the same as in Britain
and France.' She agrees, however, that the 'sting has been taken out of the
asylum issue' thanks to the drop in numbers. The real danger in the European
poll is simply persuading voters to turn out.
'I think we will have difficulty getting people to the polls at all,' she
says. 'I think we will be pleased if we get 60 per cent turnout in Munich.'
The turnout will also be a key issue for the ruling Christian Social Union
(CSU) in Bavaria - because the party needs a high vote in its home base to
cross the 5 per cent hurdle needed nationally for winning seats in the
European parliament.
The party has been forced to adopt a harsh line on immigration and a
Euro-sceptical line on Maastricht to head off the challenge from Mr
Schonhuber and other assorted protest movements. But at the end of the day,
the turnover will count.
Mr Ingo Friedrich, the party's lead Euro-candidate, says they will have to
win 40 per cent to get in, and higher still if the Bavarian turnout is down.
In spite of his party's Euro-scepticism, he argues that immigration and
organised crime can only be tackled on a European level - through
cross-border co-operation.
'The argument against Schonhuber is that we need a European police,' he
says. 'That is very popular.'
'We argue that the Republicans don't belong to the ranks of respectable
parties. We can also point to their voting record in the European
parliament.
'They are lazy and have done nothing. The German voters don't like to see
that.'
