FT  30 APR 94 / Russia, Latvia set to sign troop pull-out accord
An agreement to pull out the remaining Russian troops from Latvia is
expected to be signed today in Moscow by the leaders of the two states.
The agreement will mean that only Estonia, the smallest of the three former
Soviet Baltic countries, is at odds with Russia over troop withdrawal.
Negotiators from the two sides agreed on the last issue between them - that
of payment of pensions and other benefits to the 22,300 Russian military
veterans still living in Latvia - at a meeting yesterday in the resort town
of Jurmala.
The agreement allows the officers to stay in Latvia with benefits, but not
to obtain citizenship - a clause which nationalists in the Latvian
parliament say gives retrospective justification to the occupation of Latvia
by Soviet troops between 1940 and 1991.
The Latvians have also agreed to rent out the Skrunda radar base to the
Russians for the next four years.
The sudden worsening in relations betwee the two countries when a decree
signed by President Boris Yeltsin appeared to suggest that Russia wished to
keep troops in Latvia appears to have been patched over - with Latvian
leaders prepared to believe the explanation that the decree was carelessly
worded.
Mr Guntis Ulmanis, Latvian president and Mr Valdis Birkavs, prime minister,
are due in Moscow today to sign the treaty with Mr Yeltsin - a treaty which
should remove all 10,500 Russian troops by the end of August.
The deal, if carried through, focuses all attention on Estonia, where fewer
than 3,000 troops remain but where talks have proved fruitless and both
sides trade allegations of breach of good faith and of civil rights.
Mr Mart Laar, the Estonian premier interviewed in the US this week, said he
received assurances from Mr Boutros Boutros Gali, United Nations
secretary-general, that the UN security council would take a hard line on
Russia if there were no sign of further troop withdrawals by June.
Mr Laar said Russian troops in Estonia were undisciplined, and were offering
guns and other military equipment for sale.
Estonian security forces had stopped the attempted sale of two torpedoes by
Russian officers, he claimed.
