FT  16 MAR 94 / High pay for the few in a city out of work
Just five miles down the road from the jobs summit conference centre in
Detroit the brand new Jefferson North Chrysler car plant is a standing
affront to much of the G7 debate about job creation. The highly automated
plant, which produces the Grand Cherokee jeep, is one of the success stories
of the town's revitalised car industry.
None of the jobs summit delegates would object to the 200 robots or the
automated paint spraying and welding at the plant, which reduces the number
of employees to about 3,000. But the policymakers would not approve of the
fact that, in a town where unemployment is double the national average at 13
per cent, so much employment is hogged by the securely employed 'insiders'.
Average weekly working hours at the two-shift plants are 55 to 60 hours,
with average annual take-home pay of more than Dollars 50,000 (Pounds
34,246). Most employees work from 6am to 3.30pm, plus three Saturdays in
four.
Chrysler and the United Auto Workers union collude to maximise work and
income for those already in a job, and until recently most new recruits were
relatives of existing employees. Yet Detroit has lost 250,000 auto-related
jobs in the past 10 years and there are 23,000 people on the books of the
state employment agency who want to work at Jefferson North. A few hundred
of them may be lucky if the plant decides to put in the third shift. Anybody
who gets a job will find a plant with harmonious working relationships and
strong powers for organised labour. The UAW not only has a closed shop, it
also has equal representation on the key committees which decide most of
what goes on.
Mr Charles Matthews, a semi-skilled assembly line operator, who has worked
for Chrysler for 30 years, said: 'The hours are long but this is the best
plant I've ever worked in.' He retires in two months, aged 55.
Unlike some other US car makers Chrysler took on existing workers when the
new plant opened up, which meant an average age of over 50. There were big
retraining programmes for technicians but training in general seems less
important than many summit delegates assume.
One Chrysler supervisor admitted that many of the semi-skilled jobs take
only about half an hour to learn. There is no job rotation for those on
repetitive tasks but most workers are part of a small team and training for
less skilled workers concentrates on building up team-working skills.
Jefferson North would make only a small dent in Detroit's unemployment
problem even if it was maximising rather than minimising employment
opportunities. Although the town's prospects are improving, and it has a
dynamic mayor in Mr Dennis Archer, the Clinton administration has exposed
its unemployment sores to the world by staging the job summit here.
In central Detroit the unemployment rate climbs to 17 per cent and blacks
aged 16 to 19 have an unemployment rate of 41 per cent. Sobering statistics
for those Europeans who thought the American labour market had all the
answers.
