FT  12 DEC 94 / Domestic funding for Borneo dam
The funding for a controversial hydroelectric dam to be built in the heart
of Malaysia's tropical rainforest will be generated from domestic sources,
according to the company in charge of the project.
The Bakun dam, described by its developers as the the world's biggest
private power scheme, is being built in a remote jungle area of Sarawak on
the island of Borneo. Preliminary estimates put the cost of the project at
MDollars 15bn (Dollars 5.9bn).
Ekran, the listed Malaysian conglomerate which is developing Bakun, said
sufficient financial resources were available in the domestic market. Nearly
MDollars 6bn has been raised on the domestic market this year for projects
associated with Malaysia's plans to privatise a large part of its
electricity industry.
Financiers have questioned whether the Malaysian capital market has the
capacity to extend further loans of the size needed for the Bakun project.
There are also fears the local market might be becoming too exposed to one
sector.
The Bakun project involves building a dam nearly twice the size of the Aswan
dam in Egypt and flooding an area larger than Singapore.
Plans are to transmit the bulk of Bakun's power output to peninsular
Malaysia, first by 670km of overhead cables within Sarawak and then through
650km of cables under the South China Sea. Bakun poses technical challenges.
It is being built at a site more than 500km up-river from Sarawak's coast
and the journey involves crossing treacherous rapids. New roads will have to
be built through dense jungle to bring in building materials and engineering
equipment.
An area of more than 80,000ha, much of it tropical rainforest, will be
cleared to accommodate the dam and more than 8,000 tribes people will be
resettled.
Opponents of the project say the dam will be 'an ecological time bomb'. Dr
Mahathir Mohamad, Malaysia's prime minister, has said Bakun will be a
catalyst for industrial growth in Malaysia. It would meet the needs of
Malaysia's industrialising economy, and turn Malaysia into a regional power
exporter.
