FT  04 NOV 94 / Arts: More friends in foreign places - Sponsorship
Business in the UK gave more money to the arts in 1993-94. ABSA (The
Association for Business Sponsorship of the Arts) will announce a total of
Pounds 69.5m, a rise of 6.2 per cent on the Pounds 65.4m of the previous
year.
But there were interesting variations in the giving. Straightforward cash
sponsorship was down for the second year running, by just over 2 per cent at
Pounds 56.37m, as against Pounds 57.69m in 1992-93. Companies were, however,
more generous to arts building projects, which rose by 50 per cent to almost
Pounds 7m, and in the fast growing area of support in kind - cars,
computers, etc. - which was almost 100 per cent higher at Pounds 6.16m.
The rise in corporate donations will please the government, which hopes that
business, along with local councils, will make matching contributions to the
arts building projects financed by the lottery.
On Tuesday the British Museum will announce that an American company is
putting up in excess of Pounds 1m to create a new and permanent North
American gallery at the museum. In recent years the Museum's collection of
native American art has been shown intermittently at its off-shoot, the
Museum of Mankind. It is now coming back to Great Russell Street as part of
the BM's 250th anniversary celebrations. It will be the museum's largest
ever corporate gift.
It is amazing how generous Americans are in underpinning the cultural life
of London - especially if their name is Sackler. Last month the National
Gallery re-opened its British room, devoted to the masterpieces of Turner,
Constable, Gainsborough, etc. It looks magnificent, restored to its 1870s
splendour. And the cost, well in excess of Pounds 1m, was footed by Mortimer
and Theresa Sackler, who in the past have given Pounds 500,000 to the Tate.
Pop over to the British Museum and admire the new Ancient Near East and
Early Egypt galleries and thank Raymond and Beverley Sackler, while the
Royal Academy has been transformed by the generosity of the late Arthur and
Jill Sackler, who gave millions towards the galleries that bear their name.
The UK obviously still has good friends in the US, at least in the Sackler
family, whose fortune was founded in the pharmaceutical industry.
But by far the most generous recent benefaction to a British gallery is the
Pounds 12m to the Tate from a mysterious American. The money will be spent
on revamping the old building, making it a fitting, and much larger, home
for the British collection when the modern stuff has gone to the new Tate
Gallery of Modern Art on Bankside. The giver is shy of publicity and has
been anonymous until now. He is Edwin Manton, Essex born but living in the
US since 1933, where he made a fortune in insurance.
British arts institutions, from museums to theatres to orchestras, will need
all the friends, British and foreign, private and corporate, they can find
in the next few years. For, to attract money from the lottery, they must
show their ability to raise a matching sum. The Arts Council has made it
clear that it does not expect substantial commitments from small arts
organisations, but larger institutions will be required to make a better
show.
The TSB has revamped its arts sponsorship programme. In the future it will
concentrate on those three popular corporate causes, education, youth and
opportunity, with a budget of around Pounds 300,000 a year. The first fruits
of its new policy will be announced on November 17 at the National Gallery.
The bank is to pay the transportation costs to bring school children from
outside the London area for a first visit to the gallery. Their teachers
will receive back-up support materials.
Another scheme provides for children who cannot get to the NG to receive
information packs which will enhance a visit to their local art gallery.
Next year a similar exercise will be launched with the LSO, enabling
children to attend concerts at the Barbican on discount tickets. A third
scheme is to be be announced next year.
