FT  26 MAR 94 / Clinton steps up attack on cigarette industry
The Clinton administration yesterday launched a ferocious two-pronged
assault on the cigarette industry, already reeling from a wave of
anti-smoking measures.
As the Labour Department announced plans to ban smoking from the workplace,
federal health officials began an attempt to regulate nicotine as an
addictive drug.
Regulations proposed yesterday by Mr Robert Reich, the labour secretary,
would in effect ban smoking from all workplaces, including rest areas,
except in enclosed areas with direct ventilation to the outside.
The proposed rules, which could come into force next year, would stop
smoking in bars and restaurants because no one could be required to work in
an area where smoking was permitted.
Complying with the proposed rules could cost businesses Dollars 8.1bn
(Pounds 5.5bn) in the first year and Dollars 6.6bn a year thereafter. But Mr
Reich said this would be outweighed by a Dollars 15bn a year improvement in
worker productivity. The move follows new evidence of the damage caused by
passive smoking.
However, Mr Charles Whitley, spokesman for the Tobacco Institute, defended
the cigarette industry, saying: 'I deny that cigarettes cause cancer.'
Dr David Kessler, head of the US Food and Drug Administration, yesterday
presented a strong case to the House of Representatives health committee for
regulating nicotine as an addictive drug - a move that could lead to the
withdrawal of cigarettes that contain nicotine.
Nicotine 'meets all the criteria of an addictive substance', Dr Kessler told
a House of Representatives health committee yesterday, citing studies
showing that laboratory rats would administer doses of nicotine to
themselves. He suggested cigarette manufacturers were manipulating nicotine
levels in their products. He added that he was aware of no evidence that
manufacturers left nicotine in their cigarettes for any reason other than
addiction.
Dr Kessler's comments implicitly contradicted Philip Morris, maker of
Marlboro cigarettes, which on Thursday filed a Dollars 10bn libel suit
against ABC, the US television network, over allegations of 'spiking' its
cigarettes with nicotine. Philip Morris acknowledges that it removes
nicotine during the manufacturing process and adds it back later, but says
it puts back less than it takes out.
Tobacco companies also face a stiff increase in taxes on their products as
part of the healthcare reform legislation now being considered by Congress.
