FT  29 APR 94 / Leading Article: Iran accused
The US and its main allies have been at odds for more than a year about how
to handle Iran. For the Clinton administration the issue has been fairly cut
and dried. It asserted that the Iranian government sponsored international
terrorism, was seeking to acquire nuclear weapons and wished to undermine
stability in the Middle East. Accordingly, the US enunciated a
'dual-containment' policy designed to isolate Iran, and Iraq, and to deny
those two countries the benefits of economic relations with the
industrialised world.
Most Western European countries and Japan, while wary of Iranian intentions,
have resisted US pressure to follow its lead. In part their reasons have
been straightforwardly commercial. Iran is an important trading partner, and
at a time of international recession there was an understandable reluctance
to close off a profitable market.
On the political level there is a continuing debate about the composition
and intentions of the Iranian regime. President Ali Hashemi Rafsanjani
appears to represent the more pragmatic face of the government, seeking
better relations with the west and supporting market-oriented reforms at
home. Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the spiritual leader, appears on the other
hand to be more in the mould of his predecessor, Ayatollah Khomeini. Whether
they are the two sides of the same coin, or represent opposing political
trends in Iran, has yet to be satisfactorily answered.
Britain's accusation yesterday that Iran has established contacts with the
IRA, and perhaps with other international terrorist groups, suggests support
for the US interpretation. At best, it would indicate that the more moderate
elements in the Iranian regime are unable fully to control the most radical
factions who remain deeply hostile to the west and no less committed to
exporting their view of Islamic radicalism.
The US believes that they can best be brought to heel by offering Iran no
relief from its already grave economic crisis, brought on by war, gross
government mismanagement and by the decline in the price of oil. Almost all
Iran's main trading partners are in the process of providing such relief, by
resheduling a large part of the short-term debt built up since the end of
the war with Iraq. Britain's latest accusations against Iran seem unlikely
to stop the process.
But the Iranian regime would be foolish to believe that it can rely
indefinitely on the individual self-interest of western nations to offset
its attempts to destabilise governments it does not like. Its high level of
debt, deteriorating infrastructure, and urgent need for access to
international financial markets, makes an accommodation with the west vital
in order to head off the threat of domestic discontent. By behaving in such
a way internationally, the Iranian regime risks provoking its own
destruction and so, indirectly, plays into Washington's hands.
