FT  28 MAR 94 / Emerging Markets: News round-up
TURKEY
The market will react today to the outcome of yesterday's crucial municipal
elections, and expectations that the government will announce an austerity
package.
Last week the composite index fell 9 per cent in volatile trading. Turkey
was one of the best emerging market performers in 1993, but has since fallen
34.5 per cent.
Ms Nur Pekin of Schroders commented that expectations were that the
coalition would hold onto power in the elections.
The austerity package is likely to include a one year freeze on public
expenditure.
TOKYO
The Japan Securities Dealers Association has lifted restrictions for
Japanese individual investors to trade Shanghai B stocks.
Brokers do not expect an immediate rush to buy the shares by Japanese
investors, but hope that investment trust funds, which are now allowed to
accept funds from individuals following the lifting of restrictions by the
JSDA, will set up China funds.
'We want more investors to get accustomed to the Chinese market through
investment trust funds,' says Nomura Securities.
COLOMBO
The Colombo stock market has been one of this year's star performers.
According to Standard Chartered's latest research note, at the end of last
month the market was 'the number one (emerging market) performer in the
world'.
The All share index hit a peak of 1,443 on March 1, but since then
profit-taking has taken it down to 1,239.
Mr Rohan Fernando, deputy general manager of the stock exchange, last week
said that in less than 10 months the market had increased turnover 10 fold
to about SLRs250m (Dollars 5.2m), as foreign investors became active.
The exchange has plans to introduce electronic trading and has set a date of
the year end for its implementation.
There are also plans to start a second tier market, and the possibility of
an over-the-counter market dealing in India and Pakistan equities.
PERU
The privatisation programme will be completed by 1995, a government minister
said while on a visit to Japan last week.
Mr Daniel Hokama Tokashiki, the energy and mines minister, said that it was
hoped that the process would be finished by the end of President Fujimori's
term of office.
The government used to own about 220 companies, and 80 to 100 of them have
been or will be liquidated or absorbed by others.
Another 80 state-owned companies have been privatised and the rest will be
under private ownership by 1995.
The government, however, would remain a major shareholder in some concerns.
PRAGUE
The government has said that the Czech capital market is not yet ready for
an options exchange, in spite of attempts by a Swedish group to set up an
exchange similar to one operating in Slovakia.
'We understand the benefits a derivatives market can bring, but it is just
too early for this type of exchange with the liquidity we have in our
market,' said Mr Vladimir Rudlovacek, deputy finance minister.
Further coverage of emerging markets appears daily on the World Stock
Markets page.
