FT  21 NOV 94 / International Press Review: Little Prince pays a call -
Argentina
The arrival of the 'Little Prince', as some Argentine papers refer to
Britain's Duke of York, was by no means the only news story in town. The
official royal visit, the first since the 1982 Falklands war between
Argentina and Britain, vied for space with a political brawl over allegedly
extortionate telephone tariffs, the hotting-up of presidential elections
and, most notably, continued back-biting over government budgetary woes.
The last item was slapped across the front pages after President Carlos
Menem decreed a freeze on all public spending for the rest of the year.
Journalists inevitably produced reams asking if the state machine was about
to grind to a halt: would government officials have sufficient supplies of
coffee and toilet paper to last them until Christmas? Who was going to pay
for the president's forthcoming trip to Syria?
But the duke held his own against such feisty competition, even making the
front-page following flag-burning demonstrations outside the British
embassy.
The press was torn between whether to treat the visit as a serious news item
or to view it as a somewhat frivolous exercise in bilateral protocol.
'Twelve years after the Malvinas war, Menem received the Little Prince of
the British throne in an act of reconciliation: they played golf, they
exchanged military uniforms and today they will inaugurate the Canning
statue,' the daily Pagina/12 highlighted on its front page. Almost as an
afterthought, it added: '27 arrested and 5 wounded in protests.'
Not that the symbolism of the royal presence was lost on anyone,
particularly after recent controversy over Argentina's alleged proposal to
pay Falkland islanders up to Dollars 1.5m (Pounds 915m) each to give up
their British citizenship. 'The inhabitants of the Malvinas view the visit
with unease,' said Ambito Financiero. 'The apparently growing possibility of
a reconciliation between both countries makes them fear for the eventual
sovereignty of the islands.'
Ample coverage was also given to Argentine disquiet at the return of the
prince, who participated in the war as a helicopter pilot. El Cronista aired
the opinions of Radical deputy Raul Galvan, who 'exhorted the government not
to exaggerate in the honours bestowed upon the prince, because this 'would
signify a lack of respect to those who died in the Malvinas''.
Newspapers also focused on potential tension over the duke's visit to the
former naval base of the General Belgrano cruiser, 'sunk by the British
outside the exclusion zone'.
La Nacion said: 'A contradictory mood was expected among navy officials,
with many hinting that they would refuse to shake hands with the British
prince or to comply with the military salute.' It said, though, that most
Argentines were less worked up about fraternising with a former enemy.
'While some of those on the left and the right deplore the visit. . . for
most people the arrival of the prince does not constitute an important topic
of conversation (because) it reminds them of an incident they would prefer
to forget.'
The Falklands theme was not forgotten, though by the end of the week it had
shifted to the reported sacking of Argentina's ambassador to London. Mr
Mario Campora was said to have lost his job for criticising the plan to buy
back the islands - known locally as 'Menem's bribe' - on the grounds that
you should not pay for what was already yours by right.
The sovereignty buy-back idea, originally put forward by British prime
ministerial adviser Sir Alan Walters, has by and large been ridiculed. In
particular, Pagina/12 ran an article shortly before the duke's arrival in
which the Falklanders were represented by a photograph of penguins dressed
up in top-hats and tails. The paper felt that the 'kelpers' were basically
immune to Argentina's charm offensive. 'The foreign minister acts like a man
trying to seduce a woman. He will not be disheartened even though he is
slapped on the face at each hint.'
The article said Falkland-Argentine relations had perhaps been irreversibly
ruined by the conflict.
