FT  17 NOV 94 / Technology: Electronic immunity - Tom Foremski outlines the
similarities between computer viruses and their biological counterparts
The similarities between computer viruses and human ones may be closer than
the name alone suggests, according to computer scientists at IBM's Thomas J.
Watson Research Centre.
IBM researchers have discovered similarities in the way computer viruses
spread and the way human viruses jump from host to host. This has led them
to develop anti-virus technology that continues the biological metaphor -
using a model of the human immune system to develop a way of automatically
trapping and eradicating computer viruses before they can damage the host
personal computer and spread to other computers.
The IBM Automated Immune System is an electronic version of our human immune
system and could provide a breakthrough in the fight against computer virus
infections. There are at least 6,000 computer viruses and computer security
experts say they are discovering as many as three new viruses a day.
A computer virus is a hidden program that can replicate itself, and
sometimes causes widespread damage to data stored in the computer. While few
of these rogue programs reach widespread distribution, computer viruses pose
a daily threat to PC users.
'The Automated Immune System allows us to detect a virus without having any
prior knowledge about it,' says Jeffrey Kephart, manager of anti-virus
technology at IBM's High Integrity Computing Laboratory at the Thomas J.
Watson Research Centre. 'Once the virus has been detected, the system
automatically analyses it and removes it from any infected files.'
This approach differs from the way most current anti-virus software
operates. Anti-virus applications, such as VirusScan from McAfee Associates,
are at their most effective against known viruses and must be updated
regularly with the 'signatures' of new viruses.
Kephart says the system is modelled on the way the human immune system
protects us against viral infection. In the IBM approach, the anti-virus
software uses a decoy program to attract a virus if one is present.
The software can detect an infection by noticing changes made by the virus
in the decoy program. It will then isolate and analyse the virus, and erase
it from any infected files it finds. In the human immune system, a cell
called a macrophage searches for infecting organisms. When the macrophage
finds a virus or bacteria, it makes an analysis and then alerts other immune
cells to the specific infecting organism, triggering the production of
antibodies that target specific infections.
The IBM system has an additional capability. It helps stop the spread of
virus infections to other computers. This is essential in today's high-speed
networks because a virus can quickly spread. The system sends out a message
to neighbouring PCs that it has found an infection and instructs them to
look for a specific virus. In this way, the path of a computer virus
infection can be traced and contained.
The IBM Automated Immune System is in the prototype stage and will be
introduced into IBM's commercial anti-virus software next year. While it
appears to be an important step against infections, it will not eliminate
computer viruses. 'There are some sophisticated viruses being written,' says
Bill Arnold, an anti-virus specialist at IBM. 'These viruses are written by
people who know how we detect and analyse viruses. One such virus is the 1/2
virus which breaks itself into pieces to make itself more difficult to
analyse.'
Computer virus creators have developed what are called stealth and
polymorphic viruses. A stealth virus hides inside a PC and makes itself
invisible to anti-virus software. A polymorphic virus will change itself
slightly every time it infects a PC or a file, making it difficult to
analyse or create a 'signature' that can be used to detect infections.
Phil Talsky, manager of product marketing at McAfee Associates, says it is
risky to do nothing when a virus is detected, even if it does not appear to
be causing problems. 'The trouble is that you can never really know what the
virus will do and you risk a much bigger problem at a later date,' says
Talsky.
Although there are increasing numbers of sophisticated computer viruses, PC
users should not panic, says David Stang, computer virus expert and
president of anti-virus software firm Norman Data Defence Systems. 'The
chance of being infected is very low,' says Stang. 'But if you do have an
infection, it can be very expensive.' Stang cites the case of a brokerage
firm forced to shut down its PCs to clean out a virus infection and lost
millions of dollars in business during the few hours the PCs were turned
off.
Magali Grimany, information security analyst at Suntrust Bank, based in
Atlanta, Georgia, says that a virus infection closed down one of the bank's
servers affecting dozens of PC users for most of the day. Suntrust now uses
McAfee's VirusScan package to protect more than 8,000 PCs.
McAfee and other firms such as Symantec are trying to make the updating
process easier with new software that will automatically update. Suntrust
and other large organisations also prohibit staff from bringing in diskettes
from home or inserting diskettes into their PCs that have not been scanned
for viruses.
Creating a computer virus is not that difficult and is not illegal, says
Stang, which is why there are so many. 'You can buy a CD-Rom disk containing
hundreds of viruses and you can down-load software for creating viruses from
computer bulletin boards,' he points out.
Kephart is not the only one to note the analogy between computer viruses and
their biological counterparts. The British physicist Stephen Hawking gave
the keynote speech at a computer show earlier this year. He found it ironic
that the only form of 'life' we have created so far is purely destructive.
