FT  23 NOV 94 / Rethink on plans for County Hall
The tortuous history of County Hall, the prominent Thames-side building
which once housed the Greater London Council, took another twist yesterday
when plans to turn part of the site into a hotel were abandoned.
Shirayama, the Japanese developer which paid Pounds 60m for County Hall last
year, now plans to turn the building into offices and exhibition space.
Mr Mac Toyota, Shirayama's representative in London, said yesterday: 'We had
a better idea. We are not saying that the hotel business is not profitable.'
Plans for the rest of the 1.5m sq ft site - including conference facilities,
a leisure centre, and Europe's biggest aquarium - remained unchanged.
Luxury hotels in London have recovered from the recession and are now
enjoying occupancies well above 90 per cent.
The hotel was expected to cost Pounds 25m out of a total construction budget
of more than Pounds 100m. Shirayama has spent Pounds 10m on the site so far,
although work on the planned hotel had not started.
Mr Richard Branson's Virgin Group, which had agreed to run the 600-bedroom
hotel and to help operate the leisure centre, reacted angrily.
The group, which hopes to meet Shirayama officials today, said: 'We came
into the deal on the basis that together we were going to create one of the
best hotels in London and the country's most exciting leisure complex. We
still believe in that project and are very keen to go ahead. We have a
legally binding contract which we expect them to honour and we have
contacted Shirayama to say so.'
Virgin said Shirayama's pledge to go ahead with the entertainment and
leisure centre was inadequate. It said it regarded the hotel as the
project's centrepiece.
Mr Toyota said it was not clear whether the revised scheme would require
planning permission because existing consents covered business and
residential use.
Cambridge Seven Associates, the US architect, has been appointed to design
the new scheme, which will be known as the Pacific Asia Centre.
Lambeth Council said: 'Our principal concerns are for the preservation and
beneficial use of this building, which is an important part of London's
heritage, and to ensure that any development benefits the local economy. We
will be looking carefully at any proposals which are put to us.'
Shirayama bought the site after a fierce battle with the London School of
Economics.
