FT  19 NOV 94 / Arts: Why Saturday night is not a lottery - Christopher
Dunkley finds himself trapped in a time warp watching television
Cilla Black has gorra lorra Lycra tights, a lorra heart, and an awful lorra
ratings for ITV since 1985 when she began presenting the British version of
Blind Date early on Saturday evenings. The question is will the twinkle, the
charm, and the Liverpool accent - and of course the attractiveness of the
guys and gals on either side of the Blind Date partition - be enough to hold
the line in the ratings battle this evening when BBC1 wheels out what we are
told is going to be the biggest gun ever seen in the war for the television
audience in Britain: The National Lottery Live.
According to the ratings gurus who have studied lottery programmes in other
countries, we can expect as many as 25 million, even 30 million people to
watch, a figure which would immediately take the lottery not just to No 1 in
the weekly ratings, but No 1 in the year. It is a rare programme these days
that attracts more than 20m viewers; in 1994 only Torvill and Dean's bid for
Olympic gold has gone higher (23.95m). So if the lottery really does
regularly attract as many as 25m, it will completely upset the well
established pattern of viewing at teatime on Saturdays.
And what a good thing that will be. To immerse yourself in the programmes
which currently dominate the screen at this time is to find yourself
slipping into a time warp. Before settling down on the old green sofa you
may believe that you live in a post-communist, post-feminist age, the era of
cyberspace and the internet. But after watching Bruce Forsyth's Generation
Game and Noel's House Party on BBC1, or Blind Date and Family Fortunes on
ITV, you may wonder whether that futuristic stuff was all a dream. The
atmosphere in which Cilla and Brucie, Noel and Les (Les Dennis, host of
Family Fortunes) smother you is one in which it would come as no surprise to
be urged to 'Dig For Victory]'.
When I turned my attention back to these programmes recently, having ignored
them for years (on the same grounds that FT book critics ignore Barbara
Cartland's immensely popular novels) I was baffled by a sense of deep but
almost forgotten familiarity. Then it came to me. The activities and, more
important, the attitudes in these programmes bear a strong resemblance to
parties organised by my parents in the late 1940s and early 50s, events
which attempted to reproduce in the home the sort of parties they had
experienced at church socials in the 1930s.
There were lots of organised activities with mandatory jollity. Teams had to
pass an orange from one to another using only their knees, or a matchbox
using only their noses. There were costumes for acting games, just as on The
Generation Game. Practical jokes were elaborate: one person would be
required to imitate exactly the motions of another who would draw his finger
across the underside of a plate and then down his face, the victim not
realising that his plate had been coated in candle black.
As with Saturday teatime telly, what mattered was mucking in and having a
good time, bonhomie and laughing vigorously at weak jokes, the teller
laughing hardest of all. Above all you had to be a good sport when made to
appear ridiculous, just as you do when showered with green slime by Noel
Edmonds. On Blind Date even attitudes towards class seem trapped in the
1940s. Last week a Liberace lookalike was set up by La Black as some sort of
toff of whom she, as a working class lass, pretended to be in awe. This was
pursued throughout his time on the programme even though his supposedly
upper class clothing was actually a toastmaster's uniform.
If the lottery programme blows some of this stuff out of the water it will
be no bad thing, though we have yet to see what the new programme itself
will be like. Ominously it is to be presented by Noel Edmonds, a man who
gives the impression that he would regard the matchbox-on-the-nose trick as
a bit too sophisticated for Saturday teatime.
