FT  11 FEB 94 / International Company News: Spectrum files against Sculley -
The computer company's counter action
Mr John Sculley conspired to drive down the share price of Spectrum
Information Technologies in order to mask the impact of his resignation as
the company's chairman and chief executive, the company has alleged in a
Dollars 300m law suit.
Spectrum charges Mr Sculley with breach of contract, breach of fiduciary
duty, mismanagement and theft of trade secrets. The suit was filed late on
Wednesday, two days after Mr Sculley abruptly resigned.
Mr Sculley, former chairman and chief executive of Apple Computer, surprised
the industry last October by joining Spectrum, a little-known, loss-making
company.
On Monday, Mr Sculley resigned and filed suit against Mr Peter Caserta,
Spectrum president, charging that he had been duped into joining the company
by 'fraudulent misrepresentations'. Mr Sculley says that Mr Caserta
concealed the fact that Spectrum was under investigation by the Securities
and Exchange Commission and that the company had used 'questionable'
accounting practices.
Spectrum's counter action refutes these charges. Mr Sculley was informed
about the SEC investigation during a dinner with Mr Caserta and others at a
New York restaurant three days before he joined the company, it claims.
Mr Sculley must also have known about the company's accounting methods, the
suit asserts. A press clipping concerning the company's accounting was
'uncovered in the due diligence file that Sculley left at Spectrum when he
resigned,' the company says.
Mr Sculley has also expressed outrage at the profits achieved recently by Mr
Caserta and two other Spectrum officers when they sold substantial portions
of their stock, taking advantage of a rise in the share price when Mr
Sculley joined Spectrum. Spectrum, however, says that Mr Sculley signed an
agreement acquiescing to the stock sales.
Through a spokesman, Mr Sculley called Spectrum's allegations 'a work of
fiction'.
Both sides in this dispute appear to be keenly aware of the potential for
damaging shareholder suits. Spectrum's share price has fallen by more than
50 per cent this week. While Spectrum has accused Mr Sculley of ignoring
shareholders' interests, Mr Sculley has accused Mr Caserta and others of
insider trading.
Although Spectrum's legal action is directed only at Mr Sculley, it
identifies KMPG Peat Marwick, the accounting firm and a member of a venture
capital company, as alleged co-conspirators with Mr Sculley in hatching a
'secret exit strategy' that would enable him to minimise embarrassment and
potential shareholder claims upon his resignation.
'The references to Peat Marwick are totally outrageous,' said the accounting
firm, which this week severed its relations with Spectrum. 'Peat Marwick
acted independently and was in no way involved in Mr Sculley's resignation.
These appear to be desperate claims.'
