FT  22 AUG 94 / Labour makes fairness its theme
Labour yesterday signalled plans to focus its campaign for the next general
election on fairness as it tries to sustain the favourable publicity
generated by Mr Tony Blair's election as leader.
Targets will include executives of privatised utility companies who have
made millions of pounds from share options. They will be contrasted with
elderly people struggling to pay value added tax on domestic fuel bills.
As Mr John Major returned to London from his summer holiday, Mr Gordon
Brown, the shadow chancellor, said fairness would be at the heart of a
Labour government led by Mr Blair.
'What people want in this country is the restoration of a sense of fair play
and fair dealing in our community. It is something that has gone missing,'
he told BBC television.
'We believe in a fair society, not based on envy or malice, but on fairness.
I think people want to see social cohesion in Britain, and that is why Tony
Blair's theme of rebuilding Britain as a community has struck such a chord,'
he said.
Labour's emphasis on the word fairness echoes the attempts of the party's
modernisers, led by Mr Blair and Mr Brown, to distance themselves from the
class-based policies of the 1970s.
Party strategists believe that promises of fairness in areas such as
taxation and health will strike a chord with middle-class voters, especially
in the south of England.
The strategy will be balanced by attacks on the government's handling of the
economy, and the inequity of its approach to taxation and the health
service.
'The issue in the next election will be between high taxation under the
Conservatives and fair taxation under Labour. The Conservatives have become
the party of high taxation,' Mr Brown said.
However, the strategy risks angering traditionalist supporters of Mr John
Prescott, Labour's deputy leader, who has called for a firm commitment to
progressive taxation, implying higher taxes for many voters.
Mr Major will spend next week at home in Huntingdon planning ways of
exploiting gradual improvements in the economy to rebuild the government's
popularity.
