FT  05 MAR 94 / As They Say in Europe: Lost in translation - James Morgan
attempts to cross the language barriers
A new Paris tabloid, InfoMatin, wrote the other day: 'All proposals designed
to legislate on the use of language give off a stale smell. And a regressive
one, because words have a capacity to fly in the face of those who persist
in acting as customs officers of the language.'
This was a response to the new bill to enforce the use of French on public
signs and in private conferences. The defence of the French language is an
item of recurring interest; there is, of course, only one real enemy of the
purity of the Gallic tongue: American English.
But elsewhere things are different. Unremarked by everyone outside Germany,
the Society for the German Language (GfdS) has admitted another bunch of
words. These are new German words rather than imports but the Germans do not
have 'douaniers' like the French - any old import can make itself at home in
Germany in about 10 minutes. One can write articles consisting almost
entirely of English.
German has a gift for fabricating new words in a way Americans might envy.
Each January the GfdS picks a 'Word of the Year'. The one for 1993 was
Sozialabbau which 'stands as a generic term for a series of euphemisms for
the difficult changes that have been felt in the lives of millions of people
in east and west Germany'.
This flexibility is something lacking in French. Mind you, there are words
that leave me stunned at the richness of French life: perhaps a reader can
help with one I came across years ago but have now forgotten. It means
someone who makes a living out of taking shoes apart and selling the bits as
spare parts. Then there is ramaillage, or 'the treatment of skins in
preparation for the manufacture of chamois leather'. Maybe this reflects the
infinite linguistic variety French reserves for such matters as food and
women's clothes.
Each language has characteristics which govern the way people think and
behave. It is widely believed that it is the people who create the language
but the opposite is true. Now, you may ask: if French is so good at
sensuality, which would seem to be the case, why is it identified with
clarity, precision and analytical brilliance? The answer is that the French
have to struggle against the grain of their language to obtain these skills.
They labour to make absolutely precise in 40 words what English makes clear
in four. Unless, of course, they are treating animal skins or tearing up
shoes.
(The same phenomenon can be seen in Japanese, whose structure is so at odds
with its script that its speakers have to develop fantastic brains to make
any sense of it.)
The besetting English sin is sloppiness. The language is so good at
conveying meanings and ideas with a minimum of effort (you get my drift?)
that nobody tries very hard. New ideas and words are drawn to it like whores
to a victorious army. From French, with its emphasis on eloquence and
elegance, one often makes a desperate effort to retrieve any sense at all.
It is hard to detect the difference between brilliant observation and the
charlatan, between the icon of postmodern obscurantism, Jacques Derrida, and
the dead doyen of modern Marxism, Louis Althusser. Only when translated into
English is it possible to estimate the true value of their works.
The Germans have a different problem. Their language imposes lunatic rules
of syntax and grammar. This strait-jacket has to contain a language whose
greatest gift is an astonishing capacity for metaphysical and abstract
expression. It is no accident that there is a certain kind of German which
produces words and phrases that remind one of madmen in uniform. Today's
language avoids such traps by accepting a new informality and offering open
house to foreigners in a manner that parallels the recent asylum laws. Those
foreigners, of course, never quite become German.
What the French and the Germans have in common is a certain distaste for
English. The poet and novelist, Kurt Tucholsky, wrote 60 years ago: 'English
is a simple but difficult language. It consists of loud foreign words which
are badly pronounced.' One uses it without loving it. Not so with French.
The journalist, Karl Gunter Simon writes, 'When two non-Frenchmen speak
French between themselves they are immediately mutually sympatisch. Whole
peoples love French even if they hardly like the French.'
There was a radio programme a few nights ago about English people living in
France and how they spoke French. They confirmed that they reserved French
for endearments and English for irony and sarcasm.
The emperor Charles V famously said: 'I speak Spanish to God, Latin to my
confessor, Italian to my mistress, French to my men and German to my horse.'
If he had known English he would have spoken it to his research assistant
and his PR girl.
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.
