FT  07 SEP 94 / False alarm in Cairo: Women's education, not ideology, is
key to population control
While doing voluntary service as a teenager in French-speaking Africa, I
shocked a Senegalese friend, a primary school teacher, by urging on him the
virtues of contraception. 'Faut pas empecher les gosses de naitre, wai],' he
expostulated: You mustn't stop kids being born. (Wai], an all-purpose
vernacular exclamation, added emphasis to his statement.)
A Moslem, though by no means a fundamentalist, my friend had unwittingly
given a succinct summary of Catholic doctrine. I had trouble with it then,
and I have trouble with it now. I've always thought the Catholic Church has
a better case on abortion than most liberals and feminists are willing to
allow: it hardly makes one an irrational fanatic to describe the deliberate
destruction of an embryo human being as the 'taking of human life'. But the
Church weakens its case enormously by pushing it back before conception. At
that stage there is no individual human life to be taken: only a myriad
potential combinations, almost all of which nature will rule out anyway. Nor
is it obvious that the methods of avoiding conception which the church
recommends are any more 'natural' than those it condemns.
At the Cairo conference on population and development, Vatican delegates are
struggling to remove 'pregnancy termination' from the list of things covered
by 'reproductive healthcare' in the UN draft document and to salvage a
phrase about 'taking appropriate steps to help women avoid abortion, which
in no case should be presented as a method of family planning'. Vatican
delegates have wisely avoided taking a stand on the contraception issue.
They are not helped by TV footage from the Philippines, where last month
Catholics, led by Cardinal Jaime Sin, demonstrated against the conference
and their government's family planning policy, with banners proclaiming:
'Contraception = abortion = murder.'
Similarly the conference's organisers must have been less than pleased with
newspaper headlines yesterday suggesting that Mrs Gro Harlem Brundtland, the
Norwegian prime minister, won a standing ovation by calling for abortion to
be legalised worldwide. They have taken pains to establish that this is not
the conference's agenda. Mrs Brundtland herself complained that the agenda
had been misrepresented, suggesting that the term 'reproductive healthcare'
could not 'possibly be read as promoting abortion as a means of family
planning'. But she clearly meant to take on the Vatican with two of her
statements: that 'morality becomes hypocrisy if it means mothers suffering
or dying in connection with unwanted pregnancies and illegal abortions and
unwanted children'; and that morality cannot 'only be a question of
controlling sexuality and protecting unborn life'.
It is a false quarrel about a false alarm. A false quarrel, because each
side is attacking the other for a position which, in this conference at
least, it is not attempting to defend. And a false alarm because the current
prospect for world population growth is less catastrophic than the headlines
suggest.
In an essay just published in the New York Review of Books, Prof Amartya
Sen, a leading expert on the economics of famine, reminds us that the rate
of world population growth has fallen in the last two decades from 2.2 to
1.7 per cent, and 'is expected to go steadily down until the size of the
world's population becomes nearly stationary'.
The number at which it will eventually stabilise, around 10bn, still sounds
alarmingly high. It is, but not - as many imagine - because most of those
people will be hungry and poor: per capita incomes are rising and food is
getting cheaper in those parts of the world where most of them are being
born. The danger is the opposite: sooner or later most of them will be able
to afford western lifestyles and consumption patterns, putting an
unsustainable strain on the world environment.
That problem will not be solved by population control alone, but anything we
can do to accelerate the fall in the birth rate should help to make it more
manageable. But Prof Sen makes a strong case that coercive or 'override'
methods - those in which 'the family's personal decisions are overridden by
some agency outside the family' - are unnecessary and perhaps ineffective,
as well as being inhumane. The fall in China's birth rate since 1979 may, he
suggests, be due less to the authoritarian one-child policy than to 'more
collaborative and participatory' policies which have made education and jobs
outside the home available to many Chinese women. The Indian state of
Kerala, with 29m people, has reduced its birth and fertility rates below
those of China without any state coercion. It is among the poorer Indian
states (so economic growth is not in itself the solution, as is sometimes
argued), but it resembles China in having 'high levels of basic education,
healthcare and so on'. Most strikingly, it has higher rural literacy rates,
male and female, than any Chinese province.
China and Kerala have the advantage of being neither Moslem nor Catholic.
But the birth rate is also falling rapidly in Iran (where there is good
basic healthcare, and the authorities came round to family planning in 1988)
and in most of South America. The Tablet, the British Catholic magazine,
even claimed last month, with a certain chutzpah, that because it favours
women's education 'the Catholic Church should be regarded as one of the most
effective organisations in the world for reducing the rate of population
growth'. In other words, the Pope should be congratulated for educating his
female followers to the point where they can ignore his advice.
