FT  21 OCT 94 / International Bonds: BankAmerica launches Dollars 500m
floating-rate note offering
The eurobond market witness-ed a flood of floating-rate note offerings
yesterday amid difficult market conditions, as uncertainty about US interest
rates drove US and European government bond markets lower.
In the dollar sector, BankAmerica launched a Dollars 500m issue of five-year
floating-rate notes, with a coupon of 18.75 basis points over three-month
Libor.
Joint lead manager Goldman Sachs said it sold almost all its quota of bonds,
with demand spread across Europe and the Far East. Interest came from
commercial banks, fund managers, private individuals and some corporate
investors, Goldman Sachs said.
Goldman Sachs also led Ford Motor Credit's Dollars 250m offering of
five-year FRNs. The bonds, offering 20 basis points over three-month Libor,
also found widespread demand, it said.
'Interest in FRNs has grown substantially this year,' said a syndicate
official. 'Investors want to be protected in a rising interest rate
environment and many, in particular commercial banks, want that extra
pick-up in yield above their funding costs that FRNs offer.'
At the short-end of the D-Mark sector, IMI launched a DM300m offering of
three-year bonds with a coupon of 12 1/2 basis points over Libor.
Some syndicate managers said the bonds were tightly priced but joint lead
manager J. P. Morgan reported good sales around the 99.85 offer price. The
strongest demand came from UK institutional investors but there was also
substantial interest from Italian and German investors, it said.
'Many D-Mark investors have taken their money out of the fixed-rate D-Mark
market but with the D-Mark still well bid, they have stayed in the same
currency sector, moving instead to short-dated D-Mark FRNs,' said one
syndicate manager.
Depfa, Germany's largest private mortgage bank, returned to the French franc
sector, with a FFr2bn offering of four-year fixed-rate bonds, priced to
yield 27 basis points over French government bonds.
Depfa's second French franc eurobond was prompted partly by the success of
its debut offering in November last year, lead manager BNP said. BNP
reported demand from investors in Germany, Switzerland and France.
The Republic of Argentina's Dollars 500m global offering of five-year bonds,
launched on Wednesday, was priced yesterday at a re-offer price of 99.925 to
yield 350 basis points over US government bonds, at the top end of its
indicated spread.
