FT  28 APR 94 / Income tax on the cards for Cuba
Introduction of income tax and a reduction in state funding for a range of
economic enterprises are among measures to be debated by Cuba's national
assembly on Sunday. The special session, called in response to the
deteriorating economy, will also review the effect of economic changes
implemented over the past eight months.
Increasingly concerned about its budget deficit, the government announced a
50 per cent cut in the budget for the armed forces last month, saying the
military should 'cost the country as little as possible'. Given the central
role of the armed forces in Cuban politics, the reduction is a telling
indicator of the nature of the economic problems facing the country,
diplomats in Havana said.
Introduction of income tax is intended to recapture billions of pesos in
circulation which government officials say are being used by Cubans to
purchase hard currency. The government announced last year that Cubans were
free to hold foreign currency.
The assembly debate will effectively be a continuation of the regular
session which was held last December. That reviewed the government's more
liberal attitude to foreign currency, foreign investment and increasing
private and co-operative ownership of farms and a range of small businesses.
Since then, however, there have been signs that the island's economy is
buckling. Economic problems have worsened over the past three years
following the break-up of the Soviet Union, Cuba's main trading partner, and
the failure last year of the sugar harvest which caused a shortfall in
foreign earnings.
The assembly session comes a week after the government reorganised the
administration of the economy, creating new ministries and suggesting a move
away from central planning on which decisions have been based since the
revolution 35 years ago.
The government has also adopted a more liberal attitude to exiles. A meeting
in Havana last week attended by 200 leaders of exile communities concluded
with a decision by the government allow all exiles to return to the island
whenever they want.
However, Cuban-American leaders in Florida said yesterday they could not
accept the invitation because they would be punished by the US government
for violating Washington's economic embargo on the island.
