FT  07 DEC 94 / Survey of Zimbabwe (11): Tourism - the million mark is near
 -Michael Holman separates the facts from the hyperbole
'Africa's paradise', says Zimbabwe's marketing slogan.
Allowing for the hyperbole of the tourist business, most visitors tend to
agree that there is indeed something special about a country which offers
everything from some of Africa's best game parks to trout fishing in the
eastern highlands, and makes up for the absence of a coastline by an inland
sea called Lake Kariba.
And as word has got round, the number of visitors has soared. At current
rates of growth, by the end of the decade 1m people a year will discover
that Zimbabwe is one of the continent's most attractive destinations.
Yet it is still relatively uncrowded and comparatively cheap, and as
tourist-friendly as anywhere in Africa and beyond.
Last year, some 880,000 visitors came to Zimbabwe - more than three times
the 1989 figure - and growth is running at around 10 per cent a year. With
receipts in 1993 put at some Dollars 95m, and employing around 60,000
workers, tourism is easily the fastest developing sector of the economy.
Operators speak confidently of 1m visitors annually by the end of the
decade.
It is a perfectly feasible target. Zimbabwe is set to benefit from the
tourism boom under way in post-apartheid South Africa, and from the fact
that for the first time in 30 years, the region as a whole is at peace -
provided, that is, the Angola ceasefire holds.
There is little doubt, either, that the country can cope. It is already
renowned for its expertise in game conservation and management, as well as
innovative schemes which ensure that local communities participate in, and
benefit from, wildlife conservation.
The Communal Areas Management Programme for Indigenous Resources (Campfire),
introduced in 1984, encourages rural communities to exploit and sustain the
local wildlife through tourism, rather than deplete it through poaching.
But for anyone who knew Zimbabwe in the 1960s and 1970s, the idea of sharing
the country with 1m other visitors is most disagreeable. During those
decades, the guerrilla war against white minority rule and economic
sanctions imposed in the wake of the unilateral declaration of independence
in 1965 reduced tourists to a low of 75,000 a year in the late 1970s.
The only answer, however, is to get to Zimbabwe before even more visitors
discover the delights of one of the best value destinations in Africa.
Whether you are a backpacker staying at one of the cheap hostels that have
sprung up across the country, or in the luxury lodges developed over the
past few years in private game parks, prices and quality rival anything
regional competitors such as South Africa or Kenya have to offer.
Admittedly, some of the top hotels and lodges, comfortable as they usually
are, can be overpriced.
Many operate a two- or even three-tier pricing system - one for Zimbabwean
residents, a second for visitors from neighbouring countries, and the third
for the rest of the world. Thus what is usually termed 'overseas' customers
can find themselves paying as much as three times the local rate.
Some hotels, however, are adopting a single tariff policy, and this may
become the norm.
Even at the highest rate, there is some compensation from the fact that
prices other than accommodation are extraordinarily cheap by international
standards. It costs around Dollars 75 to fly the return journey from Harare
to Victoria Falls, one of the natural wonders of the world.
Most visitors make their base in Harare, 'one of the safest urban centres in
the world, almost devoid of the theft  .. which mars other holiday
destinations,' according to a government tourist handbook.
This hyperbole is positively misleading. Pickpockets are an increasing
menace. A common ploy is to wave a form seeking sponsorship for a bogus
charity event, and lift the wallet while the target is distracted.
For the business visitor, Meikles Hotel (795655 fax - 707754) remains the
best in town, and is centrally located. Old hands say it has never been the
same since the original Meikles, with its open verandah and balconies was
knocked down in the 1960s. Only the stone lions that guarded the entrance
remain, together with some long-serving members of staff who maintain old
traditions of hospitality and personal service.
The Sheraton (14-729771) is inconveniently situated, far enough from the
city centre to require a taxi - but the ride costs only a couple of US
dollars.
Some of the smaller city hotels such as the Bronte (796631) with its
pleasant garden, are excellent value, and not far from the town centre.
Even the most pressed business visitor should find time for a day trip to
the spectacular Victoria Falls; and if Air Zimbabwe's (737011) daily flight
is inconvenient, it is worth considering sharing a charter from one of the
several companies that operate from Harare.
If there is not time to fit in Hwange Game Reserve, one of Africa's finest,
at least get some of the flavour of the wild from a night at Pamuzinda
Safari Lodge, an hour's drive from Harare (11 lodges, 796541), or stay at
Imire Game Park, (Wedza 2257).
If you have to stay in Harare over the weekend, find time for a Saturday
afternoon at Borrowdale for the races, or an excursion to the game park at
Lake Chivero (it's advisable to take malaria precautions); and at some stage
find time to stroll round the National Gallery where the world-famous Shona
sculptures are on display.
Several private galleries also stock Zimbabwean work, and will arrange
delivery abroad.
If on holiday rather than on business, consider making the southern city of
Bulawayo your base. It is quieter, friendlier and closer to the Victoria
Falls and Hwange, and a 20-minute drive from the magnificent granite hills
of the Matobo national park, where the man who gave his name to Rhodesia -
Cecil John Rhodes - is buried.
Stay at Nesbitt Castle (19-42726), a turn-of-the-century crenellated folly
where 40-odd staff attend to the needs of guests, accommodated in eight
bedrooms, surrounded by a leafy garden with a swimming pool. Alternatively,
stay in one of the private game parks that have sprung up - Matobo Hills
(19-74589) is on the edge of the Matobo Park.
Bulawayo is also the starting point for what is by far the best way to
arrive at the Falls: by rail. Best of all is the luxurious service operated
by Rail Safaris (19-75575) - but book early.
Zimbabwe's absence of a coast is made up for by its inland sea at Lake
Kariba, where you can rent a houseboat - but beware bilharzia, the
water-borne parasite. If that is too leisurely a way to spend your time, go
white water rafting or canoeing on Zambesi River.
And if the summer heat is too much, head for the eastern highlands, where
even in the hottest months you will need a jersey in the evening. The
mountains offer hiking, riding, troutfishing - all on your doorstep if you
stay at Troutbeck Inn (129-8-305); or you could rent a cottage through the
Manicpal and Publicity Association in Mutare (120-64711).
African curios abound, but make a point of visiting African Trackwoods
(Harare 885652, UK agent 44-628-481086). The company turns old wooden
railway sleepers made from local teak and other hard woods into magnificent
tables and desks, and an associated company, Danjo Wood Products, turns the
offcuts into everything from briefcases to cigar boxes and picture frames.
The supply of sleepers is limited, and the company reckons it could run out
of them in a couple of years. Be prepared for a six-to-eight-month delivery
date.
If you are going on safari, then the Bulawayo-based Courtney Boot Company
makes hand-made hiking boots 'inspired by the legend of Frederick Courtney
Selous', the last of the big game hunters. Each pair has its own serial
number and wooden box, which for an extra USDollars 10 will bear the
purchaser's name on an engraved brass plaque.
Finally, a reading list might include the Globetrotter Guide to Zimbabwe, by
Paul Tingay, while for an insight into the war which cost some 30,000 lives
read Muzukuru: a guerrilla's story by Paul Hotz (Ravan Press, Johannesburg)
or Angus Shaw's Kandaya: Another Time, Another Place (Baobab Books, Harare).
