FT  02 JUN 94 / VW pressure on Madrid over Seat funding
Volkswagen said yesterday it hoped to end talks with the Madrid government
'in the next two weeks' to clear the way for further restructuring at Seat,
its loss-making Spanish subsidiary.
The company said it wanted Spain to contribute DM820m (Dollars 500m) to fund
redundancies at Seat. It claimed there were 'positive signals' that the
government would make funds available and a further meeting was scheduled
for next week.
However, in Madrid, the industry ministry said it would only be willing to
pump more money into the Barcelona-based car company for new development
projects. The government also argues that its scope for providing help is
limited by European Union rules.
Mr Juan Ignacio Molto, secretary of state for industry, told VW
representatives on Tuesday the government was not prepared to fund
redundancy packages. Excess labour was 'a problem for private sector
management'. However, the Spanish authorities are anxious to see Seat
maintained as a separate company within the VW group. The regional
government of Catalonia, also under pressure to assist the loss-making
company, has criticised Madrid for delay in resolving the issue.
Meanwhile, VW announced that it had had 'positive results' at company and
group level in April and May but would not give details of profits. The
company has already said it hopes to improve on its 1993 profit of DM71m at
company level this year and to break even at group level following a loss of
DM1.4bn last year.
Worldwide deliveries in the first five months rose 6.1 per cent over the
year before to total 1.4m units. Germany was the only market where
deliveries fell - by 4.1 per cent - a fact VW blamed on weak demand there
generally and poor sales at Audi.
Several shareholders were angry that the VW management had not foreseen the
DM1.84bn losses at Seat last year but there was broad support among the
3,500 shareholders for Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, the VW production
chief at the centre of suspicions about industrial espionage.
Both Mr Ferdinand Piech, the chief executive, and Mr Klaus Liesen, the
chairman of the supervisory board, made impromptu comments after prepared
speeches, reflecting the anger about Opel allegations in the days before the
annual meeting. 'There is up to now no evidence which would justify the
charge of industrial espionage,' Mr Liesen told applauding shareholders. Mr
Piech, in turn, denied all suggestion that Mr Lopez would move to Seat.
Seat lost DM350m in the first quarter of this year and VW hopes the group
will end the year with a loss of around DM1bn, compared with a loss of
DM1.84bn in 1993. The company is expected to become profitable again in
1995.
Mr Piech said there were two solutions at Seat. A 'friendly' one would be to
leave Seat as an independent subsidiary. A more drastic alternative would
involve merging Seat with other VW operations, leaving only an independent
sales unit. It has asked the Spanish government to fund the redundancy of
older workers, who are entitled to three years' redundancy payment which
will cost about DM820m. Otherwise, VW says it will spend DM160m to shed the
same number of younger workers.
