FT  16 AUG 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Conference seeks accord on high
seas fishing
Fishing nations are being urged to sink their differences and agree an
international treaty governing catches on the high seas in an attempt to
halt serious over-fishing.
Over the next two weeks, a United Nations conference in New York will seek
common ground between coastal states, whose territorial waters contain 80
per cent of the world's fish, and distant-water fishing nations such as
Japan, Spain and Russia, which have large fleets operating on the high seas.
Tensions between these two groups have risen as stocks of valuable species
such as cod have dwindled.
The UN Food and Agriculture Organisation says the global fishing fleet
increased at twice the rate of the world marine catch between 1970 and 1990,
compounded by government subsidies worth some Dollars 54bn a year to fishing
fleets.
Stock losses have led some countries to halt or reduce fishing effort -
Iceland has cut back domestic fishing by 50 per cent.
The problem is exacerbated by unregulated fishing fleets flying flags of
convenience and subject to no country's rules.
Canada, one of the coastal states most concerned about the impact of high
seas fishing on the catch in its territorial waters, seized a foreign
fishing vessel outside its waters last April, saying the crew were 'modern
day pirates stealing Canada's cod and keeping 30,000 Canadian fishers out of
work'.
There is not yet any overall international regulation of the world's high
seas fisheries - those beyond coastal states' 200-mile exclusive economic
zones - although multinational agreements exist in certain regions. The
North West Atlantic Fisheries Organisation, for example, is supposed to
cover high seas stocks off Canada.
The UN conference was initiated by the Rio Earth Summit in 1992 and started
work last year to try to close these gaps in the 1982 UN Convention on the
Law of the Sea.
This month's meeting is scheduled to be the final session.
Fish do not obey artificial geographical limits and the 'highly migratory
and straddling' stocks covered by the conference are those species found
within two or more states' territorial waters or the adjacent high seas.
Cod off eastern Canada and pollack in the Bering Sea, for example, straddle
several countries' waters, while species such as tuna and swordfish migrate
over huge distances. Coastal states want a dominant role in regulating
fishing for these species, whereas the long-distance fishing nations are
seeking international regulation.
Mr Satya Nandan, the Fijian chairman of the conference, has drawn up
principles for a treaty, including provision for enforcement, compulsory and
binding settlement of disputes, and acceptance of scientific evidence on the
state of fish stocks as the basis of the agreement.
Some participating nations believe conflicting interests make agreement on
an all-embracing treaty unlikely. They suggest, however, that one important
loophole - Panama's issue of flags of convenience - may be closed if a
convention can be drawn up stating that countries may issue flags and
fishing rights only for their own territorial waters.
'It appears Panama would agree to co-operate,' said an official from a
European Union member state. In exchange, Panama would be offered tariff
concessions on fish exports to the EU.
