FT  14 MAY 94 / The man who might be Labour's JFK: The party seems to be
turning to Tony Blair
Mr Tony Blair was saying nothing yesterday about the leadership of the
Labour party. As the shock of Mr John Smith's death continued to reverberate
around the corridors of Westminster, callers to his office were told
politely but firmly that the shadow home secretary was in mourning. Neither
he nor those around him wanted to talk about the future at the moment.
His silence did not quell the speculation. The outcome of the leadership
contest which will follow Mr Smith's death will be uncertain for some time
yet. But all logic dictates Mr Blair should and will stand.
Amid the genuine grief there is a strengthening perception in the party at
Westminster that the 41-year-old MP for Sedgefield is the natural successor
to Mr Smith. He is 14 years younger. He displays more of the impatience of
youth than the calculated caution which guided Mr Smith's leadership of his
party. But Mr Blair shares many of the qualities of Labour's lost leader.
Some comparisons are superficial. Mr Blair is English rather than Scottish,
but he was born and went to school in Edinburgh. He is middle-class. He is a
barrister. Real resemblances run deeper. Mr Blair, like Mr Smith, is a
politician at ease with himself. His family life provides an important
connection with the real world. His outlook rests on a bedrock of beliefs
which have never distinguished between social cohesion and opportunities for
the individual; between economic prosperity and social justice.
He has frequently been derided by some on the left of his party as a product
of the 'soundbite' politics of the 1980s, but - again like Mr Smith - he
sees no contradiction between passion and moderation.
His case is that Labour, as it did in 1945 and 1963, must lead the tide of
ideas if it is to return to government. Above all it must eschew the
comfortable politics of delusion which have kept it out of office for 15
years.
Mr Blair is determined that the Labour party must change. But he is equally
adamant that change does not mean abandonment of past principles. As he put
it in one of the many speeches and newspaper articles through which he has
sought to build a new ideological framework for Labour: 'Reform is not about
betraying principles but about rescuing them from the past.'
In other words you do not have to sign up to old-style collectivism, to
state ownership, or to punitive income tax rates to promote the fundamental
goal of the Labour party - offering opportunity to the broad mass of the
people.
Mr Blair's views are not unique. They are shared by his close ally and
friend Mr Gordon Brown. The shadow chancellor is also a formidable candidate
for the leadership.
But while Mr Brown has been bogged down in trench warfare with union leaders
in his attempts to construct a credible economic strategy, Mr Blair has
found the room in his present post to translate principles into policies.
His startling success in fashioning a surprisingly tough stance on crime
owes much to his more fundamental emphasis on partnership between the
individual and the community. Society as a whole has an obligation to
prevent and deter crime. But the individual cannot escape responsibility for
his or her actions. The soundbite - tough on crime, tough on the causes of
crime - is more than a clever slogan.
He adopted a similar approach in his dealings with the unions as shadow
employment secretary before the 1992 general election. To the fury of many
in the union movement - something which will count against him now - he
argued that Labour's commitment should be to the rights of individual
workers' rather than to the political muscle of the Trades Union Congress.
Voters like such sentiments - particularly when they are delivered by a
young, personable and articulate politician. It is hard to find anyone at
Westminster who does not believe that Mr Blair would be the leader most
likely to win back the support of the middle classes in southern England.
Mr Blair is confident in his convictions. Mr Neil Kinnock, the former Labour
leader, regards him as one of the bravest politicians of his generation. He
is feared by his Conservative opponents. His opponents on the Labour left at
Westminster respect him as well as disagree with him.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, regards him as the toughest Labour
spokesman he has faced across the Commons despatch box. Privately, cabinet
colleagues admit that he is the choice they fear most as leader.
If Mr Blair wins the Labour leadership the Conservatives will deride him for
his youthful inexperience. But what will frighten them is that he might
emerge as the Jack Kennedy of British politics.
