FT  18 AUG 94 / Two computer makers to put health warning on keyboards
Compaq Computer and Microsoft, two of the largest companies in the personal
computer industry, are taking the unprecedented step of placing warning
labels on computer keyboards urging users to take care to avoid possible
injuries from their use.
Responding to widespread concerns about the possibility of repetitive strain
injury (RSI) from computer use, Compaq will put stickers on its PC keyboards
reading: 'Warning] To reduce risk of serious injury to hands, wrists or
other joints read Safety &amp; Comfort Guide.'
Booklets offering advice on computer use will be included with new computers
and keyboards. The advice will include suggestions on positioning of office
equipment and furniture, posture, lighting, vision care and work habits.
Most computer makers, including Compaq, are defending themselves against
thousands of lawsuits filed by people who have suffered injuries which they
believe have been caused by keyboard use. A central issue in many of these
suits is whether manufacturers knew there were risks, but failed to give
users adequate warning.
Compaq said it was not admitting any liability for injuries. 'Even though no
scientific studies have shown that typing at a computer keyboard causes
these injuries, we believe that suggestions on proper computer set-up and
work habits are useful in promoting general workplace comfort and health,'
it said.
Microsoft is about to launch an ergonomically-designed keyboard with an
angled surface, slanted keys and a wrist rest. It will put a warning on this
product, the company said.
The companies are the first in the computer industry to warn that there is a
chance of serious injury from the prolonged use of keyboards. Other computer
companies may follow suit. However, IBM said yesterday it had no such plans.
There have been widespread reports in the US and Europe of RSI linked to
computer use. The afflictions range from muscular pain in the hands, wrists
and shoulders to serious nerve damage.
In the US, RSI is the leading form of job-related injury, with estimates of
the number of workers affected ranging as high as 5m. The American Academy
of Orthopaedic Surgeons has estimated that such injuries cost about Dollars
27bn (Pounds 17.4bn) per year in medical costs and lost income.
In the UK, there were 200,000 reported cases of job-related 'upper limb
injuries' last year, according to the Trades Union Congress.
