FT  24 JUN 94 / Survey of Norway (10): The state maintains its grip - The
banks look healthier after a period of crisis
After a gruelling five-year period of consolidation and massive credit
losses, Norway's banks returned to profit in 1993, emerging from the
country's worst banking crisis since the war.
A near-crash of several banks forced the government to undertake a
far-reaching rescue operation, which subsequently made the state the biggest
shareholder in the top three commercial banks, in what is proving to be a
lucrative investment.
During the past five years, the commercial banks alone were forced to cut
staff by a third, close 40 per cent of their domestic branches, retrench
from foreign operations and reduce operating costs by nearly 30 per cent in
real terms.
Only this year have they been able to concentrate efforts on maintaining
market share, though concern is being expressed over what appears to be
relaxation of lending practices in the face of heated competition - a key
element of the crisis, which engulfed the banks in the first place and
resulted in unprecedented high levels of credit losses.
Nevertheless, the banks' asset quality during the past year has improved,
helped by a steady upturn in Norway's oil-dependent economy, which is
rebounding from a seven-year recession that began when world crude oil
prices in 1986 plunged to their lowest level in more than a decade.
Because of the economy's upturn, which began last year, the banks have seen
a consistent decline in the level of non-performing loans during the past
few quarters, and consequently improvement in loan loss provisions.
Despite the banks' improved health, the minority Labour government has
stressed that the state will maintain until further notice a majority
shareholding of at least 50 per cent of Christiania Bank and Den norske Bank
(DnB), the country's two biggest banks. The state also owns all the share
capital of Fokus Bank, the third biggest commercial bank, which it is likely
to shed.
The state last year, however, reduced its stake in Christiania Bank to 68.9
per cent, from 98.8 per cent. But last December the it lifted its DnB
shareholding to 87.5 per cent from 69 per cent in an unpopular move in which
it converted NKr3.5bn in preference capital, which it had invested in DnB,
into 350m shares to once again shore up the bank's weak foundation.
The preference capital was converted into shares with a face value of NKr10,
but with DnB's shares trading at an average of about NKr18 this year on the
Oslo bourse, the move by the state was not only astute but also quite
lucrative.
Since 199,1 Christiania has received more than NKr9bn in state support,
while DnB has received more than NKr7bn, but the government has not escaped
criticism of the way it handled the crisis.
A report published recently pointed out that the Bank of Norway, which has
been in charge of administrating the state's shareholding and investments in
the banks, has earned more than NKr18bn from the banking crisis - at the
expense of the banks' former shareholders who were, in some cases, forced to
nullify the value of their bank shares - in the form of shareholdings and
interest on loans supplied to the banks by the central bank when the banks,
suffering from a lack of foreigners' confidence, had difficulty in raising
capital outside Norway.
Nevertheless, the government has pronounced the banking crisis dead and, for
the first time in many years, Christiania was able to tap the domestic
market for capital. Last December, it raised NKr1.88bn in fresh equity
through a successful share issue. It helped that the bank had reduced net
non-performing loans to 5.6 per cent of total loans at the end of 1993, from
7.1 per cent at end-1992, and that the outlook for the economy was bright
and expected to be brighter this year and next.
DnB is currently finalising plans to undertake a share issue in the second
quarter of this year, to raise about NKr2bn. Of this, NKr1bn will represent
a share capital increase, while the remainder will derive from a sale of
DnB's shares held by the state.
Both Christiania and DnB returned to profit last year, benefiting
substantially from securities' gains resulting primarily from a rise in bond
prices as domestic interest rates fell sharply. Underlying performances
improved, however, and should be sustained if the banks have learned the
lessons of past sins and avoid the lure of rapid credit expansion to boost
market share.
Norway's regulators are beginning to express concern over just that issue.
Recently the Banking, Insurance and Securities Commission (BISC), the
industry watchdog, decided to survey the banks' routines for issuing housing
loans. The BISC is uneasy over a sharp rise in housing prices, which it
believes may be caused by competition among the banks to finance loans to
the highest degree possible, irrespective of property values.
However, Mr Trond Reinertsen, managing director of the Norwgian Banks
Association, shrugged off suggestions that the banks may fall into old
routines. 'Credit demand will grow in line with growth of domestic
consumption, perhaps a little stronger,' he said. Credit demand in the past
year has been moderate, increasing by between 1 and 2 per cent, while the
banks have seen credit expansion of nearly 7 per cent.
Mr Reinertsen argues that this level of growth is only natural, following a
five-year period in which there has been little credit demand as households
have struggled to reduce debt and consolidate savings in the midst of
Norway's recession.
'This is not a credit-financed expansion but credit financed by growth in
incomes,' he explained, adding that Norway's economy is currently strong,
rising from a very low level. 'It has been a number of years since there has
been credit expansion.'
According to the government, the economy showed strong growth in the second
half of 1993, and mainland GDP (excluding oil and shipping) grew by nearly
2.0 per cent from 1992 to 1993. The government is predicting a further
upturn in the mainland economy this year, fuelled by increased private
consumption and housing investments.
The household savings ratio is expected to fall by one percentage point to
about 4.25 per cent this year and total GDP growth is forecast at 4.0 per
cent.
Investment in the mainland economy is forecast to increase by 5.25 per cent
this year, while investment in the petroleum sector is expected to plummet
by 8 per cent after hitting a historically high level in 1993.
Mr Reinertsen warns, however, that the issue facing policymakers is to cut
back on government spending to allow private consumption to expand further.
Government spending, currently about 8 per cent of GDP, must be reined in,
he says. By comparison, the Bank of Norway estimates the banks' underlying
credit expansion at close to 11 per cent in the past year, and believes the
expansion has been between 9 and 11 per cent during recent months.
Mr Sigbjoern Johnsen, finance minister, recently warned the banks not
succumb to past habits. 'We are not in a position to repeat the mistakes of
the 1980s,' he said. 'There are recent examples which suggest that the
lessons learned from the past have yet to take hold,' he told a recent
conference.
Norway's savings banks account for the strongest growth in housing lending,
while the commercial banks' growth has been fuelled more by corporate
lending. The savings banks, since 1987, have boosted their market share for
private loans to 33 per cent from 28 per cent, at the expense of commercial
banks whose market share shrunk to 21 per cent from 28 per cent.
In March, Christiania, DnB and Union Bank of Norway, the country's biggest
savings bank, received a fillip when the IBCA, London-based rating agency,
upgraded the individual, short-term and long-term ratings of the banks,
reflecting their return to profit last year, the positive outlook for the
economy and the continuing strong support of the state.
