FT  10 JUN 94 / Hopes smothered in shifting sands: Jordan's King Hussein
outlines to FT writers his frustration and fears for the Middle East
Life is Hell. How much stress is too much stress?' reads the headline over a
cartoon in a modest office used by King Hussein of Jordan. It could well
provide a motto for a man who has survived more than 40 years at the centre
of a still turbulent Middle East.
To what extent that cartoon reflects the king's mood may be a matter of
debate, but there is no doubting the depth of his frustration, even
exasperation, revealed by the occasional flash of bitterness about political
developments in the region. A conversation with the king offers no trace of
euphoria about the Middle East peace process, in spite of his assessment
that it is 'irreversible', but rather a deep disappointment at the
opportunities missed, and some foreboding about the future.
Beneath the diplomatic veneer, it also reveals the frustration of a man who,
for the past four decades, has been at the centre of attempts to bring about
a lasting regional peace, but who may be sensing that he and Jordan have
been edged to the periphery of a process which could define his country's
future.
Much of King Hussein's dismay stems from the failure of Arab nations to rise
above narrow self-interest, and his reluctant acceptance that Jordan may
eventually have no option but to abandon one of its most fundamental
commitments: its refusal to sign a separate peace deal with Israel. Before
Jordan, Syria, Lebanon and the Palestinians sat down with Israel at the
Madrid peace conference in October 1991, they had agreed that their greatest
strength lay in unity. They were determined to avoid the example of Egypt,
which in 1979 signed a separate peace with Israel, and not allow themselves
to be picked off individually by Israel.
'Sadly, that co-ordination has been a myth,' said the king, 'particularly in
regard to our Palestinian brethren. I had hoped that there would be the kind
of co-ordination that would allow us to address jointly our problems with
Israel. This has not happened. As a result we are convinced we cannot wait
any longer. We have to address the problems which relate to the interests of
this country. But at the same time we remain ready to address any request
for help (from the Palestinians) to the best of our ability.'
However, the king does not know what the Palestinians want from Jordan, any
more than he knew that Mr Yassir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine
Liberation Organisation, was last summer secretly negotiating an outline
peace agreement with Israel which culminated on September 13 in a signing
ceremony at the White House. The Palestinian leadership then proceeded to
provoke the Jordanians further by signing an economic agreement with Israel
which in some areas contradicted (for instance, on banking and financial
controls in the West Bank) a deal already struck with the government in
Amman. 'Instead of Jordan having an economic agreement with the
Palestinians, and the Palestinians having an agreement with Israel, we are
now having to discuss the whole thing all over again. We could have saved
time if we had co-ordinated in the first place,' said King Hussein.
The relationship does not appear to have improved since the PLO took control
of 60 per cent of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho following
the withdrawal of Israeli troops last month. The king stresses his
commitment to help the Palestinians, but added, sighing: 'If there are
specifics asked of us, we would like to know in advance what they are.' For
example, if they want help with electricity distribution, 'we are already
suffering a shortage, so if they ask this of us we may not be able to
deliver'. But the king left the impression that he doubted whether the PLO
leadership knew what it wanted - or indeed whether it adequately represented
the aspirations of the Gazan and Jericho Palestinians it now leads.
One consequence of the PLO attitude has been Jordan's decision to resume
direct negotiations with Israel this week in Washington, for the first time
since September. These should build on an outline peace 'agenda' agreed at
that time which set out territorial, security and economic issues to be
discussed. 'We have always sought to achieve progress since the ratification
of the agenda between Jordan and Israel. I am very pleased by the fact that
we seem to be at the beginning of the serious work which is required by both
sides.'
The key question is how far down that road King Hussein will venture, and
whether he might be willing to sign a peace treaty with Israel before Syria
and Lebanon. Alternatively, having already seen Egypt and the PLO abandon a
joint Arab approach, King Hussein may privately fear that Syria could go the
same way. He senses that substantial progress in the Israeli-Syrian
negotiations may not be long delayed, with Mr Warren Christopher, the US
secretary of state, likely to resume his shuttle diplomacy soon. 'We have
our own unique problems,' said the king. 'Syria has its own unique problems.
I would not say that we know exactly what is going on there. Nor are we
required to provide details of what is going on here.'
It is an answer which leaves all Jordanian options open. It also underscores
King Hussein's fears that while Arab governments may be on the brink of
securing an historic regional peace, they are failing to develop either
regional co-ordination or the political systems which would put the fruits
of peace in the hands of their people. 'It is a very sad phase. It is also
very dangerous in some respects. It is one which causes despair. And the
reaction to it, the extremism as you see it, is a reflection of poor
economic conditions and feelings of utter frustration. I will not be very
popular for saying it, but it is the result of a lack of ability to bring
about institutions which give people a meaning to their lives, give people
the right to decide what the future should be. In other words, democracy,
freedom and respect for human rights. If this continues to be absent, and
continues to be denied, then we have problems.'
The king is proud of his own response to such fissile political sentiments:
an evolving democracy which last year saw the country's first multi-party
election, and one in which an Islamic party won seats. 'All schools of
political thought have found a common language and a common ground for this
country to thrive and to continue to develop with democracy and with respect
to the constitution. We hope that others might look at us as something that
works, not as something that is a challenge to them.'
King Hussein watches with particular distaste the war in Yemen which his
personal diplomacy had failed to avert. Here, in the king's eyes, was a
union blessed by the Yemenis and bound by a democratic election, which is
being fragmented not, he says, from within but by outside meddling. 'There
are elements that are interested in fragmenting this country (Yemen), and
this is criminal,' he says, in what appeared to be an allusion to Saudi
Arabia and other Gulf states. King Hussein says he has now 'withdrawn from
the scene'.
His withdrawal is symptomatic of a deeper feeling that the king's experience
and advice is being ignored among Arab and western states. Partly, as he
acknowledges, this relative isolation derives from Jordan's inability to
claw back the diplomatic ground it lost as a result of the king's opposition
to the war against Iraq. Relations with Egypt remain cool, and the king was
again snubbed by King Fahd during a recent trip to Saudi Arabia.
The favour of western allies is returning, but slowly. This weekend King
Hussein will fly to Washington to meet President Bill Clinton with whom he
says a 'very good friendship' is developing.
But whatever diplomatic comfort the trip will provide, his journey to the US
might offer a more important cause for personal celebration and one that
will bring relief in Jordan. At the start of a 10-day trip, King Hussein
will learn whether he remains clear of the cancer that caused the removal of
a kidney two years ago. 'If everything's all right with me I will not have
to repeat what I have done over the last two years with six-monthly tests.
After this test the need probably will be for an annual check-up.'
King Hussein's vigour reinforces that optimism. But it is an ill omen for
the Arab world that its most senior statesman and leader can summon so
little optimism about the health of its body politic.
