FT  29 JUL 94 / Leading Article: Watered-down regulation
In the run-up to yesterday's review of water pricing, the industry
regulator, Ofwat, raised expectations that it would be searching and
combative. But its conclusions are disappointing.
Ofwat's review, the first since the industry's 1989 privatisation, comes at
a crucial time for the water companies and their regulatory regime. Since
privatisation, water and sewerage bills have risen annually by more than 5
per cent, on top of inflation. The rises have been driven by the spending
needed to modernise miles of crumbling sewers and water mains, and by the
companies' legal obligations to comply with European environmental rules.
But they have provoked anger among customers, not least because of the large
hikes in water chairmen's salaries.
Mr Ian Byatt, Ofwat's director-general, has done a good, tough job in
tackling one of the two main tasks of the review: setting the size of the
capital spending programme which can be passed on to customers over the next
decade. He has allowed only Pounds 24bn, several billion pounds less than
the industry had demanded. He has also performed a valuable service in
taking a closer look at the likely cost of European rules than any
politician cared to do before giving Britain's backing to the directives.
His conclusion - that the industry has overstated the potential costs by
billions of pounds - is surely right. He has concluded, too, that companies
can cut operating costs by some 14 per cent in real terms by 2005.
However, Mr Byatt has been unnecessarily generous in the review's second
task of setting the annual price rises. He rightly paid no heed to the
industry's plea that it needed a real rate of return on capital of 9.5 per
cent to finance new investment. But in settling on a figure of 5-6 per cent,
he has left the companies' ability to service their debt in a comfortable
state, as a relieved stock market indicated yesterday. Return on total
capital, now running at 13 per cent, is likely to fall to about 7 per cent
over 10 years. Moreover, analysts are still expecting dividends to rise by
some 4 per cent annually in real terms. Unsurprisingly, only one company,
South West Water, had indicated by last night that it would ask the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission to examine Ofwat's ruling.
Mr Byatt is vulnerable to the charge that shareholders have been treated too
generously, as they were in 1989. He rightly insisted that he is a public
servant, not a politician. The question, however, is whether the formulae
are as tough as they could have been. Yet the review does highlight
questions, beyond Ofwat's remit, which must be tackled if the burden is to
be distributed more fairly. One is the extent of regional disparities: areas
with long coastlines, such as the south-west, are forced to pay a
disproportionate amount. A second is whether polluting industries should not
foot more of the clean-up bill.
Those questions need to be addressed by ministers. Their squeamishness is
understandable, since water is political poison. The review has not changed
that: households still face a highly regressive, rising tax. The government
cannot, however, devolve to the regulator the entire question of who should
pay for clean water.
