FT  16 APR 94 / Leading Article: Chancellor drops a veil
The UK chancellor Mr Kenneth Clarke inspires almost as much nervousness in
the City as he does among the ranks of the Eurosceptics on the Tory
backbenches. Yet time and again he has shown a capacity not only to
surprise, but to swim with the tide of bien pensant economic opinion. Having
set out to rebalance the economy with an unexpectedly draconian fiscal
package in his first Budget last November, he has now voluntarily ceded an
element of control over the conduct of monetary policy to the Bank of
England. That is the main implication of his decision this week to accept
the recommendation of the Treasury Select Committee to publish the minutes
of his monthly meeting with the governor, Mr Eddie George.
True, it would have been a much bigger surprise if Mr Clarke had been the
one arguing for restraint before February's compromise decision to cut
interest rates by a quarter of a point. Instead the minutes confirm that the
chancellor's bias is on the side of growthmanship, while Mr George's
predilection is for the central bankerly hair shirt. This week it was the
chancellor's preference that appeared to gain in plausibility, on the basis
of lower-than-expected retail price inflation numbers. Such a pleasant
further surprise on the inflation front suggests that price competition in
the retail sector remains fierce and that the disinflationary story that
ceased to excite the markets back in February is by no means over and done
with.
Downward move
The chancellor could also argue  - and no doubt will  - that the recent
slide in equities and bonds has, in itself, contributed to a tightening of
monetary conditions by causing the cost of capital to rise. Since early
February, UK gilt yields have risen more than comparable yields in any other
country in the Group of Seven, apart from Canada. That is no compliment to
the credibility of British economic policymaking. But taken together with
the Bundesbank's decision to cut both the Lombard rate and the discount rate
on Thursday, it does suggest that the case for a further downward move in UK
rates has strengthened.
Yet the behaviour of the markets also underlines the limits to the
discretion enjoyed by the 'authorities'  - the appropriately opaque
collective noun under which the perpetrators of UK monetary policy have
traditionally cloaked their joint identity. The monetary tightening imposed
by the markets over the past two months has more than offset the loosening
over which Messrs Clarke and George argued so robustly. In a global capital
market, policy credibility is judged minute by minute. One false move and
investors will take away at the long end of the bond market what the
chancellor has tried to give away at the short end.
Moreover, against the background of an overhang of debt from the late 1980s,
the potency of monetary policy does not work symmetrically in terms of its
ability to curb or stimulate economic activity.
Genteel recovery
A fall in nominal short-term interest rates from 15 per cent in late 1990 to
5 1/4 per cent today has so far produced a very genteel recovery. Yet a
small increase in rates could exert a disproportionately depressing effect
on demand because the personal sector has failed to spend its improving cash
flow on reducing its borrowings. From its 1990 peak to the end of last year,
debt as a proportion of the personal sector's income fell from 116 per cent
to just 111 per cent.
There is, as Ian Shepherdson of Greenwell Montagu points out, a positive
side to the personal sector's balance sheet vulnerability. When the time
comes to confront genuine inflationary pressure in the economy, monetary
tightening will need to be much less aggressive than in the late 1980s
because of the debt sensitivity. But in an economy with spare capacity, that
is not the chancellor's present worry. On the fiscal front, meantime, the
markets are also on their guard for any signs of backsliding.
While the current year's public sector borrowing requirement is expected to
come in well under target, next year is another challenge. The Treasury is
already making the ritual hostile noises about the public spending round: no
room for pre-electoral tax cuts without better departmental housekeeping now
is the line.
Yet the striking feature of UK fiscal policy is how Mr John Major's
political weakness has reduced his ability to stand up to the spending
pressures around Whitehall. At the same time the campaign to reverse the
secular upward trend in public spending through fundamental expenditure
reviews appears to have lost impetus. The promise of Mr Michael Portillo,
the chief secretary to the Treasury, to set a large cat among the
free-spending pigeons now seems strangely unthreatening to the more
profligate ministers.
The picture of Mr Clarke that emerges from the newly published minutes is of
a robust chancellor who feels he is in charge. Yet there is a growing sense
of drift in his own fiscal backyard. He may need to surprise us yet again
before too long.
