FT  19 DEC 94 / Survey of Sweden (1): A watershed decision - The vote to
join the EU now settled, attention will turn again to urgent budgetary
problems
This has been a year of rare drama in Sweden.
In the space of two months during the autumn, the country went twice to the
polls. First, in September, the Social Democratic party, led by Mr Ingvar
Carlsson, defied predictions of a few years ago that the creator of Europe's
most all-encompassing welfare system was crumbling. The party returned to
power after three years in opposition when it ousted the right-centre
coalition headed by Mr Carl Bildt in a general election.
Then, in a national referendum in November that provoked much fire and
feeling, the electorate voted by a majority of 52.2 per cent to 46.9 per
cent to join the European Union, a decision which marked the most
significant strategic step by neutral Sweden since the second world war.
An essential part of the debate in both the election and referendum
campaigns was the state of the economy, which had injected its own sense of
drama into the nation's affairs. Although a recovery from a three-year
recession at last took hold, the combined effects of the slump and the costs
of the country's big public sector left the state with a yawning budget
deficit, the fastest-growing debt in the industrialised world and more than
13 per cent of the workforce unemployed.
Beyond the political arena, there were other dramas which stirred the
country to an unusual degree. In the summer - the warmest and sunniest since
records began - Swedes basked in the glory of the national soccer team's
unexpected advance to third place in the World Cup, becoming the
competition's top-scoring team in the process.
But just after the election in September, the nation was plunged into a
state of shocked mourning by the sinking of the Estonia, the Baltic ferry
which foundered in a storm taking to their deaths more than 900 passengers
and crew - most of them Swedish. The disaster was unprecedented in modern
Swedish history, striking communities all over the country much as a war
might do.
Other events rarely experienced in Sweden have contributed to an unusual
sense of insecurity. In June, a young soldier shot dead seven people in a
crazed shooting spree in the central town of Falun. In November, a teenager
was beaten to death by two schoolmates. This month, four people were killed
when a gunman opened fire on a crowd leaving a Stockholm night club.
The combination of these different events has reinforced the concern of the
Social Democrats, in power for more than 50 of the past 60 years, to restore
a sense of equilibrium to the country.
The party's instincts are clearly to rely on its traditional emphasis on
creating a unified, egalitarian society underpinned by the universal welfare
system. It regarded the 45 per cent share of the vote it won in the election
 -one of its best recent results - as a clear sign that the electorate had
rejected Mr Bildt's appeal to transform Sweden through radical, free-market
policies.
But the challenge Mr Carlsson faces is to reconcile the defence of a welfare
system with the cuts and reforms he readily acknowledges are required to
sort out the public finances and return the economy to stable, long-term
growth that will reduce unemployment. Mr Carlsson's immediate priority is,
without doubt, the state of the public finances. This crisis struck,
ironically, just as the economy was pulling out of recession.  An export
boom, fuelled by the devaluation of the Swedish krona in late 1992 and the
recovery in international markets, has delivered economic growth this year
of about 2.5 per cent after three successive years of recession which shrank
the economy by 5 per cent.
This year, Sweden's big international companies such as Volvo, Ericsson,
Electrolux and the big forestry-sector operators have surged back to high
profitability on the back of the boom. Exports are set to continue to grow
well in 1995 and there are hopes of a modest recovery in the domestic
economy as well, leading the government to forecast gross national product
growth next year of 3.4 per cent.
But unless the budget deficit is quickly brought under control and borrowing
is stabilised, there are fears that continued high interest rates could
precipitate a 'double dip' return to recession.
Mr Carlsson and Mr Goran Persson, his finance minister, have therefore set a
deadline for stopping the growth of the state debt - presently about 90 per
cent of GNP - by 1998 at the latest through a series of tax increases and
spending cuts. The budget deficit in the present fiscal year is forecast at
SKr201bn, or 13 per cent of GNP; the government has already announced a
package of tax rises and savings to reduce the deficit by SKr57bn by 1998
and plans a further SKr20bn cuts in the January budget. The two key
questions are whether this will be sufficient and whether it is politically
sustainable for the minority government. Many in the financial markets are
sceptical that the scale of the spending cuts will be enough in an economy
where public spending has reached 70 per cent as a proportion of GNP. They
fear that the government has made over-optimistic calculations of the
savings it expects from lower interest rates and lower unemployment, based
on expectations of a vigorous recovery. They are far from convinced that the
post-devaluation bounce in the economy will not turn into another damaging
inflationary cycle, as happened in the 1980s.
Ominously for the government, international credit rating agencies are
presently re-assessing Sweden's sovereign credit rating. Moody's, the US
agency, has warned that it may shortly down-grade Sweden. If it does,
interest rates will jump and Mr Persson's budget plans will be put under
even stronger pressure.
The markets are also watching political developments very carefully. Mr
Carlsson is confident the government can get its policies through the
Riksdag (parliament) by charting a 'slalom' course, seeking support for a
majority on different issues from among the six other parliamentary parties,
which range from the Left and Environment parties on the left, through the
Centre, Liberals and Christian Democrats in the centre, to Mr Bildt's
Moderates on the right. 'We are as secure as a formal minority government
could be,' says Mr Carlsson.
His confidence may be rewarded because there is a strong desire among most
parties to see public finances brought back into balance. But Mr Carlsson
and Mr Persson first have to persuade their own party supporters and the
trade unions to accept public sector and benefit cuts on a scale rarely seen
before.
The urgency of the budget battle has tended to overshadow the watershed that
will occur when Sweden joins the EU in January. Throughout the post-war
period, Sweden stood to one side from western Europe, concerned above all to
preserve its neutral stance between the Soviet Union and the US-led western
alliance.
With the end of the cold war, those concerns have largely melted away,
allowing Mr Carlsson to lead his previously anti-EU party towards Brussels.
Sweden - along with neighbouring Finland, but not Norway, which rejected
membership - will now be firmly sited in the western European strategic and
economic camp.
But Stockholm is proceeding cautiously. The government is holding firmly to
military neutrality. It will take up the minimum observer status in the EU's
military organisation, the Western European Union; it has joined Nato's
'Partnership for Peace' initiative, but has no intention of applying for
full Nato membership.
On economic co-operation, Mr Carlsson is being careful to keep his options
open, ahead of the EU's planned 1996 review of the Maastricht Treaty, which
laid out a timetable for European Monetary Union. He says he favours closer
monetary co-operation, but will not be drawn on whether Sweden supports an
eventual move to a unified currency.
With Sweden far from meeting the monetary criteria for Emu, its
participation is something of an academic question, at least until the end
of the decade. But Stockholm will support moves to make employment
conditions part of the Emu criteria - a concern that reflects Mr Carlsson's
anxiety to put the fight against unemployment at the top of the EU's agenda,
alongside the next enlargement project to include central and eastern
European nations.
