FT  15 OCT 94 / Pink Snow (4): Let's take the kids - When are children ready
to ski?
Through the eyes of a child, skiing (or other activities when mummy and
daddy are skiing) can be thrilling - or a torment. Being 'abandoned' in the
snow, or just in an unfamiliar room, with a stranger and other children can
be a traumatic experience.
Even in the friendliest resorts, there are weeping children suffering
because their parents have gone off without them. Even the chance of
learning to ski is no guarantee of being cheered up: on a bad day, it can be
cold, miserable, boring or just plain frightening.
Whether the child is to ski or simply be 'supervised' in a nursery rather
depends on the age of the child and the attitude of the parents.
Just because 'local' children in the mountains come bombing down the slopes
at the age of three or four, it does not mean that this is a good age at
which to start British children. Children who live in the mountains are
virtually born on skis.
In my own experience seven or eight is a good time to start. Four or five
might work, but this is a more risky age. If things go wrong it might wreck
your holiday and put the children off skiing a second time.
My two older daughters first skied when they were seven and five. It was not
an unqualified success, but they at least came back for more.
My younger two (twins) learnt when they were 11 - almost a perfect age.
They charged along on piste and in powder as if there were no difference,
and never had the problem in later life - as so many skiers do - of
struggling with powder as if it were some alien substance which had no
connection with normal snow.
Whether the child or children love skiing or loathe it can make all the
difference between a successful skiing holiday (which was the case when my
twins started) and a disastrous one (almost the case with my five and seven
year olds).
And for non-skiing children, good ski kindergartens can be an equally
important component of a ski holiday.
More and more ski areas are realising that the way to encourage parents to
return the following year (preferably with their children) is to find better
solutions to the question of what to do with the children.
Here is part of Riki's ski kindergarten's schedule at Mayrhofen, Austria:
'10am-12 noon: We ski to the Fairyland and to Snow White's House.
'12 noon: Lunch followed by a relaxing break in the 'Ahornhutte'. Rest by
the log fire, watch cartoons or play games with our qualified nurse Anni and
the instructors.
'1.30-3.30pm: Ski course at the Carousel on the 'Camel-bumps' over the
'Eagle Jump' and more.
'4pm: Your parents are collecting you at the bottom station of the cable
car. No classes on Saturdays]'
If only it were always that simple. In spite of cheerful enterprises such as
Riki's, some children remain almost inconsolable. Threatening them with 'a
good clip round the ear unless you stop blubbing]' - as a friend of mine
used to do - is unlikely to be the answer.
Short of the longed-for return of one or both parents (perhaps not
applicable in the case of my friend), how can these unfortunate youngsters
be cheered up?
Not by reading (assuming they are old enough to read) one rather dour
document prepared by St Anton, Austria, which seems to promise little hope
of happiness, for the child at least. It reads: 'Parents staying within the
municipal boundaries of St Anton who wish to spend the day unencumbered by
the children can bring them to the Youth Centre for half or full-day
supervision (including food and beverages). Visiting children must be aged
at least 2 1/2 years.'
But it is perhaps Mayrhofen which sums up the basic prerequisite for happy
children on the slopes: 'In our children's ski school, children are taught
to ski in a playful manner, without fear. Our ski instructors are patient
specialists with lots of ideas and sympathetic understanding.'
Off the slopes, Mayrhofen will even supervise children as young as three
months in their Babycreche, and older infants in Wuppy's Kinderland.
Some American ski areas - notably Vail and its sister resort Beaver Creek -
have entire mountainsides devoted to children's skiing theme parks, where
young skiers with their own instructors can ski through all kinds of exotic
features such as Dragon's Breath Mine, where the dragon 'roars' as you ski
through it, and the Hibernating Bear cave. (The bear is rather more stuffed
than hibernating, so anxious parents should not worry about it suddenly
waking up.)
The Big Mountain, Montana, suggests real animals. They offer: 'Free dog sled
rides for kids - with Dog Sled Adventures]'
And Mammoth Mountain, California, has a Kid's Camp and a Mammoth Explorers'
programme for Junior Explorers (aged between four and six) and 'proper'
explorers aged between seven and 12.
