FT  14 JUN 94 / Letters to the Editor: Strategy needed for UK to compete as
rest of the world does
Sir, In general, I totally agree with the arguments presented by Mr Robert
Bischof (Personal View, June 10). The British government's seeming obsession
with labour deregulation and an apparent consequent lower wage cost
advantage, as the latest miraculous route to economic success, is shot
through with flaws typical of the limited thinking of those remote from the
business world. In most manufacturing companies of my acquaintance, direct
labour costs are a relatively small proportion of cost. Purchases - mainly
materials - can be four or five times as high; so if we want to reduce cost,
which area should we attack first?
As Mr Bischof points out, overall productivity is the key to cost efficiency
and effectiveness, involving total effort across a company. But while this
is a highly significant truth, it is in turn part of a broader truth, which
is simply that as a nation we will only sell goods and services that other
people wish to buy. The business orientation needed to address this is
defined by the word marketing, and this, in my opinion, is where as a nation
we have been palpably weak and, with odd notable exceptions, continue to be
so.
My own evidence comes from more than 30 years as line manager, company
director and management consultant, working with companies of literally all
shapes and sizes. And on the broader front, there are signs a-plenty. The
limited horizons of too many of today's boards lead to justified allegations
of short-termism. Hand-wringing continues year in, year out, at our
propensity to invent things only to lose out on commercial exploitation.
Government after government introduces various palliatives, but steadfastly
resolves not to establish the long-term economic strategy that identifies
the key technologies and markets of tomorrow, and then create an environment
that really will help businesses in these areas to grow strong. Cries
off-stage, at this point, of 'interventionism' and worse - to which I would
suggest that it is high time we decided to live in the real world, get out
there and compete as the rest of the world does. The alternative, as may be
inferred from Mr Bischof's article, is to continue the story of persistent
relative decline, led by economically illiterate politicians and businessmen
with an eye to the main (short-term) chance only.
R N Bradford,
1 Trinity Gardens,
Bungay,
Suffolk NR35 1HH
