FT  25 FEB 94 / International Bonds: Widening yield spreads prompt intense
debate on launch timing
The chronic weakness in government bond markets and the recent widening of
yield spreads in the Eurobond market have sparked intense discussions
between issuers and their advisers on whether they should accelerate their
international borrowing programmes.
An official at the World Bank said he was taking soundings from the market
on the possible timing and pricing for a proposed global bond offering of
Dollars 1.25bn. The 10-year issue would almost complete the dollar portion
of the World Bank's annual borrowing programme of Dollars 10bn to Dollars
12bn which is due to end on June 30.
The official said current indications were for a tighter pricing than the
level achieved on the World Bank's last global bond offering.
When the bonds were launched last September, they were priced to yield 10
basis points over US Treasuries but they now yield 10 basis points below
Treasuries.
He added, however, that the World Bank's style was to find fair market value
and it would rather withhold from launching an issue than press for a
certain level. A decision was likely to be taken by the end of next week, he
said.
Meanwhile, a further heavy fall in the US Treasury market prompted the
National Bank of Hungary to delay the launch of its first global bond
offering until market conditions improved. The market had expected the
Dollars 500m, 10-year issue to be launched yesterday. An official at lead
manager Salomon Brothers said Hungary's decision reflected its reluctance to
pay a higher coupon, especially since it was under no pressure to borrow.
'Hungary is not in need of money, the purpose of the deal is to establish a
benchmark,' the official said.
Market jitters did not deter investment banks from underwriting just over
Dollars 2bn worth of floating-rate notes, which included the first
lira-denominated offering by a US investment bank.
The largest single FRN offering came from BankAmerica which raised Dollars
750m through a five-year issue. Some syndicate managers said the notes,
which had a discounted margin of 21 basis points over Libor, appeared
expensive compared with recent bank FRNs.
Lead manager Kidder Peabody said pricing reflected BankAmerica's improved
standing with investors. 'American banks are enjoying a renaissance in their
credit appraisal,' it said, noting that commercial banks tended to achieve
lower spreads than investment banks.
The maturity of one year and two days on Republic of Argentina's Dollars
350m offering of FRNs prompted one syndicate manager to describe it as
'glorified commercial paper'.
Lead manager Goldman Sachs said the issuer had chosen the maturity in the
belief that its yield spread would continue to improve at a rapid pace. The
margin at launch was 100 basis points over Libor.
