FT  30 MAY 94 / Media Futures: Any which way you want to read it - Anthony
Ridder believes there's still a future for traditional newspapers. But just
in case he's hedging his bets
Anthony Ridder, president of Knight-Ridder, publishers of newspaper such as
the Philadelphia Inquirer and the Miami Herald, is as certain as anyone can
be that the future of the newspaper is secure.
'We have spent a great deal of time studying the issue over the last four
years. We think the traditional printed newspaper, improved and with new
services for advertisers, is going to be a good solid business for as far
out as we can see,'
But at the same time Knight-Ridder, which last year had Newspaper revenues
of Dollars 2bn out of a group total of Dollars 2.45bn, is placing a range of
each-way bets on technologies that could affect the future of the
traditional newspapers.
These projects, backed by spending of around Dollars 10m a year, cover a
wider range of areas than those being pursued by most other newspaper
groups. They range from on-line fax and audio text services, through plans
for expansion in conventional television news, to the more futuristic
portable flat panels that can scroll through newspaper pages and sections
and bring the pictures to life with video news clips.
At the Mercury Center, in San Jose, electronic access to Knight-Ridder's San
Jose Mercury News is available for Dollars 9.95 a month. Described as 'more
of a library service' it is carried on the America Online data base, which
has 34,000 subscribers in the Mercury's circulation area. Knight-Ridder has
6,500 direct subscribers, but every time anyone else accesses Mercury News
information the company gets a fee. The service includes an electronic
version of the Mercury News classified advertisements - an important vehicle
for staff poaching in Silicon Valley. The Mercury Centre also runs fax and
audio services. A subscriber to the audio service can specify a list of
interests, such as company results, give a PIN number and receive what are
personalised broadcasts by car phone.
In Philadelphia the Inquirer is going to launch its own television News Hour
with a local station of dedicated television professionals but calling on
the 610 Knight-Ridder newsroom staff in the area. If it is a success the aim
is to turn out a 24-hour news channel for the 5m people in the area. This is
a service which, like the Mercury Center, could be replicated in other
cities where the company has a major daily newspapers.
'Our feeling is that we need to be involved in the video business,' says
Ridder, 'partly to generate moving pictures for the flat panel being
developed at the Knight-Ridder Information Design Laboratory in Boulder,
Colorado.'
Ridder believes that on-line data bases are fine, but that people like
headlines, and prefer journalists to make judgments on the relative
importance of stories, rather than simply offering relatively
undifferentiated lists of information.
By the end of this year an electronic version of Knight-Ridder's Journal of
Commerce, a daily specialising in transport and trade issues, will be
available to Personal Computers in a newspaper format.
Ridder believes the portable flat panel as a commercial product is still
probably five years away.
He reckons that when the flat panel is fully developed he will be able to
plug it into a hotel telephone socket overnight and take delivery of the
full electronic text of his daily reading - the Miami Herald, the New York
Times and the Wall Street Journal. Customers will be able to click on an
electronic pen and pull up any story they are interested in. They will be
able to display this at whatever size they want, and if they are interested
in a soccer game they will will be able to click on a sports picture and get
a two-minute video of highlights.
Roger Fidler, the Knight-Ridder executive behind the flat panel development,
believes that by the year 2005 in the US such flat panels could overtake PCs
as a method of obtaining information.
Just is case he is wrong, he is pushing ahead with more conventional
newspaper developments, such as home delivery of information for advertisers
to non-newspaper subscribers, producing specialist publications aimed at
particular areas or demographics, and even creating consumer events such as
the recent Women's Show in Philadelphia. This attracted more than 20,000
people.
As he keeps a close watch on all his each-way bets, he emphasises that every
day in America '62 per cent of all adults read a daily newspaper - 69 per
cent on Sunday - and that has not changed during the last five years.'
