FT  13 JUL 94 / Clinton echoes Kennedy in Berlin: US president tells
Germans: 'America stands on your side, now and for ever'
Standing in the shadow of the Brandenburg Gate, where the Berlin Wall once
divided east from west, President Bill Clinton yesterday followed in the
footsteps of his predecessor John F. Kennedy.
'Nichts wird uns aufhalten. Alles ist moglich. Berlin ist frei,' Mr Clinton
proclaimed, telling his German audience that 'Nothing can stop us.
Everything is possible. Berlin is free.'
In a gesture that self-consciously echoed Mr Kennedy's last minute addition
of the famous 'Ich bin ein Berliner' phrase to his speech 31 years ago, Mr
Clinton wrote the words into the text by hand on his way to the Brandenburg
Gate.
Mr Clinton's sally into German - his sixth foreign language in a week-long
trip - achieved a higher level of grammar than his boyhood hero, whose
addition of the word 'ein' changed him from a Berliner to a doughnut.
But it failed to pierce Berlin's present day indifference to pomp and
ceremony. 'Er ist kein Kennedy,' retorted an unimpressed Berlin taxi driver,
suggesting of Mr Clinton that 'he is no Kennedy'.
While Mr Kennedy brought a promise of US support in difficult times, the
only concrete promise that Mr Clinton could bring was more modest, the
construction of a new American embassy in Berlin. Perhaps of more
significance, Mr Clinton promised that US backing for Germany would not end
with the demolition of the Berlin Wall: 'America stands on your side, now
and for ever.'
Police estimates put the crowd at 150,000, but to many observers at the
scene it appeared much smaller, and some White House aides admitted they
were disappointed by the crowd's lack of enthusiasm.
Mr Clinton's promise of US support carried a particular significance on the
day that he presided over the final US military parade in Berlin.
The Berlin Brigade - the name the US military occupation forces have adopted
for the last 33 years - furled its colours for the last time in a ceremony
at the city's McNair Barracks. But the Brigade's servicemen seem less sure
than the president or Mr Kohl that their presence is no longer required.
'I hope we don't have to come back here and do it all over,' said Sergeant
Carlos Ruiz, with a glance over his shoulder to the east.
Meanwhile, the US and European Union agreed in Berlin yesterday to establish
a working group on the integration of the countries of central and eastern
Europe into western security and economic institutions.
The plans for the working group follow admissions from both sides that the
lines of communication on these issues had been inadequate.
