FT  16 DEC 94 / Warburg merger negotiations called off
Morgan Stanley and SG Warburg yesterday called off talks aimed at creating a
dominant global investment bank because of resistance from Warburg's fund
management arm, Mercury Asset Management, to the merger proposals.
The merger talks broke down after the board of MAM, which is 75 per cent
owned by Warburg, demanded a premium offer for its minority shareholders, as
well as operational independence from Morgan Stanley.
Morgan Stanley's executives indicated publicly for the first time that their
primary motive had been to gain control of MAM. 'MAM was the reason for us
to do this deal,' said Mr Stephen Waters, co-managing director of Morgan
Stanley Europe.
Although Warburg intends to resume its former strategy of building a global
business independently, the breakdown may increase the chance of a takeover
bid as well as merger offers by other investment banks.
It may also renew tensions between Warburg and MAM, which believes that its
institutional investor customers prefer it to be independent.
This year, MAM limited business it gave Warburg in protest at the handling
of a takeover bid.
MAM's board, advised independently by Lazard Brothers, the merchant bank, is
thought to have asked for a premium of up to 30 per cent for minority
shareholders, which would have meant offering them about Pounds 400m for
their equity.
Senior executives of Morgan Stanley said last night they would have been
prepared to pay some premium to the MAM shareholders. However, they were not
willing to accept the demands of MAM for continuing full independence.
Warburg's shares fell to close 99p down at 699p after the announcement,
while MAM's shares fell 67p to close at 678p. MAM shares rose after last
week's disclosure of merger talks on expectations of a premium offer.
In New York, Morgan Stanley's shares closed down  3/8 at Dollars 61.
MAM issued a statement saying its objective had been 'to maintain the
operating independence of its business for the benefit of its clients'. The
company has defended its independence from Warburg in the past.
Lord Cairns, Warburg's chief executive, said the merger had been 'a bold
initiative, but by no means essential for further progress'. He said Warburg
was 'as strongly placed as ever' to become a leading global investment bank.
Mr Richard Fisher, Morgan Stanley chairman, said Warburg would have been 'a
good fit' and the collapse was unfortunate.
Talks broke down yesterday after a meeting in London on Tuesday attended by
Mr Fisher and Mr John Mack, Morgan Stanley's president. The US firm
contacted Warburg to tell it that MAM's terms were unacceptable.
Observer, Page 19
Lex, Page 20
What now for Morgan Stanley? Page 22
US stocks, Page 37
London stocks, Page 40
