FT  20 DEC 94 / Warburg director to leave in bond shake-up
SG Warburg, the investment bank, yesterday signalled a shake-up of its bond
operations after the collapse of its planned merger with Morgan Stanley by
replacing the heads of its fixed-interest and treasury division.
The investment bank brought in Mr David Burnett, the head of its UK equities
business, to take over from Mr Peter Bass and Mr Peter Twachtmann. He is
expected to re-structure bond operations, which have performed poorly this
year.
Mr Twachtmann, a board director who has been with Warburg for 26 years, is
leaving the bank after being told the news on Friday. Mr Bass is to take a
position in Warburg's US arm, a move he was already planning.
Before taking over Warburg's UK equities business, Mr Burnett's job was to
re-shape the Tokyo equities operation. He is given credit for returning it
to profit, and re-shaping it after the Japanese equity market collapse.
Warburg told staff in an internal note yesterday that Mr Burnett's task 'in
the face of continuing difficult market conditions' was to 'reinvigorate and
renew' the firm's fixed-interest operation.
The shake-up was planned before the collapse of the merger plans last
Thursday, but was implemented when Warburg's board met to consider Morgan
Stanley's merger pull out.
Warburg has a strong presence in sterling Eurobonds, and is a gilt-edged
market maker. However, its operations in other European government bonds are
likely to be reviewed. Morgan Stanley was regarded as a good fit for Warburg
for the US firm's expertise in bond trading.
Warburg's US operation, which employs more than 600 staff, could also face
further changes. It has expanded rapidly in the past two years under Mr Tom
Wyman, a Warburg vice-chairman, who has been in charge of building its US
presence.
Mr Wyman said yesterday that Mr Bass's new role was 'not exactly' decided,
although he would take a senior post. He said Warburg would continue its
growth in the US, although some staff were still 'a little off-balance'.
He said there was unlikely to be a change in the balance of control between
London and New York. 'I would not be here if I was concerned that functional
management in London would be taking control in a decisive way,' he said.
Sir David Scholey, Warburg's chairman, said on Friday that Warburg intended
to resume a strategy of independent expansion 'with adaptations and
variations'. The bank's shares yesterday closed 28p down at 685p.
