FT  17 DEC 94 / London Stock Exchange: FT-SE surges through 3,000 after
futures expiry - Market report
The FT-SE 100 Index, which at the start of last week hit a five-month low,
rallied with a vengeance yesterday, bursting through the 3,000 level and
shrugging aside the government's hammering in the Dudley West by-election.
The main driving force came from the futures market, where the FT-SE 100
December future expired in mid-morning and was followed by a surge of buying
interest from investors keen to take a position in the market for the new
year.
Aiding the market's strongly positive tone throughout a busy afternoon
session was another buoyant showing by Wall Street,where the Dow was up
around 20 points shortly after the opening of trading.
The buying in the UK equity market was spread across the whole spectrum,
with second-line stocks aggressively bid up from the outset and closing
around the day's highs, the FT-SE Mid 250 Index finally resting 23.2 up at
3,437.1. Over the week the Mid 250 has risen 41.3, or 1.3 per cent.
The FT-SE 100 moved in a 60-point arc, dropping 20 points at the opening
before spiralling upwards in the wake of the December future's expiry to end
a net 40.2 ahead at 3,013.6. Over the week the index gained 36.3, or 1.2 per
cent.
The market's resurgence coincided with another relatively high level of
turnover in equities. Some 693.6m shares changed hands yesterday, with the
top 350 stocks accounting for well over half that figure, well above recent
levels of activity. Customer business in the market on Thursday was Pounds
1.18bn.
Dealers said the market was always going to open lower, with some market
operators said to be keen to see the December FT-SE future expire below the
2,970 level.
And even some of the market's more hard-bitten traders were surprised at the
extent of the rout of the Conservatives in the Dudley West by-election,
which produced one of the worst results for the Tories for more than 50
years.
The FT-SE 100, after opening 5.5 points off, fell to a day's low of 2,953.2,
down 20.2, within the first half-hour of trading and was down some 7 points
prior to the expiry of the December future.
Within minutes of the expiry the market embarked on a determined rally, led
by some of the current bid favourites. The rise gathered pace for the rest
of the session, and all the major indices closed at or around the day's best
levels.
'Triple-witching hour' in the US was said to have gone off without a hitch
and markets across Europe drew further strength from Wall Street's latest
show of strength, which occurred in spite of higher than expected housing
starts. The Dow has now risen in excess of 80 points over the past five
sessions.
Dealers also pointed out that the market had effectively ruled out the
chances of another interest rate rise in the US after the Federal Open
Market Committee meeting next Tuesday.
Marketmakers at the big London trading houses said there was now a strong
expectation of a good performance in the short term; '3,100 by December 31
is achievable,' said one head of marketmaking. But he cautioned that the
market had to keep a weather eye on the political situation in the UK.
The utilities areas continued to provide much of the excitement in the
market. Yorkshire Electricity announced a 90p a share 'special dividend'.
And there was a growing feeling in the utilities that the expected burst of
merger activity in the recs/waters could very well see some of the recs
launch takeovers/mergers in the waters as 'poison pills' to ward off bids in
the sector. Swiss Bank Corp, which was said to have been accumulating stock
in Northern Electric prior to this week's announcement that Trafalgar House
may bid for the utility, was reported to have been an aggressive buyer of
the electricity sector.
