FT  03 NOV 94 / Hamas moderates and Israel edge towards talks
Two weeks after a Hamas suicide bomber killed 22 bus passengers in the heart
of Tel Aviv, Israel and the bomber's Islamic Resistance Movement are edging
towards dialogue.
Two West Bank Hamas leaders yesterday came out in favour of talking to the
'Zionist enemy'. Sheikh Jamil Hamami said: 'Dialogue is not forbidden. There
must be a dialogue to stop the bloodshed on both sides'.
In Ramallah, Hussein Abu Kweik said: 'We would like to see such a dialogue
as soon as possible under Arab, international or Palestinian sponsorship.'
Mr Abu Kweik was one of 400 activists Israel deported to Lebanon two years
ago.
Both insisted Israel must first stop arresting Hamas members and release
those in prison, including Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, the organisation's founder.
They were responding to signals by Israeli ministers that they were ready to
talk to 'moderate' Hamas leaders. Mr Moshe Shahal, police minister, told
Labour MPs: 'All Arabs would prefer Israel not to exist. Some will not come
to terms. But even in Hamas there are differences. Israel is making a
mistake when it is not ready to talk to people'.
Mr Yossi Beilin, deputy foreign minister, said on Tuesday: 'I don't know
what we are going to speak about if there is such a contact. But all those
who tried to boycott their enemies eventually had to back off. It happened
to us with the PLO, the British with the IRA.
'Boycotting the other side because of its past, or its official view, is
wrong. It doesn't mean we have to negotiate with Hamas about the destruction
of Israel. But if there are some moderate forces in Hamas which believe
terrorism will not solve their problems and are ready to talk to us, I don't
believe we should exclude the possibility of contact with them.'
Mr Beilin took a similarly flexible stand on possible Hamas participation in
elections to the Palestinian National Authority.
'Movements or parties which see the destruction of Israel as part of their
platform should not participate.' But he saw no reason to oppose
participation by Islamic groups which wanted to challenge the PLO
leadership, so long as they accepted the legitimacy of whoever was elected.
The militant Islamic Jihad movement vowed to step up attacks against
Israelis after a Palestinian journalist was killed by a car bomb in the Gaza
Strip yesterday. The organisation blamed 'Israeli intelligence' for the
blast.
