FT  05 MAY 94 / Gaza-Jericho Autonomy: New realities outweighed crises on
road to accord - The overview
The worst crises in the Middle East can also be the best harbingers of hope.
Just eight months after the end of the Gulf war, during which Palestinians
cheered Iraq's President Saddam Hussein and the Scud missiles he fired into
Israel, members of the Palestine Liberation Organisation and Israel sat down
together for the first time in Madrid. Little more than 11 weeks after an
Israeli extremist shot dead 29 Palestinians in a Hebron mosque, Israel and
the PLO have filled in some of the many gaps in the outline peace agreement
signed in Washington on September 13.
If there is a lesson to be learned, it must be that the fundamentals of
international politics are a much better guide to the future than short-term
manifestations of long-running conflicts.
Mr Saddam ignored the new world realities, and the Iraqi people are still
paying the price. Israel's Arab neighbours and the PLO have better
understood the consequences of the Soviet Union's demise, and appreciated
they had little choice but to press ahead with the course mapped out for
them at the Madrid peace conference in October 1991.
For the PLO, Syria, Jordan and Lebanon, it has not been the peace process
they would have wished. Israel has not been required to fulfil UN Security
Council resolutions by withdrawing from all the land it has occupied since
1967.
Instead, Israel has shown it will bargain hard over every inch of territory,
and intends to keep a significant part of it, including east Jerusalem and
adjacent swathe of still-expanding Jewish settlements which cut deep into
the West Bank.
Under the Washington agreement, this issue, linked inextricably to the
Palestinian goal of an independent state, need not be addressed for another
two years. During that time, Palestinians and Israelis may learn better how
to live alongside each other. But it also a dangerously long time for
resentments to fester, extremists to provoke, leaders to change, and the
overall political climate of the region to deteriorate.
The peace process is also being led by men approaching the end of their
political careers. Democratic systems provide mechanisms for succession, but
in the cases of President Hafez al-Assad of Syria, King Hussein of Jordan
and Mr Yassir Arafat of the PLO, the departure of any one could inject a
dangerous uncertainty into the region.
Each has a political authority established over decades, and the confidence
to take hard decisions. In the months ahead, none will be more critically
challenged than Mr Arafat as he faces the domestic consequences of the deal
he has negotiated with Israel.
He must be able to demonstrate not only immediate economic benefits, but
also the skills of conciliation needed to heal the rifts with his numerous
critics in the West Bank and Gaza, while building a responsive bureaucracy.
All this, while Israel makes sure he adheres to every last detail of the
agreement.
Mr Assad, who shares with Mr Rabin a distaste for shaking the Palestinian
leader's hand, will meanwhile continue to exhibit his legendary patience.
The Syrian regime is well aware no Middle East peace deal can be complete or
durable without its participation, and will continue to hope its improved
relationship with the US is the key to securing a full Israeli withdrawal
from the Golan Heights.
Without such a commitment, Mr Assad knows a resolution of the conflict in
south Lebanon is not possible, and will seek to keep King Hussein wedded to
his pledge not to go the way of Mr Arafat and sign a separate deal with
Israel.
The Syrian leader is not alone in his scepticism about Israel's intentions.
A common theme running through the different strains of Islamic militancy in
the Middle East is a rejection of the peace process and hostility towards
the Jewish state.
Iran is the most obvious example, but this hostility also surfaces in
Algeria, Sudan, Egypt, Lebanon, Jordan, and, of course, among the
Palestinian community. The best antidote to such militancy, born essentially
out of deprivation, has to be economic co-operation, development, and
budgets no longer dominated by military expenditure.
The swift injection of international aid into the Gaza Strip and West Bank
should provide early evidence of the extent to which economic improvement
can offset political militancy. But, ultimately, the momentum of the peace
process will be maintained, or lost, by the people of Israel.
Because Israel is so supreme in the region, militarily and politically
through the support of the US, it will have to decide whether it can give
enough, not to satisfy Arab leaders, but to offer the people they represent
real hope for the future.
The agreement signed in Cairo yesterday is just one modest step towards that
objective. Further progress will test the fragility of Israeli coalition
politics as never before.
