FT  06 JAN 94 / Political jury still out on Patten's survival
By accepting the recom-mendations of the Dearing report, Mr John Patten,
education secretary, hopes to put an end to the controversy over plans for a
national curriculum in Britain's schools.
But it was far from clear yesterday whether he has managed to salvage his
political fortunes, even if he has ditched some of the government's
unpopular proposals.
Mr Patten was praised by some Tory backbenchers yesterday for warding off
further political damage and scaling back the ambitions of successive
education secretaries to establish a broad-ranging national curriculum for
five-to-16-year-olds.
'The national curriculum proposals were a corset that was reined in so
tightly that things started to pop out,' said Sir Malcolm Thornton, Tory
chairman of the all-party select committee on education. 'I can feel a lot
of sympathy for John Patten because he inherited a situation that had
started to get out of control.'
Mr John MacGregor, former education secretary and now transport secretary,
also claimed the changes had finally put education policy back on the right
road.
'It was always likely that the biggest and most fundamental educational
reform for decades would need to be refined in the light of experience,' he
said.
But when the Commons returns next week Mr Patten could come under fire for
having responded too slowly to criticism of the plans to broaden the
curriculum and introduce tests.
One backbench Tory MP said: 'If there was failure on his part, it was not to
engage the problems soon enough.' He was particularly critical of Mr
Patten's determination to try and push through a national curriculum for
14-year-olds last autumn, even though it was clear that the overwhelming
majority of parents, teachers and unions were against it.
Moreover, the secretary of state may also face new difficulties this year as
he tries to steer the education bill through parliament and continues to
give school governors increasing autonomy over their finances.
The education bill, which would create a new teacher training agency and
reduce the powers of student unions, was subjected to thunderous opposition
during its second reading in the House of Lords late last year.
Mrs Ann Taylor, shadow education secretary, said: 'The government wants to
give schools control over up to 90 per cent of their funds, but schools are
saying they don't want that much responsibility.'
Amid all these difficulties, the prime minister might still be reluctant to
move Mr Patten this summer if there is a reshuffle. But one influential Tory
backbencher said yesterday: 'The prime minister's inclination will probably
be to leave John in place for as long as possible. But if he runs into
stormy weather on the education bill over the next few months, that may
prove impossible.'
