FT  15 DEC 94 / Belfast Investment Conference: Delegates warm to PM's theme
Until the last moment it looked as if Mr John Major could have a flop on his
hands.
The International Investment Forum had been too hastily organised, it was
said. It was too close to Christmas and executives would not want to visit
Northern Ireland. There had been a poor response from potential investors.
Mr Major would find himself preaching to the converted - businesses which
had already invested in the province and any members of the local great and
good that the Industrial Development Board, the organisers, could manage to
attract.
To make matters worse, Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, which had
been prevaricating all week on whether it would attend the conference,
threatened to boycott it and badger delegates on their way in to the forum
venue - the much bombed but now renovated Europa Hotel.
In the event, the conference was judged by the delegates to have been a
great success. A US official accompanying Mr Ron Brown, the US secretary of
commerce, who represented President Bill Clinton, said: 'It has gone
extraordinarily well. There were some last minute panics and some glitches
over Sinn Fein. But they were not going to be allowed to wreck the
conference. There was more than a reasonable turn-out.'
Mr Brown was involved in a marathon of speechmaking in the province before
attending the conference.
He was also thought to have been instrumental in persuading Sinn Fein to
attend.
Six Sinn Fein councillors were there, ostensibly to put their point of view
to delegates. Though they staged a walk-out, there were no Sinn Fein
demonstrations outside.
Mr Brown's involvement in the conference was important - but it was Mr
Major's presence that sealed its success.
More than 300 delegates finally agreed to attend, more than expected. Many
were local, with delegations from the US, the Far East and Continental
Europe. With their partners they packed the banqueting hall for the
pre-conference, black-tie dinner on Tuesday evening.
Mr Major made a bland speech, keeping his powder dry for the conference
yesterday. But it brought the house down. Half the gathering gave him a
standing ovation.
The Duke of Abercorn, the chairman of Laganside Development, a local quango,
summed up the upbeat mood. 'The people of Northern Ireland are deeply
grateful and appreciative that Northern Ireland tops his personal agenda,'
he said.
Mr Brian Carlin of Shorts, the Belfast aerospace company, said: 'It is very
important Mr Major is personally involved in this. He has given his personal
imprimatur and that is the highest recommendation you can get.'
Mr Don O'Callaghan, an executive with the Australian Meekaharra Minerals
group which has interests in Northern Ireland, said: 'The IDB has done an
exceptionally good job. It has paid attention to detail, and organised the
presentations superbly. There were not too many speeches and they were not
too long.
'It is of major importance that the prime minister is involved. His presence
gave great comfort to overseas investors.'
Perhaps most encouraging for the organisers is that the message that
Northern Ireland is a safe place for investment seemed to be getting
through.
Mr Alan Lewis, chief executive of the British textiles group Illingworth
Morris, said: 'While the violence was going on I had my doubts about
Northern Ireland. But now it looks a likely place for investment. The
competitive wage rates and incentives on offer mean you must pay it
attention.'
Mr Chung Sung Moon, managing director of Shin Ho Paper Manufacturing of
Korea, agreed: 'There are definitely possibilities for investment here now.
We have looked at Scotland but this is a better possibility.'
