FT  17 FEB 94 / Nationwide ends tie with GRE to set up own insurer
Nationwide building society is poised to announce the end of its
relationship with Guardian Royal Exchange, the composite insurance group,
and the setting up of its own life insurance company.
A statement from the UK's second largest society is expected within two
months. Nationwide must give GRE a year's notice of its plans to sever the
existing links, through which it acts as a 'tied agent', selling only GRE
insurance products through its branches, for which it receives a commission.
The move would be a further blow to the relationships that used to exist
between life insurance companies and building societies. It would also add
to the capacity in the life sector at a time when many in the industry
expect a shake-out.
Last September, Halifax, the UK's largest society, said it was ending its
tie with Standard Life, the UK's largest mutually owned life insurance
company, and would set up its own life operation. Most of the leading
societies no longer have ties with life companies, or have announced plans
to end such links.
Societies now want more control over the range of products they can offer.
Running their own life subsidiaries should be more profitable than merely
taking commission from a life company.
The final decisions on the form of Nationwide Life have yet to be taken, but
the most likely prospect is that the society would buy in expertise through
a two or three-year contract with a life company to help it set up a wholly
owned subsidiary.
Another option would be set up a joint venture with a life company, in which
Nationwide is the major shareholder. In 1990, Woolwich building society set
up Woolwich Life along these lines with Sun Alliance.
Discussions are continuing between Nationwide and two or three life
companies, including GRE.
The society is unlikely to follow the route taken by Britannia building
society of acquiring a life company, or to settle for a new arrangement with
GRE which would give it more influence over the product range. Last year,
Cheltenham &amp; Gloucester, the sixth largest society, went the opposite way,
saying it would end its relationship with Legal &amp; General and would no
longer sell retail insurance products.
