FT  11 MAR 94 / US, Russia split over Mideast peace talks
The US and Russia, co-sponsors of the Middle East peace process, appeared
divided yesterday over initiatives aimed at restarting peace talks between
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organisation, suspended since the Hebron
Mosque massacre two weeks ago.
Conflicting international moves have diminished chances for a speedy
resumption of talks and strengthened the determination of Mr Yassir Arafat,
PLO chairman, to expand the scope of peace negotiations to include the issue
of Jewish settlements in the occupied territories.
PLO officials said Mr Warren Christopher, US Secretary of State, told Mr
Arafat yesterday to resume talks with Israel without pre-conditions, or
Washington would veto a UN Security Council resolution condemning the Hebron
Massacre.
The PLO said it was supporting a move by Russia, which is pursuing a Middle
East policy independently from the US for the first time in three years, to
convene a new peace conference in Madrid. Israel has flatly rejected the
proposal. Mr Andrei Kozyrev, Russian foreign minister, is expected in Tunis
today to discuss the proposal with Mr Arafat.
The European Parliament lent its backing to PLO demands yesterday for the
dismantling of some Jewish settlements in the occupied territories to
protect Palestinians from Jewish settlers and reduce Arab-Israeli tension
after the massacre.
The PLO has said it will not return to the negotiating table until the UN
passes a resolution condemning the Hebron bloodbath and Israel takes
measures to dismantle sensitive Jewish settlements such as the ones in
Hebron, disarm Jewish settlers and accept an international force in the
occupied territories.
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israeli prime minister, has made some gestures towards the
PLO but has ruled out meeting the full list of demands. The Israeli
government has been hoping the US would be able to nudge the PLO back to
talks in Washington, with the promise of a speedy signing of an agreement on
implementing Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and West Bank area of
Jericho.
Yesterday's ultimatum by Mr Christopher to Mr Arafat came after the US asked
the UN Security Council to postpone a vote late on Wednesday on a resolution
condemning the Hebron massacre.
