FT  24 JAN 94 / Arts: Pledge to move back to town - Architecture
For the man in the street, or on the by-pass, the planning process, which
has such an impact on our everyday lives, remains a great mystery. We all
know that there is a complex, intrusive and defiantly bureaucratic planning
system which, in theory, regulates the shape of our environment.
The system is meant to keep the planning process clean, decent and legal. It
is also meant to reflect the democratic will of Parliament and, through the
complex system of local democracy, reflect the will of the people.
But a glance at the condition of many of Britain's towns and villages shows
that there are other, more powerful, forces at work: economic, political and
market forces.
When Baroness Thatcher was prime minister she had regular private meetings
with property developers, builders and retailers with the aim of simplifying
and speeding up the planning process.
The result was the 1980s boom - the spread of by-passes and motorways and
the over-supply of superstores and offices.
From 1986 to 1992, development was focused on out-of-town locations and as a
result the traditional high street has been under tremendous pressure. As we
park our cars outside the supermarket, there are lingering worries about the
empty shops belonging to anxious traders in the smaller towns. The lower
levels of consumer spending in the past few recessionary years have not
helped and there is no doubt that competition from the shopping centres
built in the 1980s has had a direct effect on the town they 'serve'.
One of the little known aspects of planning is the Planning Policy Guidance
Notes. These notes, known as PPGs, which appear regularly as supplements to
planning Acts and government circulars, set out government policy on
different aspects of planning.
It was 'PPG 6 Major Retail Development', issued in 1988, which seemed to set
the seal of planning approval on the major out-of-town shopping
developments. Now, in an almost complete volte-face, a revised version of
the retail development guidance note has been issued, emphasising the need
to revitalise town centres.
Many will feel that the new guidance is a belated reaction to the
proliferation of new developments: the stable door is being closed long
after the retail runners have galloped all over the kingdom.
The new guidance note does, however, offer a balanced view that would permit
further out-of-town or edge-of-town retail development, providing it does
not affect the vitality *something in here (HP) *
and trading viability of a town centre. There is an implied desire to
encourage development that is accessible by more than one form of transport
 -after all, the 1991 Census revealed that 23.9 per cent of the nation's
households do not have access to a car. Environmental considerations are
also stressed with references to the the need to avoid increases in
car-borne trips in an effort to reduce pollution and congestion.
Mr John Gummer, secretary of state for the environment, made a forthright
and pointed speech at last week's seminar on planning and development
control, organised by the Town and Country Planning Association.
He pledged his help to those who are willing to, 'achieve the quality of
traditional town centres which they value, and put the heart back into
cities'. Good urban design in town centres, he said 'demands vitality in the
urban property market'.
Vitality flows from people's decisions to shop there. In turn that depends
on a positive approach to planning and managing town centres.
It also means discouraging development on green-field sites on the edge of
cities.
'Out-of-town shopping centres require people to travel by car. They deny the
opportunity to make one journey serve several purposes. Business parks on
the by-pass also demand that people drive to work; and having driven to work
they have to drive out for their lunch, or to pick up a few items for their
evening meal. Such developments are derisive - they deny access and choice
to those without a car; they are both car-dependent uses.'
Mr Gummer went on to say that we should learn to see the car as a servant
not as the determinant of the way we build. When it comes to the future of
town centres he was very clear: 'I want to see town centres which serve the
whole community and provide a focus for retail development where the
proximity of competing businesses facilitates competition from which
consumers benefit. I want to see town centres which contain variety and
activity, and in which a whole series of different uses are encouraged.
'Such diversification of use can ensure that the economic activities
reinforce each other, and make town centres more attractive to local
residents, shoppers and visitors. I want to see a range of activities -
entertainment,restaurants and cafes, health and educational activities.
'Towns need to be places where people choose to live, and work and enjoy
themselves. I want to see us improve the quality of our towns so that we can
reduce the pressures of urban sprawl and the development of green field
sites.'
These are stirring and appropriate words for the next decade. But are they
in time to bring about the renaissance of our towns and the improvement in
the quality of urban life that is so necessary?
