FT  31 MAY 94 / The Hualon Project: Authorities knew of management's
criminal charges - The government is making a Pounds 61m grant for a Belfast
textile plant. The company behind the project and on the failed attempts of
EU officials to block the deal
On the morning of June 9, the UK's polling day for the European elections,
the government plans to sign a contract agreeing a Pounds 61m grant towards
the building of a textile plant at Mallusk near Belfast.
The deal has progressed to this point although the government knew that
senior managers of the company making the investment had been charged with -
and in one case convicted of - criminal financial offences.
The European Commission approved the grant in spite of strong objections
from officials on competition policy grounds. And the economic case for the
plant, which is to compete with low-cost Asian producers at the toughest end
of the market, has been challenged by European industry bodies.
The plant - to be built in a political stronghold of the Ulster Unionist
party - will cost Pounds 157m, and will be the biggest inward investment in
Northern Ireland since the De Lorean car plant was approved in 1978. De
Lorean collapsed four years later with the loss of a substantial amount of
government aid.
After the failure of De Lorean, whose problems were compounded by financial
irregularities, the government announced new procedures to assess project
viability. These included looking at the 'worst-case scenario' and
investigating the quality of management and the personal qualities and
reputations of the entrepreneurs involved.
The Belfast plant is to be built by the Hualon Corporation, a Malaysian
subsidiary of Hualon, a quoted Taiwanese textiles, electronics and financial
services group.
The Oung family that controls the group nearly clinched a similar deal with
the Republic of Ireland, in 1990 for Gillogue, Limerick. But Mr Des
O'Malley, then industry and commerce minister, spent a week in Taiwan where
he found investigations were under way in what later turned out to be one of
Taiwan's most celebrated stock scandals.
He said yesterday: 'We decided not to go ahead with the deal because the
chairman of the company was arrested in Taiwan over an alleged share fraud.
We had found it difficult anyway for about six months for them to honour the
verbal agreement we had come to in 1990.'
The case involved two of the Oung brothers: the chairman of the textiles
subsidiary, Mr Oung You-ming; and the head of the group, Mr Oung Ta-ming.
The brothers had sold 5m shares in an insurance company to the daughter of
Taiwan's communications minister for one-fifth of their market value. The
prosecutor alleged the transactions were for the 'improper enrichment of
others'.
But by the time the UK had approved the grant for a Belfast plant 21 months
later, Mr Oung Ta-ming had received a sentence for breach of trust of 3 1/2
years' imprisonment - later reduced on appeal to 2 1/2 years - Mr Oung
You-ming had jumped bail to Malaysia, and the communications minister had
resigned. Mr Oung Ta-ming is appealing his sentence to a higher court.
When Mr Chang Liang-chin, a Hualon group spokesman in Taiwan, was asked
yesterday whether Mr Oung You-ming would return to face trial, he said: 'I
don't know. Maybe some day.'
Mr Oung Ta-ming and one of his brothers have faced other criminal charges
since, but they were eventually dropped.
Mr Oung Ta-ming is known to be one of a group of speculators known as the
'Big Hands', who trade up to a third of the daily volume on the Taiwanese
stock exchange.
Mr Robert Atkins, Northern Ireland minister until he was appointed
environment minister in January, said the Hualon project was 'set in train'
by Mr Richard Needham, his immediate predecessor at the Northern Ireland
Office.
Mr Atkins said he 'did not play too much of a part' in the project, and that
detailed negotiations were handled by the Industrial Development Board,
Northern Ireland's development agency. Mr Needham, now trade minister, was
said by the Department of Trade and Industry to be on holiday and
uncontactable.
The development board, which arranged the grant for the Belfast plant, said
it was aware of the controversy surrounding the Oung family, and of the
outcome of the criminal cases. The Northern Ireland Office has refused to
comment.
The development board was enthusiastic about the project. It had been
criticised for its performance on creating jobs in the province.
The development board said the plant, to be based in the Ulster
Unionist-held constituency of South Antrim, near Belfast, would employ 1,800
people on a continuing basis and generate 500 associated jobs.
The plant will produce 23,000 tonnes of synthetic fabrics for low-cost
clothing manufacturers in Europe, competing with Asian producers.
However, European trade groups and some commentators question whether Hualon
will be able to undercut imports from the Far East, and say that demand from
European textiles producers, which has been contracting, cannot absorb the
additional output. They also query the employment projections.
The development board said its standard procedure for appraising and
approving projects was confidential, but it was satisfied that all relevant
aspects were considered.
However, in December 1992, when the UK put the proposal to the European
Commission, which has to approve state aid, Brussels was not impressed. It
asked for more information and received three further submissions, in
February, May and June last year.
In July 1993, the commission said it was opening a full inquiry into the aid
and told Britain: 'There is nothing in the arguments put forward to support
your government's contention that Hualon's output will take the place of
imports from outside the (European) Community.'
The commission was also publicly sceptical about the UK's forecasts of a
growth in demand that would absorb Hualon's output, describing its
assumptions as 'debatable'.
The investigation did not allay these fears. Soon after it began the UK
government started lobbying the commission. Senior commission officials say
at least one British minister indicated that London as well as Belfast had a
political interest in the project. After 10 months - which officials say is
unusually long - the full commission approved the project.
Industry bodies across Europe were furious. UIT, the French textile
manufacturers association, said the decision was incomprehensible. The
British Textile and Apparel Confederation said it would appeal to the
European Court on the decision.
