FT  19 OCT 94 / Dow to buy core of east German chemical sector
Dow Chemical of the US intends to take control of the core of the former
East German chemical industry in a deal which will bring DM2.9bn (Dollars
1.87bn) of investment from the Treuhand, Germany's privatisation agency.
Treuhand officials said that Dow has signed a letter of intent. The company
said the deal would be agreed by the end of the year.
Through its subsidiary Dow Deutschland, Dow intends to buy majority stakes
in the steam cracker at Sachsische Olefinwerke in Bohlen, the
electrochemical units and derivative operations at Buna, and the
intermediate chemical operations at Leuna.
The three units formed the basis of the old East Germany's chemical industry
before unification. Since then, the Treuhand has been planning to hive off
the entire industry to private investors.
It has been engaged in a big restructuring programme aimed at attracting
investors to install a new steam cracker facility and oil refinery in the
region.
The Treuhand has been providing generous financial investment incentives for
the Leuna/Buna/Bohlen chemical sector, in which 68,500 people had been
employed before 1990. This figure has fallen sharply to 12,300 through
closures, redundancies and early retirement schemes.
The Treuhand will invest DM2.9bn to modernise the polyolefin complex at Buna
and to build a pipeline from the east German northern port of Rostock. This
line will ship gas sold by Gazprom, the Russian state-owned utilities
company, to Buna.
Treuhand officials said that, under the terms of the letter of intent,
majority control of the Buna complex's equity would pass to Dow over a
period of time. The Treuhand would retain a 49 per cent stake for several
years. Dow would eventually acquire 76 per cent of Buna's equity, with
Gazprom taking the rest.
Buna is this year expected to have a turnover of DM800m and losses of about
DM300m. However, Treuhand officials said Buna could move into the black in
four years and the investments would be completed by the end of the decade.
Dow's entry into the east German chemical sector is part of its longer-term
strategy of expanding in Germany and in eastern Europe. 'We are looking at
Europe as a whole. We are looking for opportunities. These exist
particularly in this part of Europe,' a Dow official said. Dow's turnover in
Europe totalled Dollars 4.8bn last year.
Dow already has a plastic foam insulation manufacturing plant in Balaton,
Hungary. After buying into a joint venture with Nitrokemia and Chemolimpex,
two state-owned Hungarian companies in 1991, it acquired a 100 per cent
stake in 1992.
