FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (10): Flying Finns
set the pace but Europe recalls '87
Continental European equities put up a better performance in the third
quarter of 1994 than they did over the first six months.
However, September taken alone was grisly: at the end of the month, brokers
and investors were recalling edgily that it was in October that the crash of
1987 had occurred.
Last month saw drops of 5.9 per cent in the Europe ex-UK component of the
FT-Actuaries World indices, and 8.5 per cent in both the German and the
French equity markets. The best performance was put up by Italy with a fall
of 1.4 per cent.
The theory was that the more disciplined economies of Germany and France had
virtually come to the end of their down-swing in key interest rates. Italy,
said its fans, had room for improvement, as the right-wing government headed
by Mr Silvio Berlusconi moved towards the budget-deficit reduction package,
which it announced towards the end of the month.
The Nordic bloc performed well over the three-month period, with a 2.9 per
cent gain, although it fell 3.2 per cent in September alone. Within this, at
corporate level, there were one or two hints that may have helped investors.
Picking the right country was one: during the quarter, the top ten stocks in
the FT-SE Eurotrack 100 index included three Finnish companies, two Swedes
and one Norwegian.
The Finns - Nokia, Kymmene and Outokompu - featured high in the charts for
the first nine months of 1994 - and also for the 12 months to end-September,
as well as in the third quarter - although they are a telecoms conglomerate,
a forestry group and a metals company respectively.
Forgetting their individual attractions, all three reflected Finland's
status as the best performer in the World Index series this year - up 14 per
cent over the past three months, and 22.2 per cent over nine. The local
currency gain in the latter stretched to 45.6 per cent in terms of this
year's depreciating dollar, and 36.5 per cent in terms of sterling. The
market began to flag only as corporate expansion brought out rights issues,
and the decline of the dollar bit into export profit margins.
However, choice by country carried its dangers. There were two French
companies among the top 10 performers - Carrefour, the hypermarket retailer;
and LVMH, the luxury goods group which takes in Moet Hennessy champagne,
wines and spirits, Louis Vuitton luggage and Dior perfumes. But there were
also three in the bottom 10: Alcatel Altsthom, Generale des Eaux, and
Danone.
Two of these pointed up the general rule: that it is not wise to get
involved in scandal or nasty corporate accidents. Alcatel, the engineering,
transport and telecommunications equipment group, compounded the
investigation of its chairman, Mr Pierre Suard, for alleged corruption with
the disclosure, on September 28, that profits had tumbled and were likely to
see a further decline in the second half of this year.
The Alcatel profits story cast a cloud over the European investment scene.
Analysts had been relying on cyclicals to provide excitement, rather than
apprehension this winter; but, since the company said that one of its big
problems was in the German telecommunications supply market, Siemens of
Germany went weak, too, along with Brown Boveri in Switzerland and Asea in
Sweden.
Generale des Eaux, meanwhile, was depressed by allegations of irregularities
in matters allied to political party funding.
There were other hazards. Novo Nordisk, the drugs and biotechnology group
and third worst performer in the third quarter after Alcatel and Eaux,
reported profits below market expectations in mid-August. One reason was
unrealised bond losses, a scourge of the unwary investor, corporate or
otherwise, in 1994.
The threatened rise in European interest rates finally turned defensive
characteristics into a liability. Endesa and Iberdrola, the Spanish
electrical utilities, lost ground on their interest-rate sensitivity in a
Madrid market which was, for a time, very sick on that score.
