FT  27 AUG 94 / Independent Schools - FT 500: The old powers remain at the
top of the league - John Authers assesses the results of the FT analysis of
this summer's A-level results
Football fans will recognise the latest league tables of independent
schools' A-level results.
A wealthy elite in the big cities gets first choice of all the most
promising talent, so barely half a dozen have even a chance of coming first.
Outside this premier league, competition is often fiercer, but the top
positions are out of reach.
Each of this year's top four schools - Westminster, Eton, St Paul's and
Winchester - has had an average placing in the top five in the previous five
years, while only one of the top 12 - Downe House, a Berkshire girls'
boarding school - had not had an average ranking in the top 20.
Big-city day schools with wide catchment areas, and boarding schools with an
international reputation such as Eton and Winchester, attract more
applicants and are able to select abler students. In many cases they also
have strong financial resources, and their reputations make them proof
against the recession.
Fears that the stratified English education system has created a
self-reinforcing elite seem to have some justification. All the top four
schools were among the nine 'great' public schools identified by the
Clarendon Commission 130 years ago. The other five - Harrow (34th),
Charterhouse (45th), Shrewsbury (46th), Merchant Taylors' (49th) and Rugby
(65th) - all fared well.
Meanwhile the wind of recession blew through the rest of the independent
sector, with boarding numbers falling by 5.5 per cent. With fewer children
applying, many schools have no choice but to become less selective. There
are no A-level results printed here for the schools which have closed or
merged with others since the end of last term, such as Felixstowe College in
Suffolk, or Lawnside near Malvern.
The FT excludes from its survey schools which have less than 10 candidates,
as results for such schools might be statistically insignificant. This year,
that meant cutting out 28, several of which produced weak results.
The enduring strength of the traditional elite is the most startling feature
of the table, but the showing by girls' schools outside the elite is
scarcely less impressive.
Girls' schools have poorer resources than boys' schools. They are also
coming under increasing competition from boys' schools which have opened
their sixth forms to girls, such as Westminster. But this year, several
girls' schools, most spectacularly Downe House, registered impressive leaps
in the tables compared with their usual performance.
At face value, these results are a strong case against co-education. The
highest-ranked school which is mixed throughout its age groups, rather than
just in the sixth form, is Bablake School in Coventry, which came 37th.
This may be due to the historical accident that most independent schools are
single-sex, and those which are already the most successful have no
incentive to change.
But Sue Cameron, headmistress of Downe House, suggests that single-sex
education allows girls to avoid the sexual stereotype that they should not
do science. The school's 10 successful Oxbridge applicants include students
going on to read chemistry, material sciences and experimental psychology.
League tables themselves arouse controversy. While schools, particularly in
the independent sector, accept that rankings are inevitable, A-level results
can be judged in several ways, which lead to different league tables.
The FT's statisticians, using data supplied by the Independent Schools
Information Service, have tried to make these tables as inclusive, and as
proof against manipulation, as possible. They are based on total UCAS
points, which include both A-levels, and the new AS-levels ('Advanced
Supplementary') which are intended to be as difficult as A-levels, but with
smaller syllabuses.
All grades achieved, not just As and Bs, are taken into account, giving a
full picture of a school's academic strength, and crediting extra options
such as AS levels. However, general studies A-level, which is often ignored
by university admissions tutors, has been excluded from all the FT's
calculations.
The FT has also aimed to avoid over-simplification by ranking schools using
two separate scores - UCAS points per entry, and UCAS points per pupil. The
former gives the average grade in each exam taken, while the latter gives
the total grades each pupil has on average accumulated. Arguments could be
made for either measure. The former can be manipulated by deliberately
withdrawing pupils from A-levels where they do not seem likely to do well,
while the latter rewards 'exam factories' where pupils commonly take more
than the standard three subjects.
League tables compiled using the two measures would be different, as a
glance down the columns headed UCAS points per entry and UCAS points per
pupil shows. The two have been combined to give the ranking score (for which
the precise formula is points per pupil plus three times the points per
candidate divided by four).
As the bald ranking can unfairly accentuate what are often marginal
differences between schools' results, the figure in the second column gives
an 'FT score' which shows by how much a school has varied from the norm.
This is calculated so that an average school will score 1.00. This was
achieved by the schools ranked from 262 to 269, and is equivalent to roughly
18 UCAS points, or three Cs per pupil. By comparison, Westminster, with an
FT score of 1.54, was 54 per cent better than the norm. If this sounds a
little bland, consider that Westminster's pupils achieved this score by
amassing 314 A-grades - rather more than half the total - along with 129 Bs,
51 Cs, 19 Ds and four Es. They only failed four A-levels between them.
At a less exalted level, schools can be separated by 20 or 30 positions in
the rankings, but have almost identical FT scores. If this is the case, it
would be unwise to put emphasis on the 'superior' school's higher ranking.
One disadvantage of ranking by A-level results is that it is almost
impossible to treat fairly schools which ask students to study more subjects
in the sixth-form, via Scottish Highers, or the International Baccalaureate.
Both are respected by universities, while the Headmasters' Conference, which
represents the most prestigious independent boy's schools says A-levels have
'passed their sell-by date' because they are too specialised.
No schools offering Scottish Highers have been included, as there is no
agreed fair way to rank them. However, they will be covered in the FT-1,000
guide to secondary schools, published in October.
The figures for Cheltenham College, Malvern College, and Sevenoaks School
incorporate results for some candidates for the International Baccalaureate,
using an agreed points conversion scheme. All three are probably
disadvantaged as the baccalaureate is regarded as a harder qualification. It
is reserved for the ablest pupils who might have piled up As in A-levels.
Even so, if Sevenoaks' IB candidates are treated as one 'school', they
finish seventh. Once A-level candidates are included, the school ranks in
the 50s.
These FT tables have two more profound disadvantages. One is that they cover
only independent schools, and so do not enter into the question of whether
it is worth opting out of the state sector. The FT-1,000 will incorporate
state schools, but there is no central statistical body for the state sector
to parallel the role of Isis for independent schools, so we are not yet able
to publish complete statistics for them.
A second disadvantage is that they do not control for a school's ability to
select its pupils. The main factor behind the success of the top schools is
that most of their pupils are very able, and their success is thus of no
interest to parents with less academically able children who would not be
able to gain admission.
A system which takes into account pupils' ability and sees how much value
schools in the state-maintained and independent sectors have added would be
more useful. This is harder to deliver than it sounds, but one of the first
attempts to assess 'value-added', produced by statisticians at the
Department for Education, suggests strongly that independent schools can
improve children's A-level scores.
It compared the A-level point-scores that students achieved last year with
the score they had obtained in their GCSE exams.
As might be expected, children who did well at GCSE were the most likely to
get good A-level grades. But the statisticians found that, regardless of a
pupil's achievements at GCSE, they were more likely to get good A-levels in
independent schools than in the state sector.
For example, 42 per cent of the state school pupils achieving 70 or more
GCSE points (equivalent to 10 grade As) went on to get three or more grade
As at A-level. But this feat was managed by 61 per cent of independent
school pupils with similar GCSEs.
At a level within reach of rather more children, 11 per cent of independent
school pupils who had only managed between 45 and 49 GCSE points -
equivalent to about eight B-grades - went on to score three As at A-level;
while 56 per cent of them managed at least 15 A-level points.
In state schools, only 1 per cent of pupils with GCSE scores in this range
achieved three As or better at A-level, while only a quarter managed 15
A-level points.
These figures must carry a health warning. This is their first year, and
they may prove to be a freak. Even independent schools were surprised by
them, as they felt that they should already have added value to their pupils
by the time they took GCSE. It is theoretically possible, albeit unlikely,
that private schools look good on this analysis because their children
underperform at the age of 16. As they stand, the figures must be accepted
as a powerful case for independent education, at least at sixth-form level.
