FT  19 JAN 94 / Westminster suspends policy on house sales
Westminster council yesterday suspended its 'designated sales' housing
policy following last week's allegation that councillors and officials had
'gerrymandered' the 1990 election.
Mr Miles Young, Conservative leader of the council, said he was 'erring on
the side of over-scrupulousness' but hoped to bring in a new designated
sales scheme soon.
Mr Neale Coleman, a former Labour councillor who co-ordinated the campaign
against the policy, said that over-scrupulousness was 'a recent discovery by
Westminster's Conservative group'.
An emergency meeting of the council has been scheduled for January 25 to
discuss the report, but Mr Young said the debate was 'likely' to take place
in camera.
The meeting has been called because the council has been told by the Audit
Commission that the composition of its committees is constitutionally
'defective'. The work of all committees, central to policymaking by
councillors, has been suspended, and the council must reconstitute them at
Tuesday's meeting.
So far, the suspension of designated sales is an 'executive action' taken by
Mr Merv Montacute, the council's managing director, and must be endorsed by
the council meeting.
Mr Peter Bradley, Labour's deputy leader on the council, attacked the
decision to hold the meeting in camera. He said: 'This is a matter of
unprecedented public interest, and we should be able to find a mechanism
through which as much of this can be debated publicly as possible. Many of
these issues have arisen precisely because there was inadequate public
scrutiny of Dame Shirley Porter and other Conservative councillors.'
The ruling Conservative group on the council also announced that Ms Judith
Warner, one of the 10 councillors and officials the auditor said in his
provisional view should be surcharged for involvement in the affair, has
resigned as chairman of the education committee 'to devote her time and
energy to clearing her name'.
Mr Young, who was not recommended for surcharge by the auditor, said: 'I and
my colleagues strongly believe in designated sales as an arm of our overall
housing strategy. However, a detailed reading of the district auditor's
report raises so many new and fundamental legal issues for us that I believe
the scrupulous response must be to review the basis of the policy as it is
currently constituted.'
Labour believes that the policy will not return. Mr Coleman, a former Labour
councillor, said: 'Clearly they have read the same documents as we have.
They know the game is up. The case that the policy was unlawful is
overwhelming beyond words.'
The council also announced that it had severed contacts on housing matters
with Mr Jeremy Sullivan, the lawyer who has advised the authority since 1987
on its controversial council house sales policy.
A spokesman for Mr Sullivan said the lawyer could be affected by a
'potential conflict of interest' if he continued to act on behalf of the
council during the continuing inquiry by the district auditor. However, Mr
Sullivan will continue to work for the council on other cases, and
Westminster made clear that they still had full confidence in him.
