FT  15 APR 94 / Bundesbank rate cuts win praise abroad
Yesterday's unexpected Bundesbank decision to cut both the discount and
Lombard rates by 0.25 percentage points to 5 per cent and 6.5 per cent
respectively won praise from the US Treasury and triggered a rash of rate
cuts in continental Europe.
But the German central bank itself was at pains to banish any idea that it
was currying favour abroad ahead of meetings later this month of world
finance ministers at the International Monetary Fund or the next
get-together of ministers and central bank governors from the Group of Seven
countries in Washington on Sunday, April 24.
Instead, Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank president, underlined that the
decisive factor behind the Bundesbank's decision was its expectation that
inflation in Germany would fall in the months ahead to below 3 per cent in
the second half of this year.
Sharply reduced inflationary expectations - reinforced by the unexpectedly
favourable outcome to this year's spring wage round and falling unit labour
costs - have allowed the Bundesbank to discount any inflationary
implications in the very rapid growth of M3, the bank's targeted measure of
money supply.
Although broad money, as measured by M3, grew at an annualised rate of 17.5
per cent in February and so well above its target growth range of 4 to 6 per
cent by the end of this year, Bundesbank officials yesterday stressed that
this was due to special factors.
Changes in German tax laws had provoked a massive liquidation by German
investors of mutual funds held in Luxembourg earlier this year as well as
substantial sales of dwellings. Cash realised through these transactions
landed in German bank accounts just as bond markets worldwide were suffering
the repercussions of February's move to dearer money in the US. As a result,
the cash stayed on deposit, swelling German M3 numbers.
By cutting its psychologically important discount and Lombard rates, the
Bundesbank hopes to persuade investors that German rates are decoupled from
the rise in US rates and that they can place their money profitably in long
term instruments such as German government bonds.
Such action on a substantial scale would slow the growth in M3 and could
justify the Bundesbank's decision yesterday to keep to its money supply
target for this year.
Although a surprise to financial markets, yesterday's German rate cuts are
consistent with the cautious monetary easing pursued by the Bundesbank since
the crisis in the European exchange rate mechanism in the autumn of 1992.
The important repurchase or 'repo' rate, which the Bundesbank uses to steer
monetary conditions, was left at 5.7 per cent yesterday.
At this level the repo is slightly below the mid-point of the new 'corridor'
set by the discount and Lombard rates. Yesterday's rate cuts create scope
for a further modest easing in German money market rates.
Although yesterday's action will have a modest fallout in terms of borrowing
costs, the move was warmly welcomed by ministers of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's
embattled centre-right coalition in Bonn as support for the government's
efforts to boost growth and employment.
While convincing itself that it was adhering to its anti-inflationary duty,
the Bundesbank appeared for once to have pleased both international and
national opinion.
But a comment from the German Federation of Chambers of Commerce (DIHT) that
the Bundesbank 'should not neglect the still unsatisfactory growth in the
money supply' in its policy decisions was a reminder of the strong support
that rigorous anti-inflationary policies command in German business circles
and public opinion.
