FT  20 OCT 94 / Sponsors boost 'passport to a job'
The government believes its new 'vocational A-levels' will be recognised as
a passport to employment, following yesterday's announcement that 15
companies will sponsor the qualifications.
Advanced General National Vocational Qualifications - known either as
Vocational A-levels or GNVQs - are central to the government's attempts to
ensure that more students stay in education after the age of 16. They
completed their pilot earlier this year, and are intended to be taken as
vocational courses in the sixth form.
In theory they provide a middle path between academic A-levels and narrower,
more trade-related national vocational qualifications (NVQs), which are
designed to be taken in the workplace. Thus they should be good both for
university entrance and for moving straight into employment.
Academics such as Professor Alan Smithers of the University of Manchester
have questioned whether it is possible for one qualification to achieve both
aims. Careers teachers seem to have similar doubts.
A report by government inspectors of schools and further education colleges
earlier this week suggested that students were still being steered towards
A-levels by careers counsellors, even if they had little chance of passing
them. These are the people for whom the GNVQ has been designed.
The government doubted that students would take up the qualifications
without evidence that employers took them seriously.
Each company is offering assistance towards qualifications in a particular
subject. For example, students taking a GNVQ in leisure and tourism will be
allowed to take up the American Express sponsorship, which offers work
experience with local businesses.
Amex will make extra awards to the top performing students in each of 13
regions. Travel bursaries are on offer for the top performers.
Laing, the construction company, is offering similar support for the
construction and built environment GNVQ, with guarantees of work and project
experience for all students taking the course across the UK and awards for
the top performers in each region.
