FT  08 JUN 94 / World Trade News: Way clear for Philippines debt talks
The International Monetary Fund will grant the Philippines a Dollars 630m
(Pounds 418m) 'exit facility' by the end of this month, enabling it to start
on debt negotiations with the Paris Club of creditors, according to Mr
Rizalino Navarro, the Philippines trade and investment secretary. 'Then
we'll be on our own,' he said.
Although soft loans will still be needed, the country's coffers are flush
with foreign exchange. Reserves are at a high of Dollars 7.2bn and the equal
of four months of imports which, he says, is 'getting on the high side'.
Galvanised by the country's widely praised fast-track power programme and a
new enthusiasm of the capital markets, Mr Navarro was in Washington to guard
Filipino interests in the Generalised System of Preferences which gives
tariff-free status to selected imports from developing countries.
The US has also removed the Philippines from its 'priority watch list' of
countries whose laws or enforcement of intellectual property statutes are
lax. This paves the way for increased high technology production facilities,
Mr Navarro said.
The government of President Fidel Ramos has moved on several fronts to boost
trade and investment. A new law expands the scope of permissible
build-operate-transfer deals.
The previous concentration on energy and transportation has been expanded to
include solid waste management, information technology, data base networks,
health and education facilities, and any infrastructure project authorised
by the government.
It is also comprehensive in the types of arrangements permitted. A public
utility franchise requires that 60 per cent of equity in the operating
corporation must be domestically owned. However, among new options, foreign
companies can now build a facility, lease it and transfer it or rehabilitate
a project, operate it and transfer it.
The previous 12 per cent ceiling on equity returns has been replaced by a
'reasonable returns' requirement to be set by market conditions.
The impact of the law, along with a new valued added tax, has been to spur
project approvals from Dollars 3.5bn last year to Dollars 9bn in the first
five months of this year.
Banking legislation, signed by President Ramos two weeks ago, is also
expected to boost trade and investment. It will allow the entry of 10 new
foreign banks to the country - four others have been there for more than 50
years when the door to new entrants has slammed shut.
'There is a lot of interest from the US, Japan, Europe and other Asian
countries,' Mr Navarro said. Banks usually bring their clients, who bring
more investment and facilitate trade.
The hope is that the new capital and foreign competition will drive down
interest rates nets, now at 18 per cent for borrowers.
