FT  14 MAR 94 / FT Guide to the Week
14 MONDAY
G7 targets unemployment
Finance and employment ministers from the G7 top industrial nations are
joined in Detroit by European Union social affairs commissioner Padraig Flyn
for a jobs summit. The gathering, called by US president Bill Clinton, is
the first of its kind specifically to address employment issues. The US is
likely to press European countries to cut interest rates.
US-Russian relations: Warren Christopher, US secretary of state at the end
of his 10-day Asian trip, meets Andrei Kozyrev, Russian foreign minister, in
Vladivostock.
They are likely to discuss Bosnia and the timetable of Russian troop
withdrawals from Latvia and Estonia, as well as co-operation in peacemaking
efforts in the Middle East and fall-out from the recent arrest of an alleged
Russian spy in the CIA.
World environment: Negotiations on the restructuring and replenishment of
the Global Environment Facility will resume in Geneva (to Mar 16). The
objective is to tie up the Dollars 2bn replenishment package and set up the
Facility as the financial mechanism for administering the 1992 global
environmental conventions.
European transport: The Second Pan-European Transport Conference, organised
by the European Parliament and the European Commission, takes place on
Crete, Greece. It will explore ways to develop a pan-European transport
network, involving the many new countries that have emerged since the first
conference in 1991.
Euro Disney, the hard-pressed theme park near Paris, holds its annual
general meeting, which is expected to be stormy. Its shares stand at a third
of their value a year ago.
India's prime minister, PV Narasimha Rao, on an official visit to Britain,
meets Prime Minister John Major and Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd in
Downing Street. Talks will focus on the improving relations between the two
countries, Indian economic reform and British investment in India. India's
dispute over Kashmir with neighbouring Pakistan will also be aired.
Commonwealth Day: The Queen starts the Commonwealth Games Relay Message from
Buckingham Palace then attends Commonwealth Day Observance at Westminster
Abbey.
Holidays: Much of the Moslem world celebrates the two-day festival of Eid
al-Fitr.
15 TUESDAY
EU enlargement crisis
European Union foreign ministers hold an emergency meeting in Brussels to
discuss the enlargement crisis. The ostensible purpose is to try to hammer
out an agreement on Norwegian entry to the Union, mainly a matter of
settling fish quotas. However, the issue of admitting the four Efta
applicants has raised the contentious question of the distribution of power
in an enlarged Union.
The dispute centres on national veto rights. While most member-states
support a rise in the blocking minority in the council of ministers from 23
population-weighted votes out of 76 to 27 out of 90, the UK, backed by
Spain, is opposing this move. The whole process of enlargement is at risk.
US producer prices index: Markets will be watching this indicator - and
Wednesday's consumer prices index - for signs of inflationary pressures. If
the figures turn out higher than the consensus forecasts, they will trigger
fears that the Federal Reserve may increase interest rates again.
Romania's government has said it will introduce a new minimum wage of
Lei58,000 (USDollars 37) a month from today, well below the Lei78,000-92,000
(USDollars 50-59) demanded by trade unions. The unions are threatening
further strike action if the government fails to come up with a better
offer.
Waste at sea: Japan, Russia and South Korea are to begin a survey on the
effects of nuclear waste dumped in the Sea of Japan.
Finland's prime minister Esko Aho begins a two-day visit to Estonia, where
he will hold talks with his opposite number Mart Laar.
Illinois primaries:
Illinois holds gubernatorial and congressional primaries. National attention
has been focused on the struggles of Democratic representative Dan
Rostenkowski (left) to win a further term, while undergoing a federal ethics
investigation.
World Aviation, Education and Safety congress opens in Bombay (to Mar 18).
Italian elections: The Pope is to pray for Italy ahead of next week's
general elections.
Norway's National Gallery has been given until today to ransom the stolen
painting The Scream by Edvard Munch. Following its theft last month, a
demand for Dollars 1m has been received.
16 WEDNESDAY
UK economy in focus
Figures for UK unemployment in February are expected to show a fall, after
the surprise 15,500 rise in January. Analysts predict a seasonally adjusted
drop of around 20,000. A further rise would prompt serious doubts about the
health of the UK recovery.
With April's tax increases looming on the horizon, the markets will also pay
close attention to data on February's retail sales for evidence of consumer
confidence. The consensus is for a 0.2 per cent month-on-month increase,
making the annual rise 3.1 per cent, but recent retail sales data have shown
a tendency to surprise.
Thatcher in Brazil:
Lady Thatcher, the former British prime minister begins a visit to Brazil as
guest of Banco Garantia (to Mar 19). Her trip is sandwiched between the
recent tour of bankers and industrialists led by Michael Portillo, chief
secretary to the treasury, and the arrival of Douglas Hurd, the UK foreign
minister, in April.
British exports to Brazil nearly doubled last year. Lady Thatcher will be
preaching the virtues of privatisation.
Thailand's prime minister Chuan Leekpai begins an official visit to Vietnam
(to Mar 19). Vietnam's expressed desire to join the Association of South
East Asian Nations will be on the agenda, ahead of a meeting of Asean
foreign ministers in Bangkok, the Thai capital, in July.
Stena Line, part of Sweden's diversified Stena Group, holds an extraordinary
general meeting in Gothenburg to secure the go-ahead for a rights issue to
finance two ferries.
CeBIT, Europe's largest computer and communications show, opens in Hanover.
The exhibition fills every hall in Hanover's vast showgrounds and is
depicted as a shop window for European information technology. A traditional
launching pad for new products, this year the list includes Texas
Instrument's superfast multimedia chip, partly designed in the company's UK
laboratories.
FT Survey: Information and Communications Technology.
Football: European Cup Champions' league group matches. In Group A,
Barcelona (Spain) play Spartak Moscow (Russia) and Galatasaray (Turkey) play
Monaco (France). In Group B, Werder Bremen (Germany) plays AC Milan (Italy)
and FC Porto (Portugal) plays Anderlecht (Belgium).
Holidays: Indonesia and Malaysia (markets closed).
17 THURSDAY
Partners in peace
US defence secretary William Perry starts a trip to Russia, Kazakhstan,
Ukraine and Belarus. He will discuss military and other ties with the former
Soviet republics.
The proposed links are to include regular meetings between military and
defence officials, training with the US armed forces, and technical
assistance.
Bundesbank meeting: The policy-making council of the German central bank
holds its regular fortnightly meeting, amid regular speculation as to
whether it will reduce
interest rates again.
Sky wars: US transport secretary Federico Pena is due to say whether he will
approve extension of a 'code-sharing' arrangement between the UK's British
Airways and USAir. Under the code-sharing deal, which lapses today, the two
airlines market each other's flights under the same ticketing code, making
it easier for them to feed passengers to each other.
The Clinton administration is threatening to scrap the agreement unless US
airlines secure greater access to British airports, especially Heathrow.
Macedonia's president, Kiro Gligorov, holds talks in Bonn with German
foreign minister Klaus Kinkel. President Gligorov will be hoping for Germany
to put pressure on Greece to scrap its embargo on the fledgling former
Yugoslav republic. Last week, Greece allowed a train of fuel tanker trucks
to cross into its neighbour.
French protest: Unions have called a national protest against plans to allow
employers to take on the young unemployed at 80 per cent of the minimum
wage. A quarter of those under 25 are out of work.
Wartime collaborator Paul Touvier goes on trial in Versailles, France, on
charges of crimes against humanity for picking Jewish hostages for execution
by the Nazis during the second world war.
St Patrick's Day:
Holiday in all parts of Ireland in honour of the patron saint. In London,
the Queen Mother presents shamrock to Irish Guards. In the US, Irish premier
Albert Reynolds is guest of honour at a dinner given by President Bill
Clinton at the White House.
Cricket: Second test match between England and the West Indies begins in
Georgetown, Guyana (to Mar 22). Also, the second test between South Africa
and Australia begins in Cape Town (to March 21).
The Tote Gold Cup, one of the leading events of Britain's National Hunt
horse-racing season, is run at Cheltenham.
18 FRIDAY
Apec gathering in Honolulu
Finance ministers of the member countries of the Asia Pacific Economic
Co-operation forum meet in Honolulu. The gathering is modelled after the
regular meetings of finance ministers of the G7 industrial countries.
John Hume, a member of the British Parliament from Northern Ireland, is to
address the US National Press Club in Washington.
Cuba in focus: Anticipating the New Cuba, a conference sponsored by the
World Economic Development Congress, begins in New York.
Spain's ruling socialist workers' party begins its 33rd congress (to Mar
20). Against a background of recession, high unemployment and falling
popularity, the differences between the pragmatic, market-orientated
government and leftwing elements in the unions may come to the fore.
Science week: Britain begins a National Week of Science, Engineering and
Technology. It is intended as a 'celebration and an illumination of science
and technology'.
FT Surveys: Poland, Scotland
19-20 WEEKEND
Hosokawa visits China
Japan's prime minister Morihiro Hosokawa begins a two-day official visit to
China on Saturday. He is expected to meet premier Li Peng and will be
seeking to improve trade and diplomatic ties with Japan's second largest
trading partner.
Five Nations rugby: England play Wales in London and Scotland play France in
Edinburgh on Saturday.
Sunday sees a spate of elections.
Tunisia holds presidential and parliamentary elections.
El Salvadoreans vote for a president, vice-president, a National Assembly
and a full slate of mayors.
Argentinians choose delegates for a constitutional assembly to consider
allowing President Carlos Menem to run for a second term in 1995 and
continue his economic reforms.
Schleswig-Holstein, Germany's northernmost state, holds local government
elections.
French local elections (first round).
Compiled by Patrick Stiles.
Fax: (+44) (0)71 873 3194.
