FT  14 OCT 94 / The dirt clogs up Zaire's new broom: Reforming PM Kengo runs
into resistance from the state and business 'mafia'
Zaire's main airport used to be most people's idea of hell on earth. Landing
at Dnjili, passengers would spend hours being passed from one security
service to another, each demanding its bribe, while hangers-on, promising
they could - at a price - smooth a passage through the official maze, vied
for the role of 'protocol'.
A perfect symbol of the corrupt anarchy that is Zaire, it was one of the
first targets of a radical clean-up cited by prime minister Kengo Wa Dondo
on his accession to power.
Three months into his premiership, the airport has been transformed into a
zone where it is sometimes possible to emerge without handing over a petit
cadeau (little gift). Optimists point to this as a sign of Mr Kengo's
determination to impose order. Cynics say it is the only miracle he is going
to be able to pull off.
Mr Kengo is trying to put Zaire back on the diplomatic map this week. He is
visiting France and Belgium in an effort to restore ties.
Indeed, western approval is the main incentive for President Mobutu Sese
Seko to co-operate with Mr Kengo. Being denied a visa to visit his villas
abroad and having aid abruptly cut off because of his failure to institute
democratic reform hurt Mr Mobutu's pride.
When nominated in June, Mr Kengo was regarded as a consensus candidate who
unlike Mr Etienne Tshisekedi, the radical opposition leader he elbowed
aside, would be capable of working alongside Mr Mobutu. Both the opposition
and Mr Mobutu's supporters knew it was time to end the 15-month stalemate in
which two governments competed for legitimacy and no one ran the country.
An experienced political operator, he immediately started making the noises
the disillusioned international community wanted to hear. He promised to put
a stop to official corruption, bring the anarchic armed forces under
control, stabilise the currency and rein in inflation, halt the smuggling
that yearly robs the country of a fortune in diamonds, gold, cobalt and
uranium, and restore something approaching autonomy to the Bank of Zaire,
long treated as a bottomless purse by President Mobutu and his army
generals.
The battered national currency, the new Zaire, launched in October at three
to the dollar, now trades at 2,500. In July Mr Kengo suspended the Bank of
Zaire's governor, a Mobutu appointee, accusing him of recklessly printing
notes. Recently he has disclosed two operations - one run by a Lebanese
businessman, the other by a Zairean with close ties to Mr Mobutu's son -
that would have smuggled 45 tonnes of counterfeit bills into the country.
For decades, what the opposition press describes as a 'mafia' of corrupt
Lebanese and foreign businessmen, protected by the army generals and members
of the presidential entourage, have become rich breaking the rules. By
cracking down on such activities, Mr Kengo is challenging a powerful elite,
one, moreover, that was instrumental in getting him nominated over Mr
Tshisekedi.
'Kengo is talking tough, which is great,' says a Kinshsa-based diplomat.
'But if the end result is to convince Mobutu's parliamentary supporters
they're not going to get their share of the pie, then he could come tumbling
down.'
Obstacles are surfacing in Mr Kengo's path. Zaire's attorney-general has put
the investigation into the counterfeit smuggling operation on ice, claiming
he does not have the means to carry it through.
At the customs authority and the national tax office, two key institutions
in which state revenues traditionally evaporate into thin air, employees are
fiercely resisting changes ordered by the government.
'We get the impression that we don't control anything much,' admits one of
Mr Kengo's aides. 'Mobutu, the radical opposition and Mobutu's parliamentary
supporters are all trying to trip Kengo up. He is a very isolated figure.'
Mr Kengo's powerlessness is most bleakly evident when it comes to security.
His predecessor used the army to terrorise the opposition, muffle the press
and bully human rights activists. The systematic repression has stopped, but
the under-paid army behaves like an occupation force, setting up road
barricades, demanding money at gunpoint, stealing cars.
At the same time, Mr Kengo has failed to alleviate the day-to-day problems
of ordinary people. Annualised, inflation in the first three months of Mr
Kengo's tenure was 24,200 per cent. With the state no longer providing
minimum services, parents are having to find precious hard currency to pay
teachers in state schools and doctors in public hospitals.
If the premier were forced to resign because the ground had been cut from
under him, President Mobutu could still lose all his hard-won gains. So the
outcome is probably procrastination - allowing Mr Kengo a semblance of power
while quietly subverting policies that threaten presidential privileges.
It is a tactic, after all, that has worked well since Mr Mobutu announced
the dawn of a democratic era more than four years ago.
