FT  27 MAY 94 / Survey of Relocation in the UK (14): Era of jobless growth -
Can Scotland continue to attract foreign investment?
An English economist who visited Glasgow recently was ticking off features
of the Scottish economy for which, he said, even the south of England would
give its eye-teeth. He listed a (slightly) lower unemployment rate, an
almost total absence of negative equity, a manufacturing base that now
included virtually no aged plants and, finally, an unrivalled capacity to
attract inward investment.
In Scotland inward investment (or foreign direct investment - FDI - as it is
increasingly called) is no longer the fashionable subject it was a few years
ago. Only last winter Scottish Enterprise, the development agency, was
warned by the US consultants Monitor that foreign branch manufacturing
plants were artificial creations which showed little capacity for
spontaneous growth.
The report, focusing on the Scottish electronics industry, also reiterated
concerns that in the near future Scotland would find it increasingly
difficult to attract FDI. It would face stronger competition from low cost
manufacturers in southern and eastern Europe.
Yet the fact is that a steady stream of foreign-owned companies continues to
arrive and open manufacturing plants. Scotland is gradually getting more
used to having an economy in which the commonest manufactured item is an
assembled printed circuit board, rather than a piece of riveted steelplate.
It is difficult to argue that plants like International Business Machines'
complex at Greenock or Compaq's nearby facility at Erskine have not put down
roots in Scotland, even if the former does only a small amount of product
development, and the latter almost none.
'We've had a hell of a year,' says Mr Robert Crawford, director of Locate in
Scotland, the inward investment bureau which has offices in the US, the
Asia-Pacific basin, continental Europe and London.
Though he cannot reveal his totals for 1993-94 (the report has to go to
ministers), he hints that Scotland's performance in terms of the number of
FDI projects won, jobs created and money committed will be even better than
in 1992-93, when foreign companies committed about Pounds 350m of FDI to
Scotland and said they would create more than 5,000 jobs.
As an example, Mitsubishi Electric opened its fourth manufacturing plant in
Scotland a few weeks ago, a 95,000 sq ft facility at Livingston which makes
air-conditioners and employs 200 people. In November the Singapore
electronics manufacturer PCI announced it would open a plant in East
Kilbride that would eventually employ 300 people.
At the beginning of this month, ICC, a Chicago-based company which
manufactures portable battery chargers, said it would set up a plant in East
Kilbride, creating 400 jobs over the next three years. It will be a major
supplier of, among others, Motorola's big mobile telephone plant at Easter
Inch.
And so it goes on. Setbacks, such as the departure from East Kilbride last
year of AST Computers, are absorbed. The fact that Compaq decided to
establish a new surface mount technology assembly line at Erskine, instead
of locating it in Singapore, is justifiably highlighted, as is a further
Pounds 93m investment by Roche in its Dalry, Ayrshire pharmaceuticals plant.
According to Mr Crawford, the US economy, growing at 5 per cent a year,
continues to be a good source of new FDI projects. Japan, on the other hand,
is yielding little. Taiwan and Singapore, he thinks, are more likely to
produce joint ventures and licensing arrangements with Scottish companies
rather than FDI projects, though he hopes to win a Taiwanese project later
this year.
'I don't think the emphasis on jobs as a measure of success is sustainable
in the long term,' he says, while acknowledging that as a yardstick it has
attractions for politicians. 'In an era of jobless growth we've got to find
some new way of measuring what foreign companies contribute to the economy.'
To try to extract more value from the foreign businesses already operating
in Scotland (there are between 400 and 500 of them) Locate in Scotland is
establishing a post for an official to strengthen contact with them and see
what extra opportunities they offer. It is also appointing a staff person to
Taiwan.
Although the threat of competition for FDI from eastern Europe is often
flagged up, Scotland has yet to feel its effects strongly. 'Eastern Europe
has not become massively competitive so far,' says Mr Crawford, 'but it will
develop. Most of the foreign money that's gone in there has been used to buy
up privatised businesses rather put up new plants,' he says.
Scotland has the advantages for investors of a good infrastructure (although
the Monitor report found some significant faults), government grants (though
not as good as those on offer in Ireland), duty-free access to the EU market
and the English language.
While Scotland is also winning investments from companies in other parts of
Britain, the flow of businesses relocating to Scotland is not as strong as
it was in the late 1980s, when Glasgow had a plausible hope of being able to
lure company headquarters to the city (it never succeeded). Now Glasgow
should get the army's new centralised personnel centre as part of the
government's relocation scheme.
In a well-publicised manoeuvre, the Department of Trade and Industry
transferred 60 engineers and geologists in the Petroleum Engineering
Division, which approves oilfield developments, from London to Aberdeen. As
part of a decentralisation trend, Conoco, the US oil company, is making
Aberdeen its UK headquarters, moving staff from London.
A possible threat to the winning of FDI is posed by the winding up, now
under way, of Scotland's new towns, where most inward investors want to go.
Scottish Enterprise has moved to acquire new town factory sites which could
be attractive to potential inward investors, with the government allocating
about Pounds 10m for that this year.
