FT  08 OCT 94 / Parachutists on a mission: Richard Waters on moves to
improve profitability at US investment bank Kidder Peabody
Who would buy an investment bank with a tattered reputation, bloat-ed costs,
an over-inflated balance sheet and a trunk-load of esoteric securities that
few people understand?
That is the question posed by other banks in response to General Electric's
thinly veiled desire to jettison Kidder Peabody, its troubled New York
investment bank.
On Thursday, the US industrial group took action to make Kidder a bit more
saleable. Six months after it was rocked by an alleged multi-million dollar
fraud (Kidder claimed its head government bond trader, Joseph Jett, had
created fictitious profits of Dollars 350m), the bank is undergoing an
overhaul. The result will be a smaller and - GE hopes - more profitable
bank.
The overhaul is being conducted by two GE executives parachuted into Kidder
in June to salvage its reputation: Mr Dennis Dammerman, GE's own chief
financial officer, and Mr Denis Nayden, a leading executive from GE Capital,
its financial services arm.
For Jack Welch, GE's chairman and chief executive, the changes at Kidder
come not a moment too soon. Having paid Dollars 600m for an initial 80 per
cent stake of Kidder in 1986 and pumped in another Dollars 800m in extra
capital since then, Welch's judgment has met with increasing criticism.
Kidder's new bosses are attacking the problems at the bank on four fronts.
First, they plan to shrink the bank's balance sheet. Under Mr Michael
Carpenter, the chairman ousted in June as a result of the Jett scandal,
Kidder had expanded its holdings of securities, pushing its total assets to
Dollars 106bn (Pounds 67bn) at the end of March. The bank had only about
Dollars 750m of capital to support these assets (the capital acts as a
cushion to absorb any losses).
While bond prices were rising around the world in the early 1990s, Kidder's
vast securities holdings generated profits. The bank could underwrite an
issue of new bonds, and hold the securities on its balance sheet for several
weeks or even months as it slowly sold them on to investors. The downturn in
bond prices since last October, though, put an end to the easy money days
for Kidder, as for the rest of Wall Street.
Piling assets on a small capital base produced high leverage, or gearing,
which increased market fears in recent months about the bank's financial
stability. Other big Wall Street firms have about Dollars 1bn of capital for
every Dollars 30bn-Dollars 35bn of assets they hold, says Mr Michael
Flanagan, a securities industry analyst at Lipper Analytical, the financial
research firm.
Since March, Kidder has shrunk its assets to Dollars 80bn. This week, it
said it aimed to bring the level down to Dollars 50bn-Dollars 60bn by the
end of this year.
More seems likely to follow. Mr Dammerman has said that he wants to bring
Kidder's balance sheet leverage into line with other Wall Street houses. To
achieve this means shedding assets unless he can persuade GE to pump in more
capital (which is unlikely, as GE has already injected Dollars 200m this
year).
The new Kidder bosses' second line of attack is to transfer Dollars 6.7bn of
esoteric securities, known as Collateralised Mortgage Obligations (CMOs), to
an affiliate of GE Capital. Mortgage-backed bonds, and the derivative-type
CMOs that can be created from them, have been the source of a large part of
Kidder's profits in recent years. However, the rise in US interest rates
this year - and the corresponding fall in bond prices - has hit the CMO
business particularly hard: buyers for the highly-structured securities have
vanished, making many of them hard to sell or to value.
Kidder has already sold off about Dollars 10bn of CMOs since March.
Shuffling the rest to GE Capital should remove a big question mark over the
bank and relieve pressure on its balance sheet.
The third move by Dammerman and Nayden is to take an axe to Kidder's costs
in an attempt to bring it back into profit - the bank is thought to have
lost Dollars 85m in the three months to the end of September. Among other
things, the disappearance of Dollars 350m of profits after the Jett fiasco
revealed that Kidder's real profits were lower during Wall Street's good
years than had appeared at the time.
The immediate target is to shed 10 per cent of Kidder's 5,500 staff and
reduce costs by Dollars 100m a year. The bank has said it will narrow the
scope of its investment banking activities to a handful of industries. It is
also expected to retreat from a number of business areas, such as some parts
of its derivatives trading and foreign exchange activities.
Fourth, the new management has indicated that it could sell those parts of
Kidder for which buyers can easily be found. The bank's 1,250-strong force
of retail brokers, for instance, is considered an attractive catch by
several rival broking houses. With average annual commissions said by the
bank to be Dollars 425,000, Kidder's brokers are more productive than those
at houses such as PaineWebber, which is contemplating an acquisition.
Kidder's fund management business is also considered a candidate for early
disposal.
Dammerman, meanwhile, has remained vague about whether what remains of
Kidder would eventually be sold. Announcing the staff cuts this week, GE's
chief financial officer acknowledged that outsiders would interpret such
measures as an attempt to spruce up the bank for sale. That was not the
immediate purpose, he added: rather, it was to put the bank into order.
What is undoubtedly true is that it will be a lot easier to sell what
remains of Kidder once it has been slimmed down and refocused. GE will soon
have the option of getting out of its disastrous excursion into Wall Street.
