FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (6): A cold wind that blows no good - The
climate for export credit has worsened, writes Alice Rawsthorn. France's
small and medium-size companies are the principal sufferers / Bank watch /
France
For the past year or so, as the French economy has sunk into recession, one
of the hottest topics on France's corporate agenda has been the
deterioration in relations between companies, particularly small businesses,
and their banks.
Small and medium-sized companies (SMEs) have so far borne the brunt of the
French recession. As the economic pressure has mounted, complaints about
banks being too slow and too unsympathetic in their response to companies'
cashflow problems and other financial hiccoughs have become commonplace.
The chief problems are, predictably, that the banks are, or so companies
claim, too cautious about advancing credit to tide them over difficult
periods and too quick to pull the plug when things go wrong. But
unfortunately for France's exporters the chilly economic climate has also
prompted the banks to cut back in the field of export credit guarantee
products such as short term and medium term contract insurance.
'The situation has not reached a critical stage,' said the Conseil National
du Patronat Francais, or Patronat, which is the mouthpiece for French
industry.
'But there has been a noticeable decline in the amount of funds that the
banks are willing to commit to export credit guarantee products and it has
already caused difficulties for some French companies.'
Small businesses are, yet again, the main victims of the squeeze in the
export credit guarantee market. The French government's official export
credit guarantees are distributed through Coface, the state-controlled
export credit agency. However the Coface system is extremely bureaucratic
and, in practice, most of its customers tend to be large companies. Smaller
concerns often do not have the time, or the resources, to cope and are
forced to turn to the private sector, generally to their own banks, to find
alternative products.
Until the late 1980s the market for such products was dominated by Banque
Francaise de Commerce Exterieur (BFCE), the specialist commercial bank now
owned by a group of French financial institutions including Assurances
Generales de France (AGF), the insurance concern, and Credit Lyonnais, the
banking group.
The market was liberalised in 1989 thereby enabling other banks to offer
export credit guarantee-related products and services. Credit Lyonnais
itself is now a sizeable presence in the sector together with Banque
Nationale de Paris (BNP), Societe Generale, Banque Indosuez, Compagnie
Financiere de CIC et de l'Union Europeenne, Banque Paribas and Credit
Commercial de France. The Association Francaise des Banques (AFB) estimates
that these banks, together with BFCE, now account for 86 per cent of the
market.
The Patronat has detected little evidence among its members of complaints
about the quality of the export credit guarantee products supplied by French
banks. 'The regulations for most aspects of such services are now more or
less harmonised across Europe,' said an official. 'And France, like every
other country, complies with the rules.'
Instead the problems seem to be restricted to the banks' willingness to
commit funds to such products. This 'supply problem' has, according to the
Patronat, intensified over the past two years as the banks have felt the
strain of the French economic slowdown.
France's banks have undoubtedly had a tough time in the early 1990s. The
combination of relatively high commercial lending rates and low inflation
has left French real interest rates among the lowest in Europe thereby
depressing demand for credit both from consumers and the corporate sector.
At the same time the banks have had to make steep provisions for sour loans
and on the reduced value of their property portfolios.
The most exposed banks, notably Credit Lyonnais which had embarked on a
frenetic expansion programme on the brink of the recession, have also been
forced to make painful provisions on big corporate collapses.
This tough trading climate has made the banks much more cautious about their
dealings with their clients in almost every area of activity.
However, they have become particularly cautious in the parts of their
business that they have traditionally found to be less profitable, notably
in the sphere of export credit guarantee products.
The profitability issue had already emerged as a problem even before the
economic recession. But it has loomed even larger as the general pressures
on the banks have escalated. Local chambers of commerce and small business
associations, as well as the Patronat, claim that it is becoming
increasingly difficult for their members to secure financial protection for
export orders.
The problem has been magnified in the wake of the French franc's volatility
during the European currency crises in autumn 1992 and summer 1993 which
served as a stern lesson to France's exporters as to just how vulnerable
they could be to sudden swings in exchange rates and as to the value of
currency risk cover.
'We recognise that even after the recession ends there will still be a
problem with the poor profitability of export credit guarantee products,'
said the Patronat. 'It's a complicated issue but we've got to find a long
term solution. At some stage we're all going to have to sit round the table
and talk.'
