FT  27 SEP 94 / US lifts sanctions against Haiti: Clinton sets out
commitment to helping nations end repression
The US yesterday announced the lifting of all its unilateral economic
sanctions against Haiti, except those targeting the Haitian military junta
and its supporters.
In a speech to the United Nations General Assembly, President Bill Clinton
said the US would act as quickly as it could, within the framework of the
UN-ordered embargo, to restore water and power to Haiti.
Leaders scheduled to address the session included Mr Boris Yeltsin of
Russia, who was reported to have brought a new nuclear disarmament proposal
with him to the UN.
Mr Clinton said the US had 'no desire to be the world's policeman, but we
will do what we can to help civil societies emerge from repression'.
Acknowledging reluctance both in the US and elsewhere to get involved in the
world's trouble spots, Mr Clinton said that nevertheless great progress had
been made towards peace in areas such as South Africa, the Middle East and
Northern Ireland.
Speaking as Mr Gerry Adams, the leader of Sinn Fein, continued his speaking
tour of the US, Mr Clinton claimed some of the credit for advancing the
'earnest search by the people of Northern Ireland and Great Britain and
Ireland to end centuries of division and decades of terror'.
The UN Security Council resolution which imposed general sanctions on Haiti
does not provide for their removal until General Raoul Cedras and the
military leaders who ousted President Jean-Bertrand Aristide in 1991 have
left power.
That may not be until October 15, under the terms of the agreement that
averted an invasion but led to the current military occupation by the US.
But Mr Clinton urged other countries to follow in lifting unilateral
measures such as a ban on air travel.
In Haiti, he said, a combination of creative diplomacy, the influence of
economic power and the credible threat of military force had brought
success. But Haiti's people must show patience and restraint to make the
transition to a peaceful democracy.
'They have to do this for themselves,' he said.
Mr Clinton warned that the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo 'once again faces the
prospect of strangulation' by Bosnian Serbs and that the UN would have to
show a 'new resolve' to enforce resolutions to protect the city.
'UN actions in Bosnia, as those in Haiti, demonstrate that progress can be
made when a coalition backs up diplomacy with military power.'
He also announced US support for a new multilateral agreement to control the
sale and use of anti-personnel landmines, and called for the eventual
elimination of the 85m such weapons which are now believed to be scattered
in 62 countries.
The US will propose that countries reduce the proportion of landmines in
their stockpiles that do not self-destruct or deactivate themselves, and ban
exports of mines to countries which have not signed the convention on
conventional weapons.
Counting on the Americans, Page 4
US warns Moscow on complacency, Page 5
Yeltsin's link to capitalism, Page 8
Editorial Comment, Page 19
The bear's new clothes, Page 19
