FT  14 JUN 94 / Abu Nidal follower claims Lockerbie bombing
A Palestinian follower of Abu Nidal, one of the world's most wanted
terrorists, claimed in a Lebanese court yesterday he himself had caused the
bombing in 1988 of the Pan Am flight which exploded over Lockerbie,
Scotland, killing 270 people.
Mr Youssef Shabaan, 29, made the claim during his trial on charges of
assassinating a Jordanian diplomat in Beirut earlier this year. Mr Shabaan
denies this charge, but told the court: 'I personally blew up the Lockerbie
plane.' He added: 'I've told the investigating magistrate about it before,
but my confession wasn't documented. I say it again now.'
The claim would appear to cloud further the already murky Lockerbie saga,
with which various countries and organisations have at one time or another
been associated. These include Libya, Iran, Syria and a Damascus-based
Palestinian group led by Mr Ahmed Djibril.
The focus of official US and British investigations into the bombing remains
fixed on Libya, where sanctions have been applied since 1992 for Tripoli's
refusal to hand over for trial in Scotland or the US, two security agents
blamed for bombing flight 103. Nevertheless, a British foreign office
spokesman said Mr Shabaan's apparent confession would be investigated.
Previous research has tended to distance Abu Nidal's group from the
Lockerbie bombing. In his 1992 book Abu Nidal: A Gun for Hire, author Mr
Patrick Seale says the 'world's most notorious Arab terrorist', whose real
name is Sabri el-Banna, had 'no connection' with the Lockerbie bombing. But
he nevertheless cites one of Abu Nidal's associates as quoting the guerrilla
leader saying: 'We do have some involvement in this matter, but if anyone so
much as mentions it, I will kill him with my own hands.'
However, Mr Seale records Abu Nidal's 'more outrageous lies' as including
improbable claims to have caused the Brighton bombing in 1984 and the fire
at Bradford City football ground in 1985 in which scores of fans died.
Abu Nidal's Fatah Revolutionary Council split from the Palestine Liberation
Organisation's mainstream Fatah wing in 1973 and is believed to have been
behind scores of terrorist acts in the 1970s and 1980s, including an
assassination attempt on Israel's ambassador to the UK in 1982 and the
slaughter of 16 people in a shooting at Rome airport in 1985. He is wanted
in at least 20 countries.
Abu Nidal's whereabouts are also a puzzle. He is believed to have left
Damascus for Tripoli in 1986, has been linked with Iraq, but the US state
department last year cited reports that his group had found sanctuary in
Sudan. Just five days ago Colonel Muammer Gadaffi, Libya's leader, claimed
he thought Abu Nidal had died. Quoted by the state news agency, Col Gadaffi
said: 'I believe he is not alive because I have appealed to him (to visit)
and he didn't come.'
Mr Samir Geagea, leader of the Lebanese Forces militia during the country's
17-year civil war, was yesterday charged with involvement in the February
bombing of a Beirut church in which 11 people were killed while at prayer.
Mr Geagea's deputy, Mr Fouad Malek, and six other members of the LF were
also indicted by a Lebanese prosecutor who has been investigating the
bombing. All the accused face a possible death penalty if convicted.
The indictment claims that one of the accused had direct contact with an
Israeli intelligence officer before the bombing.
