FT  21 JUN 94 / Labour calls for new procedure on complex bills
Labour is pressing the government to remove the technical aspects of Budget
legislation from the finance bill as part of an overhaul of parliament's
antiquated legislative procedures.
The proposal, put forward in talks with Mr Tony Newton, the leader of the
house, would split the finance bill, which implements the budget, into two
parts.
The main bill, dealing with the principle of changes in the level and scope
of taxation, would be debated by MPs on the floor of the Commons in the
traditional way.
The technical aspects of proposed changes would be tabled in a taxes
management bill, which would be debated by a committee with powers to take
evidence from experts.
This split could also be used with the technical aspects of other complex
bills such as legal reforms, housing and local government measures and
privatisation proposals.
The proposal has emerged as one of the main prospects for changes in
parliamentary procedure in talks between Mr Newton and Mr Nick Brown, the
shadow leader of the house.
Mr Newton, who has not yet accepted Labour's proposals for technical bills,
has argued for a system of formal timetabling of all legislation, which
would rule out any delaying action by the opposition.
Labour remains implacably opposed to formal timetabling, but has indicated
that it might accept more discussion between the two front benches on the
approximate amount of time needed for bills to pass through the Commons.
Both parties want to reach agreement quickly on implementing parts of a 1992
report on parliamentary procedure produced by a select committee chaired by
Mr Michael Jopling, a former Tory chief whip.
The Jopling report's main recommendations included sitting in the morning
one day a week, completing business by 10pm on most nights, and ending the
system of carrying sick MPs through the division lobbies for critical votes.
Mr Jopling claimed in the Commons yesterday that agreement was being held up
by traditionalists in the Labour whips' office who fear procedural changes
would weaken the opposition's ability to force government concessions by
delaying bills.
Labour has also indicated some sympathy for separate proposals put forward
by Mr John Major to reform the twice-weekly prime minister's question time
by allowing MPs to table topical questions 24 hours in advance.
