FT  27 JAN 94 / FT Exporter (16): When expertise is no luxury - Krystyna
Krzyzak writes that countertrading is a costly as well as complicated
activity. The services of specialist consultants are in regular demand, and
they can be choosy about the deals they handle / Countertrade focus / How to
find a consultant
Countertrading can be an extremely costly undertaking, absorbing anything up
to 30 per cent of the value of the original export order. On top of that,
many of the large specialists, including banks, would find the size of a
countertrade deal proposed by a small or medium sized enterprise (SME) too
small to contemplate.
Third party specialists can also be choosy. One consultant says that he
charged a daily fee of Dollars 500-Dollars 600, which most SMEs would find
prohibitive. Finding a specialist can thus be almost as frustrating as
completing the export order.
The role of the outside specialist in countertrade transactions varies. It
can, for instance, involve bringing a consultant to help negotiate the
countertrade component of an export contract. Alternatively, the specialist
may be responsible for assembling the entire arrangement or, more
specifically, organising the sale of the countertraded product.
Locating or providing financing to make countertrade arrangements work are
other key functions. The UK clearing banks were more helpful providers of
countertrade services in the 1980s, the heyday of countertrade, when every
leading financial institution had its dedicated unit.
Now many have scaled down their operations and will only arrange a deal if
it is large enough. The banks may, however, for a finder's fee, put the
company in touch with a suitable trading company that can handle the goods
or commodities on offer. Ministries and departments of trade are another
possible port of call.
The Projects and Export Policy Division at the UK's Department of Trade and
Industry publishes a booklet, Countertrade: a guide for exporters 1993/94,4
which provides an overview of countertrade techniques, lists current
countertrading policies and legislation throughout the world, including in
some cases contact names, addresses and telephone numbers of relevant
governmental bodies.
There is also a contact list of nearly 30 consultants, trading companies,
bank units and political credit risk insurance services offered in the UK.
The list is by no means comprehensive, and one company contacted denied all
knowledge of the practice, but certainly in the case of the banks the time
saved in being able to get through directly to the right person could cover
the cost of the publication.
Meanwhile, since the clearing banks reduced their operations many of their
switchboards appear to be under the impression that countertrading is part
of the accountancy department.
Canada's Department of External Affairs, Germany's Federal Association of
Wholesale and Foreign Traders, and Federal Association of German Exporters
and the US Department of Commerce have also produced similar publications.
The extent of official support given to smaller companies depends more on
the government's view of the state's role in economic planning than its
attitude towards countertrade. Both the UK and the US view countertrade as
contrary to free trading. As the DTI stresses, the department itself will
offer general information about countertrade but advises exporters to seek
professional advice.
France is more dirigiste and enthusiastic. In addition to its trade
ministry's specialised countertrade department, the Bureau des
Compensations, it established as far back as 1977 the Association pour la
Compensation des Exchanges Commerciaux (ACECO), generally regarded as one of
the world's best government-sponsored countertrade organisations. ACECO
organises seminars, provides clearing arrangements, and runs a computerised
data bank on national policies, legislation and useful contacts in French
and English.
Lists and data banks are useful up to a point, and can narrow the field down
to regional and industrial traders and advisers. Rarely to be found on lists
are highly specialised consultants who became fascinated by trading in
difficult markets and branched off on their own. They are found by word of
mouth, but the chances are they once worked for a company in the same line
of business. The countertrade round tables provide an alternative first port
of call to government departments. As the industry's network, they are in
the best position to know who, if anyone, is in a position to dispose of
unfamiliar goods or arrange trade financing for unfamiliar CIS companies -
if not both.
The London Countertrade Round Table has 40 members consisting of a
cross-section of companies using and offering countertrade services (small
manufacturing industries, trading houses, consultancies, banks, insurance
brokers, and a few multinationals). The annual membership fee is Pounds
40.00, and it can be reached via the secretary Alan Linger at Standard Bank,
London.
The London CRT meets quarterly; it is also a member of the European
Organising Committee, alongside the Munich and Eindhoven Round Tables, and
ACECO; this body also arranges meetings. International equivalents include
the Asian Pacific Round Table, their Australian and South African
counterparts, and the largest body, the American Countertrade Association,
which is organising the 1994 World Countertrade Conference in Philadelphia.
