FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of Slovakia (6): Call of the Tatras - Anthony
Robinson takes the mountain tourist trail
When Czechoslovakia divorced into its constituent Czech and Slovak parts the
Czechs ended up with two thirds of the population and most of the viable
economic assets. But Slovakia ended up with the most beautiful parts of the
former federal state which in inter-war times extended even further east
into Trans-Carpathian Ruthenia.
Slovakia's jewel, and the focal point of its tourist industry, is the High
Tatra mountains, which separates Slovakia from Poland. Its snow-covered
central massif is less than 50km. long.
Immediately after the 'velvet divorce' the High Tatras lost their habitual
aficionados, mainly Czechs and Germans. But this year tourism in general,
but especially in the High Tatras, is showing a marked recovery.
Last year, (according to official statistics which understate the
contribution from the private sector) tourism earned only Dollars 314m from
16.3m visitors, This year, 14.4m visitors entered the country in the first
nine months alone and earnings for the first six months reached Dollars
268m. In the summer, Bratislava, the capital, received a steady flow of
weekend tourists from Austria and other countries, while hotels and guest
houses in the High Tatras report full bookings for Christmas and the New
Year.
The communist regime constructed a superhighway along the base of the
Tatras, which is fine for tour coaches but bad news for walkers. The old
regime also put up ugly concrete blocks masquerading as hotels. Fortunately,
however, there are also plenty of survivors from a more civilised age, such
as the splendid Grand Hotel at Stary Smokovec, and smaller, cheaper
establishments typified by the chalet-like Hotel Panda, also at Smokovec,
which provides a warm welcome, goose for dinner and simple comfortable rooms
for Dollars 25 a night all found.
Meanwhile, walkers and wanderers can ignore the super highway by opting for
the red trams which wind their way around the contours of the mountain and
through the pine forests.
But there is more to Slovakia than the High Tatras. Bratislava, or rather
its historic centre, is small and provincial compared with the glories of
Prague. It was further spoiled by the communists who demolished a medieval
synagogue and a network of cobbled streets and old town houses to build the
bridge which connects the old town with the high rise 1970s suburb of
prefabricated 'panelak' housing called Petrzalka across the fast-flowing
Danube.
Under the Habsburgs, when it was still called Pressburg, Bratislava was a
favourite place for weekend outings by the people of Vienna upstream. Under
its honest and capable mayor, Mr Peter Kresanek, it is now looking up again.
The mayor, a Christian democrat, was re-elected with a comfortable majority
at last month's local elections.
Privatisation, and the restitution of property to former owners, has led to
a reconstruction and re-furbishing boom which has restored the elegance of
medieval, gothic and baroque churches, public buildings and the cheap and
excellent opera and national theatres. Formerly neglected streets have been
transformed and new private shops, cafes and restaurants have created a new
vitality.
A small private hotel, the Perugia, has opened near the main square and the
post-war Devin Hotel remains friendly, good value and full of central
European atmosphere. The same cannot be said for its brash neighbour on the
river front, the French-owned Danube, which charges high prices for spartan
rooms, shoddy decor and the same terrible telephones as cheaper
establishments. The Forum Intercontinental remains the smartest hotel in
town, but it too is expensive, heavy on the marble and light on charm.
Between Bratislava, at the south western tip of the country, and Kosice,
500km. east of the capital and 100km. from the Ukrainian border, lies a
string of small towns and industrial villages along the Vah valley. An
alternative route takes one through the folds of the low Tatra mountains,
actually a succession of wooded hills and occasional rocky outcrops, often
crowned with spectacular ruined castles.
Before the war the towns and villages must have been harmonious little
jewels. Their centres usually still are. But all too frequently the
communists surrounded the historic centres with uniformly ugly glass and
cement housing estates in defiance of all the rules of aesthetics or the
logic of natural contours.
Visitors to Kosice, the capital of eastern Slovakia, are often depressed by
the endless industrialised suburbs on the outskirts, only to be delighted by
the glorious gothic pile of St Elisabeth's cathedral, the restored 19th
century theatre and the strongly Hungarian-influenced architectural style of
the old city.
Kosice's churches, with services in Slovak and Hungarian, synagogues and
fine houses reflect the past ethnic complexity and cultural vitality of a
city striving to revive its past glories. One of the three synagogues is
still functioning, although plaques on the two largest recall how thousands
of Jews were rounded up and sent to their deaths when Kosice was returned to
Hungary by Hitler and the rest of Slovakia was ruled as a Nazi puppet state
headed by a renegade Catholic priest, Father Jozef Tiso.
Scattered throughout Slovakia are remnants of earlier settlements of
Swabians, Hungarians, Ukrainians, Jews, Ruthenians, Gypsies and others.
Beyond Kosice lies Ruthenia, although most of Trans-Carpathian Ruthenia was
annexed by Stalin after the war and now lies in Ukraine.
In general, the further east one goes the poorer the people, but the more
intact are the old villages and towns, like Bardejov, and many other
reminders of a rural past which was shaken up but not entirely destroyed
during the communist years.
