FT  30 JUL 94 / Lloyds up 21% at half-year but rivalry fears hit shares
Shares in Lloyds Bank fell sharply yesterday despite a 21 per cent rise in
half-year pre-tax profits to Pounds 605m. The marking down of the stock
reflects concern among investors that clearing banks are starting to compete
for business by cutting loan margins and charges.
Lloyds' results reinforced fears that banks are building up more capital
than is needed to meet slack demand for loans. Analysts said banks were
likely to start reducing charges to attract business in an overcrowded
market.
Lloyds' shares fell by 18p to 544p. Other bank shares declined. Lloyds
raised its interim dividend by 14 per cent to 7.5p, but the increase was not
as great as some analysts had predicted, given the bank's generation of
capital.
Sir Robin Ibbs, Lloyds' chairman, said the bank was confident it would
succeed with its Pounds 1.8bn agreed bid for Cheltenham &amp; Gloucester
Building Society. C&amp;G is expected to announce revised terms in mid-August
for sharing the cash among its members.
Sir Robin emphasised that the C&amp;G purchase would not be the last acquisition
considered by Lloyds. 'Just because we are moving towards a satisfactory
conclusion with C&amp;G does not mean we are pulling down the shutters,' he
said.
He said Lloyds would not impose charges on current accounts in credit,
although the decision was not a consequence of the capital build-up. 'If one
is virtuous to begin with, one does not need even more temptation to be
virtuous,' he said.
Weak loan demand and flat income from charges meant revenue grew only 5 per
cent to Pounds 1.92bn, against Pounds 1.83bn in the first half of 1993.
But the bank's trading surplus rose by 13 per cent to Pounds 713m, against
Pounds 632m, because costs were held down.
Lloyds gained from the improvement in credit quality among UK companies in
the first half of the year as the effects of the economic recovery were
felt. Its provisions for bad and doubtful debts fell to Pounds 102m,
compared with Pounds 138m.
The bank continued to gain from its decision in the 1980s to retain
non-performing debt to less developed countries.
Its debt portfolio earned it Pounds 148m, including a release of Pounds 105m
provisions due to Brazilian debt rescheduling in April.
Two problems were caused by financial market turmoil in the first half. It
lost Pounds 5m in securities trading, and sustained a Pounds 25m loss from
Banco Multiplic, a bank dealing in Brazilian government securities in which
it has a 50 per cent stake.
Sir Brian Pitman, the bank's chief executive, said it was holding on to
about 80 empty branches in the hope of getting better prices when the
property market picked up.
Sir Brian suggested that they would make good restaurants.
Future worries affect present, Page 10
London stocks, Page 15
Lex, Page 24
