FT  09 JUL 94 / Finance and the Family: The week ahead
Tomkins, the industrial conglomerate, reports annual figures on Monday which
may finally silence the critics of its Pounds 990m takeover of Ranks Hovis
McDougall in December 1992. Analysts expect the food group to have
contributed profits of around Pounds 100m despite the pressure on UK grocery
prices. For the group as a whole, forecasts range from Pounds 255m to Pounds
265m, up from Pounds 171m.
Improved margins in North America and signs of increased volumes in
continental Europe are expected on Monday to lift Low &amp; Bonar's interim
pre-tax profits for the six months to May 31 by about 22 per cent to Pounds
17.5m. The international packaging and materials group has shed non-core
businesses and shored up its mainstream activities with acquisitions such as
Cereal Packaging, the former Kellogg company.
Owners Abroad, the package holiday company, is expected on Wednesday to
announce a first-half pre-tax loss of about Pounds 35m, compared with Pounds
38.6m last time. There is nothing alarming about a first-half deficit for a
holiday company, though. More important will be the management's assessment
of the summer market and the prospects of a price war.
HP Bulmer, the Hereford-based cider-maker which is withdrawing from the soft
drinks market, is expected to report operating profits rising from Pounds
19.6m to Pounds 21.5m on Wednesday. But the pre-tax profits are likely to be
around Pounds 4m following exceptional charges for re-structuring.
Cray Electronics Holdings, the data communications and software systems
group, is expected on Wednesday to report annual pre-tax profits of Pounds
25.5m. This compares with Pounds 29m in 1992-93 when exceptional items
included Pounds 12.6m from selling Malvern Instruments.
Great Universal Stores, the mail-order, retail, financial services and
property group, which last year enfranchised its shareholders, is expected
to report a 46th year of uninterrupted growth on Thursday. Pre-tax profits
are forecast at Pounds 510m for the year to end-March, ahead from Pounds
475m.
The Rank Organisation, which announces first-half results on Thursday, is
expected to reveal profits before exceptional charges of between Pounds 111m
and Pounds 115m. The exceptional charges of Pounds 112m relate to US video
distribution closure costs and Rank's share of the re-structuring of Rank
Xerox.
