FT  28 MAY 94 / Skiing round the world: Guiltless in Seattle - Arnie Wilson
is searched for drugs
Arnie Wilson and Lucy Dicker are trying to ski every day of 1994 on a
round-the-world expedition. They skied in America and Europe before moving
to the Himalayas and Japan. This week they returned to the US.
We have been body-searched - with disturbing thoroughness - for drugs. When
we arrived in Seattle on a section of our expedition that has taken us round
the world in 23 days (Geneva-Delhi-Tokyo-Seattle-Chicago-Los Angeles)
sniffer dogs took too much interest in us for comfort and we were 'selected
for a search'.
The only irregular item in our luggage was a sealed Japanese legume which we
had purchased in a box aboard a bullet train thinking it was some exotic
version of sushi.
But the dogs had apparently picked up a whiff of narcotics.
Having failed to find anything incriminating in our luggage, immigration
officers marched Lucy and me into separate cubicles and carried out an
intimate search.
They found nothing, of course. We can only put it down to Manali, our
Himalayan base, where growing and smoking of cannabis is rife.
In Japan, the violent rain storms at the summer ski area of Gassan in the
Yamagata Prefecture blew themselves out, to be replaced by bright sunshine.
At last we could see where we were skiing: quite a substantial mountain with
a vertical drop in summer of 1,500ft (much more in winter, but then there is
too much snow for the resort to open).
Four of the five lifts were rope tows, two of which involved clipping on
detachable steel grips: a tricky business. The fifth, to our relief, was a
conventional chairlift, enabling us to ski more than 20 miles in six hours -
more than we had managed in the previous six days.
Our hosts at the Pension Yu-Yu-Sha in Goryu Toomi (close to Happo One, where
part of the 1998 Winter Olympics will be held) and at the Gassan Resort Inn,
were a delight, and served us such delicious food that we did not want to
leave our chopsticks when we flew to the Californian ski resort of Mammoth
in the spectacular High Sierras. As it turned out, a Japanese dinner was on
the American Airlines menu.
