FT  24 OCT 94 / International Company News: Price rises boost earnings at US
steel companies
A series of price increases this year has boosted earnings at US steel
companies faster than expected, and is likely to be followed by further
price increases throughout 1995.
Nucor, the US's biggest mini-mill, and LTV, an integrated steel producer
which emerged from bankruptcy protection a year ago, each surpassed market
forecasts with third-quarter profits. The US's biggest steel producers, US
Steel and Bethlehem Steel, are among those due to report results this week.
The improved results come in the wake of three rounds of price rises pushed
through by most makers of flat-rolled steel products in the US so far this
year. More increases are expected early in 1995.
Next year's increases are reflected in the current 'spot' price for steel,
which has risen by 20 per cent this year, said Mr John Jacobson, a steel
analyst at Wefa, an economic consulting group. 'That will be translated into
the bottom line next year' as steel makers renegotiate contracts with their
biggest customers, he said.
In the three months to the end of September, Nucor's sales rose 34 per cent
from a year before, to Dollars 786m, as the company benefited from increased
capacity. LTV's sales rose 8 per cent, to Dollars 1.05bn, on a 4 per cent
increase in volume.
Steel imports into the US have jumped this year as domestic makers have hit
capacity constraints. In the first eight months, imports accounted for 24.2
per cent of total US sales, up from 17 per cent in the same period in 1993.
In an apparent attempt to ease the pressure for further price rises, General
Motors last week reached agreement to buy steel from Kawasaki Steel - the
first time it has bought Japanese steel for more than 20 years. However, the
small size of the deal made it 'largely symbolic,' with little influence on
prices, said Mr Jacobson.
Nucor, which makes steel from scrap in electric furnaces, reported earnings
per share in the third quarter of 74 cents, against market expectations of
around 62 cents. Its after-tax profits were 85 per cent up on a year before,
at Dollars 64.5m.
LTV, meanwhile, achieved earnings per share of 35 cents, some 3 cents higher
than expected. Its net income was Dollars 34.1m, compared with only Dollars
400,000 a year ago.
