FT  15 JAN 94 / Markets: Just one stop for unit trust investors - Serious
Money
Weekend FT readers know that this newspaper welcomes any efforts to make
life simpler for investors and to reduce the costs of financial services
products.
This week, Fidelity Brokerage, part of Fidelity Investments, the large US
fund management group, launched a new service which should make buying and
selling unit trusts easier and, in many cases, cheaper too.
Funds MarketPlace is a brokerage service through which you can buy any of
the 1,400 or so UK-based unit trusts. This is a 'one-stop' dealing account
particularly suited to those who want to buy unit trusts from different fund
management groups.
Most private investors buy unit trusts either through a financial adviser or
directly from each company. Fidelity, which provides a single account
service in the US, has spotted a gap in the UK market for a similar product.
So how will it work?
You open a Funds MarketPlace Account with Fidelity and use a 0800 number for
dealing. Fidelity handles the settlement, dividends and reporting and will
send you a portfolio statement every six months.
The units are held in a designated nominee account. They can be in your own
name but the disadvantage is that Fidelity will then charge commission on
sales, even though unit trusts do not normally impose a selling charge.
There is no selling charge for units held in a designated nominee account.
How much does Fidelity charge for this service? The cost of buying a unit
trust is reflected in its initial charge, which is usually about 5.25 per
cent, and includes the commission which the fund managers pay to
intermediaries for selling the trust - the industry norm is 3 per cent.
Since Fidelity is acting as an intermediary, it will receive the 3 per cent
commission in any case and therefore does not need to make an extra charge
on the investor.
What about unit trusts with low initial charges? Murray Johnstone and Lazard
have cut their initial charges while others, such as Fidelity, M &amp; G,
Gartmore and Cazenove, have lowered the initial charge on some or all of
their unit trust personal equity plans. However, since most of the companies
sell the bulk of their unit trusts through financial advisers, they are
continuing to pay intermediaries 3 per cent.
A handful of equity funds pay less than 3 per cent commission. Murray
Johnstone only pays 1 per cent commission to intermediaries on its range of
unit trusts; currency and bond funds pay little or no commission. Fidelity
says that in these cases it will charge the investor its usual commission
rates. It admits that it will be cheaper for the investor to buy these funds
directly but hopes that the convenience of its one-stop service will
outweigh the charge.
Fidelity will give discounts off the initial charge to those making large
purchases. Although reduced brokerage rates are common for large unit trust
transactions, the deals usually have to be well over the Pounds 5,000
starting rate which Fidelity is proposing.
The discounts are on a sliding scale. There is a reduction of 1 per cent for
purchases of Pounds 5,000-Pounds 10,000, 1.5 per cent for Pounds
10,001-Pounds 20,000, 2 per cent for Pounds 20,001-Pounds 40,000, 2.5 per
cent for Pounds 40,001-Pounds 100,000 and 3 per cent on deals of Pounds
100,001 and above. However, for trusts with an initial charge of between 3
to 5.25 per cent, Fidelity will reduce the discounts so that the scale will
be between 0.5 per cent to 2.5 per cent. There will be no discounts for unit
trusts which pay less than the 3 per cent commission.
The other point to note is that since Fidelity is an 'execution-only'
broker, you do not receive any investment advice although you can use the
0800 number to ask for basic information such as the performance history of
the trust, the name of its manager and the date the fund was launched.
Only 4 per cent of UK households own unit trusts (compared to 25 per cent in
the US) but Fidelity believes the market will continue to expand strongly
against the background of lower interest rates. 1993 was the best year ever
for collective funds raising new money and Fidelity thinks that an
increasing proportion of that market will be buying funds on an
execution-only basis.
Certainly, this has been the pattern with retail equity deals. In 1987-88,
only 5 to 6 per cent of sales and purchases of individual stocks and shares
in the retail market were done on an execution-only basis but that has now
risen to about 30-33 per cent.
Although only 8 per cent of retail unit trust sales were bought directly
last year, Fidelity is predicting that this will grow to 20-25 per cent of
the market in the next 2-3 years.
Choosing a unit trust without taking financial advice is not a good idea
unless you know what you are doing. Even if you have run through the
arguments and have decided that a unit, rather than investment, trust is for
you, choosing between the wide variety of regions and different types of
funds is not easy. Moreover, performance figures may not be readily
available but in the article on page III, we list some of the ways of
finding out.
Active investors dabbling in large sums are the ones most likely to find
Funds MarketPlace, and similar products which may be spawned in its wake,
worthwhile.
