FT  06 DEC 94 / Court drops diamond price-fixing case against GE
The US price-fixing case brought against General Electric over its
industrial diamonds business collapsed yesterday as a judge ruled that the
company had no case to answer.
The abrupt end to the trial, which began five weeks ago, marks a severe blow
for the US Justice Department. It had accused GE, the US industrial
conglomerate, of conspiring with De Beers, the South African group, to fix
the price of diamonds in 1991 and 1992.
The case followed a two-year Justice Department anti-trust investigation
into GE and De Beers, which together control more than 80 per cent of the
world's industrial diamond output. Under the Clinton administration, the
department launched a stream of anti-trust inquiries, from computer software
to car rentals.
Yesterday, Judge George Smith, who was hearing the case in federal court in
the southern district of Ohio, accepted a GE motion to dismiss the Justice
Department's charges.
The motion was filed after the US authorities had completed their case
against GE, but before the company had begun its own detailed defence.
The judge's decision to reject the case turned on the role played by Mr
Philippe Liotier, the head of a diamond tool-making company owned by Societe
Generale de Belgique and a customer of both GE and De Beers.
The Justice Department had alleged that Mr Liotier passed on to GE
information about De Beer's plans to raise its diamond prices. Mr Liotier
was on the board of Sibeka, a company whose marketing was controlled by De
Beers.
Commenting on his decision to dismiss the case, Judge Smith said: 'Proving
that Liotier was acting on De Beer's behalf was a crucial link in the
government's case. It is a link the government failed to establish, despite
Herculean efforts, even under the relatively low hurdle of the sufficiency
of the evidence standard.'
The judge went on to say that the Justice Department had not managed to
prove that the link existed, 'even when the evidence is viewed in the light
most favourable to the government'.
