FT  02 SEP 94 / Waiting for the workers' harvest: a look at attempts to
update UK trade unions
Trade unionism in Britain is like a pruned back plant poised for a new burst
of growth.' The 1,000 delegates assembling this weekend in Blackpool for the
126th gathering of the Trades Union Congress may draw comfort from the words
of Mr John Monks, TUC general-secretary. But could the TUC's modernising
leader just be whistling to keep their - and his - spirits up?
The immediate outlook for trade unionism, as he himself acknowledges, is not
good. Membership has continued to decline, by 400,000 to 7.2m, over the past
year despite the fact that unemployment started to fall. Long-term trends
contributing to the decline of unions and collective bargaining - the shift
from manufacturing to services and the shrinking size of the average
workplace - persist.
Nevertheless, TUC delegates can find some reasons for feeling cheerful. The
arrival of Mr Monks, who only took over from the unappealing Mr Norman
Willis last year, has almost certainly improved the public standing of the
TUC and unions in general.
He has reorganised the TUC to give it a sharper focus; attempts to
reposition it as a non-party political lobbying organisation for all
employees are begining to take effect. The arrival of Mr Michael Portillo as
employment secretary may reduce the scope for dialogue with the government.
But Mr Monks can develop further his friendly relationship with the
Confederation of British Industry and later this month he will be the first
TUC general secretary to address meetings at the Liberal Democrat and
Conservative conferences.
Best of all for the unions as a whole, the biggest challenge they faced for
years has been surmounted with relative ease. Recent legislation has
required them to obtain positive consent from members before employers can
'check off' union subscriptions from pay packets, in effect requiring unions
to re-recruit the 80 per cent of members who pay union fees this way.
Overall, TUC-affiliated union membership may shrink by about 500,000 as a
result.
But for the first time in 15 years, the movement can look the government in
the eye and state that its core membership is real and voluntary.
But in spite of Mr Monks's personal achievements, his attempts to modernise
the union movement may be insufficient to stem long-term decline. In
addition his reforms face opposition from within union ranks.
Some of the more conservative union bosses have not grasped that
European-style social partnership - which the TUC leadership regards as
providing a new lease of life for the movement - requires changes from them
too. There could be rows at the Congress on the policy of supporting
workplace rights for all workers, rather than just union members, and on the
shift to a less politically partisan stance.
Mr Monks's modernisation strategy has few reliable allies in the big unions,
while the TUC's two biggest affiliates - Unison, the public service union,
and the TGWU general union - remain consumed by splits between different
internal factions.
Further, some old fashioned problems could be looming. Several unions are
facing financial difficulties, none more than the heavily-indebted building
union Ucatt. Mr John Edmonds, leader of the GMB general union, says the
fortunes of the unions no longer rise and fall together and that it is now a
question of the 'survival of the fittest'.
Another echo of the past could be a revival of strike action. Mr Jimmy
Knapp, chairman of this year's Congress and leader of the embattled RMT rail
union, is enjoying strong public backing for his striking signal workers.
But the relative popularity of unions may be because strikes are so rare. A
renewed bout of militancy over wages, often predicted in the course of the
recovery, could undermine the support unions have begun to enjoy. So, too,
could possible large-scale disputes over compulsory redundancies at British
Telecommunications or British Gas, which could cause much disruption for the
public.
Worst of all for the future of the unions, there is no sign at the workplace
that employees are turning to them for support in the face of increased
labour market insecurity.
Unions are failing to improve their record in the recruitment of women or
part-time workers. Only 21 per cent of part-timers are in unions compared
with 37 per cent of full-timers, while the proportion of women workers in
unions fell last year to 30 per cent.
There is also no evidence that employees who are not covered by collective
bargaining agreements are starting to join unions as an insurance policy,
for legal help and advice on subjects such as pensions.
Despite these obstacles to renewal the unions are not completely helpless.
They can look to two outside sources for help - the European Union and the
Labour party.
The EU is already passing union-friendly legislation in areas from health
and safety to works councils for consulting workers. And although the EU's
social dimension is not expected to produce much new legislation for a few
years, there is still plenty in the pipeline for organised labour to welcome
 -despite the UK's opt-out from the social chapter.
But for an actual increase in union membership, or even for an end to
persistent decline, a Labour victory at the next general election is a
necessity. Mr Tony Blair, the Labour leader has talked about treating unions
as just another pressure group. He will be anxious not to play into the
hands of a Conservative party which will point to the apparent tension
between Labour's commitment to full employment and its union-inspired
policies on minimum wages and workers' rights. But a new right to represent
workers, stopping short of full union recognition, is certain to appear in
Labour's manifesto. 'That would open the door for us to show that we can
help workers in difficulty,' says Mr Edmonds.
UK trade unionism may be a pruned-back plant but it is still waiting for
fertilisation from outside.
