FT  25 FEB 94 / Leading Article: Over to LegCo
Mr Chris Patten, the governor of Hong Kong, will today publish the second
and more controversial of his two electoral reform bills. China has not
availed itself of the chance for further discussion offered by Mr Patten's
decision to delay this bill, while going ahead with the supposedly
'straightforward' items in a separate bill which was passed by the
Legislative Council (LegCo) on Thursday. Mr Patten could not delay any
longer if arrangements are to be in place for next year's election.
He has not chosen to incorporate into the bill any of the concessions which
the UK offered during eight months of fruitless negotiations with China last
year. These concessions were not popular with the pro-democracy block, which
comprises most of the directly elected members of LegCo, and without whose
support the bill would certainly not pass. But, by publishing a detailed
record of the negotiations in a white paper yesterday, the British
government has dropped a broad hint to centrist members of LegCo about the
sort of amendments it could live with. Mr Patten's advisers reckon the
pro-democracy group is more likely to vote for the bill after it has been
amended in LegCo than if the concessions are presented as British government
policy.
Outsiders may well wonder what is the point of this parliamentary gavotte,
when China is serving notice that it will ignore the result and dissolve the
offending LegCo as soon as Beijing assumes sovereignty in 1997. It seems
quixotic for Britain, after conceding so much, to be jeopardising its
relations with the world's most populous country and fastest-growing economy
for the sake of a few extra seats in an assembly which will only last two
years.
With hindsight, it seems naive of Mr Patten to have imagined that he could
persuade China, by a public demonstration, to accept more than it would in
private talks. We shall never know whether, if he had not chosen this
method, China might have been more willing to accept the 'through train'
arrangement giving LegCo members elected in 1995 security of tenure until
1999.
Yet if he had not set out his proposals in public he would certainly have
been criticised, both in Hong Kong and in the UK, for not even attempting to
set up a representative legislature before handing the colony over to
Chinese rule. Wednesday's vote on his first bill, when he actually had a
majority larger than the one that backed his original proposals, and
including almost all the directly elected members, suggests that support for
what he is trying to do persists among the general population, although this
is not true of the business community. At least this way he is giving Hong
Kong people the chance to experience two years of relative democracy, if
they so choose, and to leave China's rulers with the responsibility of
dismantling it in full view of the world, if they so choose.
