FT  09 DEC 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Concerns linger over seabed
settlement - Doubts about the effectiveness of a new UN authority
Behind the back-slapping and mutual congratulations on a job well done, some
long-standing concerns lingered after last month's inaugural meeting of the
International Seabed Authority.
Uncertainty remains about how well the new United Nations agency, which will
monitor the exploitation of the mineral wealth of the international seabed,
will implement the Law of the Sea Convention, the broad treaty which took 12
years of contentious negotiation before it could be kneaded into a shape
digestible to all UN members.
Despite this, there is consensus that the treaty, and the establishment of
the ISA, was no mean achievement.
The prevailing sentiment was captured at the inauguration by Mr Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, the UN secretary general. 'The convention is a repudiation of
the pursuit of progress through a competition for spoils,' he said. 'It is a
rejection of the notion that economic might can transcend fundamental
national rights. It is a strong disavowal of the tactics of gun-boat
development. This is a historic day.'
The creation of the Authority was made possible by changes to a section
(Part X1) of the convention, which was adopted by the UN in July. It went a
long way towards meeting the competing demands of developing and
industrialised countries about how best to share the trillions of dollars
worth of polymetallic nodules that are lying on the international seabed,
outside the economic zone of any country.
The nodules contain copper, nickel, manganese and cobalt, and a variety of
other minerals.
With the resources of the international seabed having been declared the
'common heritage of mankind' by the UN, developing countries wanted a treaty
that would guarantee that they would benefit from deep seabed mining,
despite their lacking the technology and financial resources. This 'parallel
system' for sharing concerned the governments of industrialised countries,
who argued against a government-controlled agency that would not adhere to
market principles.
The Part X1 compromise aims at resolving problems relating to the deep
seabed mining provisions of the treaty, including the costs to some
countries, the mandatory transfer of technology, production policies,
financial terms of mining contracts, and the conduct of the Enterprise, the
economic arm of the Seabed Authority.
'We still have problems with Part X1,' said Mr Joseph Warioba of Tanzania,
one of the architects of the convention. 'Some say it has killed the
parallel system, while others say it has removed obstacles so that many
states have accepted the Convention.'
The changes appear to have done neither for the US, one of the harshest
critics of the early efforts to fashion the treaty and establish the ISA.
While the convention is important for securing solutions to the problems of
the use and conservation of the oceans, said Mr Wesley Scholz, leader of the
US delegation to the ISA, there are three factors which will determine
broad-based support for the authority.
'First is the recognition of the importance of free market principles,' he
said. 'Second is the recognition that those with major economic interests
affected by the actions taken by the authority must be given a role
commensurate with those interests.
'Third is the recognition that the evolution of the International Seabed
Authority and the elaborating of the regime for commercial purposes must be
in response to the evolution of commercial interests in mining.'
Mr Scholz warned against over-regulation of seabed mining, interference in
the market, excessive fees and taxes and political interference, saying the
authority should act in a manner that would earn the confidence of potential
investors.
Delegates from several developing countries said the US position was not
new, but was surprising in the light of 'magnanimous' concessions made by
the developing countries to satisfy the concerns of industrial states.
China, which has already invested heavily in deep seabed mining, admitted
that the convention was an imperfect instrument.
The industrialised countries, which have or can develop the technology for
deep seabed mining, do not all appear as concerned as the US about the
future operations of the ISA. The European Union 'is looking forward to
co-operating fully with other members of the authority, and trying to ensure
that the system works effectively and efficiently,' said Mr Tono Eitel,
chairman of the German delegation, who spoke on behalf of the EU.
By all indications, Japan is satisfied with the agreement reached for mining
the international seabed. 'By streamlining the structure of the authority
and removing excessive regulations. . . the agreement provides an
economically sound and viable framework which will improve the climate for
investing in deep seabed mining,' said Mr Hisashi Owada, Japan's permanent
representative to the UN. 'The development of deep seabed mineral resources
is of considerable importance to Japan, whose economy relies on imports of
such metals as manganese, cobalt and nickel, which can be produced from
polymetallic nodules.'
