FT  18 NOV 94 / UK Company News: New chairman in place at Lucas
The final piece in the new corporate jigsaw of Lucas Industries, the
automotive and aerospace components and systems manufacturer, slotted into
place yesterday when Sir Brian Pearse replaced Sir Anthony Gill as chairman.
Sir Brian will oversee a flattened management structure, with six business
managing directors. He will report to Mr George Simpson, the chief
executive.
This system, introduced by Mr Simpson since his arrival at Lucas last April,
replaces the previous portfolio management structure built up under Sir
Anthony.
The switch in chairmen took place, as scheduled, after the annual meeting in
Birmingham. 'It is the end of a specific and determined effort to get the
top team reformed with some continuity in it,' said Sir Anthony.
This is a reference to the decision taken three years ago, largely to meet
the recommendations of the Cadbury committee, to split the roles of chairman
and chief executive, filled by Sir Anthony since 1987. That it has taken so
long to achieve the change reflects the confusion caused by the selection
and then de-selection of Mr Anthony Edwards as Sir Anthony's heir apparent.
The main focus of power in Lucas now is in the offices of Mr Simpson, fresh
from the renaissance of Rover, the car maker, and Mr John Grant, who became
finance director in 1992 after Mr David Hankinson, his predecessor, fell out
with the rest of the board.
Sir Brian, a banker by background, sees his job as non-executive chairman as
looking after the corporate governance of Lucas, enabling 'George Simpson to
think through the strategy and to act as his sounding board.'
He stressed that he is a 'team player' and promised 'I will get involved
wherever I think I can add value to George, but I certainly will not get in
his way.'
He becomes chairman as Lucas, exploiting the strength of the automotive
market but rationalising in the face of a sluggish aerospace market, heads
towards 1994-95 pre-tax profits of probably more than Pounds 120m. This
follows a 1993-94 loss of Pounds 129.7m, caused by provisions for
restructuring.
While Sir Brian arrives with 10,000 shares, Sir Anthony retires as the
largest private individual shareholder with 700,000 shares, 983,851 options
and 300,000 warrants.
Lucas shares yesterday closed up 4p at 211p.
