FT  03 OCT 94 / FT Guide to Plague and Other Infections
Outbreaks of plague in India have provoked panic in affected areas and
worldwide action to quarantine the country. Could a global epidemic be in
prospect?
Definitely not. There is no risk of anything like the past pandemics, such
as the Black Death of the mid-14th century and the Great Plague of 1665. The
disease is now preventable and curable. If the patient is treated with
tetracycline antibiotics when symptoms appear, there is almost always a
complete cure. Outbreaks can be prevented by ensuring reasonable standards
of public hygiene.
What is the risk of a plague epidemic in India?
The disease is extremely unlikely to return to the levels that were normal
before antibiotics brought it under control. Until 1950, plague killed about
20,000 Indians each year.
What should the Indian authorities do to control the outbreaks?
Most important is to ensure that adequate stocks of antibiotic are available
in the affected areas, together with health workers to dispense them to
those showing signs of infection. However, mass-administration of
antibiotics to the whole population of cities such as Surat and Delhi would
be a mistake, because it could lead to the evolution of drug-resistant
strains of the bacteria. The spread of the disease can be reduced by keeping
those infected in isolation hospitals.
Should other countries take action to prevent plague spreading outside
India?
Plague is already present in many parts of the world. The World Health
Organisation says that in 1992, the last full year for which figures are
available, 1,768 cases, including 198 deaths, were officially reported from
nine countries (including the US). Under-reporting means that the real
incidence of plague is probably much higher. Even so, it is sensible for
countries to take some precautions against Indian plague - for example, by
advising against travel to places directly affected by the outbreaks and by
ensuring than everyone arriving from India is aware of possible symptoms.
WHO says a comprehensive ban on travel to India is not justified.
If the world is over-reacting to the threat of plague, which infectious
diseases should we be worrying about?
Today's biggest killer is tuberculosis - responsible for 3m deaths a year
worldwide. Close behind is malaria, with 2m. Both are on the increase.
Other infections that kill many thousands of people a year include
dysentery, cholera, typhoid and Aids.
What about the future? Is there a threat of new germs emerging to threaten
world health?
Yes, microbiologists are becoming increasingly concerned about the
complacency of the western world and its assumption that medicine has won
the war on lethal infections. They fear that a variety of factors are
combining to set the stage for new killers to appear and old ones to
re-emerge. These include increased international travel, over-use of
antibiotics, and human disturbance of tropical forests (which are breeding
grounds for lethal new germs).
What sort of germs should we be most frightened of?
There is no way of predicting what is going to emerge. But most scientists
are more frightened of viruses than bacteria such as plague. Viruses can
reshuffle their genes and mutate more rapidly than bacteria, and the
pharmaceutical industry has few antiviral drugs with which to fight them,
even in the early stages of research.
What is the microbiologist's ultimate nightmare?
For some, a previously unknown monkey virus mutating into a new strain that
is virulent, untreatable and transmitted easily between humans. For others,
the fast-changing influenza virus emerging in a form more virulent than the
one that killed 20m people worldwide in 1918-19 and then mysteriously
disappeared.
