FT  16 MAY 94 / Hanson increases investment pay-back time
Hanson, the Anglo-US conglomerate, has lengthened its pay-back period for
new investments by up to two years, in a move to take advantage of low
interest rates and inflation.
Mr Derek Bonham, Hanson's chief executive, confirmed that the company had
lowered its pay-back criteria for capital investments. They will be
authorised if they pay for themselves within five or six years instead of
the previous target of three to four.
The move comes as other companies are considering lowering investment
thresholds, and targets for return on capital, in response to falls in
interest rates. But other big industrial groups have not yet lowered their
pay-back levels.
Hanson's change of strategy is partly based on the company's outlook for
interest rates and inflation, which Mr Bonham expects to remain under
control. But it is also keen to deflect charges of short-termism often
levelled at conglomerates.
In a report on UK competitiveness, the Commons Trade and Industry Select
Committee warned of an alarmingly low level of labour productivity and
'remaining deep-rooted problems' in investment.
Hanson believes the falling cost of capital will enable it to take the
longer-term view on capital investment that has been urged by the Bank of
England and the Confederation of British Industry.
While analysts welcomed Hanson's change of policy some voiced fears that the
company may be making an admission that short pay-backs are no longer
feasible.
BTR, the industrial conglomerate, has generally had a pay-back period of
less than four years, although it told analysts this was not feasible during
a recession.
The General Electric Company, which told the trade and industry committee
that institutions were pre-occupied with short-term economic performance,
said its real target rate remained unchanged at 20 per cent.
Mr Alan Spall, finance director at Imperial Chemical Industries, believed
inflation to be only one element in the equation. 'The fact that inflation
has come down doesn't at all mean that our hurdle rates have come down as
well,' he said recently.
Hanson is expected to confirm tomorrow, when it publishes its results, that
the US still offers the best acquisition opportunities, although it would
like to make a big takeover in the UK.
Lex, Page 16
