FT  30 JUN 94 / International Company News: US hospital chain admits illegal
payments
National Medical Enterprises, a Santa Monica-based hospital chain, has
agreed to plead guilty to making illegal payments to secure patient
referrals and pay Dollars 379m in settlement of civil and criminal charges.
The settlement, which follows a three-year federal investigation of NME's
psychiatric hospitals, was announced yesterday by Ms Janet Reno, the US
attorney-general.
As part of the settlement, the group's NME Psychiatric Hospitals subsidiary
is expected to plead guilty to six counts of illegal payments to secure
referral of Medicare patients to its hospitals, and one count of conspiracy
to make such payments.
The agreement, which is subject to approval by a federal judge, would be the
US's biggest healthcare fraud settlement. Previously, the highest healthcare
fraud settlement was against National Health Laboratories, which agreed to
pay Dollars 111m in 1992.
'This settlement will signify that NME is is taking full responsibility for
its past conduct in certain of its businesses,' said Mr Jeffrey Barbakow,
chief executive officer. It is not expected to cover individual fraud
charges against the company's employees, the company said.
On Monday, Mr Peter Alexis, former NME regional vice-president, pleaded
guilty in Dallas to arranging up to Dollars 40m in payments for patient
referrals. Justice Department officials said yesterday NME would co-operate
with continuing investigations.
The department said some of NME's patients had been hospitalised more than
was necessary, maximising insurance premium payments to the company. In some
cases, that overstay amounted to years rather than months.
National Medical said earlier this year it had set aside Dollars 375m to
cover a preliminary agreement with the Federal government, and talks have
continued since then on finalising the details.
The company had previously announced that, as part of the settlement, it was
divesting its psychiatric hospitals business to 'refocus' on its core
business of acute care. It has agreed to try to complete the divestiture
within the next 90 days. NME says it has undertaken an ethics and compliance
overhaul since the fraud was uncovered.
The Clinton healthcare plan, and its congressional variants, put great
stress on cutting US healthcare costs by eliminating fraud and waste. The
administration is likely to point to settlement of the NME case as a
significant success.
