FT  25 NOV 94 / Russia raises its Gulf profile: Conservative Arab states
have something to gain
Mr Victor Chernomyrdin, the Russian premier, returns to Moscow today having
lifted the Russian profile among the conservative Arab states of the Gulf.
Also, he may have achieved a diminution of the suspicion that Russia remains
inheritor not just to the property and treaties of the Soviet Union, but to
its alliances with the radical states of Syria, Libya and Iraq.
'Not so,' says Mr Valery Kuzmin, deputy head of the Russian Foreign
Ministry's Middle Eastern and North African department.
'The changes in the ideological position of the Soviet Union were coming
evident in the late 1980s; we officially ended the period of confrontation
in the Middle East in 1991; now we are partners in the peace process (in
Israel/Palestine) and our interests are to support the development of
economic ties.'
Kuwait was the most difficult stop on the trip. Still fearful of President
Saddam Hussein's Iraq, the Kuwaiti leadership saw the visit to Baghdad by Mr
Andrei Kozyrev, Russian foreign minister, as suspicious, even when he won
Baghdad's apparent recognition of Kuwait.
'We wanted to reassure Kuwait and the other states we did not have something
going on with Iraq behind their back. The visit was important in that
regard, a sign of the importance we attach to good relations with these
states after a time when it was said, wrongly, that we had lost interest in
them.'
Mr Chernomyrdin signed five fairly standard agreements on economic
co-operation, information exchange and investment protection. Mr Oleg
Davydov, Russian trade minister, noting Arab capital usually came into
Russia through western intermediaries, told his Kuwaiti hosts: 'It would be
more profitable if the money was invested directly.'
Mr Chernomyrdin got nowhere on the Russian debt to Kuwait of Dollars 1.1bn
(Pounds 687m), nor did he manage to unfreeze a credit promised in 1992.
The Kuwaitis were not interested in a plan to restructure the debt along
similar lines to that achieved in the Paris club of western creditors; the
form of words said only the two sides had reached 'a common understanding on
the issue of the possible reconstruction of the debt'. But contracts worth
Dollars 750m were signed to deliver to Kuwait Russian armoured personnel
carriers and other equipment, though it is not known what part, if any, of
that is to be written off against the debt.
The United Arab Emirates, closest to Russia of all the Gulf states, has
concluded military contracts Russian experts say are worth up to Dollars 3bn
and include joint production of a new SU-37 fighter (a version of the
SU-35).
The Russian debt to the UAE is Dollars 550m, with arrears on interest
payments of more than Dollars 60m, according to the Interfax news agency. No
decision on deferment, or of the use of the military shipments to pay off
the debt, has yet been announced.
Mr Chernomyrdin had most to gain from Saudi Arabia, but seems to have
achieved little but formal agreements. The Saudis opened an embassy in
Moscow only after the fall of the Soviet Union and remain distant. A claim
by Mr Davydov of an agreement to put off repayment of Dollars 250m owed by
Russia to a group of Saudi banks was flatly denied by Mr Mohammed Ali Aba
al-Khail, Saudi finance minister, who said the banks demanded full repayment
immediately.
For these wealthy states, Russia is of moderate interest. It is indigent,
and has better links with the radical states. But it offers a chance to
diversify arms purchases and put some pressure on the west; it is an active
partner in the Palestinian-Israeli peace process; its economy may be chaotic
but offers high quick returns in some spheres, and may become stable soon;
its diplomacy remains skilful and its memory long. Both sides had something
to gain.
