FT  22 JUL 94 / British &amp; Commonwealth Collapse: The DTI Report - Catalogue
of errors and misinformation / B&amp;C's Collapse
John Gunn built British &amp; Commonwealth Holdings into a company worth Pounds
2.5bn in a few furiously busy years in the 1980s. But his purchase of
Atlantic Computers, a deeply flawed company, proved his undoing. B&amp;C crashed
in 1990 with Pounds 1bn in liabilities. Suits and counter-suits against
advisers are seeking some Pounds 3.5bn in compensation
The end came quickly for British &amp; Commonwealth, shortly after it realised
the huge burden it had acquired with Atlantic Computers. But before Mr David
McCormick, Atlantic Computers' chief executive, alerted B&amp;C directors, he
sold shares in the group, the DTI inspectors report.
On April 12 1989, Mr McCormick, telephoned Mr McFadyen, a partner in
accountancy firm Moores Rowland in Jersey.
Mr McCormick, who joined Atlantic in 1986 and was appointed chief executive
after its acquisition by B&amp;C, had built up a holding of 1.2m shares in B&amp;C
through Fundinco, a company controlled by trustees for the benefit of
himself and his family. That afternoon he instructed Mr McFadyen to sell
500,000 shares. The deal, which raised approximately Pounds 1m net, came
after Mr McCormick had become aware of a contingent liability for Atlantic
'far in excess of Pounds 30m to Pounds 40m', say the DTI inspectors.
Information concerning the sale has since been referred to the DTI.
The same week, Mr McCormick told colleagues that Atlantic's liabilities were
substantially higher than the Pounds 30m to Pounds 40m. Mr Nicholas Kennedy
Scott, then a director of Atlantic and B&amp;C, and Mr Adrian Howe, later to
become Mr McCormick's personal assistant, were told that Atlantic's gross
liability was Pounds 160m, none of which had been provided for in Atlantic's
accounts.
The information 'was the first clear disclosure to B&amp;C that Atlantic faced
serious problems', the report says. It marked the beginning of the end for
B&amp;C.
Two years earlier the two senior directors of B&amp;C, Mr John Gunn and Mr Peter
Goldie, had been regarded as successful and experienced in corporate
acquisitions.
During the 1980s, B&amp;C was transformed from a broadly-based industrial group
to a financial services business. It was a transformation achieved on the
back of substantial borrowings when interest rates were relatively low. B&amp;C
was also committed to buying out, over a short period, the interests of the
Cayzer family, former controlling shareholders.
B&amp;C imposed minimal head office control on divisions. This 'hands off'
management philosophy 'may have had its merits', says the report, but 'it
also posed a serious risk for B&amp;C if the business management of any of its
divisions had not been thoroughly researched and understood before
acquisition'.
For B&amp;C the attraction of Atlantic was that it would replace the earnings of
Bricom, which it had sold in 1988. It saw Atlantic as a strong financial
services group with substantial overseas interests, and Atlantic's accounts
indicated that it had strong cash and fast-growing profits.
But the inspectors conclude that B&amp;C completed the deal without having a
clear understanding of the Flexlease, by which Atlantic conducted most of
its leasing business.
'The root cause of Atlantic's failure lay in the lack of commercial
viability of its core product, the Flexlease, and the way in which Atlantic
accounted for profits and failed to make provision for the contingent
liabilities associated with the Flexlease,' the inspectors say.
B&amp;C was told by Atlantic on several occasions that it was not exposed to
residual risks, and never seriously questioned those assurances. The report
primarily blames Mr John Tomkins, Atlantic's chief executive, and Mr Kennedy
Scott for the misrepresentations.
The report also highlights the 'ill-defined' relationship that B&amp;C had with
its external advisers, BZW and Outram, Cullinan &amp; Co, a firm of strategy
consultants. 'B&amp;C appears to have been looking to BZW for advice of a kind
that BZW believed was not within their remit.' The inspectors suggest that
there should have been a detailed letter of engagement between BZW and B&amp;C.
The inspectors also say that BZW should have adopted a more independent and
critical stance in appraising the thoroughness of B&amp;C's enquiries, enabling
them to recognise the shortcomings.
B&amp;C's decision to go ahead with the deal was also influenced by the fact
that Atlantic's published accounts had been given unqualified audit reports
by Spicer &amp; Oppenheim, as well as by a flawed OC&amp;C valuation report of
Atlantic.
The valuation contained 'a serious, but readily detectable, error which was
not noticed by B&amp;C, BZW or OC&amp;C': its definition of operating cash flows.
'It appears to us that the valuation of Atlantic prepared by OC&amp;C had a
material influence on the B&amp;C principal directors' decision to proceed
further with the acquisition negotiations,' the inspectors state.
'In our opinion this financial disaster for B&amp;C and its shareholders would
have been avoided if B&amp;C had adopted a thorough professional approach to its
pre-acquisition enquiries.' B&amp;C acquired Atlantic at the beginning of
September 1988 for about Pounds 408m.
Within seven months, three directors of B&amp;C - Mr Gunn, Mr Goldie and Mr
Rusty Ashman, finance director - had been told of gross liabilities
estimated at Pounds 160m in the UK and US. They first learnt of it,
according to the inspectors, shortly after B&amp;C had issued a preliminary
announcement of its 1988 results, but before signature of either Atlantic's
or B&amp;C's 1988 accounts.
The three men resolved that the 1988 accounts of B&amp;C should not be amended
to provide for Atlantic's liabilities; that Spicer, Atlantic's auditors, and
Deloitte Haskins &amp; Sells, B&amp;C's auditors, should not be told; and also that
the matter should not be disclosed to the rest of the B&amp;C board.
As a result, Atlantic's published accounts for 1988 were 'grossly
misleading' and the inspectors conclude that Atlantic 'in all probability
had never made a profit'.
It was not until late July 1989 that the whole B&amp;C board was informed of
Atlantic's contingent liability problem, and it was only after the
appointment of Mr Mark Wood as managing director of Atlantic in March 1990
that 'B&amp;C finally set about a realistic and objective assessment of
Atlantic's business for the first time'. Mr Wood reported that facilities of
up to Pounds 160m were required if Atlantic was to survive. B&amp;C could not
provide such funds.
'The decision was taken, in our view reasonably, to place Atlantic into
administration,' the inspectors state, summing up the response of B&amp;C's
management to the contingent liability problem as 'much too little, much too
late'.
Soon after, on June 3 1990, B&amp;C itself went into administration.
