FT  20 APR 94 / Management: Little knowledge goes a long way - Cancer of the
prostate need not be a killer / Health Check
Earlier this year, 13-year-old Andrew Steele from Wales died from cancer of
the bladder and prostate. His death is a grim reminder that no male should
consider himself immune from waterworks trouble.
The prostate, a gland about the size and shape of a chestnut, lies deep in
the pelvis just below the bladder. Because it surrounds the urethra, it has
the potential to block the flow of urine completely. Like the breast and
womb, the prostate is under hormonal control; unlike them, the prostate
enlarges throughout adult life, and most men give it little thought until it
starts causing trouble.
Benign enlargement (known as benign prostatic hypertrophy, or BPH) affects
about one in three men over 50 and gradually causes outflow obstruction.
Even then, many are remarkably tolerant of symptoms such as trouble starting
to pass water, trouble stopping, reduced stream, urgency and changed
frequency, all of which can be extreme. Eventually, pressure on the system
may damage the kidneys. Since BPH is curable, prompt action is better than
waiting until life is dominated by the location of the nearest toilet, or
until total blockage forces admission to hospital.
Many men regard plumbing problems as an inevitable part of ageing, and some
are reticent about discussing intimate symptoms.
While drugs such as alpha-blockers and finasteride can relieve early
symptoms of BPH, the principal treatment for prostate disease is surgery.
The two main operations are transurethral resection (done without incision
through the tip of the penis) and open prostatectomy (which needs an
incision above the pelvic bone).
After surgery, sperm will flow the wrong way so sterility can be expected.
Impotence is unlikely, though it can happen if delicate nerve bundles are
destroyed during the operation.
Newer therapies for BPH include cryotherapy, laser treatment, microwave
therapy and balloon dilatation, but these have yet to be evaluated fully.
Malignant disease of the prostate is surprisingly common. The second most
common cancer in men, it kills around 8,000 a year in Britain - or four
times as many victims as cancer of the cervix. The cause is unknown, but it
is rare under the age of 40. The incidence increases with age, so that about
40 per cent of men over 65 are found to have cancer of the prostate at
post-mortem.
It can also be an incidental finding during life. Studies show that up to 10
per cent of prostates removed during an operation turn out to be malignant
when examined under a microscope. In fact, the disease can only be
positively diagnosed by laboratory examination, though there can be strong
clues. For instance, it is possible to pick up some small tumours from a
blood test and some larger ones from rectal examination. Both procedures are
essential when assessing prostate symptoms, but they could also be used to
screen the rest of the population for cancer of the prostate.
The British Prostate Group of surgeons believes this cancer to be one of the
most treatable if spotted early, and that lives could be saved by screening.
Others point out that prostate cancer is often slow-growing, or even dormant
 -according to one adage, men die with it rather than from it. They say
there is no point picking up cancers if they are virtually harmless.
Studies are under way in the UK and in the US to clarify the issue, since
there is no firm evidence that lives would be saved by universal screening.
Less contentious is the point that many men would benefit from being more
aware of their prostate before it starts running and ruining their lives.
The author is a London general practitioner.
