FT  26 MAY 94 / Rise in durable goods orders points to growth
US orders for durable goods rose 0.1 per cent between March and April, less
than analysts expected, but the longer-term trend appeared consistent with
continued robust economic growth.
The increase in orders was the 11th consecutive monthly gain and followed a
revised 0.7 per cent increase in March. Orders were 10.4 per cent higher
than in April last year, before allowing for inflation of just under 3 per
cent.
Separate figures yesterday showed a small rise in sales of existing US homes
last month, to an annual rate of 4.12m against 4.07m in March.
The volatile transport sector accounted for much of the weakness in goods
orders last month. A decline in orders for motor vehicles and railway
equipment more than offset increased demand for aircraft. Excluding
transport, orders rose 0.6 per cent from March.
Analysts were divided over the figures, partly because they disagree on the
extent to which increases in short- and long-term interest rates are curbing
economic growth.
'Today's report adds to earlier evidence that the economy was already
slowing down,' said Mr Robert Barr, a senior economist at the US Chamber of
Commerce. The Federal Reserve's decision to raise interest rates last week
'may not have been warranted,' he added.
Mr Richard Berner, chief economist at Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh, said the
underlying trend was strong and predicted US capital spending would remain
robust, partly because demand for US durable goods was now growing in
overseas markets.
The Fed would soon have to consider raising interest rates again, to prevent
growth putting upward pressure on inflation, he warned.
Many analysts expect figures for gross domestic product, due on Friday, to
show a modest downward revision in economic growth in the first quarter to
an annualised rate of just over 2 per cent, against a preliminary estimate
of 2.6 per cent.
But this is widely seen as underestimating the economy's underlying rate of
growth. Wall Street growth projections for the second quarter range from an
annual rate of 3.5 per cent to as much as 6 per cent.
