FT  16 FEB 94 / Viacom wins Paramount fight
Viacom, the cable television group, yesterday emerged victorious in the
Dollars 10bn (Pounds 6.8bn) struggle for control of Paramount
Communications, owner of the US's last big independent film and television
production company.
Viacom announced that 74.6 per cent of Paramount's shareholders had accepted
its cash-and-securities offer, in preference to a bid from QVC Network, a
home shopping group.
Viacom extended its offer to March 1 to allow all Paramount shareholders to
accept the bid, while QVC conceded defeat.
The deal marks the end of a five-month battle by Mr Sumner Redstone,
chairman of Viacom, to combine Paramount's television and production
operations with his group's cable TV network.
Yesterday, Mr Redstone denied that he had paid too much for Paramount.
However, Viacom's non-voting B shares fell another Dollars 1 7/8 to Dollars
28, or less than half their value when Mr Redstone first bid.
Viacom faces a further battle to persuade shareholders in Blockbuster, the
video rental company, to approve the terms of a merger which would also
bring it into the Viacom/Paramount group.
If completed, the three-way merger would create an entertainment group with
annual revenues of Dollars 26bn and businesses stretching from cable
television and film production to book publishing and video rentals.
Pointing to the proposed grouping's 'diversified and formidable assets', Mr
Redstone said the three would 'create a global media powerhouse of
unparalleled proportions'. The scale of its businesses would put it on a par
with Time Warner, the entertainment giant created by one of the 1980s'
biggest takeovers.
The acquisition of Blockbuster, which has strong earnings and little debt,
is seen as an important element in creating a sound financial footing for
Viacom/Paramount. Viacom faces opposition from the company's shareholders.
Mr Frank Biondi, chief executive of Viacom and of the enlarged company
formed by the Paramount takeover, conceded that Blockbuster shareholders had
'mixed reactions' to the planned merger.
Although initially favouring an agreed merger with Viacom, Paramount
chairman Mr Martin Davis was forced by the Delaware courts to put his
company up for auction to the highest bidder. As a result, Mr Davis, who had
negotiated a role as number two to Mr Redstone, faces an uncertain future.
Lex, Page 24; A monster, Page 32
