FT  18 AUG 94 / Leading Article: Controlling population
Two stories are told in the annual report from the United Nations population
fund, published yesterday. The first is one of success: in the past 40 years
the rate of growth of the world's population has slowed sharply. The second
 -about prospects for the future - is less cheerful. Nevertheless, the
evidence shows neither that population growth is the overwhelming problem it
is so often alleged to be, nor that policy is helpless to lower it, even in
poor countries. What is required is no more - but also no less - than to
help people, particularly women, achieve the families they themselves
desire.
The most encouraging feature of past experience is that, contrary to the
once cherished theories of demographers, declines in the rate of population
growth have occurred even in countries that have seen little economic
growth. Education of women has helped. But much of the fall can be
attributed to better distribution of contraception, argues the UN. One of
the clearest messages of the report is that people will willingly use
contraception, if it is made available.
The UN's story about the prospects for coming decades is somewhat more
disturbing. The number of people on the planet is likely almost to double,
from the present 5.7bn to some 10bn, by the middle of next century. This
assumes that birth rates continue to fall; other assumptions suggest figures
between 8bn and 12.5bn.
Food supplies
Yet such increases need be no disaster. The UN report rightly rebuts fears
of a global food shortage, of the kind voiced by the Club of Rome two
decades ago. But uneven distribution of the world's food supplies leaves
people in many regions facing starvation. More even than food, water may
become a cause of conflict. It also warns that pressure on other natural
resources - forests, seas and the atmosphere - will increase.
Yet it is important to recognise that population growth is not the sole
cause of pressure on resources. Nor would even a stable global population
halt it. Economic growth is still more important. That is why the 15 per
cent of the world's population in rich countries consumes so
disproportionate a share of global resources. It is also why calls from this
minority for limits on the numbers of the poor majority look morally
disreputable.
Neither prophecies of doom nor hypocritical bombast are justified. What is
needed, instead, is for developing countries themselves to recognise that
unchecked population growth imposes, at best, a heavy burden of additional
investment upon them. At worst, it threatens their social stability, as
people flood from the countryside to the cities, in search of jobs.
Family planning
These pressing social and economic issues underline the importance of next
month's conference in Cairo, the first UN meeting on population for a
decade. The UN's draft agenda calls for co-ordination of measures to
stabilise the world's population, including a trebling of spending on family
planning programmes, and better education for women.
This is the right policy agenda, because it emphasises helping people help
themselves. This is not just the most ethical, but also the most practical
way to address the issue, since what people want for themselves is also what
their societies need.
Despite the convergence of support for such measures among governments, the
agenda faces opposition. This month the Vatican, which has called on
governments to boycott the conference, accused the UN of promoting abortion.
That charge is ill-founded, given that the United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA) is barred from portraying abortion as a way to control family size.
It would be both inhumane and imprudent for governments to reject the UN's
draft agenda. That is not to make light of the social and cultural
implications of the policies recommended by the UNFPA. But it is surely
right for women to be given control over the number of children they bear.
Western countries should assist countries that wish to make contraception
available, though not those that resort to coercion. They should also remind
recalcitrant governments that the alternative to contraception is both lower
growth in incomes per head and serious social disruption.
