FT  08 DEC 94 / International Capital Markets: Regulatory focus shifts to
protection for customer - Derivatives
Eighteen months ago, the popular concern about derivatives in regulatory and
political circles was their potential threat to the integrity of the banking
system. Good old boys with banking roots fretted that these new fangled
financial gizmos with trillion-dollar valuations might somehow set off an
economic catastrophe of undetermined depth and severity.
Derivatives dealers have since successfully educated their detractors,
convincing entities as notable at the Federal Reserve and the Bank for
International Settlements that further regulation is not required. As 1994
comes to an end, not one piece of new derivatives legislation has been
enacted in the US.
A cornerstone in the derivatives community's defence was an industry-funded
report by the Group of Thirty (G30), issued in July 1993, that recommended
guidelines for managing derivatives. So long as prudent risk management
practices are followed and understood, derivatives offer no more of a
financial threat than conventional securities such as bonds or shares, the
report suggested.
The report offhandedly stated that it was a good idea for derivatives
end-users, as well as dealers, to adhere to these 'best practices'
recommendations. However, when questioned closely, prominent backers of the
G30 recommendations, including J. P. Morgan chairman, Sir Dennis
Weatherstone, said they did not believe it was a dealer's responsibility to
give customers the tools to perform these risk-monitoring tasks.
This attitude, that derivatives end-users are sophisticated enough to take
care of themselves, has come back to hit the dealing community a serious
blow to their flank.
Among the many sore losers in interest rate derivatives transactions this
year, the most prominent has been Procter &amp; Gamble, the consumer products
group. In its lawsuit against Bankers Trust, it claims a derivatives dealer
engaged in misleading sales practices, and failed to provide the information
the corporation needed to properly monitor the value and risks of its
derivatives position.
That suit remains in court. However, this week Bankers Trust consented to a
written disciplinary agreement with the Federal Reserve, promising, among
other things, to give reasonably transparent pricing and valuation
information, sometimes on a daily basis, to customers who are counterparties
in leveraged derivatives transactions.
It is clear from the Federal Reserve's broad statement attached to the
agreement that the regulatory focus on derivatives has now shifted from
systemic banking concerns to customer protection.
'Banking institutions engaged in derivatives activities,' the Fed said,
'should maintain effective policies and procedures relating to client
selection, sales practices, and pricing and valuation.' Client suitability
and sales practices standards are common in the securities industry.
However, assisting clients with transaction pricing and valuation once a
deal is done is not common, or particularly necessary in larger, more liquid
and more transparent deals in conventional bond, foreign exchange, or equity
markets.
With leveraged derivatives, where deals are structured individually to meet
a client's needs and where pricing is done by the dealer as counterparty, it
can be nearly impossible for an end-user to measure, as is recommended by
the G30,how much of the investment could be lost given changes in market
parameters, across the term of the deal.
The customer is almost always dependent on the dealer for this information,
a factor that apparently is attracting more regulatory attention.
In fact, insiders expect that now Bankers Trust has settled with its chief
regulator, the Fed, two other agencies, the Securities and Exchange
Commission and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission will also issue
disciplinary judgments. Neither agency will comment on this, but it appears
both are anxious to demonstrate their interest in OTC derivatives cases to
an extent that frightens lawyers for trade groups such as ISDA.
The 'hawks' in the derivatives dealing community contend that OTC
derivatives are neither securities nor futures, and so do not come under the
jurisdiction of either the SEC nor the CFTC. However, there is little to
stop either or both agencies from extending their reach by issuing
enforcement actions in a derivatives case.
An aside to all the derivatives publicity this week has been the G30's
release of a follow-up survey to its 1993 internal controls recommendations.
Buried in the data was news that 50 per cent of the biggest end-users
surveyed allow their treasury departments to use derivatives to create risk
exposures rather than just perform hedge functions.
The survey showed that more than a quarter of even the smallest end-users
allow their derivatives managers to speculate. Less surprising, but equally
revealing, the treasury departments of dealing firms themselves are allowed
to use derivatives to create risk exposures, rather than to mitigate them.
The G30 survey said 58 per cent of dealers gave this freedom to treasury
operations.
