FT  05 SEP 94 / UK Company News: Fantasy war games maker for market with
Pounds 40m tag
Renegade goblins, space orks and blood angels will be fighting for
investors' attention next month when Games Workshop, a fantasy war games
manufacturer, comes to the market in a flotation expected to value it at
over Pounds 40m.
'We are not a toy maker, or satisfying some fad,' says chief executive Mr
Tom Kirby. 'This is a business which has been serving a hobby enjoyed by
thousands of young people for 16 years. I think our record speaks for
itself.'
The Nottingham-based group was the subject of a Pounds 10m management
buy-out three years ago, and in that time has doubled turnover to Pounds
24.5m. Operating profits have increased nearly threefold in the same period
to Pounds 4.6m.
Games Workshop designs, manufactures and markets all its own products. The
customers are predominantly male and between the ages of 10 and 17.
The company invents futuristic war games complete with figures and rules,
which it then controls and supplements with developments. Customers are
encouraged to keep up with the latest changes through the company's own
magazine, 'White Dwarf', which sells some 60,000 copies a month.
About 10 per cent of the UK business is done through mail order, the rest
through the company's network of 75 outlets. Like the magazine, the shops
sell only Games Workshop material and staff advise on the hobby. Games
Workshop also has branches in France, Germany, Australia, Spain and the US.
Last year, 45 per cent of sales came from abroad.
Mr Kirby is dismissive of changing tastes affecting the company's future.
'We have created several generations of customers already and are adding new
ones all the time. War games have been played for centuries, nothing's going
to change that.'
The flotation will seek to raise some Pounds 20m through a placing of half
the shares, with management share sales accounting for about 10 per cent of
this. The remaining 50 per cent of the shares will be subject to a free
float. Credit Lyonnais Laing is acting as stockbroker, and Samual Montagu as
financial adviser.
