FT  20 JAN 94 / Technology: Lucky numbers - A network for Britain's national
lottery
Britain's new national lottery opens for business in about a year, promising
big cash prizes to the punters and much-needed tax revenues for the UK
government.
For the consortium chosen to operate the lottery, however, it also poses
some daunting technical problems, not least of which will be setting up one
of the largest computer networks in the world in around six months.
The eight consortia expected to bid for the licence next month agree that,
while the technology involved is relatively simple, the sheer size of the
network, coupled with strict requirements for reliability and security, will
make building the necessary computer system a tortuous task.
Having stated its requirement, the government is leaving the specification
of the system to its potential suppliers. To be truly national, however, it
will need to cover more than 10,000 nationwide retail outlets at launch
time, rising swiftly to approach 25,000. Each will be installed with a
specially designed terminal connected to a central computer system handling
on-line transaction processing at speeds of up to 2,000 to 3,000
transactions a second at peak betting times, typically the hour before the
weekly jackpot is drawn.
A second computer centre, located at a separate site in case the first is
hit by disaster, will be on constant standby, ready to take up the
processing load should the lead computer system fail.
David Bale, chief executive of the New Zealand Lotteries Commission and a
consultant to UK bidder the Great British Lottery Company, warns against
over-ambition. 'The key is integrity. The system must do everything
properly, all the time. I would suggest that it would be irresponsible for
anyone to bid newly developed software for such a large system as the UK. It
must be well and truly tested, as must the hardware and communications
network.'
New Zealand's lottery, set up under Bale's guidance in 1987, has 700 outlets
but because of their geographical spread and the country's demographics, it
has proved a tough testing ground. Newsagents were initially connected to a
central system via New Zealand Telecom leased lines and modems, although the
network was digitised last year to improve availability and resilience as
well as to add new features such as an emergency satellite back-up service.
Bale's worst memory is the Saturday morning when a road digger sliced
through both the primary and secondary wires connecting 50 per cent of New
Zealand's lottery customers to the central system, jeopardising an equal
percentage of the week's income. In this instance, service was resumed by
5pm in time for intense activity before the 7pm weekly big prize draw.
Besides leased lines and locally connected circuits, communications
technologies which may be viable in the UK include cable, packet radio
networks, emerging integrated services, digital networks and, ultimately,
the latest generation of satellite services.
Bale cautions, however, against a mix-and-match approach to building the
communications network. 'Every time you add a new media, you add problems. I
would avoid it like the plague.
'BT's twisted-pair wiring goes everywhere in the UK and I believe it will
deliver a very resilient service.' With the investment in technology to set
up the network expected to be Pounds 200m or more, British
Telecommunications will not be the only supplier keen for a slice of the
action, although its involvement is almost guaranteed as Mercury has neither
the coverage, nor the experience, sought by the consortia.
Established suppliers of lottery system hardware include US companies
Digital Equipment Corporation, Concurrent Computers and Control Data, which
also offers complete systems through its subsidiary Automatic Wagering
International. Software and specialist terminals are dominated by US-based
G-Tech, with more than 60 per cent of the world market. It is also a member
of the Camelot consortium (backed by Cadbury Schweppes), although this will
not preclude other bidders from selecting its systems.
Specially designed G-Tech lottery terminals, bearing some resemblance to a
hybrid automatic teller machine and cash register, and made by consortium
partner ICL (the UK-based and Japanese-owned computer company), would be
installed in retail outlets with communication handled across a customised
network of mixed media chosen for its cost effectiveness.
Don Stanford, G-Tech's senior vice-president for technology, says: 'We need
to achieve over 99.98 per cent availability and total transaction times of
less than 5 seconds from when the customer hits the button to when he
receives a receipt. And we want to give retailers a terminal designed to
provide the power, capacity and speed to sell all game products within 5
seconds. In the UK, things will go wrong if the solution is not completely
integrated or properly tested.
'The hardest part of the job will be planning and tackling the complexity
involved to have everything online on day one. Besides the computer systems,
retailers need to be trained and there will be a high field service
requirement.' Although none of the consortia is prepared to commit itself,
Stanford - who masterminded the Texas and California state lotteries -
believes more than 500 jobs in manufacturing, operating the lottery and
servicing retail sites will be created by the consortium chosen to run the
lottery under the first seven-year licence.
IBM, the technical partner in the Lottery Foundation (formed by Richard
Branson, chairman of Virgin), endorses the need for systems integration. In
its self-appointed role as a services company rather than hardware supplier,
the US computer group will act as a project management and implementation
specialist.
To enhance its technical credibility in the eyes of the government selection
team, Rainbow, the group put together by advertising agency Leo Burnett
under the chairmanship of Sir Patrick Sheehy (chairman of BAT Industries),
has enlisted a well-known technical expert. Peter Borer, formerly head of
British Rail's telecommunications arm, is, like his counterparts,
scrutinising all the technical options available.
As Bale points out: 'The UK lottery is the last big prize (in the gaming
sector) in the 20th century and probably the 21st. The battle will be in
marketing, but that must be supported by first-class gear.'
