FT  19 DEC 94 / Emerging Markets: Casablanca puts itself on the map - The
Emerging Investor
New share issues, privatisations, the arrival of foreign investment funds,
and the reform of the bourse's organisation have completely transformed the
Casablanca stock exchange in less than two years. As a result the stock
market has established itself as the second largest on the African
continent, excluding South Africa, with a market capitalisation of about
Dollars 5bn.
For Moroccan and foreign investors, last month's sale of the state's 66.64
per cent stake in the Societe Nationale d'Investissement marked a watershed
in the kingdom's privatisation programme.
The sale, for which Pallas Stern, a subsidiary of Swiss Bank Corporation,
acted as adviser, netted an estimated Dh2.03bn (Dollars 222m), twice the
amount raised in July 1993 when the state sold 51 per cent of the CIOR
cement company to a French subsidiary of the Swiss Holderbank group.
The increasing involvement of US, UK and French portfolio managers in the
Casablanca market reflects an improved perception of the Moroccan economy,
now that the IMF-backed adjustment of the 1980s has been completed and the
country has resumed repaying its debts after a series of rescheduling
agreements.
Over the past 12 months, some Dollars 200m of foreign money has come onto
the market, about 40 per cent of total volume, according to Mr Adil Douiri,
co-founder of Casablanca Finance Group, a financial intermediary company set
up in 1992. He expects such inflows to reach Dollars 500m next year.
According to Upline Securities, a stockbroker which alone in Morocco
provides market research in corporate finance, the total volume of foreign
investment in Morocco, including the aforementioned Dollars 200m, is set to
top Dollars 1bn this year.
Trading volume so far in 1994 has reached Dh7bn, which amounts to a 97 per
cent increase against the first 11 months of 1993. The overall share index
has shown a 30 per cent rise so far, while the CFG 25 share index has risen
by 36 per cent. However, the bourse does have some very illiquid shares,
making the market more attractive for wealthy individuals or funds than
individual investors.
The reform of the bourse, approved in September 1993, is still in the
process of being implemented, and is based on the French model. It involves
converting the market into a limited company in which the stockbrokers are
shareholders.
Its aims include better company information - up to now a very opaque area
as most companies are family owned and operated and accounts are seldom
audited by international auditing firms; more protection for investors, and
a broader range of financial instruments.
The reforms have prompted the emergence of investment funds. The largest
include the Pounds 39m Morocco Fund, jointly owned by ONA, the kingdom's
largest company, and Salomon Brothers; the Pounds 15m Interfina Fund,
jointly owned by three Moroccan banks, the International Finance Corporation
and Spains's Banco Exterior; a Dollars 30m fund set up by Framlington, a
subsidiary of Credit Commercial de France and the International Finance
Corporation; and another by Morgan Stanley Africa Investment Fund.
ONA has further contributed to the modernisation of the financial system by
a capital increase last May which took the form of the largest share issue
ever in the country, worth Dollars 120m. ONA allowed foreign investors to
buy into its capital, one third of which is now owned by Morgan Stanley,
Lehman Brothers, Paribas, BSN Danone and Assurances Generales de France.
George Soros's Quantum Emerging Growth Fund bought a 2 per cent stake, for
Dollars 40m, last April.
The reasons for the interest Morocco provokes abroad are easy to see. Mr
Pierre Lasserre who runs Finacor, the largest money broker in Paris, last
year bought a 47.5 per cent stake in Upline Securities, which has just
gained a seat on the Casablanca stock exchange. Mr Lasserre sees 'many
opportunities in Morocco' and was keen to 'back a group of energetic and
enterprising young Moroccans'.
All however is not plain sailing, as the minister for privatisation, Mr
Abderrahmane Saaidi, publicly acknowledged after the privatisation of SNI.
Demand for the shares of SNI, a holding company whose interests include
cement, drinks and the financial sector, was very strong, but the manner in
which shares was allocated has left a sour taste in the mouths of some
investors.
One fifth of all the shares on offer was floated on the Casablanca stock
exchange during the first week in November at Dh300 a share and was eight
times subscribed. This came as little surprise to bankers in Casablanca as
SNI shares were trading at Dh425 when they were suspended a few days before
the offering, but had the advantage, from the government's point of view, of
encouraging institutional investors to offer a higher price for the shares.
The authorities allowed the trading of SNI shares to resume before they had
completed the sale of the two other tranches, which went to institutional
investors. This encouraged people to borrow money and make a quick killing.
However, this reinforced critics in their view that the process of
privatisation was turning into 'something of a casino'.
Of the two institutional tranches, 35 per cent was sold to Moroccan
institutions, which cannot onsell the shares for five years, and a further
16 per cent went to Moroccan and foreign institutions. The commission which
overseas privatisation operations set the minimum price per share for the
two institutional tranches at Dh325, but successful bidders bought the
shares at Dh425.
SNI shares have since fallen back to Dh400 as many individual buyers who
bought them on borrowed money have been forced to realise their gains to pay
their creditors back. Further criticism focused on the role of the agent
bank for the sale, Banque Populaire, whose back room operations were
described by one City institution as a 'shambles of red tape'.
Faster progress in the broader aim of liberalising the management of
Morocco's financial sector is handicapped by three factors: the absence of
money and foreign exchange markets and hence the impossibility of currency
hedging and the absence of market driven interest rates, for which the IMF
has been pressing for two years.
The Banque al Maghrib, the central bank, and leading Moroccan banks are
according to observers, dragging their feet because they are comfortably set
in their old ways and fearful of change.
For decades, the unwritten contract between the central bank and the banks
was that the latter would finance large government deficits and leave the
banks to make comfortable margins on their other business. With an estimated
Dollars 500 to Dollars 600m deficit in government financing written into
next year's finance bill, the banks have good reason to continue in their
old ways.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
TEN BEST PERFORMING STOCKS
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                           Friday Week on week change
Stock                        Country     16/12/94    Dollars        %
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Hualon Teijran               Taiwan        1.2912     0.2937    29.44
Telebras                     Brazil        0.0450     0.0053    13.40
Finance One                  Thailand     14.4137     1.6672    13.08
Philippine National Bank     Philippines  14.0158     1.6199    13.07
Barito Pacific Timber        Indonesia     1.5428     0.1498    10.75
HM Sanpoerna                 Indonesia     4.7541     0.4381    10.15
Advanced Info Services       Thailand     13.8563     1.2691    10.08
Technology Resource
  Industries                 Malaysia      3.3732    10.2924     9.49
Bangkok Bank                 Thailand      7.8439     0.6740     9.40
SM Prime Holdings            Philippines   0.3281     0.0281     9.36
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Baring Securities
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
