FT  30 MAY 94 / Opel lawyer seeks arrest of VW's Lopez
German prosecutors have been asked to issue a warrant for the arrest of Mr
Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, second-in-command on the Volkswagen board
and the production chief of the automotive group.
The latest twist in the VW-General Motors saga came in a request from Mr
Volke Hoffmann, a lawyer representing Adam Opel, who claimed at the weekend
there was a danger Mr Lopez might leave Germany.
Opel, the local subsidiary of GM, whose suspicions of industrial espionage
by Mr Lopez and associates prompted the start of criminal investigations in
Germany and the US last year, believes Mr Lopez may be bound for Spain.
It is believed that there are no extradition arrangements between Spain and
Germany or the US relevant to the Lopez affair.
According to Mr Hoffmann, suspicions have hardened after continuing
discoveries of evidence from data seized in a raid last summer on VW's
Wolfsburg headquarters and the homes of former GM employees who joined the
German group last March.
Opel is expected to issue details of some of the latest findings in a
statement due today - in advance of a key VW meeting to discuss the
continuing crisis at the group's Spanish subsidiary, Seat.
VW retorted that Opel was trying to influence public opinion and said an
independent inquiry last year had shown no secret Opel documents had reached
the company or were used by VW. 'Representatives of Opel interests are again
trying to influence public opinion with insubstantial accusations,' VW said.
'False reports or one-sided speculation about alleged arrest warrants are
unfortunately nothing new. That has happened repeatedly in the past and then
it was always just a rumour which evaporated in thin air.'
Speculation has re-emerged recently that Mr Lopez, currently production
director for the Volkswagen group, might be sent in to rescue the
loss-making Spanish concern.
Leaders of the supervisory board, which will review the Spanish situation
tomorrow, are known to have discussed the possibility of sending Mr Lopez to
Seat late last year.
The idea was rejected on the ground that, apart from the unfavourable
impression a move might have made at that time, 'if a bad appointment
decision has been made at Volkswagen there is no point in making another,'
reliable sources suggested.
Mr Jorge Alvarez, who joined VW from Opel immediately after Mr Lopez, was
earlier this month appointed head of purchasing at Seat in a partial
management shake-up.
Mr Alvarez, 27, was one of the people involved in the shredding of Opel data
in Wolfsburg last March. VW has said documents were shredded to avoid any
danger of their coming into the group's possession. It is also known that
some documents were photocopied but their fate has not yet, apparently, been
cleared up. Mr Alvarez was also a former occupant of a house in Wiesbaden
where Opel and GM secrets were discovered last June, shortly after he left.
Today's statement from Opel, VW's main rival in the European car market, is
expected to include information on that find and more recent discoveries.
Opel's latest initiative follows a recent attack from VW featuring
allegations of dirty tricks by private detectives hired by Mr Hoffmann, and
bias on the part of the German prosecutor in charge of the investigation.
Mr Jurgen Taschke, Mr Lopez's lawyer, told German media at the weekend that
issuing an arrest warrant made no legal sense. Mr Hoffman's request was
intended only as a media diversion, he added.
The Opel move appeared to be timed to have the maximum effect at VW's annual
meeting in Hamburg on Wednesday, as there are already signs that the board
will be challenged by shareholders.
At least one shareholder has formally proposed that the obligatory approval
of the management board's behaviour in the past year should be postponed
pending clarification of the Lopez affair, the Seat crisis and the group's
failure to break even last year in spite of repeated pledges from Mr
Ferdinand Piech, group chairman.
