FT  23 MAY 94 / Launch of Euro-manifestos ends political truce
The main parties will this morning signal an end to the political truce
which followed the death of John Smith with the launch of their manifestos
for the European elections. The return of politics as usual will mean that
after a welcome respite during the past 10 days, Mr John Major's government
will return to the uncomfortable glare of the political spotlight.
Uncertainty in the Labour party offers no guarantee that the Conservatives'
disastrous performance in recent local elections will not be followed by
another electoral calamity on June 9.
For its part, Labour's claim that Smith has bequeathed a mature, united
party will be tested severely by the leadership struggle which will permeate
the European campaign. The contenders for the succession inevitably will
spend as much time in internal manoeuvring as in fighting the Conservatives.
Mr Paddy Ashdown's Liberal Democrats must demonstrate that they can win
seats in the European parliament as well as protest votes in the Eastleigh
by-election on the same day.
The party's claim it represents the only real alternative to the Tories in
much of southern England now confronts the strong possibility that Labour
will re-invade the same ground by choosing the social democrat Mr Tony Blair
as leader.
It is Mr Major however who has most to lose. The conventional wisdom is that
his leadership is now safe through the summer. Mr Michael Heseltine no
longer looks quite such an attractive alternative. The reputations of Mr
Kenneth Clarke and the youthful Mr Michael Portillo are not at their best.
But the Tory party's destructive divisions over Europe have not disappeared.
Nor, as the rightwing Conservative Way Forward reminded him at the weekend,
has the determination of a section of the party to undermine the prime
minister. Mr Major has to survive the autumn as well as the summer.
So the Conservative election manifesto will address two audiences: the wider
electorate and the warring factions within the party.
Party strategists see glimmers of optimism. For all its internal divisions
and underlying unpopularity, Europe remains the one issue on which voters
seem prepared to give the Tories the benefit of the doubt.
Private polling suggests the electorate still trusts the Tories to do a
better job of standing up for Britain's interests in Europe than Labour or
the Liberal Democrats. The voters may not like the government but they have
no time for Brussels.
Mr Douglas Hurd insisted at the weekend the government was offering a
positive vision of a wider, decentralised, de-regulated Europe in which the
main foreign, economic and social policy levers remain with nation states.
But on the doorstep that will be translated by party workers into a pledge
to fight off the Brussels bureaucrats. Labour and the Liberal Democrats will
be cast in the role of unthinking supporters of a European super-state.
The government has all but given up hope of holding on to its 32 seats in
the Strasbourg assembly. But if its message gets though it might keep 20
rather than a dozen or less.
That gap between defeat and disaster may well depend on the Euro-sceptics on
the Tory back benches and their ministerial backers in the cabinet.
Careful manifesto language on the European exchange rate mechanism (Britain
will not return in the foreseeable future) and a single currency (parliament
will decide if and when it ever happens) has brought a temporary truce. Mr
Portillo and his fellow sceptics in the cabinet have been told to follow the
party line scrupulously.
But one or two bad opinion polls during the campaign will generate pressure
from the sceptics on Mr Major to widen his attack on socialist control of
the European Union's institutions to the institutions themselves.
If he succumbs, the pro-Europeans will retaliate. Images of the two wings of
the party fighting it out on the hustings will not inspire its supporters to
vote.
Labour's tactics are more straightforward. Its manifesto will press for a
positive but discriminating approach to European integration. Britain should
sign up for the social chapter of the Maastricht treaty, accept the
principle of a single currency and be ready to extend majority voting in
some areas.
But the party will insist it is not committed to the blueprint for a federal
Europe tabled by its partners in the parliament's Socialist Group - nor to
the detail on such issues as taxation policies and working time.
The thrust of Labour's campaign will be on domestic rather than European
issues anyway. Its strategy will be to maximise the electorate's anger with
recession, tax increases and the air of incompetence around the government.
The closer the character of the poll on June 9 is to a nationwide
by-election, the better the chances of Labour adding to its present 45 seats
in the parliament.
The Liberal Democrats start from a much lower base. They are unrepresented
in the Strasbourg assembly. Projections based on recent opinion polls
suggest Mr Ashdown should win a minimum of two or three seats this time
round.
The party is concentrating its efforts on a swathe of south-western England
from Cornwall to as far east as Hampshire. It also seems assured of a
by-election victory in the once-Tory bastion of Eastleigh.
Wary of frightening off Tory voters, Mr Ashdown has already tempered the
Liberal Democrats' reflex Europeanism with the promise of a referendum on
the next stage of integration.
He intends to benefit from popular disenchantment with the government's
domestic policies - and from any divisions which emerge during Labour's
leadership race.
John Smith's premature death did more than deprive the Labour party of a
popular and astute leader. It shifted the political landscape. In the next
three weeks the European elections and their aftermath will begin to fill in
the new contours.
