FT  02 SEP 94 / Where Egypt boasts decade of progress: Population curbs have
worked, but there is still far to go
None of the women attending the Cairo Family Planning Association clinic in
the sprawling suburb of Zeinhom yesterday knew that the world's biggest
population conference was due to open up the road on Monday. Few probably
cared; none seemed the least persuaded that seeking family planning advice
might be un-Islamic.
'I'm convinced Islam is not against family planning,' said Hoda, a
30-year-old woman swathed in a black Hejab veil, the badge of Islamic piety.
'My brother-in-law is a religious man and he ordered his wife not to use
contraception. He tried to deter me, but I didn't listen. I encouraged all
my friends to come to the clinic. Now all of them blossom like fresh
jasmine.'
Hoda has stopped at five children, and was having a routine check on her
IUD, a visit which cost 25 piastres (about 5p) at this private clinic. Her
21-year-old sister had come along too. She has two daughters and said that
was enough: 'I have an IUD, and don't plan to have any more children. My
husband would like a son, but he doesn't pressure me.'
For most women visiting the clinic, said Dr Mawahab el-Mouelhy, a UK and
US-educated doctor, birth control is a practical consideration, determined
usually by women's concerns for their health and, perhaps more commonly,
because they simply cannot afford to clothe, feed, educate or house more
children.
For all the criticism by Egypt's religious conservatives of the population
policy agenda of Monday's International Conference on Population and
Development, the strictures of Islam have so far done little to put a brake
on a decade of progress in population control, which Egypt's policymakers
and aid workers consider little short of remarkable.
The population growth rate has plunged from 3 per cent to about 2.1 per
cent. A fertility rate of 5.3 in 1980 has come back to an average of 3.9
births per woman, 2.9 in urban areas. Knowledge of family planning among
married couples is almost universal, while 47 per cent of women use
contraception in Egypt (predominantly IUD devices and the pill) against 24
per cent in 1980.
Behind such results lie 20 years of concerted government policy, backed by
foreign aid, of which USAID has provided 75 per cent of all family planning
assistance, a total of about Dollars 170m (Pounds 113m), to fill the media
with birth control information and stock and staff hundreds of clinics,
enough for 96 per cent of all Egyptian women to be within 5km of a family
planning centre.
But cheered as the government and organisations such as USAID are by such
results, they remain far from meeting their ambition of creating for Egypt a
population growth which the country can comfortably sustain. At present
rates, Egypt's 60m population grows by 1m every 10 months.
The constraints on the country's most basic resources are severe enough; all
but 4 per cent of its 1m sq km is desert. A recent report by the UN's
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia reckoned Egypt was consuming
95 per cent of its available water sources and faced a water deficit by the
year 2000.
By most estimates, the economy needs to generate about 500,000 jobs a year
to mop up new entrants to the labour force, implying an annual growth rate
of 5 per cent of GDP, more than twice the most optimistic estimates of
present growth. The World Bank reckons that at least 5m new jobs must be
created by 2000 even to halve the present unemployment rate of 20 per cent.
But population experts tend to agree that cutting the growth rate to perhaps
1.9 per cent is unlikely to come by providing more pills, coils or publicity
campaigns alone.
'There is something missing,' says Dr el-Mouelhy. 'Which is the status of
women in this country. We need to work hard on this. It's not just family
planning, its about education of women.'
Emphasis on the education of girls is a central theme of the conference's
draft document to be discussed next week in Cairo, and one which groups such
as USAID and the Population Council hope the conference's hosts will take to
heart. A well established concomitant between raised educational standards
among girls and subsequent falls in fertility rates is seen as the key to
future policy in countries such as Egypt, these groups argue.
A guide to the task lying ahead for Egypt lies in the fact that, by
conservative estimates, at least 66 per cent of Egyptian women are
illiterate.
Changing that will require more than the provision of teachers and schools,
of which Egypt must already build on average one a day to keep up with the
rise in schoolchildren. It will need an attempt to alter many ingrained
attitudes, and is likely to depend on an improved economic climate. All that
before the air can thicken with the scent of jasmine.
