FT  22 JAN 94 / Complex game in the souk: Dominic Lawson goes looking for a
chess set and falls for the carpet gambit
Abdullah, the handsome young major-domo at our loaned villa in Marrakesh,
shook his head when we told him we wanted to visit the souk. 'I would never
go there,' he said. 'As foreigners you will be pestered until you take on a
guide. Then he will take you only to the shops run by his contacts. It's all
side-deals and hidden commissions.'
'Don't worry,' I said, 'we can take care of ourselves. And my wife runs a
store in London. She knows all about profit margins.'
'Marrakesh is not London,' sighed Abdullah, 'but all right, I'll drive you
there.'
Of those would-be guides who pestered us at the entrance to the souk, we
took pity on one who rested on a crutch. Once inside the market we soon
realised that the main purpose of the crutch was to deliver stunning blows
to other guides who wanted to poach us.
'What you wanna buy?' asked our guide, panting from the effort of repeatedly
swinging his crutch above the perpendicular.
'A chess set,' I said.
'Another chess set,' corrected my wife.
'I take you to the best place,' said our guide, and, hobbling at a startling
pace, took us on a route which seemed to double back on itself several
times. Finally we arrived, possibly next door to where we had started, at a
shop which indeed, seemed to contain nothing but chess sets. They were all
of identical design, a reminder that it is not just observance of tradition,
but also fantastic lack of imagination, which ensures that the Islamic world
retains its medieval integrity.
'These chess sets are all the same,' I said to the shopkeeper.
'No,' he replied, 'they are in many different sizes.'
'They are all too small,' I said, irritably.
Then I heard my wife's shout from the basement of the shop. 'Come and look
at this]'
Downstairs was the biggest chess set I had ever seen, the pieces sitting
fatly on a board which must have been at least a yard square.
'Not too small?' inquired the shop owner.
'Not too small,' I said. The man named an exorbitant price.
Then I noticed a big crack in the board. 'It can be repaired,' said the
shopkeeper.
'No,' said my wife, in the tone of voice I imagine she uses with
manufacturers bringing in faulty goods. 'Make another one exactly this size,
and we will come back in a week to pick it up.'
A week later we arrived back at the shop. No giant chess set. The owner
wrung his hands. 'You see sir, we had your new set in the window, when a
member of the royal family walked by. He wanted it. And in this country,
when a member of the royal family wants something, he can just take it. Do
you have such problems with the royal family in your country?'
Not waiting for my reply, he suddenly brightened. 'So we hid your chess set.
And now I will take you to it.'
Another tortuous route found us in a carpet shop. The carpet shop owner sat
us down. 'The chess set will be ready in half an hour,' he said. 'Would you
like to see some carpets?'
'No,' we replied in unison.
The rest you can guess. After about half an hour of noeing we finally
cracked and shook hands on a deal to buy two carpets. At exactly that
moment, as the carpet man's hand gripped mine, two colleagues staggered into
the room bearing the missing chess board. 'Oh, what a surprise,' said my
wife.
At the door of the shop, an incredibly old looking man waited, attached to a
barrow on to which our chess board, pieces and carpets were loaded. Bent
low, he dragged our possessions out of the souk and towards our car.
Unfortunately no such service exists at Gatwick airport: we had to drag our
own booty towards and through the Red Channel of the Customs ourselves.
'What have we here?' asked the customs officer. We tried to explain. 'Some
of that lot attracts duty at 33 per cent,' he said, finally.
'Why so much?' I asked. The customs man looked at me, amazed at the fatuity
of the question. 'Protectionism,' he replied.
Where were you when we needed protecting, I thought. I did not say anything
so tactless, of course: I hoped to do a deal.
Dominic Lawson is Editor of The Spectator
