FT  07 NOV 94 / Media Futures: Newspapers: the eyes have it - A case for
traditional reading matter
It is a truth universally acknowledged that newspapers will soon be popping
their clogs - that the newspaper is to television what the pony and trap was
to the motor car.
I beg to differ. Unarguably, newspaper circulations have fallen during the
40 or so years since television got going. But they have not plummeted. In
the mid-1950s, when post-war newsprint rationing ended and papers were
artificially cheap, the total circulation of Britain's national dailies
peaked at 16.7m. After 35 years of television, that figure had dropped to
15.6m. During the late 1980s, total circulations grew.
The Sundays, admittedly, fared worse in the 1950s and 1960s, but likewise
later stabilised. So the walk to the virtual scaffold, if such it be, has
been long and sedate.
The soothsayers believe the walk is about to turn into a trot. Their on-line
tea leaves predict that as televisual communications become faster, cheaper,
more sophisticated, more flexible - and interactive - people will get more
and more of their news, data, entertainment and know-how off the screen.
Before too long, everything newspapers now offer will be provided
televisually, and everyone knows that a pixel is worth 1,000 words, don't
they? Again, I beg to differ.
Forget, for the moment, superhighways, CD-Roms, surfing on the Internet and
the plethora of less-than-user-friendly hyper-jargon. Think, instead, about
the human eye - upon which, in the end, all the cybernetic doodahs depend.
From the eye's point of view there are several key differences between
printed communications and televisual communications. First, televisual
communications must be sequential. In future it may be possible to alter the
sequences - to get your sport at the beginning of the TV news instead of at
the end. Even that will be hideously difficult and costly. But you will
never be able to start at the end and work backward. Or, if you do, you
won't be able to make sense of it.
You can't make much sense of watching film backwards. Human eyes (and ears
and brains) don't work that way. But human eyes can, and do, start anywhere
on a page, and skip around. This will prove to be much more significant than
it may seem, for it leads to another - perhaps still more significant -
difference between printed and televisual media. The eye can scan this
entire edition of the FT in minutes, selecting the items you want to explore
further. Imagine doing that by pressing buttons to bring articles on to your
screen. You might hardly get beyond sorting out the leader page.
And this is anything but unimportant. To read your FT from beginning to end
(excluding the market prices) would take six or seven hours. (Even reading
The Sun would take a couple of hours). So it would be impossible to include
the full contents of the FT - or even of The Sun  - in a television news
programme.
With a newspaper your eyes can sort out what interests you most and
eliminate what does not. You can start to read an article, then stop, or hop
from paragraph to paragraph, or go back and re-read if you haven't
understood something. Try doing that on a screen, with or without a remote
control.
Not that there is much benefit in getting data from a screen if you have to
read it. The benefit of a screen is either that an announcer can read it to
you (but how slow), or that the data can be interwoven with relevant film
material (making it sequentially time-consuming). True, screens can
constantly update data, as can radio. But how many areas of information
require continuous updating? Even watching the news non-stop is dullsville.
Sky News and CNN are great to dip into - dreary as hell to sit glued to.
And I have not even mentioned the more mundane benefits of newspapers. They
are portable, light, silent, very cheap and can be disposed of easily. They
can be studied, scribbled on and passed around. They don't crash or catch
viruses. They can be stuck on notice-boards and photo-copied. Above all,
they can be handled by non-computer-literate, non-dextrous, non-interactive
dumb human beings like me.
With all these advantages, one cannot help but wonder whether - had TV been
invented by Caxton and printing by John Logie Baird - seers would not now be
predicting the demise of TV and an explosion of printed communications.
Advertisers are in no doubt about the efficacy of printed messages. Although
their market share has dipped, total print media in Britain still account
for 55 per cent of all advertising expenditure compared with 28 per cent for
television. (In fact, the fastest-growing UK advertising medium at the
moment is homely, old-fashioned steam radio).
None of which is intended to imply that televisual communications are not
about to grow rapidly. Patently they are. But they are less competitive with
newspapers than they seem. The two forms of media complement each other, and
will co-exist for as far ahead as the human eye can see. And it will be the
human eye - not futuristic technology - which evaluates their relative
strengths and weaknesses.
If Britain's national dailies continue to lose circulation, as they have in
the past, by 1.1m copies every 35 years - we are talking trends, aren't we?
 -they will still be selling 2m or so copies daily in 2,500. That is not a
problem I can get worked up about right now.
Winston Fletcher is chairman of the UK Advertising Association, and chairman
of the advertising agency DFSD Bozell, whose clients include the Financial
Times.
