FT  21 SEP 94 / Aristide sees rivals still in power: Profile of Haiti's
turbulent priest in exile
The agreement producing the peaceful US occupation of Haiti has been broadly
approved, even if with some reservations, in the US. But the one man in
whose name it was effected remained noticeably unenthusiastic.
Father Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the ousted president who now lives in a
modest one-bedroom apartment in the middle of Washington, stayed silent for
a day and a half after President Bill Clinton announced the deal negotiated
with the Haitian military leaders. Yesterday he issued a terse statement
calling for 'a state of law so that there will be neither violence nor
vengeance in our nation', but pointedly refusing to endorse the agreement.
Mr Aristide's supporters have been less reticent. Randall Robinson, the
human rights activist, Michael Barnes, the former congressman from Maryland
in charge of public relations for Mr Aristide and Robert White, the
ex-diplomat, have all criticised Sunday's agreement for leaving the military
junta free from criminal charges for human rights abuses and under no
obligation to leave Haiti.
Nor was Mr Aristide's name other than perfunctorily mentioned in the
ceremonies marking the return of the US team headed by former President
Jimmy Carter. One of its members, Senator Sam Nunn, even went so far as to
disclose that he had told the junta not to equate democracy with one man -
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
In reality, the ousted president probably has little alternative but to
accept once again the hand he has been dealt, if he wants to return to his
homeland for the year-plus left of his term. But he will surely go back a
different man.
The US administration has found him hard to characterise over the last three
years. A typical assessment came over the weekend from Bill Gray, the US
special envoy to Haiti. 'Who is Aristide?' he asked rhetorically. 'He's a
Haitian. A priest. An intellectual. An ideologue. Not your practical pol who
has lived in a functioning democracy.'
Mr Jean-Bertrand Aristide certainly was - and perhaps in some measure still
is - a classic product of the school of liberation theology which has caused
so much controversy in the Roman Catholic Church over the last generation.
What separates him from the large class of politically activist priests is
that he carried his beliefs in defiance of Rome all the way into the elected
office of the presidency of his country.
He was born, on July 15 1953, in the southern fishing village of Port Salut.
His father, a land-owning peasant, died when he was young and in 1959 he
moved, with his mother and sister, to Port-au-Prince.
His education was at schools and seminaries run by the Salesian Fathers in
the Haitian capital, with his novitiate spent, in 1974-75, in the
neighbouring Dominican Republic. He obtained his bachelor's degree in
psychology from the University of Haiti in 1979 and, after further studies
in Italy, Israel, Britain and Canada, was ordained a priest in the Salesian
Order on July 3 1982, and was assigned as curate in the St Joseph parish on
the outskirts of Port-au-Prince.
From the very outset, Mr Aristide was an outspoken critic of the Duvalier
dictatorship. He used his religion as a club - or, as he once put it, 'the
Gospel, in its raw form, could act like a stick of dynamite'. More
practically, he set up centres for the homeless, community stores, car
washes and schools to cater to the needs of the destitute.
Duvalier's exile in 1986 in no way calmed his social and political activism
and he was a thorn in the side of the subsequent military regime. Twice, in
1987 and 1988, he barely escaped assassination attempts, in the second of
which 12 of his parishioners were killed and over 70 wounded at his church,
now Saint-Jean Bosco in Port-au-Prince.
But his relentless criticism of the status quo also brought him into severe
conflict with the local Catholic hierarchy, always close to successive
authoritarian regimes in Haiti, and with the Vatican. In 1987, the Salesian
Fathers tried to persuade him to stop preaching in favour of the poor and to
leave Haiti, but he resisted.
In 1988 he was expelled from the order. He appealed, but received no
response from Rome for two years - until the month he was elected president.
He then spent more than a year, admittedly depressed at the conflict with
his religious superiors, but also writing extensively.
The military regime was overthrown early in 1990 and general elections
called. Initially, Mr Aristide refused to run for office, but he registered
as a presidential candidate on October 18, the deadline for filing. On
December 16, he won over two-thirds of the vote and became Haiti's first
democratically elected president.
He was sworn into office on February 7 1991, but only after an attempted
coup in January, led by Roger Lafontant, former head of the Tonton Macoutes,
was undone by massive street protests by his supporters. In the course of
this, the Catholic cathedral in Port-au-Prince was burned and the Vatican
embassy sacked.
As president, Mr Aristide confounded expectations based on his lifelong
criticism of neo-colonialism and international financial institutions by
entering negotiations with the IMF and World Bank. He accepted the need for
reform, including higher taxes, a devalued currency and cuts in the state
bureaucracy.
His heart, however, remained clearly well to the left of centre on any
political chart, with programmes promoting literacy and radical
reorganisation of the peasantry.
But his party, the National Front for Change and Democracy, did not command
the legislature and increasingly he relied on organised popular
demonstrations to get his way.
At least twice Mr Aristide spoke approvingly of the use of the 'necklace'
(the burning tire placed round the neck of the victim). He also established
his own armed presidential guard, evidence, to his critics, of increasing
paranoia.
He attended the UN general assembly session in New York in September 1991,
at a time when coup rumours were rife. The denouement finally came after his
return, on September 30, with the army coup led by Lt Gen Raoul Cedras. Mr
Aristide fled to Venezuela and later in the year took up residence in
Washington.
His financial sustenance since then has come from the approximately Dollars
35m (Pounds 22.5m) in Haitian official financial assets in the US frozen by
the Bush administration in the wake of the coup. These funds have also
helped underwrite the vigorous international public relations campaign for
his restoration to power.
In Washington, he has been a predictably controversial figure.
Conservatives, including powerful forces inside the CIA, had long ago
suspected him of anti-Americanism and began publicly to question his mental
stability. His brief term in office, during which he compared himself with
Robespierre, provided plenty of ammunition for those determined to cast
doubt on his democratic credentials.
But he established influential alliances with the US congressional black
caucus, which proved pivotal in the unfolding Clinton administration
policies towards Haiti. He was also circumspect in criticising both the Bush
and Clinton administrations and demonstrated, in the abortive Governor's
Island agreement, considerable flexibility.
But in recent weeks, as the momentum towards his restoration by force
gathered pace, it became clear that Mr Aristide accepted that he had to
convince his US patrons of his democratic credentials.
Thus, last Friday, he confirmed what Mr Clinton had said the night before -
that, in accordance with the Haitian constitution, he would not stand in
presidential elections due in December next year. He had maintained that the
1991 coup had deprived him of three years of his term of office, which he
was entitled to reclaim.
The words he used were music to the administration's ear. In a democracy, he
said, 'it is the second election that is the most important'. He also
committed himself to amnesty and reconciliation and held out the hope that
his people could now move 'from misery to poverty - with dignity'.
But that was spoken under the assumption, reasonable given Mr Clinton's
commitment, that the junta would be physically gone when he got back - even
if out of the reach of Haitian or other justice. Now they are being spoken
of, if not as heroes, then as simple military men of honour with whom past
and present US presidents can do business. Swallowing this bitter pill will
surely test the Christian charity that was not always his most visible
trademark while president.
