FT  05 OCT 94 / International Company News: Bouygues-led consortium wins
mobile net licence
The French government yesterday announced that a consortium headed by
Bouygues, the construction and communications group, had won the
fiercely-contested and potentially lucrative licence to operate the
country's third mobile telephone network.
The announcement marks the end of a protracted battle between Bouygues and
two other French industrial giants, Alcatel Alsthom, the telecoms and
engineering group, and Lyonnaise des Eaux, the utilities and construction
company.
Bouygues and its consortium partners, which include Cable &amp; Wireless of the
UK, US West, Veba of Germany and Jean-Claude Decaux, a French property
company, will be granted a 15-year licence to operate a national network.
The licence includes a four-year exclusive right to use the DCS 1800 digital
system in five of France's biggest cities, including Paris and Lyon.
The start-up cost of the network is expected to involve an investment of up
to FFr10bn (Dollars 1.9bn) over the next few years. However, industry
observers say the licence is attractive because of the strong growth
potential of the French market.
The French mobile telephone market has been slow to develop, with about
730,000 subscribers at the end of August, compared with 2.7m in the UK and
1.8m in Italy. But the two existing operators of mobile telephone networks,
France Telecom and Generale des Eaux, the utilities group, report rapid
growth in subscribers since the beginning of the year.
The award of the contract marks a significant victory for Bouygues, which is
seeking to diversify from its traditional base in construction and
engineering.
The French industry ministry said it had been hard to separate Bouygues and
Alcatel, but that Alcatel had been disadvantaged by a few considerations,
including its position as a supplier to the existing operators.
The French industry ministry sought to defuse criticism of the award process
by allowing the defeated consortia to consult the recommendations by the
managing director of the post and telecommunications authority. The ministry
said the offers from the rival groups would be made public, except for where
industrial secrets were compromised.
The sensitivity of the award stemmed from the closed nature of the selection
process and political considerations. In particular, some observers claimed
that Bouygues' controlling stake in TF1, the country's largest television
station, gave it an advantage in view of the presidential elections
scheduled for next spring.
According to the industry ministry, the operation of the licence is
conditional on the maintenance of a stable shareholding structure.
