FT  18 MAR 94 / Murdoch plans to axe BBC news from China satellite service
Mr Rupert Murdoch is planning to stop beaming the BBC World Service
Television News into China, Taiwan and Hong Kong, apparently in response to
Chinese government sensitivities about television news from the west
delivered by satellite.
Mr Murdoch, who last year bought a controlling interest in Star TV, the
satellite system that broadcasts the BBC around Asia, is planning instead to
show a Chinese language film channel.
China recently clamped down on Star TV dishes and it has also expressed
anger with regard to a recent BBC documentary on the life of the late
Chinese leader Mao Zedong and references in programmes to the massacre which
took place in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
News Corporation and the BBC are already in dispute concerning the latter's
plans to launch an Arabic language television service aimed at the Middle
East, a service which would have overlapped geographically with the
five-channel Star service.
The main issue between the BBC and News Corporation, however, is the Star
television news contract and detailed negotiations have been going on for
some time.
Both sides have the right to terminate the contract at the end of this year
but Mr Murdoch wants to end the contract before then.
If agreement can be reached, however, the BBC is prepared to give up the
northern beam of the Star satellite system which broadcasts to China, Taiwan
and Hong Kong, in return for being able to stay on the southern beam which
covers India and the sub-continent, for up to 18 months.
That would give a breathing space to enable the BBC to move World Service
Television News to other satellites in the region, probably with new
partners.
If the BBC cannot reach agreement with Star, it will insist on the contract
being honoured until the end of the year.
According to The Far Eastern Economic Review, the new Chinese movie channel
replacing the BBC in China is to be launched in early May. Marketing plans
have been drawn up and printed material produced for cable television
operators in Taiwan.
In a London speech in September, Mr Murdoch emphasised how advances in the
technology of communications had proved an unambiguous threat to
totalitarian regimes everywhere. Satellite broadcasting in particular, Mr
Murdoch added, had made it possible for information-hungry residents of
closed societies to by-pass state-controlled television.
Last month, Mr Murdoch conceded at a New Delhi press conference that 'there
had been some sensitivity, particularly about beaming foreign news into
China. We certainly intend to do everything we can to resolve certain
difficulties with the government of China'.
