FT  30 APR 94 / Switched on for cyberchat: Christina Lamb has a host of new
contacts since her Internet article
A month ago I wrote about my adventures in cyberspace through Internet, the
worldwide web of computer networks. Just to see what would happen we printed
my e-mail message address quite discreetly at the end for readers to send
comments.
The next morning I switched on my computer to find more than 100 messages -
comments on the article from places as diverse as Poland, Zambia and Los
Angeles.
The following morning I signed on with anticipation to find another 80
messages, many with suggestions for further articles or even series on the
same theme. Some people I had already replied to had written back again.
By the end of the week I had heard from more than 300 readers and one month
on I am still receiving e-mail messages about the piece. This is far more
than our letters editor receives for even the most controversial articles
and many of these are never seen by the reporters.
And while people are usually spurred by irritation to writeletters to a
newspaper, my e-mailers were friendly, positive and did not include a single
Mr Angry. The ease and informality of being able to sit down at the keyboard
and knock off a message directly to the writer seems to stimulate good
humour.
Many, I think, were inspired to correspond by the article's headline, 'Yes
it's true. I was a cybervirgin', dreamt up by an imaginative sub-editor.
Messages often began 'Dear cybervirgin'. Some even wanted to share their own
cyber-deflowering. Robert Dilworth, in Frankfurt, wrote: 'My first time was
six weeks ago and I'm 35 years old . . .' I kept expecting a threatening
message from the Internet postmaster, accusing me of providing a sex
service.
I began to look forward every morning to a new surge of mail and even
cancelling real-life dates in order to have time for new cybercontacts.
Unsurprisingly, given the net's roots in academia, a large number of
messages came from professors and researchers, ranging from the geography
department of Edinburgh University to the English department of Rhodes
College, Memphis; from Nairobi to the University of California (UCLA).
The second biggest group were businessmen, from owners of small companies
extolling the virtues of Internet in enabling them to develop a home-based
business into one with customers and suppliers all over world, to the
president of Citibank in Moscow who kept me updated on the city's snowfall.
The third most prolific message-senders work for organisations such as the
World Bank, a UK teachers' union, the UN and the European Union.
I heard from FT correspondents in remote places such as Kiev and with whom I
am now carrying on a lively correspondence; I received messages from an old
schoolfriend with whom I had lost touch; and from contacts in Brazil, my
last posting, telling me the latest gossip and inflation figure. A man in
Bombay even said the article had saved his skin by providing fodder for a
talk he was due to give.
Apart from being entertaining, many were useful. A professor in South Africa
is giving me a daily personal account of the elections, while a reporter on
the local Boston paper is providing a useful exchange of ideas. While the
length of some messages led me to speculate over the amount of time some
people had on their hands, one paediatrician impressed me by writing his
e-mail mid-air, ready to send as soon as the flight landed.
Most of the messages came from enthusiasts frustrated by the media's
tendency to focus on negative aspects of Internet.
Many described signing on initially just for messaging, only to find a new
world awaiting them. James Quirke, from Wolverhampton, who subscribed to
correspond with his daughter at Bradford university, says: 'Yes it is
addictive but I've never had so many friends.'
Some wanted to complain about cyberjunk; others had been inspired by the
article to try to access the mass of information available online. For some,
messaging me was their first attempt at e-mail overseas or outside their
company. There emerged a generalised frustration over the cost of access in
Europe, although I received many suggestions for the cheapest methods.
The experience showed that such interactivity will be the norm in the
future. In the US, more than 100 newspapers are online and subscribers can
message reporters directly for more information or to comment on articles.
Some newspapers, such as the Raleigh Observer in North Carolina, have their
computer systems connected to local schools enabling students to send in
sports reports or make comments.
And from the journalist's perspective, for the first time in seven years I
feel a real sense of who readers are and what they are interested in.
The only problem is that I am so busy reading and replying to e-mail that
there is no time left to write articles . . .
