FT  30 NOV 94 / Budget '94 (News and Analysis): Moratorium to reduce number
of receiverships - Company rescues
The government is pressing ahead with reforms to company rescue procedures
which have been fiercely attacked by the banks and the insolvency
profession.
In an attempt to reduce the number of viable companies going into
receivership, the government is to introduce a 28-day moratorium to give
insolvent companies time to reach voluntary arrangements with creditors.
The moratorium will be binding on all parties, including companies' banks.
The proposal, which the Department of Trade and Industry put forward in a
consultative document last November, has been attacked by the banks which
argued that it would discourage lending.
The DTI said last night that following the consultations a broad consensus
had emerged supporting the moratorium.
However, Mr Malcolm London, president of the Insolvency Practitioners
Association and a partner of accountants Coopers &amp; Lybrand, said that
applying the moratorium to banks as well as unsecured creditors could be
damaging.
He called for further consultation. 'Banks are generally sensible anyway.
This could influence their attitude to lending in future if they felt their
freedom to manoeuvre will be limited.'
In contrast, the proposal has been welcomed by the Confederation of British
Industry on the grounds that it would reduce the number of corporate
failures.
However, the Society for the Practitioners of Insolvency, the largest trade
body, has published research suggesting that it would have little impact on
company survival rates.
There have been worries that it would increase risk of fraud, but the
chancellor stressed that there would have to be 'proper safeguards to
prevent abuse' during the moratorium.
Mr Clarke also announced further consultation on a proposed mechanism that
would facilitate the substitution of equity for debt of firms in
administration or receivership. He said: 'This could have a profound
influence on behaviour during insolvency negotiations and lead all parties
to focus on the potential of business for continued trading.'
Mr London commented: 'This may have a role to play in relation to large
companies, but it is difficult to see how it would apply to small
insolvencies in practice.'
The British Bankers' Association has attacked the moratorium proposal saying
it would weaken their right to preferential treatment over other creditors
and limit their freedom to appoint receivers to troubled companies. Last
night the association said it would not comment until it had consulted
members.
