FT  14 JUN 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Indian government red-faced
over sugar crisis - A look at a supply shortage that is being blamed on
'import bungling'
The failure of the Indian food ministry to recognise in time the extent of
shortfall in sugar production in the current season and arrange sufficient
imports has snowballed into a major political crisis for the federal
government.
The opposition parties, which are putting pressure on the government to
institute an independent enquiry into the 'sugar import bungling', will no
doubt take advantage of the issue during assembly elections in the nine
states at the end of the year.
It was known quite early in the season that India would for the second
consecutive year suffer a heavy setback in sugar production. The initial
production estimate of 11m (repeat 11m) tonnes for 1993-94 has been scaled
down to 9.8m tonnes. According to industry officials, however, the season
may end with still lower output.
The current year's production, plus opening stocks of 3.2m tonnes, will
hardly leave any sugar to be carried forward to next season after meeting
the domestic requirement of over 12m tonnes. And as there is negligible
production of sugar in the first two months of the season, India cannot do
without large-scale imports.
The prospect of shortage has led to a sharp increase in the open market
sugar prices. (Under the distribution control mechanism, 60 per cent of the
industry's production is sold in the open market. The balance 40 per cent is
distributed through fair price shops at fixed rates.)
Even then, it was only on March 9 that the government allowed the duty-free
import of sugar. Earlier, however, the government allowed the import of raw
sugar for refining by the local factories for re-export at a minimum value
addition of 7.5 per cent.
In the beginning, the Indian Sugar &amp; General Industry Exim Corporation, the
industry's trading arm, and some private parties were making imports. At a
much later stage, at the intervention of Mr Narasimha Rao, the prime
minister, government trading agencies like the State Trading Corporation and
Minerals &amp; Metals Trading Corporation started making import contracts.
Procrastination by the government about directing its trading agencies to
import sugar has given opposition parties a weapon to use against it. Mr
Kalpnath Rai, the food minister and the opposition's main target, caused a
major surprise when he barred the Food Corporation of India from signing
import contracts for 600,000 tonnes of sugar on the grounds that the agency
lacked experience in trading.
Import contracts made by STC and MMTC are, however, at much higher prices
than the offers FCI received. This is because STC and MMTC had entered the
market later. According to commerce ministry sources, India had so far
signed import contracts for 1.14m tonnes of sugar, including 535,000 tonnes
by STC and MMTC.
