FT  15 JUL 94 / Bretton Woods (50 Years): Managers, not police - Mahbub ul
Haq continues the anniversary series
If Lord Keynes and Harry White were to rise from their graves, would they
recognise their own creations? The chances are rather slim, for the Bretton
Woods institutions have drifted far from their original vision. Keynes
proposed a fund equal to one half of world imports, to enable it to exercise
a major influence on the global monetary system. Even the more conservative
White proposed reserves equalling one-sixth of world imports.
Keynes also regarded balance of payments surpluses as a vice and deficits as
a virtue, since deficits sustained global effective demand and generated
employment. Moreover, at the heart of the global monetary system were to be
fixed, but adjustable, exchange rates.
Today, the International Monetary Fund controls liquidity equal to only 2
per cent of world imports. Deficit nations, particularly in the developing
world, come under tremendous pressure for adjustment, but surplus nations do
not. Finally, fixed exchange rates collapsed in the early 1970s and
subsequent attempts to introduce a modicum of stability have proved largely
futile.
The World Bank did help raise market funds at lower cost, with longer
maturities, and for purposes that private markets would not have touched. It
also introduced the International Development Association in 1960, to
provide cheap loans to poor nations. Yet recently its net resource
transfers, including IDA funds, have been negative, to the tune of Dollars
1bn to Dollars 2bn a year. Private lending to developing countries has
increased rapidly, but three-quarters of it has been to about 10 relatively
better-off economies in Latin America and south-east Asia.
Two aspects of this 50-year evolution are particularly worrying. First, the
Bretton Woods institutions are no longer institutions of global management:
they police the developing world instead. The Group of Seven leading
industrial countries and the private capital markets have taken over the
global job.
Second, while founders of the Bretton Woods institutions were searching for
expansionary economic policies, world leaders have now become more
preoccupied with inflation than with jobs (though the pendulum is beginning
to swing back once more).
The developing countries have, unfortunately, had to live with the
consequences of the more deflationary agendas of the industrial world. The
emphasis has too often been on adjustment via demand contraction rather than
supply expansion. Also, the wrong items have usually been cut. There are
many low-priority budgetary items. Yet education and health expenditures
have often been trimmed ahead of military expenditures, and food subsidies
to the poor slashed in preference to subsidies to landlords and
industrialists. The staff of the Bretton Woods institutions do not normally
seek such outcomes, but they should have offered stronger resistance.
What reforms would help reposition these institutions for the 21st century?
There does need to be a global institution to ensure sound macro-economic
management and global monetary stability. It should be able to perform five
functions:
Help stabilise global economic activity.
Act as a lender of last resort to financial institutions.
Calm financial markets when they become disorderly.
Regulate banks and institutions with an international reach.
Create and regulate new international liquidity.
At least the first four functions must be played by the IMF if it is to
reclaim its role in the global monetary system. Four cautious steps would
start it in the right direction.
First, there should be a new issue of some SDR 30bn-50bn in reserves. This
is appropriate now, when inflationary pressures are low, primary commodity
prices have hit bottom, most industrial countries are reducing budget
deficits and an extra dose of global liquidity might help fuel world
economic recovery.
Second, the Compensatory and Contingency Financial Facility (CCFF) of the
IMF should offer full compensation for shortfalls in exports. Its loan
period also needs to be extended. Even more important, there should be no
policy conditionality.
Third, in collaboration with the Bank for International Settlements, the IMF
should gain some regulatory control over international banking.
Fourth, the IMF must acquire a greater role in global macro-economic
management, by exerting influence over the policies of major industrial
powers.
The World Bank is the finest institution for advising developing countries
on economic growth, but it needs to develop greater sensitivity and
expertise in linking growth to human lives. It must also find new ways of
recycling resources. Real IDA availability per poor person has been
shrinking, greatly limiting the bank's options. There will need to be more
innovative ways of raising finance to address global poverty.
Finally, the bank must consider restructuring its own debts. It has advised
all other creditors to restructure their debts, but refused to reschedule
its own, citing its charter and concern about its credit rating. The result
is that the bank will end up recycling the servicing of its own past
lending, rather than transferring new resources.
Two broader points must be made. One is that any proposal for a merger of
the IMF and the World Bank would be extremely unpopular in the developing
world. Rightly or wrongly, there is a lot more goodwill for the World Bank
in the developing countries than for the IMF.
Second, the United Nations needs to be reborn as a force for peace, rather
than just a police force. Since conflicts are increasingly within nations
rather than between them, sustaining peace requires socio-economic
development. Also necessary is a far broader consultative process than is
offered by the G7. For these purposes an Economic Security Council should be
established within the UN which should supervise the policy direction of all
international economic institutions, including the Bretton Woods twins.
The founders of the Bretton Woods institutions and the UN were neither
inhibited nor timid 50 years ago. But where is our creativity now regarding
the future shape of global economic governance? It is time to begin
designing the global institutions of the 21st century.
The author is a former finance minister of Pakistan, a former official of
the World Bank and is currently chief architect of the UNDP's annual Human
Development Report. Previous articles in the series were on June 21 and 28,
and July 8
