FT  17 MAR 94 / North Korean nuclear deal on verge of collapse
A deal to resolve suspicions about North Korea's nuclear programme appeared
to be on the verge of collapse yesterday after the International Atomic
Energy Agency confirmed its inspectors had been unable to carry out some
checks on one of its nuclear sites.
'Important measures agreed to in writing before the team went (to North
Korea) were refused,' an agency spokesman said. This was particularly the
case at the Yongbyon radiochemical laboratory. 'As a result the agency was
not in a position to verify there had been no diversion of nuclear material
at the facility.'
The IAEA will hold a special meeting of board member states on Monday to
decide on a response to obstructions.
The spokesman added that six experts of the IAEA team just back in Vienna
after a two-week visit to North Korea had been unable to take some samples
and measurements, and that there were 'problems' with seals placed on IAEA
monitoring equipment.
Mr Hans Blix, IAEA director-general, yesterday briefed representatives of 50
member states, though details of the briefings were not made public.
The US had promised to cancel this year's Team Spirit military exercise in
South Korea and hold a new round of high-level talks with North Korea on
possible diplomatic recognition if Pyongyang allowed unrestricted IAEA
inspections and exchanged envoys with Seoul.
The US State Department said last night that the meeting was unlikely to go
ahead next Monday because of the restrictions placed on the IAEA inspectors.
North Korea's refusal to carry out the terms of its agreement with the US
might be part of its negotiating strategy to gain 'leverage' to win new
concessions from the US and guarantee that Washington fulfilled its end of
the deal, a Foreign Ministry official said in Seoul.
On Tuesday, North Korea complained the US 'had raised unreasonable
preconditions' for suspension of Team Spirit, adding it would stop
negotiations with Washington unless the demands were dropped.
By raising new objections itself, Pyongyang may be seeking the repetition of
a deal concluded with the US in January 1992 under which Washington
suspended that year's Team Spirit in return for North Korea accepting
regular IAEA inspections, according to analysts in Seoul. Progress in
nuclear talks between North and South Korea was not included as a condition
in that earlier agreement.
North Korea was also balking at an exchange of envoys, who would discuss the
implementation of a 1991 bilateral non-nuclear pact, in an attempt to create
differences between Seoul and Washington and break their close co-ordination
on the nuclear issue, South Korean diplomats said.
Pyongyang also wanted to minimise the status of South Korea, which it has
accused of being a client state of the US, they added. Resumption of Team
Spirit in March 1993 angered the North, which then blocked the IAEA from
examining its nuclear sites until this month.
The North also threatened to withdraw from the nuclear non-proliferation
treaty a year ago in response to the IAEA's demand to examine two undeclared
sites, suspected to be nuclear waste dumps. The IAEA believes inspection of
the waste could determine if the North has processed more plutonium than it
has declared.
The North has repeatedly said it will not allow inspection of these two
sites, which were not included in the recent IAEA visit.
