FT  26 OCT 94 / Leading Article: Rooting out corruption
Not before time, Mr John Major has perceived the need for a comprehensive
inquiry into standards in British public life. The prime minister's
announcement in the House of Commons yesterday is welcome, but it might
better have been made sooner. Over the past few days two of his junior
ministers have been obliged to resign, following allegations that they
received payments in return for political favours. If that was the whole
story, Mr Major might be said to have acted both decisively and swiftly.
In terms of public disquiet, however, these falls from grace were merely the
latest in a long series of incidents, some of them similar, some of a
different nature. Conservative politicians in particular have been put under
the spotlight, and too often found wanting, since the 'back to basics'
campaign of a year ago, and indeed before that. There has been a growing
perception, fed by media inquiries and opposition statements, that after 15
years in office some prominent members of the governing party are behaving
with less care or good sense than they should.
This must be seen in perspective. The British inclination is to believe that
corrupt behaviour happens in other countries, but not at home. A more
accurate proposition is that malfeasance uncovered elsewhere is often on a
far larger scale than in Britain, but that the trade-off of cash for favours
has become universal.
Relatively small
The corruption revealed in Italy was systemic. It led to the overthrow of
the long-established parties, and the election of Mr Berlusconi. Large sums
of money, and large banks, are implicated in tales of corruption in Spain.
The allegations of malpractice that recently forced two French ministers to
resign involve greater sums, and more obvious departures from probity, than
anything said in the recent British cases. Mr Edouard Balladur has had to
contend with allegations that his ministers took serious money; Mr Major
that junior members of his government dabbled in peanuts.
The prime minister has been forced to take action because of an accumulation
of relatively small incidents of corruption, most of it rather petty and
some of it involving the exercise of political patronage rather than the
receipt of cash. Questionable individuals donate money to Conservative
funds. Appointments to public bodies are not listed; the suspicion grows
that they are politically motivated. The Scott inquiry has yet to report on
the exercise of ministerial and official discretion in the matter of arms
sales to Iraq.
Independent scrutiny
Mr Major's announcement yesterday addresses some, but not all, of the many
such issues that have arisen over the past few years. The standing committee
he is to set up will 'examine current concerns about standards of conduct of
all holders of public office, including arrangements relating to financial
and commercial activities, and make recommendations as to any changes in
present arrangements which might be required to ensure the highest standards
in public life'.
To judge from his remarks in the House, Mr Major does not envisage that the
new committee, to be chaired by Lord Nolan, will examine the sources of
payments to political parties. It should. Mr Major said nothing about
publishing a list of members of quangos, or subjecting their appointments to
independent scrutiny. He should do so now.
Lord Nolan is not to examine the charges against individual ministers; that
inquisition will take place, in camera, in a parliamentary committee. It
should be held in public, even though some of the evidence may come from Mr
Mohamed Fayed, an Egyptian-born financier, whose motives were put in
question yesterday by both the prime minister and the leader of the
opposition.
Otherwise, as Mr Tony Blair, the Labour leader, said, 'there will be
justifiable public concern that the general inquiry is being used to sweep
the particular allegations from public view, when it is these allegations
that have given rise to the public concern'.
Mr Major's announcement may take some of the heat off the government. The
inclusion of local authorities in its remit makes it likely that some Labour
councils will be shown to be corrupt. But he needs to do more if he is to
restore public confidence.
