FT  29 JAN 94 / Lautro to impose heavier fines
Lautro, the self-regulating body for the life insurance industry, is to warn
members that those who fail the second round of inspection visits can expect
heavier penalties.
This tough line will be set out in a statement expected in the second half
of next month.
The second round of periodic visits to member firms has begun and the fines
imposed on those who do not meet the regulator's standards are likely to
emerge within the next couple of months. Lautro has imposed a series of
fines within the last few weeks.
Early in January it fined Life Association of Scotland Pounds 145,000 - a
near-record amount - for failing to screen and supervise its sales force
properly. Among other faults, the company ignored the warnings of its own
compliance officer about the behaviour of some sales agents. The following
week Crown Life was fined Pounds 130,000 for failing to control its internal
affairs responsibly and for employing a sales agent who had been convicted
of illegal deposit-taking - an activity Crown Life allowed him to continue.
On Thursday Laurentian Life, the life and pensions company, was fined Pounds
70,000 for breaches of Lautro rules over a four-year period to July 1992.
These offences included selling investors policies they could not afford,
and failing to record investors' existing policies.
Lautro's decision to take a tougher stance was first signalled last November
in a statement by Mr Barry Sherlock, its chairman.
He said that the one-in-six failure rate in the first round of visits was
unacceptable. 'Those failing at the second round must expect disciplinary
action and are likely to face tougher penalties,' he added.
Next month's statement is also expected to set Lautro's approach to fining
in context. The regulator believes that bad publicity for firms can be as
much of a penalty and deterrent as the fines.
Fimbra, the self-regulating body for financial advisers, announced yesterday
that fees for member firms for 1994-95 would rise by an average 17 per cent.
