FT  02 DEC 94 / Arts: Festival director drops the baton - The
Schleswig-Holstein dream has turned to nightmare
It was a dream come true - a festival for ordinary people, set in
picturesque north European landscape, mixing international stars and
homespun atmosphere. But the dream has suddenly become a nightmare.
The Schleswig-Holstein music festival, one of Germany's most successful
cultural events, caught everyone by surprise last week when it announced a
deficit of DM3.75m (Pounds 1.5m). The state government in Kiel - the
festival's biggest single backer - pinned the blame on its founder and
artistic director, Justus Frantz. As pressure mounted for his dismissal,
Frantz resigned.
Frantz then began a public slanging match with the Schleswig-Holstein
economics minister, Peer Steinbruck, who chairs the festival board. Frantz
said he would sue the state government for defamation, and claimed he had
had no responsibility for festival finances since 1992. Steinbruck accused
Frantz of trying to bring the whole festival edifice down around him.
Supporters of the festival are now asking if it can survive without Frantz,
whose energy, international contacts and fund-raising ability fuelled its
whirlwind growth. Yehudi Menuhin and other prominent artists have voiced
solidarity with Frantz, and several say they will boycott future events.
Sponsors - who contributed a quarter of the DM16m budget - have also begun
to withdraw. 'Justus Frantz is the Schleswig-Holstein festival', said one.
Meanwhile, the state government has named a British concert agent, Jasper
Parrott, as chairman of a new artistic advisory committee. The appointment
has been criticised by representatives of the German music industry, who say
Parrott cannot offer independent advice while he has his own artists to
promote.
Although the festival always projected itself well to the outside world,
insiders say problems had been building up for years. The festival was
Frantz's child. Inaugurated in 1986, it thrived on his friendship with
prominent musicians and politicians, including the former German chancellor
Helmut Schmidt. By 1989, it was attracting 300,000 visitors, and had a
budget of more than DM16m. Leonard Bernstein was its local hero, Sergiu
Celibidache gave conducting classes, and quiet towns like Kiel, Lubeck and
Salzau found themselves on the tourist map.
The idea was to provide a new kind of festival - one which attracted the
young and concert-shy as well as the rich and knowledgeable. Concerts were
given in local halls, castles and barns. The atmosphere was informal: Jessye
Norman, Anne-Sophie Mutter and other big-name soloists came within reach of
rural audiences. The state government was only too happy to pump money into
an event which promoted Schleswig-Holstein in the wider world.
As the festival expanded, Frantz's role and controversial operating methods
came under scrutiny. Frantz, 50, is a concert pianist, but his ambitions
have always gone further. The festival enabled him to start a career as a
conductor and music manager. He became known as a wheeler-dealer, charming
businessmen into giving money, negotiating contracts from his home in the
Canary Islands and hosting his own show on German television.
Frantz's critics say he increasingly used the festival to push his own
career. Leading ensembles were invited on the assumption that Frantz would
conduct some performances - for which he was often paid an additional fee.
He began to channel sponsorship towards projects outside the festival. Last
year, some members of the festival orchestra walked out. They questioned his
competence as a conductor and said he was too busy juggling other affairs to
devote time to music.
But the current crisis stems equally from the state government's failure to
build a ladder of responsibility which would serve the festival's long-term
interests. 'How could such a deficit pile up without them knowing?', asked a
disillusioned local volunteer this week in Lubeck. 'Where was the
book-keeping? Why was no-one checking the takings and matching them to the
costs? It's a mystery.'
In 1992 the government installed a finance ministry official as the
festival's business manager. Resentful of political and bureaucratic
interference, Frantz went ahead regardless. In February this year, for
example, the board ordered Frantz to cancel the Kirov Opera visit - but when
he pledged to find the necessary sponsorship, the contract was approved. In
the end, he raised only 10 per cent of the cost, and this summer's Kirov
performances lost DM440,000.
The question now is whether the state government can find a new artistic
director who can stop the festival degenerating into a provincial
Burgerfest. Steinbruck says he would prefer a full-time manager in the mould
of Gerard Mortier at Salzburg, 'someone who can gather leading artistic
personalities around him, without being distracted by his own ambitions as
entertainer, conductor, media star and whatever else.'
The new artistic advisory committee will not meet till mid-January, and will
have no executive function. According to Parrott, any suggestion that the
festival cannot survive without Frantz is 'complete nonsense'. He says there
is a natural period in which artistic projects flourish before losing steam,
and that the festival had reached the point when review and reform were
necessary. 'There is so much basic energy and potential there, far beyond
any single personality. These resources need to be gathered together,
rethought and properly harnessed.'
