FT  07 APR 94 / Survey of International Hotels (5): Gender goes on the
agenda - The needs of women travellers
Female business travellers are finally being treated like their male
counterparts and not as either inferior or non-existent guests.
Compared with 10 years ago, hotels are responding more positively to the
lone woman guest - and the woman host in hotel restaurants. Discrimination
still lingers, however, particularly with older staff, but examples are few
and far between in the mid-1990s.
It has been a long haul. Hotel amenities have slowly improved for women.
Hair dryers are the norm. There is better lighting; bathrobes; skirt
hangers; ironing boards; door spy holes and door chains. (These benefit the
male guest, too.)
But lobbying by the female travellers' sorority was not only about
amenities. Staff attitudes and certain procedures were also criticised.
Security issues were central. Allocating women rooms at the end of long,
dark corridors, for example, or reception staff loudly calling out room
numbers at the check-in desk, were two worries. Technological advancements -
such as plastic, numberless, computer-driven key cards presented in discreet
folders, and the disappearance of the key display behind the counter - have
helped reduce the latter concern.
At first, those few hotel operators bothered enough to take action went too
far, giving women special products and treatment which only served to
alienate those the hotels were trying to reach. (Ironically, Crest's  - now
owned by Forte - 'female rooms', called Lady Crest, were requested more
frequently by male guests than by their target customers.)
The Victoria and Albert hotel in Manchester offers a ladies' wing monitored
by video cameras and equipped with panic buttons. Women do not want to be
singled out for special treatment; this can be patronising. What they want
is equal treatment in service and courtesy offered - and not to be ignored.
'The thing which really annoys me about hotels is that I always get the room
with the longest walk to the lift and, in a restaurant when I'm entertaining
a man, unless you make it clear that you're the host, the waiter inevitably
presents the bill to the man,' says Julia Clark, a public relations
consultant.
Hotels are now at least finding out what female travellers want. Surveys
abound - most of which conclude with what women have been saying all along:
'Treat us the same.' One such survey was undertaken by Hyatt Hotels &amp;
Resorts earlier this year. 'Women don't want preferential treatment, they
want just the same recognition as men,' explains Jim Evans, senior vice
president, sales and marketing, for Hyatt Hotels Corporation.
The survey highlights the fact that extra security is important, and so are
services such as extended room service hours and valet service, a choice of
informal venues where women can enjoy a drink without feeling
self-conscious, and the request for better in-room amenities. 'Many of these
services are also appreciated by male business travellers, so additional
services are added because of, but not specifically for the female business
traveller,' says the survey.
American businesswomen travelling in the US have a better time of it; US
hotels woke up to this new market sector years ago. Women now account for an
astonishing 40 per cent of the total US travel market (Hyatt reckons a more
conservative 25-30 per cent) and, on a global basis, a figure of about 25
per cent - and growing fast. By the year 2000, only six years away, it is
estimated that women will represent half the business traveller market. In
the UK, American Express reckons the women's market share is nearly 20 per
cent of all travellers.
In a hotel market hit by recession, travel suppliers are putting gender on
the agenda. Smaller, less impersonal, 'boutique' hotels, many managed by
women, or with a higher proportion of female management, have eased the
problem. So has women's improved confidence; they are more likely to be
vocal - and to vote with their feet.
Restaurants, often the domain of older staff whom changes in society may
have passed by, remain an area of concern.
Most have not had the experience of treating women on an equal footing and
prove impervious to change. Ramon Pajares, general manager of the Four
Seasons Inn on the Park hotel in London, stresses that older staff need more
training. It is commonplace for a woman dining alone to be given the worst
table in the house - next to the lavatory or the kitchen door. No wonder
most women take room service and an in-room movie for their evening's
entertainment.
The emergence of hotel executive floors has alleviated this to an extent;
the better ones offer complimentary canapes in a small, friendly lounge area
 -a far better option than being snubbed in a public restaurant.
Wine waiters are good at snubbing women - they tend to offer the wine to the
male guest to taste, although the female host has just ordered it.
Similarly, there is still a tendency to give the bill to the male guest,
although it was the woman host who asked for it - and, finally, to return
the credit card, clearly bearing the name of the female owner, to her male
guest.
But if this is the last hurdle, then female business travellers have at
least made progress.
