FT  08 APR 94 / Survey of East Kent (2): More inward investment sought -
East Kent Initiative
The first key objective of the East Kent Initiative has been achieved with
the granting of assisted area status last year and the government's
acknowledgement of the region's problems, but this does not guarantee
recovery. Much more work needs to be done and the Initiative is now
concentrating on attracting inward investment.
'The important point is that people now know where we are. We are getting
many more inquiries and we must convert these into jobs,' says Mr Martin
Hemingway, general manager of the EKI since its launch at the end of 1991.
However, Mr Hemingway, returning to Eurotunnel after his two-year
secondment, stresses that the government grants, while welcome, do nothing
to change the underlying problems.
'The structural difficulties remain - there is insufficient strength in
manufacturing and the major employment areas like the cross-channel ferries,
Customs services and mining are in decline or employ fewer people. It is
these long-term problems that we have to combat.'
The EKI, a partnership of Whitehall, local government and the private
sector, was established to counter these long-term employment problems,
exacerbated by the introduction of the single European market and the
construction of the channel tunnel. A study in the late 1980s showed there
could be a shortfall of 40,000 jobs by the year 2000 if no action was taken.
The idea was that one powerful umbrella organisation would be more effective
at hammering home the need for action and support than individual
organisations and local authorities fighting the same battles but
separately.
Core funding comes from four main private sector sponsors, British Telecom,
Dover Harbour Board, Eurotunnel and P &amp; O European Ferries, whose
contributions are matched by the Department of Employment.
Other contributors are Kent county council, Kent training and enterprise
council, and the six local authorities in East Kent, Ashford, Canterbury,
Dover, Shepway, Swale and Thanet. Chairman of the EKI is Sir Alastair
Morton, chairman of Eurotunnel.
Some of the member organisations have provided personnel, and funding for
individual projects has been secured from a variety of private and public
sources including the European social fund. The newly-appointed general
manager is Mr Ian Gill, former chief executive of Thanet district council,
the only local authority in East Kent to have secured full development area
status.
The role of the EKI has been to stimulate and regenerate the rundown local
economy, partly by self-help and partly by persuading Whitehall that the job
could not be done without outside aid.
The success in achieving assisted area status came from persuading ministers
and senior civil servants that some areas in the historically prosperous
south-east deserved help as much as economic blackspots in the midlands and
north.
Assisted area status is not seen as a panacea but as help that will tip the
balance in favour of a faster recovery and a more secure future. The main
objectives now are to encourage the completion of key development sites to
enable new jobs to be created, and to ensure that further improvements are
made to East Kent's transport infrastructure.
The EKI has been organised into five action groups - inward investment and
promotion; infrastructure and site development; skills development and
training; business development and trading links; and tourism. Each has its
own co-ordinator and a small core staff at the Dover headquarters.
Many improvements have already been made to the region's infrastructure,
including completion of the M20 motorway to Folkestone and Dover, but more
needs to be done.
Thanet, the district with the highest unemployment levels that covers
Margate, Ramsgate and Broadstairs, is still too isolated, but access will be
easier when dual carriageway improvements to the Thanet Way are completed
and new Networker rolling stock is introduced on the notorious north Kent
commuter railway.
The most intransigent employment problems in Swale are centred on the Isle
of Sheppey, which despite the potential for growth at the deep water port of
Sheerness, has a depressed local economy and is handicapped by having only
one crossing to and from the mainland, a swing bridge that disrupts traffic
for five minutes in every hour.
The other big problem facing the EKI in its battle to attract inward
investors is the lack of available premises. Half a dozen potentially
excellent business parks have been earmarked for development, including Kent
International adjacent to the airport at Manston in Thanet, White Cliffs at
Dover, Cheriton Parc near Folkestone and Eurolink at Sittingbourne, but they
need substantial infrastructure improvements including better access.
This work is seen as a top priority by Mr Ken Welsh, EKI's inward investment
manager - 'we have got to get our business parks opened up as fast as
possible, otherwise there is a danger that potential jobs will go
elsewhere.'
Talks are taking place with English Partnerships, the government development
agency, to get work on the parks started soon. The only town in the area
with business parks ready for easy occupancy is Ashford, designated by the
county council as an area for growth, but take-off here awaits a decision on
routing the channel high speed rail link through or around Ashford and its
international passenger station.
Mr Welsh and his colleagues are targeting six sectors of industry and
services that would be suitable for East Kent and the available workforce -
food processing, construction materials, medical products, paper and
packaging, high technology including ceramics, and business services.
'What we badly need is a flagship project of high quality where we can show
what we can do to the company's satisfaction. This would act as a catalyst
for others,' he says.
One of the area's problems has been the dearth of large companies because of
the lack of a manufacturing base. Around 93 per cent of businesses employ
less than 20 people, and apart from specialist employers like the ferry
companies, among the few success stories have been Pfizer, the US-owned
healthcare company which employs 2,500, including 1,200 research staff at
Sandwich; Portex, the medical products company, based at Hythe and
Folkestone; Knauf, the building materials producer, near Sittingbourne; and
Sericol, the industrial inks specialist, outside Broadstairs.
