FT  25 MAY 94 / Japanese try to block Antarctic whaling ban: Quotas in
limited sanctuary area proposed
Japan has sought to block a comprehensive whale sanctuary for the Antarctic
Ocean by proposing a partial ban in a more limited area.
The sanctuary is the main topic of debate at the annual meeting of the
International Whaling Commission, held in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, and a
vote is expected later this week.
The Japanese proposal would create a sanctuary for all but minke whales in
the Antarctic waters, which could be hunted when and if the current
moratorium on whale killings is replaced with a programme of strictly
enforced quotas for the number of whales that can be killed.
The Japanese plan was dismissed by environmentalists as a cynical ploy,
since they say minke whales are the only whales abundant enough in the
Antarctic to be of commercial interest. 'The majority of the Commissioners
see this for what it is,' said Mr Mike Sutton, vice-president at World Wide
Fund For Nature. 'This does not create a sanctuary at all.'
The Japanese amendment came as support for a complete ban on whaling
covering all of Antarctica appeared to be gaining momentum, with
environmentalists confident that they would obtain the necessary
three-quarters support of the 40 member countries of the International
Whaling Commission.
France has proposed that all commercial whaling be prohibited south of 40
degrees latitude. Chile has offered an amendment that would reduce the size
of the sanctuary so it would not infringe its own waters. The Chile
amendment accepts almost all of the sanctuary proposed by France and appears
acceptable to many member countries.
Commercial whaling is currently prohibited under an eight-year moratorium,
although it is violated by Norway.
The Japanese and Norwegians believe the moratorium should be replaced by
quotas, set so as not to endanger population levels of whale species. The
Japanese and Norwegians are generally supported by some Caribbean countries
and south Pacific states.
The US is expected to submit a resolution that would expressly prohibit
individual countries using sustainable quotas calculated by the Scientific
Committee of the Whaling Commission to justify unilateral hunting. The US
and other member countries say the quotas should only be adopted when a
comprehensive programme is in place that permits observation and inspection
of whale hunters.
Some environmentalists are concerned that the information on which quotas
are calculated may be faulty. Earlier this year it was reported that the
former Soviet Union had under-reported the amount of whales it killed.
The scientific committee of the whaling commission said its models can cope
with misreporting of catches of up to 50 per cent each year. It said that if
misreporting was greater than 50 per cent further trials would be necessary.
