FT  12 MAR 94 / Administration assails media over Whitewater
The White House yesterday denounced the mainstream media for giving credence
to unsubstantiated Whitewater rumours that have moved the financial markets
this week.
Ms Dee Dee Myers, presidential press secretary, took particular exception to
a chain of events on Thursday. This started with an obscure conservative
newsletter in Washington which raised new doubts, but offered no evidence,
about the suicide last summer of Vincent Foster, the former deputy legal
counsel.
This was immediately picked up by Rush Limbaugh, the popular right-wing talk
show host, and graduated immediately to the markets, where US bonds and the
dollar took a hammering. Versions of the rumour were reported mostly in
yesterday's newspaper money market columns as a factor influencing trading
sentiment.
Ms Myers said: 'I think anybody who may have lost money yesterday should
blame David Smick (co-publisher of the newsletter) and Rush Limbaugh. The
report was completely irresponsible and unsubstantiated. There is not a
shred of credible evidence to suggest that it is true.'
She accused the Reuters news agency of being 'one of the worst offenders'
because its market reports had noted the rumour - along with denials from
the White House and other sources. But it prompted a flurry of questions
from other news organisations. 'Since when are we in the position of having
to prove a negative?' she asked. 'I think we should pause and ask why.'
Market interest in the Whitewater affair has suddenly grown keen this week.
The FT office in Washington has received, for the first time, several calls
from financial institutions seeking either additional information or to
verify the many rumours circulating. They have been disappointed.
Mr Lloyd Cutler, newly installed White House legal counsel, and Mr David
Gergen, the presidential counsellor, both took comfort in the fact that
legal proceedings had begun to investigate possible interference by
administration officials in the inquiries into the failed Arkansas savings
and loan company at the centre of the Whitewater affair.
Mr Cutler said of Thursday's first round of grand jury testimony: 'It may
look bad, but when it becomes clear exactly what happens in those meetings I
don't think it amounts to very much.'
Mr Gergen referred to 'a difficult day', but added that he thought people
would be 'comforted by the fact that the president has made it very plain
that this White House will be co-operative, honest, forthright, and
aggressively so'.
