FT  28 FEB 94 / Survey of Jamaica (9): Cavalry troop of one - Gordon
Stewart: business man who saved the JDollar
As the Jamaican dollar was slipping (by 33 per cent) in the second half of
last year, many people thought of Mr Gordon Stewart, one of the island's
leading businessmen. Would he do it again?
In the event, Mr Stewart did not. Furthermore, by all indications, he will
not. 'Although I am still concerned about the effects of this on the
economy, the last one was a very expensive exercise for me,' he says.
Just under a year ago Mr Stewart was being credited with engineering
revaluation of the Jamaican dollar single-handed, after it had slipped
significantly. He was at once thanked by Jamaican consumers and pilloried by
some in financial services.
The government's deregulation of the foreign exchange market in late 1991
was followed by a depreciation of the currency. Each day's breakfast
newscasts offered consumers an unpalatable diet of increasing prices. The
deregulation was part of a wider programme of economic liberalisation - but
it was accompanied by billowing inflation, eased only temporarily when the
government's measures to reduce liquidity brought fleeting stability.
A central bank whose reserves had long before been depleted could not
intervene to protect the exchange rate. Some parts of the business sector
accused commercial banks of fuelling the depreciation by offering
increasingly higher rates for foreign currency. There was mounting
scepticism of the government's move towards a free market economy and the
levels of inflation led many to speculate on the increasingly likelihood of
social unrest.
'I feared social unrest, not only because it would first affect tourism in
which I am involved, but also because it would seriously damage the entire
country at a time when it could least afford it,' Mr Stewart says.
In a move which took the financial market by surprise, he announced that he
would offer for sale to the commercial banks USDollars 1m per week at a rate
a few points lower than that at which the market was operating, and would be
making subsequent sales of foreign currency at still lower rates.
'The government deregulated the foreign exchange market without any reserves
in the central bank and the system got out of control,' Mr Stewart explains.
'Because the central bank could do nothing, it was left to the private
sector. We were worried because the credibility of the private sector was
being questioned, particularly that of the commercial banks, because of
apparent helplessness in stemming the slide.'
Mr Stewart's intervention had an immediate effect. Even before he had
actually sold any, there was a significant increase in the volume of foreign
currency sold to the commercial banks. People holding hard currency unloaded
it, contributing to the very revaluation which they feared. Hoteliers and
companies in other sectors of the economy offered to sell their hard
currency at less than the going rate. The result was a revaluation of 36 per
cent.
'The money we used to influence the exchange rate was no more than the hook
which one normally uses in a marketing plan,' Mr Stewart says. 'It was
important to stop the decline and to try to revalue the Jamaican dollar. I
felt the speculators were going overboard under the liberalised financial
market because all balances and checks were removed.'
Mr Stewart, now 52, heads the ATL Group, a diverse conglomerate whose
interests range from a hotel chain, through coffee farming to a motor
vehicle dealership. Leaving a job with a local trading company, he started
the group in 1968, and expanded it significantly 13 years later when he
established a chain of all inclusive hotels, six in Jamaica and three others
in Antigua, Barbados and St Lucia.
While the revaluation which followed his intervention was welcomed by the
government and some in the business community, Mr Stewart has not been
without some criticism. He has been accused of using his wealth to
manipulate what has been a free market. He rejects this, claiming that he,
and others who followed him, were free, in a free market, to set their own
price in any transaction.
The intervention was 'an act of enlightened self interest.' he says. 'At
that time I saw it as an opportunity which would allow the government to do
the right thing. It worked well until the government opened the floodgates,
and the last budget closed the door on a lot of things. Another intervention
can be made, but its effect will be temporary - I am still concerned about
the effects of all this on the economy.'
