FT  08 NOV 94 / More troops to quit Haiti and Kuwait
The US plans to withdraw nearly 14,000 of its troops from Kuwait and Haiti
over the next six weeks.
The withdrawal will leave around 9,000 US troops in Haiti to supervise the
parliamentary elections scheduled for January, but in Kuwait the US will
keep only prepositioned heavy equipment and aircraft.
Administration officials said the decision, approved by President Bill
Clinton at the weekend, had nothing to do with today's congressional
elections. Indeed, they said the White House had asked the Pentagon not to
make a public announcement of the withdrawals because it would look like a
political ploy.
'The drawdown of forces in Haiti is linked to mission accomplishment, not to
artificial timetables,' said Mr William Perry, the defence secretary.
Nevertheless, the news that most of the US soldiers now deployed in Haiti
and Kuwait will be home in time for Christmas is expected to be popular.
Mr Clinton had hinted at a December pullout when he visited US troops in
Kuwait recently, telling soldiers not to forget their Christmas shopping.
This had reportedly caused some morale problems among soldiers in Haiti, who
felt they were being overlooked.
The 7,800 US troops in Kuwait are expected to be back in the US by December
22. They went to Kuwait after Iraq had shown some signs of threatening a
second invasion of the emirate by building up its forces in the south.
The navy and marine forces already in the Gulf region before the Iraqi
build-up will stay in position, and the US will also keep an extra 50
warplanes, mostly ground attack aircraft, in the Gulf.
The US has already withdrawn 6,000 of the 21,000-strong force it sent to
Haiti in September to oversee the safe return of President Jean-Bertrand
Aristide and to ensure the departure of the military leaders who ousted him
in a coup in 1991.
This weekend's order will mean that another 6,000 troops can return to the
US by December 1.
US officials said that troops from other countries such as Bangladesh had
now taken over some of the security duties originally fulfilled by the US
occupation force.
In addition, around 3,000 Haitians who have been trained by United Nations
instructors are expected to be ready to take over policing responsibilities
next month.
In Port-au-Prince yesterday, a new prime minister was expected to take over
after a vote of confidence in the lower chamber of the Haitian parliament.
Mr Smarck Michel, chosen by Mr Aristide for the post, had already won
approval from the Haitian senate.
