FT  10 JUN 94 / VW close to deal with Madrid on aid
Volkswagen and the Madrid government yesterday came close to an agreement in
negotiations over state aid for Seat, the German vehicle group's crippled
Spanish subsidiary.
Further talks are scheduled next week and VW said a deal could be expected
not long after that.
According to a joint statement from Mr Ferdinand Piech, VW chairman, and Mr
Juan Manuel Eguiagaray, the Spanish industry minister, the two agreed that
there should be no direct subsidies from the Spanish government for
redundancies. Help would come instead in the form of support for
technological projects.
VW initially sought an injection of Dm820m (Pounds 328m) from Spanish
central and regional authorities to cover 4,600 further job cuts at Seat,
reducing the company's workforce to 9,500. Other multinational motor
companies manufacturing in Spain reacted sharply against the prospect of
special conditions for Seat.
The statement made clear that state aid would be tied to 'certain
commitments' from VW and from Seat itself. It also said an agreement would
be aimed at 'keeping the basic elements of Seat as a company with its own
capability for competing in the global market'.
The uncertain scale of Madrid's financial commitment is crucial to VW's bid
to plug the hole in VW group finances which is threatening for the second
year in succession to sink hopes of breaking even.
Seat lost DM1.8bn (Pounds 720m) in 1993, was DM350m in the red in the first
quarter of this year, and is heading for a further full-year deficit of
DM1bn, according to company officials. The result would be even worse if VW
had to bear the full restructuring costs.
Yesterday's talks were also attended by mr Gerhard Schroder premier of the
state of Lower Saxony, which is VW's main shareholder, and senior officials
of Catalonia's regional government. The two-hour meeting marked the start of
substantive negotiations following a bout of shadow-boxing interspersed with
implicit and explicit threats from VW.
These ranged from veiled hints that Seat might be declared insolvent, to
clearer warnings that the company could lose its independence. Since the
unexpected discovery of last year's losses and the sacking of the former
chairman last September, Seat has already lost much of its independence.
In return for emergency cash injections, Volkswagen has taken control of
Seat's Pamplona factory and financial services division. The Zona Franca
plant in Barcelona - subject of the current negotiations - is to be closed,
leaving Seat with just one works, a new plant at Martorell.
More recently VW has suggested that research and design might be taken over
by the German parent, effectively leaving Seat stripped down to a
manufacturing and distribution operation.
Last month German executives with close links to Mr Piech were installed in
central board and management positions, although Spaniard Mr Joan Llorens
remained as chairman.
Yesterday's progress followed encouraging hints from Mr Felipe Gonzalez, the
Spanish prime minister, after he discussed the issue at a meeting last
weekend with Chancellor Helmut Kohl. Spain was prepared to accept 'certain
responsibilities,' Mr Gonzalez said.
