FT  21 JUL 94 / Hanley at centre of reshuffle: Four ministers go as Major
shapes cabinet for next general election
Mr John Major yesterday made the surprise promotion to the Tory party
chairmanship of Mr Jeremy Hanley the centrepiece of the most extensive
ministerial shake-up of his premiership.
The elevation of 48-year-old Mr Hanley, formerly the armed forces minister,
to the pivotal role in planning the Conservatives' general election strategy
was part of a mid-term reconstruction of the government which saw the
departure of four cabinet ministers.
The shake-up came on the eve of the certain choice by the Labour party of Mr
Tony Blair as its new leader. Mr Blair, whose election will foreshadow a
drive to shift Labour further into the political centre ground, is expected
to be joined by Mr John Prescott as deputy leader.
Mr Major's reshuffle was intended to put in place most of the team which
will fight the election, due by mid-1997. But it left scope for further
changes. Mr Douglas Hurd, who remained as foreign secretary, is widely
expected to step down within the next two years.
Overall the changes pointed to a shift to the right by Mr Major with Mr
Michael Portillo, the Thatcherite standard-bearer, promoted from the
Treasury to the post of employment secretary, and Mr Jonathan Aitken,
another right-winger, entering the cabinet as chief secretary.
Some Tory MPs were suggesting that this combination - with Mr Peter Lilley
at social security - could herald the start of another sharp squeeze on
spending on the welfare state. The number of right-wingers in the cabinet -
dubbed the 'bastards' by Mr Major - has now risen from four to five.
But the elevation of Mr Hanley, widely regarded as on the centre-left of the
party and as a protege of Mr Chris Patten, former party chairman and
governor of Hong Kong, surprised and irritated Tory Eurosceptics. Mr Hanley,
a pro-European and a liberal on social issues, will sit in the cabinet as
minister without portfolio. He will be joined at Central Office by a new
team of deputies led by Mr John Maples, a former Treasury minister and now a
senior executive at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi. Among the other main promotions, the
left-leaning Mr Stephen Dorrell entered the cabinet as heritage secretary
and Dr Brian Mawhinney as transport secretary. Viscount Cranborne also
joined the cabinet as leader of the House of Lords.
The principal casualty of the reshuffle was Mr John Patten who was
unceremoniously sacked as education secretary. In a terse letter to the
prime minister, Mr Patten did little to disguise his anger at the decision.
Mr Peter Brooke resigned from the heritage department while Mr John
MacGregor and Lord Wakeham had expected to be asked to leave the cabinet.
Mrs Gillian Shephard, who replaced Mr Patten, is a close political ally of
Mr Major and will be expected to improve relations between the government
and teachers in the run-up to the next general election.
Mr David Hunt, the former employment secretary and the most widely-tipped
candidate for the party chairmanship, took over as public services minister
from Mr William Waldegrave who becomes agriculture minister. But Mr Hunt was
also given the chairmanship of a number of key cabinet committees previously
run by Lord Wakeham. Downing Street said Mr Hunt would have an important
role in resolving disputes between Whitehall departments and improving the
presentation of government policy.
A more extensive shake-up lower down the ministerial ladder saw the
departure of five ministers of state and the promotion of a number of
juniors such as Mr David Davis, Mr Gerald Malone and Mr William Hague.
MAJOR'S RESHUFFLE
Pages 8 and 9
PM eschews glitz to maintain a balance
No surprises in the list of casualties
Brooke bows out, Page 19
Observer, Page 21
Editorial Comment, Page 21
