FT  16 SEP 94 / Latin American trade gap to widen further this year
Latin America's trade deficit will widen further this year as growth of
imports outpaces export expansion, the UN Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean (Eclac) says today.
Publishing preliminary estimates of the performance of Latin American
economies, Eclac said it expected the region's exports to grow by 9 per cent
this year, with growth mainly due to the recovery in prices of primary
exports, which had fallen for five successive years.
However, the recent tendency for imports to grow at a faster rate continued:
this year imports are expected to grow by 12 per cent, leaving a widening
trade deficit.
Higher US interest rates have also increased the sums paid out by Latin
countries in interest and profit remittances.
These payments are expected to rise from Dollars 31bn to Dollars 34bn, which
will produce a regional current account deficit likely to widen from last
year's Dollars 45bn to around Dollars 53bn (Pounds 34bn) this year.
However, amounts of foreign capital approaching the record levels of the
previous two years - an estimated Dollars 55bn - will continue to flow into
the region to finance this deficit.
Although the number of Latin bond issues has fallen this year because of
political instability, other types of capital inflow - in particular, direct
investment and foreign share issues - should nearly compensate, the agency
said.
Foreign debt for the region is likely to rise in nominal terms by 4-5 per
cent from last year's Dollars 497bn. However, because of export expansion,
the ratio of debt to exports should drop from 300 per cent in 1993 to 285
per cent this year.
The region will continue to grow 'moderately' in 1994, with average growth
rates of just above 3 per cent, the preliminary estimates suggest. To judge
from first-half data, Peru is expected to be the most dynamic regional
economy this year, with growth of about 8 per cent, followed by Argentina at
6-7 per cent. Bolivia, Chile, Colombia and Costa Rica are all expected to
boost gross domestic product by between 4 and 5 per cent.
Regional laggards include Honduras and Haiti, both expected to record
negative growth. Venezuela, which is battling a financial crisis, is singled
out as the worst performer, with a likely fall in GDP of 4.5 per cent.
Although Mexican GDP is expected to rise by only 2 per cent this year, the
result is seen as positive in view of last year's near-zero growth. The
start-up of the tripartite North American Trade Agreement, the improvement
of the US economy and the depreciation of the peso are noted as contributing
to the improved performance.
In spite of the generally encouraging regional performance, Eclac cautions
that 'in the majority of countries, investment ratios are not sufficient to
sustain faster growth in the long term'. Chile, with an investment rate
above 27 per cent, is one of the principal exceptions.
Eclac points out that, because of expanding populations, per capita growth
throughout Latin America will average only 1 per cent.
The first half also saw 'new progress' in the reduction of inflation, which
Eclac describes as 'one of the most important achievements in Latin America
of the last decade'. Regional inflation, which averaged 49 per cent in 1991,
was down to 16.5 per cent for the 12 months to August. Argentina, Bolivia,
El Salvador, Mexico and Panama are all expected to record single-digit
inflation this year.
The fate of Brazilian inflation, which reached 2,500 per cent last year,
hinges on the success or otherwise of the recently introduced Real currency.
Venezuela is again seen as going in the wrong direction - the 12-month
inflation rate to August was 68 per cent, compared with 46 per cent at the
end of 1993.
