FT  02 JUL 94 / Patten lightens testing workload
Mr John Patten, education secretary, yesterday an-nounced a package of
measures to bring an end to the teachers' boycott of compulsory testing in
schools in England and Wales.
From next year teachers will not be required to mark the tests for children
aged 11 and 14. The marking will be contracted out to 'agencies of proven
competence' employing external markers.
Temporary supply staff will be provided in primary schools to give class
teachers time to carry out the compulsory tests of 7-year-olds. External
audit of teachers' assessments for these tests is to be abolished, reducing
the onerous record-keeping involved.
The measures are designed to lighten the workload involved in testing, an
important factor behind the teachers' boycott. They follow the radical
streamlining of the national curriculum and testing programme recommended by
Sir Ron Dearing, the government's curriculum adviser.
Mr Patten said yesterday that Sir Ron's reforms had already halved the time
taken by testing.
He said: 'The arrangements for external marking and supply cover will now
remove any vestige of a case on workload grounds for not carrying out the
tests in 1995.'
Mr Patten's announcement carried a veiled threat of reprisals against
schools that failed to carry out the tests in future. He implied that they
might be subject to more frequent or searching inspection without the hard
information provided by test results.
The National Union of Teachers, the largest teaching union, said the boycott
would continue. Mr Doug McAvoy, NUT general secretary, said external marking
would mean teachers still had to assess pupils and operate the tests, which
disrupted classroom lessons.
He added: 'Mr Patten is throwing tens of millions at educationally flawed
policies rather than sitting down with the teachers and working out a system
which has the profession's support.'
The other teaching unions welcomed the announcement.
Mrs Ann Taylor, shadow education secretary, said it amounted to 'an
admission of failure'. She added: 'The Tories have wasted almost Pounds 750m
with futile experiments on our children's education.'
