FT  18 JUL 94 / Survey of South Africa (34): Credit rating sought - Foreign
borrowing
One of the more dramatic signals of the normalisation of South Africa's
international economic relations has been the country's decision to seek an
international credit rating.
After an intense competition among international merchant banks for the
right to represent the country, the new government in May appointed Goldman
Sachs as its agent to secure a grading from the leading agencies, who are
expected to announce their assessment later this year.
Although South Africa has long borrowed money on European markets without a
rating, it wants access to the American market, hence the the new move.
Following the successful agreement with international banks on a repayment
schedule for outstanding debt that had been caught in the 1985 standstill,
and given its new-found political stability, the country feels the time is
ripe to make formal entry into global capital markets.
Depending on the success of the present initiative, a similar move into the
Japanese market may follow early next year.
Although political and economic uncertainty has long forced South Africa to
pay a fairly hefty premium on offshore borrowing, government authorities are
confident of achieving an investment grade rating of at least BBB.
'I would actually prefer a lower rating that we can improve upon, rather
than a higher one which might be downgraded,' notes Mr Chris Stals, South
African Reserve Bank governor.
Even with the rating, however, initial borrowing is likely to be limited.
The new budget makes allowance for about Dollars 500m, but Mr Derek Keys,
finance minister, says that figure may well be increased, depending both on
the final rating achieved and the comparative strength of international
markets at the time of borrowing.
The outcome of the government's initiative will also have a bearing on South
African companies seeking to raise money offshore.
Assurer Liberty Life recently announced plans for a Dollars 360m-Dollars
500m rights issue, and electricity utility Eskom and the Development Bank of
South Africa are both likely to float issues some time later this year.
