FT  05 JAN 94 / Hume urges republicans to back Ulster peace initiative
Mr John Hume urged republican leaders yesterday to embrace the UK-Irish
peace initiative but said it would require 'one of the greatest acts of
moral courage of this century' for the IRA to renounce violence.
The leader of the mainly Roman Catholic Social Democratic and Labour party
argued in a passionate five-page statement that last month's Downing Street
declaration satisfactorily addressed the IRA's stated reasons for its
25-year armed struggle.
He said: 'I do believe that the declaration makes very, very clear that the
traditional reasons for the use of physical force no longer exist that the
republicans have given.'
But Mr James Molyneaux, the Ulster Unionist leader, later made clear he
thought the IRA had already, in effect, rejected the joint declaration. This
in turn prompted a sharp response from Mr Hume who said: 'Some people'
thought Mr Molyneaux was 'trying to provoke' the IRA into saying no.
Their comments came as a letter bomb exploded at Sinn Fein's Dublin
headquarters without causing injury. The outlawed Ulster Volunteer Force
claimed responsibility.
Republican leaders have yet to make a definitive response to the
declaration, although recent comments have suggested they are edging towards
rejecting it.
Mr Hume's statement was interpreted as an attempt to influence the intense
debate thought to be raging inside the republican movement on the response.
In remarks made less than a day after Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president,
had poured scorn on Northern Ireland's right to self-determination, Mr Hume
appealed to everyone affected by the peace process to avoid 'insensitive and
unhelpful language'.
He said: 'With peace, the border will in fact be gone. Let us commit
ourselves to spilling our sweat and not our blood.'
Mr Hume said the joint declaration was not in itself a settlement of the
province's troubles. That would come only 'at the next stage of the process
involving both governments and all parties, hopefully in a totally peaceful
atmosphere'.
Interviewed later Mr Hume appealed to Mr John Major, the prime minister, to
respond to Sinn Fen's calls for clarification of the joint declaration.
He said it was not yet appropriate for him to publish details of the
initiative he launched last year with Mr Adams and pledged to consult the
Sinn Fein president before doing so.
In a speech in Lisburn to fellow Ulster Unionists, Mr Molyneaux urged the
government to combine tougher security measures against terrorists with a
drive to inject fresh impetus into talks involving Northern Ireland's four
constitutional political parties.
Editorial comment, Page 13
