FT  12 DEC 94 / Summit of the Americas: A promise to advance in prosperity
and democracy
In a five-page declaration of principles, the 34 leaders at the Summit of
the Americas in Miami yesterday committed themselves 'to advance the
prosperity, democratic values and institutions, and security of our
hemisphere'.
The declaration of principles promises:
'To preserve and strengthen the community of democracies of the Americas',
by strengthening the Organisation of American States, making government more
transparent and accountable, attacking corruption and fighting organised
crime, drug trafficking and terrorism.
'To promote prosperity through economic integration and free trade', by
beginning immediately 'to construct the 'Free Trade Area of the Americas'
(FTAA), in which barriers to trade and investment will be progressively
eliminated'. Negotiations are to be completed no later than the end of 2005,
but 'concrete progress' is to be made by the century's end. Mechanisms are
to be created to promote investment in the hemisphere, as well as to develop
telecommunications, transport and energy links.
'To eradicate poverty and discrimination in our hemisphere' by improving
access to education and health care, helping indigenous peoples and
strengthening the role of women in political, social and economic life. It
is 'politically intolerable and morally unacceptable that some segments of
our populations are marginalised and do not share fully in the benefits of
growth.'
'To guarantee sustainable development and conserve our natural environment
for future generations' through partnerships to control pollution, protect
ecosystems and encourage sustainable use of biological and energy resources.
The summit also agreed a 23-point plan of action to follow up their
declarations. The plan includes specific and less-specific promises of
action, including:
More support for OAS efforts to promote democracy.
Guaranteed protection for the human rights of migrant workers.
A review of the regulatory framework to facilitate non-governmental
organisations' operations and fund-raising.
Establishing conflict of interest standards for public employees - with
stiff penalties for abuses - and hemispheric arrangements to prosecute or
extradite corrupt officials.
Laws to permit the freezing and forfeiture of proceeds of money laundering.
Striving for comprehensive trade agreements on tariff and non-tariff
barriers to trade, agriculture, subsidies, investment, intellectual property
rights, rules of origin, anti-dumping duties, sanitary standards, dispute
resolution and competition policy.
Guaranteed universal access to quality primary education, with a goal of 100
per cent of the population completing primary school and at least 75 per
cent enrolment in secondary school by 2010.
National plans for a basic package of health services including care for
children and mothers, family planning, immunisation and Aids prevention.
A volunteer corps of people in 'white helmets' to tackle natural disasters,
development needs and emergencies, in their own countries and, at the
request of the UN, abroad.
National plans to phase out lead in petrol.
The action plan calls on the OAS and the Inter-American Development Bank to
take the lead in following up the summit's decisions, and lays out a
programme of meetings of officials and ministers, including meetings of
trade ministers in June 1995 and March 1996 to work on the FTAA. Other
scheduled meetings will cover sustainable energy use, measures to build
confidence in democracy and science and technology in 1995, and energy
industries and sustainable development in 1996.
