FT  31 MAR 94 / In peril on stormy seas: Support for the UK prime minister
is sinking, but he's not quitting yet
The present storm may abate. Parliament's Easter recess offers Mr John Major
the hope of a breathing space. But still blacker clouds have gathered
already on the horizon. His premiership is in serious peril. If the ailment
is chronic rather than acute, it is no less dangerous for that.
Mr Major has been assailed before from the Tory backbenches: sterling's
ejection from the European exchange rate mechanism, the row over coal
industry closures, and the civil war over the Maastricht treaty provide only
a small sample of such occasions.
But this week it was different. The attacks came not from an embittered
group of irreconcilable Eurosceptics. Nor were they confined to the
Europhiles on the Tory left who have become increasingly agitated by Mr
Major's efforts to appease the right. This time it was the usually loyal
centre - described by one senior minister as the party's lumpen proletariat
 -that deserted their leader.
The sullen silence in the Commons chamber when he announced the compromise
over European Union voting rights offered far more eloquent testimony to the
depth of his troubles than the public attacks on Mr Major by the maverick
Tory MP, Mr Tony Marlow.
The word swirling around the bars and tearooms of Westminster was that Mr
Major had lost the confidence of his party. Conservative MPs would no longer
give him the benefit of the doubt.
Ironically it was not the substance of the deal with Britain's European
partners that dismayed the government's supporters. Many Tory MPs hardly
bothered to look at the details.
What was damning in the eyes of a demoralised and dejected party was the
perception that Mr Major had caved in - that a week after he had derided Mr
John Smith, the Labour leader, as the poodle of Brussels, he had assumed
that very role himself.
It made no difference that those who follow European affairs knew in their
hearts that, however strident Mr Major's rhetoric had been last week, he
would be forced to cut a deal with his European parters. Britain, the
champion of enlargement of the European Union, could not delay indefinitely
the entry of Austria, Sweden, Norway and Finland.
Mr Major's decision to accept the deal had the backing of 18 of the
cabinet's 22 members. Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, would probably
have resigned if the cabinet had rejected it. If that had happened, Mr Major
would have had trouble surviving in office for the rest of this week.
But such awkward realities were overlooked on the backbenches. Instead the
focus was on the four cabinet ministers - Mr Michael Howard, Mr Michael
Portillo, Mr Peter Lilley and Mr John Redwood - who had urged him to hold
out for further concessions.
This time many believed that, once he had staked out an uncompromising
position, Mr Major should have stuck on the side of the men he had once
called the cabinet's 'bastards'. As one erstwhile supporter of the prime
minister commented: 'I don't give a damn about the technicalities. What I
want, what the party wants, is some leadership.'
The front pages of the Tory tabloids yesterday - mocking the prime minister
with a brutality usually reserved for leaders of the Labour party -
reinforced the message.
So the conventional wisdom among Conservative MPs is that it is no longer a
question of if Mr Major will go, but merely one of when.
That judgment may well be wrong. It has been in the past. In such febrile
times, the reflex at Westminster is to project the present into an
indefinite future. Mr Major is a more resilient man than he is given credit
for. He has told friends that panic on the backbenches or vilification in
the newspapers will not force him to fall on his sword. He will fight to
stay in 10 Downing Street.
He has other advantages. For all Mr Marlow's insistence that a leadership
challenge will be mounted in the autumn, there is no obvious candidate on
the Tory backbenches. Mr Michael Heseltine and Mr Kenneth Clarke, the
principal contenders for the succession, cannot challenge him from within
the government.
But elections loom. The local elections in May, five parliamentary
by-elections and the European Parliament poll in June will provide the most
important test of national opinion since the 1992 general election. The
opposition parties intend to make them a referendum on Mr Major's
premiership. As one cabinet minister admitted, the debacle over voting
rights has ensured that the background to the campaigns could not be worse.
If the Conservative defeats are as bad as the opinion polls predict, Mr
Major's determination may not be enough to save him. More than one
ministerial colleague has recalled recently that, only hours before she
quit, Lady Thatcher declared her intention to fight to the bitter end. If Mr
Major lost the confidence of his cabinet, he too would be forced to resign.
The name of the 61-year-old Mr Heseltine, written off after his heart attack
less than a year ago, is suddenly on everyone's lips. Encouraged by his
Gaullist rhetoric, the Tory right has made the mistake of believing the
president of the board of trade has ditched his fervent Europeanism.
Even those who swore they would never forgive him for toppling Lady Thatcher
are beginning to view Mr Heseltine in a different light. As one
middle-ranking minister put it: 'I would never trust him, but at least he
would give us a fighting chance of winning the election.'
Mr Clarke's star has waned in recent weeks. His-less-than-adroit handling of
the row with opposition parties over impending tax increases has removed
some of the lustre. His robust attitude to Brussels has not persuaded the
party's sceptics that he has joined the ranks of nationalists. But Mr Clarke
remains the champion of the mainstream Tory centre-left. If there is a
contest, he will be a hard man to beat.
There is much more, though, to all this than Mr Major's style of leadership.
Those few Conservatives - including a handful in the cabinet - who are
willing to think more deeply about the present crisis are gripped by
foreboding.
The fault-line in the party over Europe is much deeper than many of them
realised even a year ago during the parliamentary battle over the Maastricht
treaty.
The sceptics are not in the majority - far from it. But there is now a
destructive minority which clings to the belief that the past 30 years of
Conservative history has been a disastrous aberration - that the party
should never have become the champion of the European cause.
They would be happy to see the government lose the next general election -
and then to be reborn in opposition as the party of nationalism, under the
leadership of Mr Portillo. It is a vainglorious dream.
Mr Hurd demolished the argument in a speech last week, setting out in stark
terms the economic and security realities binding Britain to a European
future. But the Europhobes are beyond such reason.
There are other factors dogging Mr Major. The prime minister lacks the
constancy born of deep-rooted political convictions. He too often confuses
tactics with high principle. His party bears the burden of 15 years in
office and has lost the habit of loyalty.
But Europe looks once again like an anvil on which the modern Conservative
party will break itself. Day by day it seems more likely that Mr Major will
be the first victim. He might yet survive - it is still possible to find one
or two willing to put serious money on his prospects. But in any event his
departure would not solve his party's problems.
The present mood was caught by a Tory MP who remarked that he was rereading
a book familiar to every student of modern British history - Mr George
Dangerfield's account of The Strange Death of Liberal England. Contemplating
the self-destruction of his own party, the MP shrugged his shoulders as he
explained: 'I want to know what it is like.'
