FT  16 JUL 94 / The Long View: Jumping Jupiter]
For the week of the end of the world, Freddie seemed surprisingly cheerful.
'My coffee futures positions are up 200 per cent this year,' he boasted.
'Never thought I would enjoy a bracing hard frost quite so much]' I should
have known better than to accept an invitation to the annual Candlestick
Charts Convention.
Scarcely had I emerged blinking from the session on combining candlesticks
with stochastic oscillators than inevitably (it seemed) Fringe Freddie was
there with the rasping voice, the gleam in the eyes and the overwhelming
enthusiasm for the latest esoteric investment pursuit. I was trapped. If
only I had a mobile phone that might conveniently ring . . .
'Stop writing all that rubbish about paper securities. Fill your boots with
commodities, dear boy,' he thundered. 'Bonds are fraudulent, equities are
dead.
'Mind you, when the fragments of Jupiter hit us we may be dead too, like the
dinosaurs 65m years ago when the comet came here. But just think what two
years with the sun blotted out would do to the prices of softs. Worst case
scenario, of course - but not priced into the markets at all.' Freddie
grinned happily at the prospect.
Presumably, I replied, he was referring to the imminent collision of
fragments of the Shoemaker-Levy 9 comet with the planet Jupiter. More than
20 pieces of the broken-up comet would slam into the planet at a speed of
60km a second over a period of a few days, starting this weekend. But surely
scientists were predicting that the impacts would be unobservable from the
Earth, however uncomfortable they might be for any aliens who happened to be
domiciled on the wrong part of Jupiter.
Hardly had I said this, than I realised I was simply providing raw material
input for Freddie's conspiracy theory tendency. 'But what are the scientists
privately telling the world's leaders?' Freddie said. 'What we see in the
conventional media is a typical cover-up to prevent a global panic. Fact is,
there's a 50-50 chance that the outer layers of Jupiter will be blown off to
create a dust cloud that could reach as far as the Earth's orbit, cutting
sunlight levels by half for up to two years, and incidentally disrupting
other cometary paths. It's all been set out in the Astro-financial Letter,
but of course the establishment papers have been told to keep quiet. So buy
agricultural commodities, and while you're about it, short suntan cream
shares too.'
There was no stopping Freddie now. 'Haven't you wondered why they did
nothing at the global summit in Naples last weekend about the collapse of
the dollar? The answer's simple, they knew they didn't need to. When Jupiter
blows, the big agricultural producers like the US will hold the rest of the
world to ransom. The yen will be dead meat.'
Hold on, I said impatiently, Freddie should know he has a tendency for fads
and fashions to get the better of him. Last time we met he was heavily into
gold at, if I remembered correctly, about Dollars 380 an ounce. But it had
gone nowhere. Whatever happened to his theories about inflation and monetary
collapse?
'Only a matter of time,' said Freddie. 'The gold market has been rigged.
Haven't you also wondered why the bullion price has been so unnaturally
steady recently? There's been a secret deal between the Americans and the
Saudis: if the Saudis dump gold and help to hold the price down the
Americans will push the crude oil price up by buying for their strategic
reserve. Neat, eh?' But this was just another wild, unproven idea, I
protested. There had been so many in the past. What was it he had said on a
previous meeting about the eruption of Mount Pinatubo and the cloud of dust
which would cool the globe? But the temperature in London had hit 920 this
week. Now, it appeared, he was importing a cloud of dust from Jupiter to
replace the unreliable terrestrial volcanic variety.
'Jupiter is the icing on the cake, old boy,' he rasped. 'It's all happening
to commodities already. It only takes a cold front or two over Minas Gerais
state in southern Brazil to send the coffee price up threefold. Western
consumers have become complacent about commodity prices but they're on a
knife-edge. Coffee is still only half the price it reached in the 1970s. The
Third World is going to hit back.'
Don't bet on it, I said. The coffee bubble was a completely artificial
creation of the US commodity and hedge funds which had created a one-way
market. They were in league with greedy Brazilian farmers amd merchants
phoning in uncorroborated scare stories of killer frosts.
In any case, only half the Minas Gerais crop could be affected at maximum.
That was only 5 per cent of the global coffee crop. How could that possibly
justify a trebled price? Nestle and Maxwell House would not fall for such a
basic trick. In any case, just wait until the hedge funds started to rotate
into something else.
Freddie looked at me pityingly. 'This is just the start of the dash into
real assets,' he said. 'No one's woken up to just what the politicians are
doing. The Germans have given up controlling the money supply. Their M3 is
rising at 15 per cent a year and the Bundesbank is just laughing. Meanwhile
the Americans are hell-bent on devaluing the dollar to sustain the US
economy long enough to get Clinton re-elected in 1996. Gullible investors
are being stuffed with trillions in global bonds which the politicians plan
to repay in Micky Mouse money. I'd rather own Euro Disney shares, myself.'
Er, fascinating stuff, I said unconvincingly, but it was time for the
presentation on candlesticks and Elliott Waves. Perhaps we could meet later
for coffee?
'I can't afford to drink the stuff any more,' said Freddie. 'Much too
expensive. I've switched to tea instead.'
