FT  11 JUL 94 / The Group of Seven Summit: Dollar statement fails to
convince
Finance ministers of the Group of Seven leading industrial nations repeated
their belief in the need for a stronger dollar, but failed to dispel concern
that they still disagree on what to do about the weakness of the US
currency.
The finance ministers, using words negotiated in advance, said they 'agreed
that the underlying fundamentals are sound, and that the conditions for an
enduring recovery with low inflation are now in place in each of our
countries'.
They expressed concern, nevertheless, over foreign exchange volatility, and
'agreed recent movements in exchange rates are not in line with the basic
conditions prevailing in our economies'.
The US resisted efforts by some G7 states to incorporate the statement in
the formal communique issued by heads of government. US officials said they
wanted to keep the communique for longer term issues, and appeared
determined to treat the dollar's weakness as a short-term manifestation of
foreign exchange markets' irrationality.
'I've quit trying to anticipate what's going to happen insofar as the
currency markets are concerned,' Mr Lloyd Bentsen, US Treasury secretary,
said yesterday. The currency markets, however, have not quit trying to
anticipate what is going to happen when Mr Bentsen and President Bill
Clinton talk about the dollar.
For weeks, the US administration has tried to enforce a strict blackout on
exchange rate comments by anyone but the laconic Mr Bentsen. In the days
before the G7 meeting that blackout broke down.
The biggest breach came at the summit itself, when Mr Clinton in effect
ruled out either intervention or changes in macroeconomic policy to combat
the dollar's weakness.
'If we continue to pursue growth without inflation and to work on generating
new jobs out of that growth, then eventually the macroeconomic realities
will assert themselves and the currencies will be righted,' Mr Clinton said.
US officials assured reporters there had been no intention of presenting a
different policy on the dollar. Mr Bentsen, apparently anxious to counter
the impression the US had abandoned thought of intervention, hastened to
reopen the possibility.
