FT  21 JUL 94 / Jail looms again for released Italians
The Italian government's abrupt about-turn on the controversial issue of
preventive detention has left more than 2,000 people wondering whether they
will be obliged to return to jail.
Yesterday, the jails were still releasing people in line with the terms of
the decree approved by the cabinet last Wednesday that restricted the
judiciary's right to arrest and imprison. But this decree is now due to be
dropped by mid-August - as soon a new text is endorsed in cabinet and passed
through parliament.
Since last Thursday, when the decree came into force 2,137 people have been
freed from jails all over Italy. Of these 929 have been confined to house
arrest. According to Ansa, the national news agency, 189 had been held in
preventive detention on various charges of corruption and only 125 of these
were under house arrest.
The main public outcry has centred on the release from prison of those held
on charges linked to the nationwide investigations into corruption. But
magistrates said yesterday they were concerned that some known drug-dealers
and criminals had been able to secure release under the decree.
These included a man held on fraud charges, but alleged to be the personal
doctor of Mr Toto Riina, acknowledged head of Cosa Nostra, the umbrella
organisation of the Sicilian Mafia.
'Each individual public prosecutor's office will be able to decide on an
individual basis whether or not those released will have to go back to
prison,' Ms Elena Pacciotti, chairman of the national
magistrates'association, was quoted as saying. But she insisted that this
case-by-case approach would have to wait until the new law had been
approved. The revised law will reinstate cases of corruption involving the
public administration as a serious crime; but it is not clear what other
crimes will be reclassified as serious.
Lawyers were also divided on whether time now spent under house arrest could
be included as part of the time served in prison. Magistrates can hold
people in preventive detention for a maximum of three months, unless
exceptional proof for renewing the imprisonment is accepted by a special
civil liberties tribunal.
Yesterday, the team of Milan anti-corruption magistrates, who resigned in
protest over the introduction of the decree, were working normally. However,
they indicated that they were reserving their judgment until the text of the
new law was known. Although they were the only ones to resign, their stance
was backed by colleagues in other prosecutor's offices all over Italy.
Italy's media, meanwhile, were unanimous in the view that Mr Silvio
Berlusconi, the prime minister, had suffered a serious setback with such
headlines as 'Berlusconi surrenders and withdraws decree' and 'Isolated and
defeated'. In a withering front-page commentary. Mr Eugenio Scalfari, editor
of La Repubblica and a declared adversary of the prime minister, said: 'What
happened yesterday was the lowest point ever touched (in the Republic).'
