FT  23 JUN 94 / Technology: On-line for a speedy sale - Louise Kehoe
continues a series on electronic retailing with a look at the growth of
shopping by home computer
Want to send roses to your sweetheart, buy a new car, choose a cookbook for
your mother's birthday or purchase computer software? One of the quickest,
if not the cheapest, ways to make these purchases in the US is via on-line
computer information and communications services.
On-line computer shopping has been around for several years, but until
recently most of the products available were aimed at computer hobbyists.
Now the proliferation of home computers, with about one-third of US
households equipped with a personal computer, is attracting the attention of
a broad variety of retailers to on-line shopping as a potentially important
new sales channel.
Prodigy, the on-line service jointly owned by Sears Roebuck, the US
retailer, and International Business Machines, offers products from 125
merchants including Sears, Spiegel, Patagonia, L'Eggs tights and the US
Postal Service. On CompuServe, another on-line service, choices range from a
Brooks Brothers suit to contact lenses, life insurance or a honey-baked ham.
America On-line allows subscribers to offer their homes for sale.
Shopping centres are also being built on the Internet, a global network that
links an estimated 20m computer users. The Internet Shopping Network, for
example, offers an 'electronics superstore', offering more than 15,000
computers, software and related products.
Global Network Navigator, a free on-line service for explorers of the
Internet, has its own 'marketplace' which is supported by advertising
revenues. While nobody is predicting that computer shopping will replace
every trip to the mall, on-line merchandising is expected to grow rapidly
over the next few years as multimedia technology becomes cheaper and more
accessible to consumers.
To date, on-line shopping has generated only modest sales. Less than Dollars
200m (Pounds 132m) in goods were sold on-line in the US last year, compared
with a total of Dollars 1,500bn retail sales (of which mail order catalogues
accounted for Dollars 53bn) and Dollars 2.5bn in sales by television home
shopping channels that take orders by telephone.
However, on-line shopping will generate about Dollars 4.8bn per year by
1998, Forrester Research, a US market research company, predicts. Growth
will be driven by the proliferation of home computers and by improvements in
on-line product presentation, Forrester researchers say.
The largest US publishers and retailers are rushing to offer their products
on-line, says Gene DeRose, head of research at Jupiter Communications, a
market research company that specialises in the on-line services market.
'For media companies, getting on-line means instant communication, new
revenue streams and access to a fast-growing, high demographic customer base
hungry for new services.
'More importantly, getting on-line prepares companies for all forms of
electronic distribution while selling their products today to millions of
on-line consumers.'
The low costs of selling on-line are a big incentive for merchants. In
contrast to mail order marketing, which has high upfront costs for the
publication and distribution of catalogues, retailers selling on-line have
minimal start-up costs and typically pay only about Dollars 15,000 to
Dollars 30,000 annually to reach millions of subscribers.
The market for on-line retailing is expanding as commercial on-line computer
information and communications services such as Prodigy, America On-line and
CompuServe expand. At year-end 1993, there were 3.9m subscribers to these
services and this number should grow to about 5.2m by the end of 1994,
according to Jupiter.
And the on-line services say their shopping centres are drawing more
customers every year. The number of people coming into CompuServe's
'Electronic Mall' has increased 80 per cent this year and sales are up by
more than 30 per cent.
For consumers, the main attraction of computer shopping is convenience. The
services draw 'too busy, two-income families', say the merchants that are
selling on-line. The computer can also provide new shopping opportunities
for the house-bound or disabled, notes Peapod, a Chicago-based venture
offering grocery shopping by computer in the Chicago and San Francisco
areas.
With home computer software supplied by Peapod, San Francisco consumers can
shop at their local Safeway supermarket without leaving home. On-line
shoppers can either wander through the 'virtual supermarket' aisle by aisle,
as they might when making a weekly shopping trip, go directly to specific
types of products like coffee or cereals, or type in the name of the product
they want. Personal shopping lists, with the items you buy regularly, can
also be created.
Special requests, such as ripe bananas or fine ground coffee beans, can be
added to the shopping list. Special offers available in the store are
highlighted on-line and money-off coupons are accepted. The grocery order is
delivered at the shopper's convenience.
Bargain hunters may not, however, be impressed by computer shopping. Most of
the merchandise available on-line is priced at, or above, the prices
available in stores and delivery charges are typically added to the selling
price.
Another shortcoming of computer shopping is that it usually lacks the
pictures of products that are typically found in mail order catalogues.
Although some on-line shopping services make pictures of products available,
it typically takes several minutes to 'paint' these pictures on to a home
computer screen.
Multimedia PCs are, however, beginning to make computer shopping malls more
attractive. CompuServe, for example, recently launched a CD-Rom catalogue to
augment its on-line shopping service with pictures and videos of products
available. The combination of CD-Rom and on-line ordering may be a winner,
Forrester's market researchers believe. While each approach has its
limitations, in combination they provide the immediacy of on-line shopping
and the multimedia capabilities of CD-Rom.
Today's computer shopping services are, however, quite primitive in
comparison to the 'interactive shopping' planned by several US cable
television companies. These services will feature full video and sound and
may provide customers with 'agents' to help them shop.
You might, for example, have decided to purchase a sweater and trousers but
be unsure about which colours would look best together. Your personal
shopping 'agent' could lend a hand by displaying various combinations, or
even make the decision for you.
It may be several years, however, before interactive television shopping
becomes widely available because it will require substantial investments by
the cable television or telecommunications industry in broadband networks.
In the meantime, on-line computer shopping is drawing both retailers and
consumers in increasing numbers.
 --------------------------------------------------
         1998 MARKET MAY BE EVEN BIGGER IF:
 --------------------------------------------------
More women are attracted to on-line
Grocery delivery becomes profitable
Big-ticket items such as cars catch on
Stores give away PCs to consumbers for ordering
 --------------------------------------------------
