FT  30 SEP 94 / Survey of World Economy and Finance - The World's Economies
 -Europe (37): Sceptics forced to think again - Lionel Barber discusses the
future of the European Monetary Union
What a difference a year makes. The collapse of the exchange rate mechanism,
12 months ago, looked like vindicating criticism of Europe's plans for a
monetary union. But in the interim, the sceptics have been forced to think
again.
The cause of the reassessment is twofold: an incipient recovery bolstered by
a steady reduction in German interest rates; and the commitment of member
states (notably France) to maintaining exchange rate stability rather than
resorting to competitive devaluations to kick-start growth and reverse
rising unemployment.
Suddenly, John Major's remark that talk of a monetary union had all the
quaintness of a rain dance looks somewhat short-sighted. A shrewder judgment
on the implosion of the ERM on August 2, 1993, would more likely echo
General De Gaulle's comments on June 18, 1940: Europe has lost a battle not
the war.
Relative calm in the European currency markets since August 1993 suggests
that the new 15 per cent fluctuation bands are working. The 'dirty float'
has offered a respite from the speculators who revelled in testing the
willingness of the central banks to defend the former narrow fluctuation
bands of 6 per cent and 2.25 per cent respectively.
Hans Tietmeyer, Bundesbank president, leads a consensus among his central
bank colleagues in favour of a system which no longer imposes an obligation
on the strong to intervene to prop up weaker currencies. The accent now is
on each member state taking the necessary corrective action - reducing
budget deficits and keeping control of inflation - to bring economies into
line.
This path to economic virtue holds good whether or not member states are
serious about EMU. All the signs, however, suggest that they are. The
creation of the European Monetary Institute is a signal of the political
will to continue on the road to EMU. The caveat is that the Bundesbank's
argument that currency stability is more important than rigid adherence to
the Maastricht treaty's timetable for monetary union clearly holds sway.
So what comes next? First, the EU's road map to a single currency by the end
of the decade may need rethinking. Maastricht's concept of using the
discipline of narrow fluctuation bands to move progressively to fixed
exchange rates looks questionable.
Second, it is worth looking at the margin for manoeuvre offered within the
treaty itself, notably the criteria laid down for membership of a future
monetary union. These fall into three groups: for inflation and interest
rates; for exchange rates; and for fiscal policy.
Consumer price inflation must be within 1 1/2 points of the average of the
best three members. Long-term interest rates must be within 2 per cent of
the average bond yield in the three countries with the lowest inflation
rate.
On exchange rates, member states must respect 'normal' margins of
fluctuation within the ERM for at least two years 'without severe tensions'.
On fiscal policy, the treaty offers two 'reference values': 3 per cent for
the ratio of the planned or actual government deficit to gross domestic
product at market prices; and 60 per cent for the ratio of government debt
to gross domestic product at market prices.
It has suited EMU sceptics to stress the near insuperable nature of the
criteria, particularly those relating to public deficits. EMU supporters
have also had a vested interest in promoting their importance. To do less
would be to encourage backsliding and unnerve the Germans who have most to
lose by surrendering the D-Mark.
Yet EMU may not be quite as elusive as was first imagined. The inflation
target looks eminently manageable for the majority of EU members, and the
interest rate criterion is by no means onerous. It is quite conceivable,
too, that finance ministers could elect to call the wider ERM bands 'normal'
later this year.
The trickiest obstacle remains fiscal deficits. But here again the
Maastricht treaty provides for a degree of political judgment.
Responsibility for applying the 'excessive deficit' procedure lies with the
European Commission which is required to identify 'gross errors'. Also, the
ratio of public debt to GDP must decline 'substantially and continually' and
come close to the reference values.
On the other hand, member states have the chance to argue that their deficit
is temporary or exceptional, and that they are moving toward the reference
values. Thus, on government debt, the reference value is 60 per cent 'unless
the ratio is sufficiently diminishing and approaching the reference value at
a satisfactory pace'.
This year, the Commission has already argued that Ireland does not fail the
fiscal test, despite its high debt, because of its low deficit. The move
offered an important signal about future flexibility, assuming the Council
of Ministers agrees (it must act by a qualified majority on the
recommendation of the Commission).
It is tempting to conclude that EMU is eminently feasible, with the outcome
depending on the political will of those member states with the strongest
commitment to European integration. The refusal of the Belgians and the
French to break ranks with their partners on interest rates suggests that
the governing elite's support for EMU remains undiminished. Together with
Germany, the Netherlands and Luxembourg, Belgium and France look very much
like an informal hard currency club.
Yet it would be unwise to ignore the statements from leading Germans,
notably Mr Tietmeyer, that EMU needs to be balanced by a greater degree of
political union in Europe. The precise nature of such a political union
remains unclear, but the thrust of the argument holds: Germany remains
hesitant about surrendering monetary sovereignty unless its partners are
prepared to pool sovereignty in other areas.
EMU supporters argue that the Germans have entered legal obligations, so it
is too late to draw back now. But it seems inevitable that the future debate
on EMU will increasingly be coloured by political arguments, with German
calls for greater powers to the European parliament, deeper co-operation on
foreign and defence policy, and a more forthcoming approach to eastern
European neighbours in joining the EU high on the agenda. The final argument
on which countries are deemed eligible to join EMU is also expected to be
controversial.
The lesson of the past 12 months is that the EU retains an enviable ability
to improvise in the face of obstacles or setbacks.
