FT  08 OCT 94 / Markets: A little knowledge is a sensible thing - Serious
Money
Options trader, quantitative analyst, property economist, pensions manager,
swaps trader, foreign exchange dealer, investment manager, head of high
yield and distressed debt: this list is not some yuppie equivalent of
'tinker, tailor, soldier, sailor'; it reflects the new student intake at
London Business School's investment management course.
Tuesday evening this week found all these high-powered, highly-paid students
solemnly tossing a pair of dice 10 times to simulate probable portfolio
returns. More prosaic moments dinned home such useful messages as:
Risk-tolerant and long-term investors prefer more equity.
Investors with real liabilities prefer short gilts to long (or
index-linked).
Investors with nominal liabilities prefer to match.
High-tax investors prefer short gilts to long gilts.
Most serious private investors would have found the seminar illuminating,
but one residual query is obvious: to what extent can even a rich individual
make use of investment theory intended for professionals managing
multi-million pound portfolios?
You might well run your own investment portfolio very differently from that
of a pension fund or unit trust. But the more you understand about the
characteristics of different types of security and the way professional
investors use them, the better. Knowledge might not help you to make money -
but it should help you to avoid losing it. And steering clear of pitfalls
plays a large part in successful investment.
Take risk, for example. Most sensible investors take some risks, but they do
not take risks which are at odds with their objectives or unlikely to offer
a commensurately greater reward.
It would be stupid to buy a share that you expected at best to provide the
same return as a gilt held to maturity. Since the return on the share is
uncertain, it becomes a sensible choice only if you expect it to produce a
higher return than the safer alternative. Diversification helps reduce risk.
Such basic cautions are as useful to the individual investor as they are to
the professional. They may seem blindingly obvious, but too many people
still regard buying shares as the financial equivalent of a white-knuckle
ride without a safety net: a test of machismo. Unsurprisingly, such
investors tend to end up losing money.
Emerging stock markets are one type of investment where risk/return
calculations are particularly relevant. After a hectic rise in 1993, the
markets - which include those in the fast developing countries of Asia,
Latin America and central and eastern Europe - have first fallen sharply and
then recovered so far this year.
There is at present a heated debate among professional investors as to
whether emerging markets represent good value at their present levels. What
is slightly chastening about this debate is that such intelligent people can
use the same evidence to come to opposite conclusions.
Two recent papers sum it up. 'Has the gravy train been and gone?' asks David
Shaw at Legal &amp; General.
His answer is that although there continues to be 'a strong, compelling
secular case for emerging markets, the purely cyclical justification is near
the end of its shelf life'. In other words, they are still attractive in the
long term, but investors should be ready to take profits in the short term.
Shaw's immediate worry is that US interest rates will rise enough next year
to pull mutual fund money back home. If the Fed funds' rate tops 6 per cent
(against the present 4 3/4 per cent), that will trigger 'the US private
investors' liquidity preference'. So, the little old lady from Pasadena will
call her wandering dollars home from Rio and Beijing. And the long feared
global capital shortage will become reality.
Over at Independent Strategy, David Roche has an answer to this fear. 'The
global capital market is like a bath that is being tipped towards the deep
end of high returns in the restructuring economies,' he says.
Capital will be sucked out of the rich countries and fed into more
productive investments in infrastructure and technology in the emerging
economies. And 'the existence of hedge funds and derivatives guarantees
that, when the bath tips, the water will slosh towards the productive end
fast, though perhaps with considerable volatility'.
Since the rewards look good enough, investors will accept the risk. But mind
your eye.
This is one of those pleasing occasions where private investors are actually
placed better than professionals. The two Davids both agree about the
long-term attractions of emerging markets, and any sensible private investor
would put money in emerging markets only on a long-term basis.
Hoping to hit the jackpot by trading in and out of this kind of market is a
mug's game. But owning shares in an emerging markets trust is a the mark of
a canny long-term investor.
Are personal equity plans a tax break used only by the rich? Autif is keen
to point out that 50 per cent of unit trust Pep-holders are basic-rate
taxpayers. Yes, but . . .
One of the worries about Peps is that they are often sold to people who are
unlikely to benefit from them - such as basic-rate taxpayers.
