FT  29 APR 94 / Forte faces delay on Meridien decision
Air France, the state-owned airline, yesterday announced that it is to delay
a decision on the sale of its Meridien hotel chain which is at the centre of
a fierce battle for control between Accor of France and Forte of the UK,
which has made the higher bid.
The airline said it had sent the Forte and Accor bids to the privatisation
commission, an independent body which advises the French government on
privatisation issues. It said a final decision, which had been expected at
yesterday's board meeting, should be made soon.
The statement was seen on both side of the Channel as evidence of the strong
pressure being exerted on Air France not to sell the chain, in which it has
a 57 per cent stake, to a non-French buyer.
A minority shareholder in Meridien said yesterday: 'We've been appalled at
the clear political pressures that have been brought to bear that have
nothing to do with the economics of the bid.'
Air France confirmed yesterday that it suffered losses of FFr8.48bn (Pounds
990m) last year, the biggest in its history and almost three times the
deficit of FFr3.3bn recorded in 1992.
The sale of a controlling stake in Meridien is an important element of a
rescue package for the airline.
This would also include a FFr20bn capital injection from the French
government, which would require European Commission approval.
Industry observers in Paris argue that a decision to accept a lower bid
could add to resistance in Brussels to the capital increase.
A reference to the privatisation commission is part of the procedure for the
selling off of state assets. However, hotel industry observers said that the
Air France board could have expressed a preference for one of the bidders
and referred only its offer to the commission.
The board eliminated from the contest a third potential buyer, Kempinski,
the German hotel group, but declined to come down in favour of either Forte
or Accor.
Meridien said this week that it favoured the approach from Forte, which
values the chain at FFr1.8bn.
Accor, which has joined up with Prince Al Waleed of Saudi Arabia, has made a
bid which values Meridien at about FFr1.6bn. It argues that its offer would
keep Meridien in French hands and that it would ensure a flow of business to
Air France, thereby aiding its recovery.
Some owners of hotels managed by Meridien are believed to have warned Air
France that they would attempt to cancel the management contracts if Accor
won control of the chain.
Air France results, Page 26
