FT  24 NOV 94 / Survey of Italian Banking and Finance (10): Support for old
foundations - A look at Italy's most traditional banking institutions
Italian ballet students are being helped to aspire to the achievements of
compatriots Carla Fracci and Alessandra Ferri. Thanks to Turin's Fondazione
Sanpaolo, Milan's La Scala ballet school will be leaving its cramped and
inadequate facilities for new buildings at the end of next year. Work has
just started on a L5bn project in central Milan.
Assistance for La Scala's ballet school adds a new dimension to the
benefaction undertaken by the Fondazione Sanpaolo di Torino per la Cultura,
la Scienza e l'Arte. Since being established in 1985, it has financed the
L12bn restructuring of Turin's Egyptian Museum, and also the restoration of
the San Fruttuoso abbey, at Camogli near Genoa, and of the Superga basilica,
Juvarra's baroque masterpiece overlooking Turin.
Milan's Brera gallery, churches in Turin and Rome, and the Turin RAI
orchestra are also among the beneficiaries to which funds have been
channelled.
Gianni Zandano, Sanpaolo's chairman, explained: 'The Fondazione allows us to
operate on two fronts - first, the restoration and, in the best sense,
exploitation of our cultural heritage; and second, the promotion of
scientific research, paying particular attention to the environment. Both
areas of intervention directly concern the quality of life in society today.
. .
'The establishment of the Istituto San Paolo, in 1563, arose from
participation in the life and problems of society, the bank's predecessors
being a charitable body, the Compagnia per il Soccorso dei Poveri, and the
Monte di Pieta' whose aim was to combat usury,' Mr Zanadano said, adding
that the bank had never fallen short on social commitment.
The Fondazione is funded by Compagnia di San Paolo, which also funds the
charitable organisations Ufficio Pio and Educatorio Duchessa Isabella. In
1992 and 1993, they spent L17bn on welfare activities, essentially in
assisting people at society's margins. The poor, drug addicts, alcoholics
and the handicapped are among those benefiting.
Compagnia di San Paolo is the foundation established when the Istituto
Bancario San Paolo di Torino spun off its banking activities in 1991. It
owns the Sanpaolo Bank Holding, a joint stock corporation owning 76 per cent
of the San Paolo Bank that was floated in March 1992 and is listed in Milan,
Turin and London. The foundation obtains its income from dividends from its
shareholding in the bank.
San Paolo, Italy's biggest banking group, is not alone in having ties to a
cultural and charitable foundation. During the past three years, other
public sector banks, including Banco di Napoli, Banco di Sicilia and the
savings banks (casse di risparmio), have settled on similar ownership
structures in which foundations have control. Indeed, Banco di Napoli led
the way, being the first to transform itself from a combined foundation and
bank into a foundation with a separate bank corporation.
In doing so, Banco di Napoli made use of the Amato Law, the starting point
for the shake-up that has been re-shaping the public-sector part of Italy's
banking system. Passed in July 1990, the law aimed to create the conditions
for rationalisation and concentration by offering fiscal incentives. It was
also an early, tentative step to encourage bank privatisations.
Formerly denominated as public law credit institutions, Turin's Sanpaolo and
Banco di Napoli both now enjoy stock market quotation. They are leading
examples of Amato Law transformations. Cassa di Risparmio delle Provincie
Lombarde (the Milan savings bank Cariplo), which ranks fourth on assets and
leads in terms of Tier 1 capital, is another.
Cariplo was transformed in December 1991, the foundation spinning off its
banking operations into the Cariplo SpA joint stock corporation. Since then,
it has been engaged in a campaign of acquisitions of shareholdings in other
savings banks, either directly or indirectly through sub-holdings.
It has controlling interests in the savings banks of Puglia, Citta' di
Castello, Viterbo, and Calabria and Lucania. Significant minority
shareholdings give Cariplo a place in 11 other savings banks in central and
northern Italy.
While Cariplo has been casting its eyes over the savings banks and
exercising its financial muscle and skills of persuasion to draw some of the
many small and medium-sized casse into its orbit, Banca di Roma (controlled
by the Cassa di Risparmio di Roma) and the Turin's Banca CRT have been doing
the same.
There has been large scope for rationalisation in a category, nearly
80-strong, where most members operate on a provincial scale and where the
average network has less than 70 branches. Some have allied themselves in
holdings, a solution adopted by groups of savings banks in Emilia Romagna
and Tuscany. Projects for other alliances and for mergers will lead to
further concentration among savings banks, a category with nearly 30 per
cent of the banking system's deposits.
'The situation is fluid,' said Pier Giulio Cottini, general manager of ACRI,
the Italian savings banks' association. He noted that the use of holding
companies has the advantage of giving a voice to the small participating
banks. 'It provides a way of maintaining the savings banks' local ties,'
explained Mr Cottini.
Change and fluidity characterise the savings banks' banking operations.
Uncertainty is a feature of their controlling foundations. This was made
clear at the annual meeting of the Italian banking association ABI in June.
Treasury minister Lamberto Dini said that most foundations were pursuing
vague objectives, and had an unsatisfactory spread of unco-ordinated and
non-homogeneous interests.
Mr Dini, whose ministry oversees the foundations while the banking
activities are supervised by the Bank of Italy, reminded the foundations
that many need to revise their statutes. The law foresees that they should
undertake works of public utility in the areas of education, scientific
research, art and health. Mr Dini wants feasible, detailed programmes. The
treasury minister considers that the foundations should co-ordinate their
activities, and even merge.
He may appoint a commissioner if he considers that a foundation is not being
correctly administered. The treasury also has the powers to give general or
specific indications on how foundations should invest. Mr Dini said that
there must be diversification away from banks. A controlling public
shareholding is no longer a requirement. Moreover, foundations that sell
their bank shares will not incur capital gains tax.
Privatisation is not an issue. Indeed the real risk seems to be
nationalisation. The assets of the savings banks' foundations, which Mr
Cottini estimates at L30,000bn, make them an attractive target for
cash-strapped public bodies.
With this kind of money under management, even though annual dividend income
is probably a modest L300bn to L500bn, membership of the boards of the
savings banks' foundations' offers appetising opportunities for patronage.
At present, there is no statutory requirement for independent audit, nor for
the publication of annual accounts. Mr Dini could give a boost to
transparency, and put the boot into bad old practices, by opening up the
foundations to public scrutiny.
