FT  26 APR 94 / US Congress seeks IMF transparency as condition of aid for
poorest states
The US Congress may demand much greater transparency from the International
Monetary Fund as a condition for approving the Dollars 100m (Pounds 67m) US
contribution to the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility, which lends to
the poorest developing countries.
Congressman Barney Frank, who chairs the US House of Representatives
sub-committee which will put together a bill to authorise the ESAF
contribution, plans to require much the same level of public disclosure from
the IMF as he did of the World Bank last year.
Mr Frank's pressure last year, when the US administration was seeking
congressional approval for the US contribution to a similar World Bank loan
fund, played a role in prodding the World Bank to promise to publish a wide
range of documents, and to set up an independent inspection panel which
would review complaints.
Public disclosure of internal documents has infuriated some long-serving
bank officials, who complain it compromises their negotiations with
borrowers and with contractors.
Such disclosure is likely to face even stiffer opposition at the IMF, where
many member countries baulk at the possible disclosure of their internal,
macro-economic projections.
That is, however, precisely why IMF critics insist that greater transparency
is needed.
'If governments are afraid or unwilling to explain these policies to their
own people, how can they build and sustain public support? Transparency and
openness is necessary for building political consensus,' said Mr Nguyuru
Lipumba, a former adviser to the government of Tanzania.
Mr Jeffrey Sachs, a professor at Harvard University in the US and an
outspoken critic of the IMF's performance in Russia, argued that greater
transparency would improve the Fund's own economic policy recommendations,
and would greatly improve political accountability in countries seeking to
borrow from the IMF.
Mr Jeffrey Shafer, assistant secretary for international affairs at the US
Treasury, said that the US administration backed greater transparency at the
international financial institutions, but he warned that the cause had
attracted little support from other countries. Indeed, the US was defeated
by a vote of 22 to two when it recently asked the IMF to publish its annual
country reviews.
IMF officials are openly irritated by the difficulty of extracting even the
smallest financial contribution from their largest member - the US  -
without a protracted congressional debate. They are particularly irked in
the case of the ESAF, since the Dollars 100m US contribution to the Dollars
3bn ESAF subsidy account is so small and was so grudgingly given.
Nevertheless, the IMF cannot simply fail to accept the US contribution,
because many other donors make their own contributions conditional on the US
coming up with a share.
