FT  30 NOV 94 / Budget 94 (Public Spending): NHS funding wins increase of
Pounds 1.3bn - Health
The National Health Service was picked out by Mr Kenneth Clarke as one of
the few areas where public spending would rise in real terms.
'Next year spending on the health service will grow by Pounds 1.3bn, 1 per
cent in real terms, against the 0.5 per cent increase allowed for in last
year's Budget,' the chancellor said.
'Further improvements in efficiency are expected to release at least Pounds
600m extra for patient care next year.'
The British Medical Association, the doctors' representative body, said that
'initially, the Budget looks like relative good news. But we'd like to know
where efficiency savings of Pounds 600m - about 2 per cent - can be made.
Many NHS trusts are already reporting that their costs have been cut close
to the bone.'
Mr Philip Hunt, director of the National Association of Health Authorities
and Trusts, said he was relieved that real spending would rise.
He believed the efficiency savings could be made through a reduction in the
number of patients staying in hospital along with a rise in the proportion
of outpatient treatments and lower management costs through regional health
authority mergers.
He said the increased spending and savings would allow about 4 per cent more
patient treatments to be carried out.
But he warned that this would happen only if there was no real increase in
hospital employees' wages and a minimal increase in staff numbers.
Under the Budget plan, NHS spending will rise by 1 per cent in real terms in
1995-96 to Pounds 32bn.
Within that, hospital capital spending would be cut by 6.3 per cent to
Pounds 1.8bn, compared with a rise of 16 per cent in 1994-95. This would be
offset by receipts from land sales and private investment.
'There are now over 50 health projects either approved or completed bringing
in over Pounds 100m of new capital into the NHS,' said Mr Clarke.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, said that the higher spending
meant that from April 1995 'nobody will have to wait more than 18 months for
treatment'. She added there would be a new standard for outpatient waiting
times announced 'soon'.
One of the biggest beneficiaries of government spending is in Family Health
Services - general practitioners - which see a real increase of 2.5 per cent
in spending to Pounds 7bn.
This may be partly to take into account a drugs bill which is increasing
faster than the rate of inflation. Most drugs are dispensed to patients
through GPs.
Department of Health spending on administration is budgeted to fall by 8.8
per cent to Pounds 272m.
Mr Clarke said that the real increase in spending on the NHS was the result
of lower than expected inflation. This made it 'possible for us to reduce
our previous plans for health and still meet our manifesto commitment to
real growth in resources each year,' but such a reduction would not take
place.
He said that the NHS would deliver 'even better standards of patient care,
with further improvements in patients' charter standards, and more progress
in reducing waiting times'.
