FT  08 MAR 94 / Survey of Credit Management (9): Powerhouse capability to
deliver - Information Technology
The use of information technology has now permeated almost every stage of
the credit management cycle, from application vetting through to litigation.
At the start of the cycle a large number of companies provide on-line
assessments of credit worthiness in the trade finance and consumer sectors.
Clients are demanding information in more user friendly forms.
For example, UAPT-Infolink has just launched Prophet, a Windows-based
package. Data is downloaded on to a client pc from Infolink's mainframes and
can then be fully manipulated using the full range of Windows' facilities,
including graphical interfaces. 'We're giving them full remote processing
capability,' says Mr Kevin Still, Infolink's head of marketing.
From the mid-1980s the UK's credit information providers started to tie
their computer systems into those of important clients. News about a
particular customer can be fed straight into a client's database on demand.
'For our very large customers we can build direct links into our database
and give them unlimited access,' says Mr Chris Brooker, distribution and
marketing director at Dun &amp; Bradstreet.
Alternatively, rather than providing information on request, credit
information on customer files in client databases can be continuously
updated. 'It's really a question of giving them a seamless system,' says Mr
David Pearce, director of computer service development at Graydon Ltd, a
trade finance information provider.
Scoring systems are one of the most high-profile uses of IT within the
credit management function. They are mainly used to vet consumer credit
applications - though use in trade finance is growing - with points awarded
for key factors such as how long applicants have been in residence at their
current addresses, whether spouses are in employment and so on. Fair Isaac
developed the technique in the US back in 1958. Other suppliers of score
cards are CCN, MDS and Mathtec, with bureau services available from Equifix,
Scorex and UAPT-Infolink.
Building credit score cards is no longer the preserve of external experts.
Paragon Business Solutions has been marketing DSS, a pc-based package for
in-house score card building, for over two years.
Ms Caroline Hendra, head of personal credit at the Co-op bank, has used DSS
to build an application scorecard for a Visa gold card and to predict
response for a personal loan product. She also uses external consultants,
but is clear on the need for in-house building: 'As life becomes more
complicated you need to react more quickly.' Scorex can also supply building
software and SAS Institute Ltd will assist with development tools.
About 10 years after developing credit score carding, Fair Isaac began to
aggregate data drawn off customers' files after credit had been granted. The
resulting behaviour score cards enable companies to decide, for example,
whether to increase a client's credit limit or to renew a facility.
It is only in recent years that behaviour scoring has really taken off, on
the back of computers' advances in power and agility. 'It has big IT
applications,' says Mr O D Nelson, senior vice president at Fair Isaac.
'There can be 150 characteristics on a rich customer file to bring into a
decision making algorithm.' About two thirds of bank credit cards now have
account details analysed by behaviour scoring.
Mr Ian Arthur, an associate partner with Andersen Consulting, points to the
way in which sophisticated relational databases are increasingly built into
operational systems, linking and exploiting information across customer
files for different credit products. 'You can be more focused in the
marketing you do,' he says. Behaviour scores are combined with other data to
assess a customer's likelihood of buying a new product.
Use of expert systems is growing. A scorecard predicts customers' future
actions on the basis of past behaviour. Expert systems are built by
extracting the rules underlying credit professionals' decisions and building
systems that apply them automatically. Use has expanded beyond application
vetting to decide, for example, whether to authorise unusually large
transactions.
Neural networks are the next stage. Rules built into expert systems can only
be changed externally, but neural networks alter them on the basis of
experience. According to Mr Darren Whobery, new technology consultant at
UAPT-Infolink, neural networks have a slight edge in many applications. The
gap widens if there is more data available, particularly if it contains
variables with non-linear relationships.
Neural networks are already in use in the US. They are often coupled with
more conventional technology in hybrid systems, and are creeping into the
UK. 'It's only a question of time,' says Mr Arthur. UAPT-Infolink is being
sponsored by a club of big UK financial institutions, to evaluate neural
networks against score cards and expert systems.
The final stage of the credit process is, of course, collection. Systems
have been available for this end of the cycle for over 10 years and have
been particularly useful in the recession and its aftermath. Cases can be
put on a priority list for pursuit, according to rules laid down by users.
As part of pre-litigation processes, packages can now help users decide
whether to pursue a debt in-house, use an external collection agent or go to
the courts. They can issue letters of reminder and warnings before
initiating County Court and High Court proceedings.
Sanderson CFL markets two packages in this area. Tallyman deals with arrears
and collections, while the wonderfully named Minder (Monitored Integrated
Debt Recovery) assists recovery and litigation. 'We've done very well out of
it,' says Sanderson's Ms Sharon McBean, of the latter.
The packages are suitable for clients handling at least 10,000 debtors.
Current users include banks, building societies and utilities. Other
suppliers of software in this area include Target Computer Group, AST
TransAct (part of SHL Systemhouse Europe Group), AIM Law Data and Law Data
Systems.
Credit Collection Systems Ltd offers a bureau-type service to companies
wanting an in-house collection system without a large capital outlay. 'We
take care of all the hardware and software,' says sales manager Mr Richard
Brooks. Users access a central processing installation through terminals,
and payment is on the basis of each account put on the system.
Computers can deal with administration of undefended cases, but with
defended actions the role of IT in the credit management cycle ends. As Mr
Brooks points out, computers cannot yet walk into court and argue a case:
'There's no way you can take it that far.'
