FT  10 SEP 94 / Drive for more bank regulation 'may reverse'
The trend towards ever more detailed regulation of banks may soon reverse, a
senior Bank of England official told the British Association economics
section in Loughborough yesterday.
Mr Lionel Price, head of the Bank's Centre for Central Banking Studies, said
the views of Mr Don Brash, governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand,
might be 'a harbinger of a wider shift in opinion'. He 'has come to the view
that banking supervisors should be less ambitious,' Mr Price said.
The supervisory burden faced by central banks is made much worse by the
rapid growth of derivatives, he added. 'The pricing of these products, and
the measurement of the risks they carry, has provided much rewarding
employment for mathematicians,' Mr Price said.
Professor David Llewellyn of Loughborough University said the ingredients
were in place for a 'regulatory nightmare'. He proposed moving from
regulating specific risks to supervising each bank's risk-management system.
Mr Price also asked whether central banks are necessarily the right bodies
to supervise the banking sector. 'The distinctions between banks and other
financial institutions are breaking down,' he said. 'As their fields of
activity overlap . . . the case for placing them under a single regulator
becomes stronger.'
Traditional banking is a declining industry, Prof Llewellyn said. As entry
barriers come down thanks to new technology and changes in regulation, banks
will lose business to other financial institutions and to non-financial
corporations in retailing and manufacturing.
'Direct banking', using new computing and communications technology, will
reduce the importance of conventional branches, Prof Llewellyn said.
'Institutions with a substantial branch network may find that what used to
be a major competitive advantage. . . becomes one of their most expensive
problems.'
Banks will continue to respond to the encroachment by moving into other
financial services. 'However, it is unlikely that the market will continue
to support anywhere near the current number of banks in the global financial
system,' Prof Llewellyn concluded.
