FT  05 SEP 94 / Letters to the Editor: Mitigating cost of contract
termination
Sir, Those concerned about large payments to directors on termination
('Insurers join outcry against large pay-offs', August 20) of contract
should always refer company boards to the Companies Act 1985, sections 312
and 316(3). Any payment will require shareholder approval unless it is a
bona fide payment by way of damages for breach of contract or pension for
past service.
English contract law requires that any party suing for breach of contract
must mitigate his loss. To the extent loss is mitigated the damages claim is
reduced. The claim will similarly be reduced if the party could, but failed,
to mitigate his loss.
If the terminated director is able to obtain another job at the same salary
on the day after leaving (and he is obliged to make efforts to find fresh
employment as soon as possible) his entitlement to damages will be
extinguished. While there will always be a judgment on the extent to which
mitigation is possible, it may be a relatively rare case where none is
possible over, say, an unexpired three-year period of a contract - it
requires the judgment that the person concerned will not work at all during
that period. If the view can so readily be taken that the services of the
terminated director are so little in demand, perhaps shareholders are
entitled to wonder whether the executive should have been taken on in the
first place.
While welcoming the focus on length of existing service agreements,
shareholders may rightly want to assure themselves that mitigation
principles are properly applied on any termination. After all, any payment
made by boards without appropriate consideration of what mitigation is
possible, without proper reference to shareholders, will, in the words of
section 312, 'be unlawful . . .'
Perhaps a board might even consider continuing to pay the director concerned
over the unexpired period of his contract or until he finds a new job -
whichever is the sooner. This threat can inject realism into negotiations
with a departing executive.
Martin Winter,
Biddle &amp; Co, solicitors,
1 Gresham Street,
London EC2V 7BU
