FT  07 MAR 94 / Leading Article: Part-timers
Two important court judgements last week, based on European law, are set to
enhance the rights of some British employees. The first almost certainly
means that consultation procedures with employees will have to be
established in the many organisations where they do not already exist to
cover certain cases of business transfer and large-scale redundancies. The
second means that part-time workers will have to work for an employer for
only two years rather than five to be covered by unfair dismissal and
redundancy pay provisions.
This underlines the point that Britain's ability to opt out from European
Union social legislation was always likely to be constrained in practice.
But it does not mean that the British programme of labour market
de-regulation has been stopped in its tracks. Indeed, contrary to the claims
made by depressed Conservative Euro-sceptics and over-optimistic union
leaders, the effects of the judgement are likely to be rather limited. The
consultation judgement will not apply to small companies and will require,
at most, an election procedure to establish consultation arrangements, which
can be dissolved as soon as a transfer or redundancies have occurred. It
will not mean the establishment of works councils up and down the land.
In the case of part-timers the five-year qualification threshold for
employment protection, accepted by all Tory and Labour governments since
1971, has always seemed an unfairly long time to decide whether someone's
face does not fit. Moreover, the potential redundancy payments will never
amount to more than a few hundred pounds. In any case, only about 500,000
out of Britain's 5.8m part-timers are likely to gain from the two changes.
Although the government will fight the consultation judgement if it is
confirmed by the European Court of Justice, it seems to be taking a
relatively sanguine view of these developments. This may be because it does
not want to stir up its own Euro-sceptics prior to the European elections.
But it may be also that it recognises that the changes involved are too
small to have any impact on demand for labour. Part-time work expanded just
as fast in the more regulated and union-influenced labour market of the
1970s as it did in the less regulated 1980s, suggesting that there are
bigger economic and social factors at play.
It is also true that even after the recent judgement takes effect there will
be a big cost and regulatory bias towards part-time employment, especially
if an individual is earning under the Pounds 56 a week threshold for
National Insurance payments. Given the difficulty European economies have
displayed in creating full-time jobs, especially for lower skilled workers,
governments would be wise to seek further incentives of this type to
stimulate this part of the labour market, rather than seeking to deny basic
employment rights to part timers.
