FT  15 NOV 94 / Business and the Law: Drugs imports advert ban upheld -
European Court
A German ban on advertising of pharmaceuticals imported from other EU member
countries was justified under Rome treaty free movement rules, the European
Court of Justice ruled last week.
The Court said the ban was a restriction on internal market trade which
could be prohibited under the Rome treaty, but was justified on public
health grounds.
In the absence of Community harmonisation measures, therefore, the ban
benefited from the exception to the treaty prohibition of free movement of
goods restrictions.
The Saarbrucken Landgericht had referred two questions on the interpretation
of the Treaty free movement of goods rules to the ECJ.
The questions arose in the context of litigation between Lucien Ortscheit
and Eurim-Pharm, two German pharmaceutical importers. Lucien Ortscheit
sought an order that its competitor cease advertising foreign imports which
had not been approved by the German authorities. Under German law, all
pharmaceuticals, including imports, must be approved by the responsible
Federal authority prior to marketing in Germany. But there is an exception
for certain pharmaceuticals authorised in their country of origin which may
be lawfully marketed when ordered by pharmacists in limited quantities to
supply prescriptions.
The advertising of this specific category of imports is prohibited by the
German law (Heilmittelwerbegesetz) relied on by Lucien Ortscheit. Since
April 1992, Eurim-Pharm had advertised in the professional medical press the
availability of imported pharmaceuticals unauthorised in Germany.
The ECJ said the advertising ban was a restriction on the free movement of
goods since it applied only to imports.
It did not affect the marketing of domestic products in the same way as
imports originating in other member countries. Therefore, it could not
escape the Rome treaty prohibition of restrictions on the free movement of
goods.
In particular, the advertising ban could potentially restrict the volume of
pharmaceutical imports concerned by depriving the market of information on
their availability.
On whether the ban was justified on public health grounds, the Court said it
was covered by the treaty exception to the prohibition of import
restrictions for a number of reasons. First, the treaty exception remained
applicable in the field of production and marketing of pharmaceuticals
insofar as Community harmonisation of national rules was incomplete. In
particular, the 1992 directive (Directive 92/28/EEC) on the advertising of
drugs for human use was not in force at the time material to the German
dispute.
The ECJ then confirmed that public health was among the foremost interests
protected by the exception to the treaty prohibition of free movement of
goods restrictions. The Court said the member countries were free to decide
the degree of health protection they provided subject to the limits imposed
by the treaty. The exception, therefore, would apply only if there was no
method less restrictive of trade than the advertising which was equally
effective for its purpose.
It concluded that the advertising ban was necessary to prevent evasion of
the German pharmaceutical authorisation regime. Since there was not yet a
Community approval system or reciprocal recognition of national
authorisations, member countries were required by the 1965 pharmaceutical
harmonisation directive (modified in 1989) only to permit the marketing of
pharmaceuticals authorised by their responsible national authority.
The advertising ban was intended to maintain the exceptional character of
the specific authorisation exception for imports so that the normal
authorisation requirement would not be systematically evaded. If there was
no such ban, there was a risk that manufacturers would obtain authorisation
in member countries where standards were less strict, and then import the
pharmaceuticals into Germany on the basis of orders resulting from
advertising campaigns.
C-320/93, Lucien Ortscheit v Eurim-Pharm, ECJ 5CH, November 10 1994.
BRICK COURT CHAMBERS, BRUSSELS.
