FT  16 DEC 94 / Major in row over early recess
An intended goodwill gesture turned sour on Mr John Major, the prime
minister, yesterday when he was accused of bringing forward the Christmas
parliamentary recess to dodge a political roasting in the Commons.
In a rare display of public anger, the prime minister vigorously denied that
his decision to engage in a tactical retreat was responsible for MPs
starting their Christmas break on Tuesday instead of Wednesday.
Mrs Ann Taylor, shadow leader of the Commons, said the scrapping of the
business originally planned for Tuesday would enable the prime minister to
escape a testing question time session.
Mr Major was further angered by her suggestion that he was resigned to the
loss of the Dudley West by-election and wanted to deprive Mr Ian Pearson,
the Labour candidate, of a high-profile introduction to the Commons on
Tuesday.
After an animated conversation with the prime minister, Mr Tony Newton,
leader of the Commons, said MPs ought to know that the recess had been
brought forward a day in response to a request from the office of Mr Tony
Blair, the Labour leader.
To Tory cheers, Mr Newton called on Mrs Taylor to apologise to the prime
minister 'for the comments you made'.
Mr Tony Banks, Labour MP for Newham north west, scornfully called for a
debate on the health of the prime minister. Backed by Labour cheers and
laughter, Mr Banks said: 'If he is going to get out of his pram like he did
just now in response to Mrs Taylor's question he is going to do himself a
mischief.'
Mr Newton replied that the prime minister showed 'every sign of being and
continuing in vigorous health'.
He said it was not surprising, in the circumstances, that Mr Major had been
'cross' about Mrs Taylor's suggestions.
After hurried consultations with other members of the Labour front bench Mrs
Taylor insisted that Mr Blair had not requested an earlier start for the
Christmas recess.
She pressed for the reinstatement of prime minister's questions and the
other business planned for Tuesday.
Mr Newton admitted in conciliatory tones that there could have been a
misunderstanding.
'Manifestly the impression had been created in Mr Major's office that
something approaching a request had been made,' he said.
