FT  19 DEC 94 / Warburg attempts to rebuild character: The aftermath of
collapsed merger with Morgan Stanley
To suggest to Sir David Scholey, chairman of SG Warburg, that near the end
of a 30-year career with the UK's leading investment bank, he has been taken
for a ride by a US rival is to be met with a silent stare. 'No,' he says,
pausing for emphasis before repeating the word quietly. 'No.'
It is an understandably sensitive point for Sir David and Lord Cairns, the
bank's chief executive. After the collapse of their proposed merger with
Morgan Stanley last week, they picked up the Financial Times to read a brisk
dismissal by an executive of the US firm of their reason for merging.
Mr Stephen Waters, co-managing director of Morgan Stanley Europe, said that
Mercury Asset Management, the fund management company 75 per cent owned by
Warburg was 'the reason for us to do this deal'. There was no mention of
creating a global investment bank at a single stroke.
It was not what Sir David wanted to read, amid criticism from outside
Warburg - and privately from within - over the handling of the affair. By
Friday, he and Lord Cairns faced suggestions that they had acted naively,
and that Warburg no longer had credibility as an independent firm.
Sir David does not mince his words over Mr Waters' remarks, calling them 'a
subjective and selective alibi', and arguing that Mr Waters has 'a hell of a
containment job to do' in re-establishing the confidence of Morgan Stanley's
2,300 European staff.
The tension between Morgan Stanley's European employees and Warburg over how
European operations would have been run in a merged firm, and which firm
would bear the brunt of job cuts, spilled out at the end. Warburg faces its
own containment job in the coming weeks.
The bluntest view, expressed by some rivals and even some of Warburg's
employees, is that Lord Cairns should resign, because he is so closely
identified with the failed merger. Sir David insists that all the firm's
directors were involved, and no such sacrifice is called for.
'We think we were entirely right to pursue the opportunity of a merger in a
way that was constructive, imaginative, and thoroughly responsible. It was
not a move that was born out of dire need,' he says. He talks of the
inevitable risk of trying to do something 'radical and bold'.
The attempt broke down within days of the news leaking, and the two banks
having to issue a statement that they were in talks. Warburg has been blamed
for the disclosure, but Sir David says that executives wanted to involve as
many employees as possible, even at the risk of a leak.
'We took a very positive view that we were not going to do this the Salomon
Brothers/Phillips Brothers way (when the US groups merged) - asking everyone
to a country club on Saturday and locking them up until they accepted that
it was going to happen on Sunday.'
But the collapse leaves Warburg's management with several challenges: the
need to restore the confidence of staff, to convince outsiders that Warburg
can continue as an independent institution, and to ensure that it can
re-establish a harmonious relationship with MAM.
Sir David accepts that staff are bound to question what went wrong. 'Could
the management have handled it better? That is the question they are asking,
and how we all respond and react to that in the hours and days and weeks
ahead will be an important test for us.' He insists that there is no need
for Warburg to panic, about whether it can survive independently, arguing
that 'any suggestion that this puts the firm up for sale, puts it on the
line, or hangs it out to dry, or whatever, is dealer-speak rather than a
reflective management view'.
The problem will be to convince staff and outsiders that the bank can return
to its strategy of independent expansion. Sir David talks of a strategy
'fundamentally based on our pre-discussion strategy, but with adaptations
and variations' and of adding 'a new dynamism'.
Yet he and Lord Cairns will not specify what this means, insisting that
staff will be the first to be told. Warburg appears to be caught at a
crossroads, with poor first-half profits suggesting the need for cuts, but
the merger failure suggesting the need for more rapid growth.
Unless Warburg can make its case, it will find it hard to resist an approach
from an outsider. The logic of linking up with any other institution is
dismissed, with Lord Cairns talking of an 'uncanny' fit with Morgan Stanley
not found in rumoured predators such as HSBC Holdings.
There is also the question of whether Warburg's relations with MAM will be
damaged by the affair. It was MAM's demand for operational independence as
well as a premium offer for minority shareholders that convinced Morgan
Stanley there was no point in proceeding.
Sir David says MAM's board 'acted entirely professionally and properly, and
in accord with how we would expect them to act'. He says MAM's independence
remains vital, but admitted that Warburg will have to 'communicate and
re-affirm the continuing relationship' with MAM.
He talks of the merger collapse being 'very edifying and stimulating, and if
we react in the right way, as one's grandfather might say, it will be
character-building'. But convincing Warburg's employees and observers that
it can carry on alone will take all of Sir David's grandfatherly qualities.
