FT  19 MAY 94 / European Elections (June 9 and 12): Price to pay for drachma
at polls
Greece's currency crisis has placed the economy squarely at the centre of
the campaign for next month's European elections. The success or failure of
the socialist government's efforts to protect the drachma will have
repercussions that go well beyond the Athens financial markets.
'The Greeks are very aware of currency fluctuations,' says Mr Michalis
Papayiannakis, a Euro-MP for the small Left Alliance party. 'Whether it's
taverna owners catering for tourists or farmers whose children study abroad,
the socialists will be judged by what happens to the drachma. A devaluation
would be costly at the polls.'
While the campaign has been slow to start, opinion polls put the governing
Panhellenic Socialist Movement (Pasok) several percentage points ahead of
the conservative New Democracy party.
One early poll gave Pasok 42 per cent of the vote, to 37 per cent for ND and
9 per cent to Political Spring, the right-wing party led by Mr Antonis
Samaras, the former foreign minister. The remainder would be split between
the Left Alliance and the Greek Communist party, still unblinkingly
Stalinist.
However, the socialists dismiss the European election as 'no more than a
live opinion poll' on the government's performance during its first eight
months in power, and appear to be conserving their energies for local
government elections in October.
One reason is that even before the drachma started coming under pressure,
the economy was showing few signs of emerging from recession. Though the
socialists have been adding to the bloated public sector payroll,
unemployment is projected to rise again this year.
By October, however, funds from the EU's new structural package for poorer
member-states will have started to arrive. The government should be able to
launch several large infrastructure projects out of Greece's Ecu16.2bn
(Pounds 12.5bn) share of the package, mainly in highway construction.
The socialists' reluctance to pay much attention to the European elections,
also reflects the unpopularity of European Union institutions with Greek
public opinion, following the Commission's decision to start legal
proceedings against Greece for its blockade of the former Yugoslav republic
of Macedonia.
The Greek presidency of the EU is also being glossed over because of a
widespread perception that most EU member countries have a hostile attitude
towards Greece.
On the other hand, there is growing anger in Pasok over the exclusion of
several prominent pro-European personalities from the party's new executive
bureau - among them Mr Theodoros Pangalos, the European affairs minister.
New Democracy is unlikely to be able to exploit voters' disenchantment with
the socialists, as Mr Miltiades Evert, who took over as leader after last
October's election defeat, has so far failed to build a consensus among the
powerful party barons.
