FT  19 SEP 94 / People: Vindication for odd man out - Karl Popper, the great
philosopher, who died at the weekend
Until he died on Saturday at the age of 92, there were many who regarded
Karl Popper as the greatest living philosopher. Yet he was never in fashion
with other professional philosophers. This fact had important consequences.
One is that he exerted more influence outside philosophical circles than in
them, especially in the fields of science and politics. Another is that his
influence on academic philosophy lagged many years behind his work. Over the
last 20 years he has become a world figure for ideas produced half a century
ago. His period of greatest influence may be yet to come.
Karl Raimund Popper was born in Vienna in 1902 into an unusually gifted
family. His father was a successful lawyer involved in social work and
actively interested in philosophy and the arts; his mother was a talented
musician from a family that included the conductor Bruno Walter. Both were
Jews who had been baptised, with the result that Popper's upbringing was
Lutheran.
For nearly 10 years he was a student at the University of Vienna in physics,
mathematics, philosophy, psychology and music. During those years the
logical positivism of the Vienna Circle became high intellectual fashion, as
did its seductive 'verification principle'. This asserted that any statement
about fact had to be verifiable if it was to claim content: if it was
unverifiable it was not false but meaningless, for if no observable state of
affairs would reveal whether it was true or false there was nothing it
conveyed. The intention was to eliminate metaphysics, including religion,
from rational discourse. Popper pointed out that it eliminated also the
whole of science.
This was because - as he famously argued in his seminal book The Logic of
Scientific Discovery in 1934 - scientific laws cannot be verified. From no
finite number of observations can an unrestrictedly general statement, such
as a scientific law, be deduced. However, since any such statement is
contradicted by one single counter-example it can be proved wrong even
though it cannot be proved right, and it can therefore be tested against
reality. The scientific theories we accept at any given time are those that
have stood up to tests so far, but they remain conjectural, and will almost
certainly be refuted and replaced by better theories.
Apart from Einstein, Popper probably did more than any other individual to
change the 20th century's conception of science. And he showed that since
our scientific knowledge is the most reliable knowledge we have, such a
change radically alters our conception of the nature of knowledge itself.
In doing this he developed a formidable armoury of arguments that were then
trained on the pseudo-sciences of Marx and Freud. The arguments with which
he demolished their claims to be scientific are now as widely accepted as
the arguments with which he demolished logical positivism; yet for decades
he was the object of a hostility amounting sometimes to hatred for putting
them forward.
The Marxist left denounced him as the blackest-hearted of reactionaries; but
the truth is that the Popper who published The Open Society and Its Enemies
in 1945 had been always left-of-centre. Only later in his life did he drift
from liberalism into conservatism.
Meanwhile, because of its positive doctrines, The Open Society established
itself in the eyes of many (Isaiah Berlin, for instance) as the outstanding
work of political philosophy of the 20th century. It has special relevance
wherever human beings are attempting to establish democracy. The collapse of
international communism, for reasons some of which Popper was the first to
formulate, has given him a guru-like reputation in the former communist
countries.
Popper left Austria in 1936. His first university teaching job, which he
took up in 1937, was in New Zealand, and he remained there until the end of
the second world war. In 1946 he arrived in England to take up a readership
at the London School of Economics, where in 1949 he became Professor of
Logic and Scientific Method. The rest of his career was spent at LSE, and
the remainder of his life in Britain. He loved his adopted country. He was
knighted in 1965 and made a Companion of Honour in 1982.
A break in Popper's whole way of life occurred when he left Austria. Up to
that point he had shown an inexhaustible appetite for social activity:
left-wing politics, social work with the unemployed, teaching deprived
children, helping arrange concerts of music by the new Viennese school of
composers. He lived surrounded by friends; and his marriage to a fellow
student, Hennie, brought him lifelong happiness, although there were no
children. But in both New Zealand and England, he and Hennie lived a much
more reclusive life, in which all distractions from productive work were
eventually eliminated. This made possible the uninterrupted production and
publication of ideas that continued well into his 80s.
Popper regarded the analytic approach to philosophy, an approach that
dominated his profession for most of his career, as an error: he believed
that problems of substance were to be solved not by analysis but by new
explanatory ideas. As for the view that philosophy's subject-matter is
linguistic, he had no time for that at all: he regarded a preoccupation with
words and their meanings as inimical to creative thinking (except, of
course, in the field of language studies).
He made a conscious attempt to put his ideas forward in such a way that
nothing of importance depended on the way he used words - though in fact he
had a clear and pungent style, full of character, despite the fact that most
of his work had to be written in a language not his own.
Like many philosophers of the very front rank, he produced creative work
across the whole range of philosophy. He made the biggest contribution of
any to evolutionary epistemology (Objective Knowledge, 1972), and did
outstanding work on the body-mind problem (The Self and Its Brain with J C
Eccles, 1977), and on the philosophical implications of relativity theory
and quantum mechanics (Quantum Theory and the Schism in Physics, 1982).
Popper's axiomatic systems for probability theory have generated a whole
literature. He maintained a steady output of scholarly articles alongside
his more original work - in his 90s he was still publishing major
contributions to the study of the pre-Socratic philosophers of Ancient
Greece. The many-sided story of his mental life is told up to 1974 in his
remarkable intellectual autobiography, Unended Quest.
The fact that he was always, in every field, thinking afresh for himself,
always original, always different, set him apart, and helped to make him a
lonely figure. It also made him difficult to have dealings with. Touchy,
defensive, aggressive, over-intense, a workaholic, he was not easy to like
from a distance; but those close to him loved him for the utter genuineness
of all his many interests and commitments, the self-forgetfulness of his
devotion to them, and his absolute integrity - although that could be
maddening at times.
The prolonged illness of his wife, who died of cancer just short of her 80th
birthday, was a cold, dark tunnel through which he had to pass in old age.
But his own final years were an Indian summer of international recognition
and personal happiness among people devoted to him. He was showered with
doctorates and prizes. Heads of governments from different parts of the
world made unpublicised visits to his home. At the age of 92, this odd man
out - who had been unable to get any academic job until he was 35 - had
lived to see his own vindication.
Bryan Magee is Honorary Senior Fellow in the History of Ideas at King's
College, London
