FT  28 FEB 94 / Malaysia tightens trade curbs on UK companies
The Malaysian government has tightened its newly decreed trade restrictions
against the UK by outlining a range of projects in which British companies
will not be allowed to participate.
Mr Anwar Ibrahim, deputy prime minister, said at the weekend that Malaysian
companies negotiating joint ventures within the country's wide-ranging
privatisation programme would have to abandon talks with UK partners. 'They
should seek joint ventures with companies other than British ones,' he said.
Malaysia's ministers for defence and energy also announced that British
companies would not be allowed to tender for projects managed by their
departments.
Mr Najib Tun Razak, defence minister, said British companies would not be
allowed to participate in a joint venture to build 27 patrol vessels for the
navy, a project that might be worth more than Pounds 1bn.
Mr Samy Vellu, minister for energy, has also said that - in the short term -
British businesses might lose Pounds 370m worth of power projects in
Malaysia.
The Malaysians have instigated the restrictions on trade with the UK in
protest at British press allegations that bribes were offered to Malaysian
politicians, and at disclosures of a controversial link between a Pounds 1bn
defence contract won in 1988 and the Pounds 234m of aid provided for the
Pergau hydroelectric project.
British companies calculate that hundreds of millions of pounds' worth of
work will be lost in Malaysia and jobs in Britain might be under threat.
In London, Mr Richard Needham, a minister at the Department of Trade,
expressed concern about Malaysia's recent actions and issued a stinging
attack on the British press for its reporting of the Pergau dam affair. 'I
do blame the British press very directly for this situation. Its reporting
has been ridiculous.'
He was also concerned about the impact that British reporting might have on
UK trade with other countries in the region.
Allegations by MPs that the aid for the dam was illegally linked to a Pounds
1bn defence contract are certain to intensify this week.
Tomorrow the Commons will debate a Liberal Democrat motion on the matter. On
Wednesday, Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, will be asked by MPs on the
Commons foreign affairs committee why he gave the final go-ahead for the
deal. The following day, Baroness Chalker, minister for overseas
development, will be questioned.
Dr Mahathir Mohamad, Malaysia's prime minster, said in his first public
comment on the move that the action was based on steps by western countries.
'We have learnt from the west. They have so often used economic weapons to
force us to become democratic, to respect human rights and the environment.'
Malaysia's fury may scare investors, Page 4
Press review, Page 4
Editorial Comment, Page 17
