FT  17 MAR 94 / Hurd supports EU expansion: UK studies compromise deals for
dispute over blocking veto
The UK government made clear last night that it would not allow the dispute
over its blocking veto to jeopardise the enlargement of the European Union.
Hoping to unite the party behind a compromise, Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign
secretary, told Conservative MPs at a meeting of the backbench foreign
affairs committee that he was not prepared to see enlargement fail.
He said that was a policy in Britain's national interests that had been
strongly supported by Mr John Major and Mrs Margaret Thatcher.
Ministers are still fighting to prevent the number of votes needed to block
legislation from rising from 23 to 27. Mr Hurd is believed to have told
backbenchers that '23 is best'.
But he is understood to have made equally clear that he is worried that any
delay to agreement might jeopardise enlargement. Ministers hope to reach a
compromise at a further meeting of European foreign ministers next Tuesday.
Britain's 'incomprehensible insistence on an obsolete set of rules', was
criticised yesterday by Mr Poul Nyrup Rasmussen, the Danish prime minister.
London was Denmark's closest ally when Copenhagen sought opt-outs from the
Maastricht treaty.
Without a compromise by Britain and Spain, which have been opposing the
proposal to increase the number of votes required to block decisions,
Sweden, Finland, Austria and Norway will be unable to join the EU by next
January.
Mr Hurd was careful not to reveal his negotiating hand to Tory MPs, who
applauded him.
Ministers believe a formula put forward by Spain 'is a possible way
forward'. Under its terms, the blocking vote would rise to 27 once the new
members join the EU, while maintaining a further blocking vote at 23
provided a maximum of three countries made up the 23 votes.
That would keep the status quo intact and allow two large EU members and one
small one  - with a combined population of at least 100m  - to block
decisions by the EU Council of Ministers.
However, Mr Hurd's difficulty in finding a compromise acceptable to the
Euro-sceptics was highlighted by comments made earlier in the day by Mr
William Cash, a leading Euro-sceptic.
He warned the government against making 'an attempt to sell a cosmetic
exercise' to the Commons.
The government plans to bring forward legislation to the Commons in the
autumn if there is agreement on enlargement.
Franco-German strain, Page 2
Political Notebook, Page 8
