FT  25 JUN 94 / PosTel draws line on contracts: Group will vote at AGMs
against directors' three-year deals
PosTel, the Pounds 20bn investment management group, is to vote at company
annual meetings against the re-election of directors who have rolling
employment contracts longer than two years.
The decision comes after concern was expressed over large payouts to
directors when they are forced to resign. Directors with three-year rolling
contracts can receive up to three times their basic salary if they are
forced out.
Implementation of the policy will begin 'with the AGM proxies we start
filling in on Monday', Mr Alastair Ross Goobey, chief executive of PosTel,
said yesterday. Among directors likely to be immediately affected are those
of several privatised electricity and water companies which are still to
hold their AGMs.
It is also likely to lead PosTel, which handles investment for the Post
Office and BT pension funds, into conflict with the directors of rival fund
management organisations. For example Mr Mick Newmarch, chief executive of
Prudential Corporation, has a three-year service contract against which
PosTel will vote.
Mr Ross Goobey said yesterday he hoped other institutional shareholders
would back his campaign. However, Mr Michael Sandland, chief investment
manager of Norwich Union, said: 'We have not been supporters of contracts
which are three-year rolling contracts but we have no current plans to
follow Postel.'
The action was also heavily criticised by those directors who are likely to
be targeted. Mr Peter Hunt, chairman of Land Securities, defended three-year
rolling contracts.
They are 'normal and best current practice', he said. 'You have to have
three-year contracts to attract and retain top people, otherwise you would
have to pay higher salaries. Three years' notice works both ways.'
PosTel's move follows last May's letter from Mr Ross Goobey to the chairmen
of FT-SE 100 companies in which he said: 'PosTel will vote against the
re-appointment of any director who is on a rolling contract of more than 12
months.'
Mr Ross Goobey said yesterday a number of companies had recently reduced
their contracts to two years. One-year contracts remained his preference but
'to vote against two-year contracts would send inappropriate signals to
those boards of directors who have shortened contracts from three years'.
PosTel stressed that only in 'exceptional circumstances' would it not vote
against an offending director's re-appointment. It said it would normally
vote against the re-appointment of any director with more than a two-year
rolling period of notice.
See Lex
