FT  22 AUG 94 / Linus Pauling, leader in chemistry: Obituary
Linus Pauling, one of the great figures of 20th century chemistry, has died
at the age of 93. He was the only person to win two solo Nobel prizes in
different disciplines.
Pauling won the Nobel Chemistry Prize in 1954 for his work on chemical
bonds. This gave scientists a theoretical framework for understanding the
forces that hold atoms together - and a practical guide for predicting the
structure and shape of new molecules. Pauling's research is the basis for
the computer programs used today in the pharmaceutical industry to design
new drugs.
His second Nobel award was the 1962 Peace Prize, in recognition of his
tireless campaigning against nuclear weapons testing. His anti-bomb petition
to the United Nations, signed by 11,000 scientists from across the world,
helped persuade the US, UK and Soviet Union to sign the 1963 atmospheric
test ban treaty.
But Pauling is probably just as well known today for his scientific crusade
over the past 25 years in favour of vitamin C. He believed that huge doses
of vitamin C - two spoonfuls per day, or hundreds of times more than the
officially recommended daily allowance - could help stave off illnesses from
colds to cancer and prolong healthy life by more than 20 years.
Pauling himself was a good walking advertisement for mega-doses of vitamin
C. He remained mentally and physically active into his 90s, writing a dozen
research papers a year, and his gaunt figure, topped with blazing blue eyes
and bright white hair, was a familiar sight at scientific meetings.
However, Pauling did not win the scientific and medical establishments over
to his view of the virtues of vitamin C.
Although mainstream researchers have become more aware of the health
benefits of vitamins since Pauling began campaigning, most regard his claims
as grossly exaggerated. Indeed some privately pointed to Pauling as a
warning to successful scientists not to become obsessed with cranky ideas in
their old age.
Pauling was born, bred, lived and died on the US West Coast. He grew up in
Oregon, the son of a small town pharmacist who used the slogan: 'Pauling's
Pink Pills for Pale People' and from whom he derived his love of chemistry.
After studying chemical engineering at Oregon State University, he moved to
the California Institute of Technology for graduate studies in 1922, at the
age of 21. Cal Tech was to be Pauling's base for the next 41 years, during
which he developed his Nobel-prize winning theories of chemical bonds and
struc-tures.
Chemists will remember Pauling above all for his book, The Nature of the
Chemical Bond, published in 1939 and without doubt the most influential
chemistry book written this century.
He died on Friday night at his Californian ranch in Big Sur.
