FT  26 FEB 94 / The Malaysian Trade Ban: Row may sour business in Asia -
Britain in Asia / Malaysia's ban on state contracts for British companies in
protest at reports of corruption by the UK media has taken John Major's
government by surprise and doubled its embarrassment over the Pergau dam
affair. FT writers explain the background to the conflict and the depth of
the troubles now facing UK companies
Is the British government fumbling away the prospects for UK business in the
world's most dynamic economies?
The nerves of British businessmen who see European, Japanese and US
counterparts forging ahead in Asia, often with substantial collaboration
from their governments, can only have become more frayed after a week in
which official relations with Malaysia and China have dramatically
deteriorated.
The announcement yesterday that British companies will not be considered for
Malaysian government contracts comes hard on the heels of warnings from
Beijing over its future with UK business. China stopped short of imposing
sanctions but it has said UK business is bound to be affected by the dispute
over Hong Kong, which deepened further this week.
Although the performance of British companies has lacked lustre in some
parts of Asia, here are two countries in which they have been doing well and
have been well-positioned to make further progress. In both countries their
efforts have been supported by high-level government trade missions as part
of the policy of Mr Michael Heseltine, secretary of state for trade and
industry, to co-ordinate more closely with business in boosting exports and
investment.
Britain's colonial heritage appears to be both a blessing and a curse in its
efforts to participate in Asia's rapid growth. On the one hand, it has given
many British companies experience and contacts in the region. On the other,
it has left a legacy of sensitivity to the former imperial power.
Mainly thanks to Hong Kong, UK and UK-linked companies have a reasonably
strong and growing presence in China, which is seen by companies around the
world as the country in which they must not miss out because of its size and
extraordinary potential.
But China's deep suspicion of London's ulterior motives has been obvious
throughout the negotiations over Hong Kong, even after reversion of
sovereignty to Beijing was sealed in the 1984 Joint Declaration. Chinese
officials see the proposals of Mr Chris Patten, Hong Kong's governor, as an
attempt to perpetuate Britain's influence after the 1997 handover.
The accounts of last year's 17 fruitless rounds of talks on Mr Patten's
plans show the negotiations to have been a dialogue of the deaf. The
fundamental differences in the starting positions of the two sides made
concessions by either side futile.
However, many businesspeople in Hong Kong and Britain believe that Mr Patten
and the British government have unnecessarily provoked China through a
combative approach. They doubt the usefulness of Mr Patten's stance, given
that Hong Kong business is already adjusting itself to Chinese sovereignty
regardless of politics, and that Beijing says it will reverse his reforms
anyway. The Hong Kong business community appears unconvinced by the argument
that free and fair elections will be the best underpinning for Hong Kong's
continued commercial success.
It especially feels that the British government's effort to make an
honourable exit from Hong Kong will not have been worth it if it
substantially weakens Britain's longer-term prospects in China.
The Malaysian dispute is very different, not least because of the strong UK
governmental involvement in the private-sector contracts involved, whether
through defence or official financing. If the colonial legacy is an
exacerbating factor, it lies in Malaysia's persistent sensitivity to what it
sees as the west's attempts to impose its own standards on the developing
world.
Since Malaysia's independence from British rule, Britain's fortunes there
have fluctuated. Statutory teaching of English, once banned, has been
re-instituted. UK companies were warmly welcomed after the ending of the Buy
British Last campaign in the 1980s but now may be frozen out again. Nor is
Britain the only country to have fallen out with Dr Mahathir.
Kuala Lumpur must have difficulty understanding how governmental deals which
clearly benefited both sides have become so exposed to public scrutiny. The
agreements were of the sort which south-east Asian governments understand,
in which governments and private-sector companies - with or without links to
ruling parties of long standing - operate effectively as one entity in
forwarding the national interest.
London's attempts to explain the agreements will have been as unimpressive
in Kuala Lumpur as they have been in Britain.
Yesterday's move by Kuala Lumpur will leave British companies nervous not
only about their prospects in Malaysia but also about the impact of the
present dispute in other south-east Asian countries in which they seek
infrastructural contracts which need involvement by governments.
They will wonder how well-equipped is the government in London to promote
and then to defend their interests.
