FT  02 MAR 94 / A million miles from Beirut: Michael Cassell meets one of a
growing contingent of overseas inward investors in Belfast
'I thought I was heading for some place like Beirut,' insists Mr Tom
Johnson, who three years ago moved his family from sleepy Shelbyville,
Indiana, to the uncertain streets of Belfast. 'My preconceptions turned out
to be a million miles away from reality.'
Mr Johnson, managing director of Ryobi Aluminium Casting, a Japanese-owned
automotive castings manufacturer, is one of the small but growing number of
expatriate businessmen sent to Northern Ireland to manage companies. He
leaves shortly for another job in the US, where he will stoutly defend the
reputation of a place he says is damaged by distorted reporting and too
often viewed through a prism of ignorance.
He says: 'We've made good friends. My daughter has picked up the accent,
though I don't know how it will go down in South Carolina. We'll be back for
holidays and, for the rest of our lives, we'll be watching what happens
here.'
A posting to Ulster might not be at the top of many executives' gift list,
but Mr Johnson arrived with his wife and seven-year-old daughter during
Christmas 1990 to take charge of Ryobi's Pounds 16m investment. His company
had been drawn to the province by the prospect of lucrative contracts to
supply Ford of Germany and by a range of incentives arguably as attractive
as any in Europe.
Yesterday's announcement by Benelux adds another name to the register of
companies which have already decided that Northern Ireland's reputation as a
war-torn trouble spot is outweighed by its commercial advantages.
Estimates suggest that about 55,000 people in the province are directly
employed by overseas companies. In the past year alone inward investors have
created more than 1,600 jobs and, since last summer, foreign companies have
announced new investments worth more than Pounds 100m.
More are in the pipeline. A Taiwanese floppy-disk manufacturer is poised to
invest Pounds 13m in a new west Belfast factory while a Taiwanese textile
group wants to build a Pounds 160m plant that will involve the biggest
inward investment in the UK for five years. The UK is seeking European Union
approval for the deal, which could mean employment for 2,000 people.
The jobs are badly needed in a part of the UK with higher-than-average
unemployment and ghettos where the jobless outnumber those in work. When
Ryobi advertised for its first nine skilled operators, more than 150
qualified people applied.
Some US companies are investing in the province - particularly in and around
Londonderry - but many remain wary about putting money into what they see as
a high-risk commercial zone.
The pace is being set by Far East companies, which do not appear to be so
easily troubled by the province's international image. 'If you are a Seoul
businessmen, you are well used to having Sam missiles pointed at you,' says
one Belfast-based location consultant.
For Ryobi, the province beat several other European locations because of the
availability of highly skilled workers and a range of grants which provided
about 25 per cent of start-up costs. The highly automated plant in
Carrickfergus on the edge of Belfast employs 44 people and, given an
improvement in the European vehicle market, could eventually give work to
250.
Yet Mr Johnson's bosses from Japan still needed some persuading. 'They
approved all the figures but were understandably very nervous about the
political situation,' he says. 'Two board members came over and we drove
them around the best and the worst that Belfast has to offer. They realised
that, for most people in most places, life was no different to anywhere
else. We were told to go ahead.'
Ryobi, like other foreign investors, has not been touched by the Troubles
and stays out of politics.
As for Mr Johnson's own thoughts as he prepares to leave: 'I would not dare
suggest I know the answer and won't preach pessimism or optimism. I am sure
it will take some while to sort out. But there are so many good people here,
one day it must be solved.'
