FT  16 MAR 94 / International Company News: Chinese group powers on with HK
float - Simon Holberton visits Dongfang, a leading maker of power generation
equipment
It takes nearly two and a half hours to travel the 59 kilometres from
Chengdu, the provincial capital of Sichuan in China's south-west, to Deyang,
the home of Dongfang Electrical Machinery.
Through a landscape undergoing a familiar transformation from agriculture to
industry, the journey is enlivened by the anarchic quality of motoring in
modern China. But it is one which the managers of Dongfang, China's third
largest maker of power generation equipment, hope will not deter investors.
The company expects to be floated on the Hong Kong stock exchange next month
 -the eighth of the first nine companies which the Chinese government
nominated last year for listing outside China - with an issue of about 125m
'H' shares.
Nomura, the Japanese securities house which is the lead manager, estimates
that this offering to foreign investors, which is equal to 25 per cent of
Dongfang's capital, will raise about HKDollars 350m (USDollars 45m). A
slightly smaller percentage of the company will be issued in the form of 'A'
shares to mainland Chinese investors and listed on the Shanghai stock
exchange.
In the Hong Kong stock broker jargon, Dongfang is an 'infrastructure play',
a 'warrant' on the fast-growing Chinese economy. The company appears well
positioned. According to Dongfang, it has a 40 per cent share of the Chinese
market for hydroelectric power generating equipment and a 25 per cent share
of the country's steam turbine generator market.
Overall it has a share of 30 per cent of the Chinese power engineering
market - a market which still has plenty of room to mature. Electrification
touches only 67 per cent of households in China, compared with 80 per cent
in Thailand and 82 per cent in India.
Moreover, if China is to sustain economic growth rates of around 10 per cent
a year it desperately needs more electric power plants. On current trends,
demand for electric power is set to double between now and 2000. According
to Mr Jacky Chiu, an analyst at Nomura Research Institute, this means adding
an extra 20,000MW of generating each year. But the gap between China's need
and its capacity to meet that need is large. The production capacity of the
three mainland manufacturers is only 10,000MW to 12,000MW a year.
'As the Chinese government has designated that most of the annual
requirement for power generation capacity should be satisfied locally, local
manufacturers have to increase substantially both production capacity and
technological levels in the next few years,' Mr Chiu wrote recently.
Underlining the need for rapid development of the power industry is the
decision of the Chinese government to offer foreign investors stakes in
other power companies. Recently 22 companies were nominated for foreign
(mostly Hong Kong) listings and among them is Harbin Power Plant Equipment
Group, China's biggest manufacturer of power generating equipment, as well
as four power supply companies.
Dongfang's managers say that increasing productive capacity and raising the
company's technological sophistication are the main benefits they see coming
from the listing in Hong Kong.
According to Mr Chen Weijian, general manager, Dongfang plans to invest
Yn920m (Dollars 105m) over the next three years in increasing the capacity
of Dongfang's works.
Of this, the lion's share (Yn670m) will go to upgrade its technology in
hydro power production. By 1997 it wants to increase production capacity of
its hydro generators to 1,600MW from 600MW. A smaller amount (Yn250m) will
be allocated to increase the production of steam turbine generators with
capacities of 300MW and 600MW.
Dongfang needs an infusion of capital for expansion. Its order book is full
until the end of 1996. Not only that but by that time China's biggest
hydroelectric development - the Three Gorges project on the Yangtze river -
is expected to be well under way.
When completed the Three Gorges will be the world's largest lake and
hydroelectric power system. In its first phase the project will consist of
26 700WM units. Although Dongfang will be just one of the suppliers to the
project company executives expect the Three Gorges to underwrite its future
for many years to come.
In pursuit of technology, the company is exploring joint venture
possibilities with European and North American power generation equipment
manufacturers. Dongfang is holding preliminary discussions with GE Canada
about a joint venture in hydroelectric power, and it recently signed a draft
memorandum of understanding with Siemens.
This gives the German manufacturer 51 per cent of a steam turbine assembly
and test factory. Siemens will put up DM26m for its share of the business
while Dongfang will provide the land and erect the factory. Executives
expect the joint venture to be operational in 1995.
As Mr Rao Fangquan, a deputy general manager, observed: 'The most important
aspect of a joint venture is not the capital but the technology, so our
company can develop.'
