FT  21 NOV 94 / UK Company News: HNVA offer for Heron near to winning
approval
Shareholders, banks and bondholders will have already decided the fate of
Gerald Ronson's collapsed property empire, given tomorrow's deadline for
proxy votes, and Mr Steven Green appears set to emerge as the new proprietor
of Heron.
There have been small voices of dissent - unsurprising, considering
investors have seen the value of their investments fall by about 85 per cent
in the past 18 months - but the consensus is that Mr Green offers the best
escape route.
Bankers to Heron International have not yet formally submitted head office
approvals for acceptance, but it is understood that this is agreed,
following an independent analysis of Heron's value.
Mr Green's investment vehicle, HNVA - he is executive chairman - offered the
highest bid in an auction which attracted only limited interest.
One of the other bidders said last week: 'I think it is a spectacular deal
for bondholders, and if they can get this offer, good luck to them.' He said
HNVA's valuations for Heron's European properties appeared high.
The directors of Heron have also rallied to the HNVA cause, claiming that
the only alternative, receivership, would realise Pounds 4,433 per Pounds
10,000 of debt, versus an HNVA offer worth Pounds 4,664. The
post-receivership funds would also take a long time to resolve.
Finally, those who feel that HNVA is getting a bargain are invited to
participate in the advantages by taking equity in the new investment
vehicle.
Mr Gary Klesch, a specialist in distressed debt, has been one of few
bondholders to stand up and oppose the deal, urging fellow investors that
'there is still value worth fighting for'.
He raised the issue of the precise identity of the HNVA backers and hinted
at the existence of an alternative buyer - which seems unlikely, considering
the limp response to the auction and the close deadline for the HNVA offer.
HNVA has stated that its backers include high profile shareholders such as
Mr Rupert Murdoch and Mr Craig McCaw, chairman of McCaw Cellular
Communications. Mr Green has also proven himself through his turn-around of
the Samsonite business.
A more important issue for prospective takers of the equity should be the
fact that an enforced change in Heron's articles of association will remove
most standard shareholder rights.
Remuneration will be decided by the directors; there will be no requirement
for non-executive directors; and proposals which previously required 75 per
cent shareholder approval will now require only a majority, which Mr Green
will control.
This means that future investors would need to feel extremely confident in
the integrity and ability of the new management.
Merchant bankers connected to the deal suggested that the equity take-up
would fall below 30 per cent, but that the buy-out would succeed.
Even Mr Klesch admitted: 'I think this deal will go through.'
