FT  10 SEP 94 / Finance and the Family: Should we insure for old age? - More
people are living longer. Bethan Hutton explores the case for compulsory
cover
Insurance to pay for the cost of care in old age could become compulsory,
according to A Crisis in Care?, a report published this week by the Family
Policy Studies Centre and the Centre for Policy on Ageing.
It says longer life spans will lead to much larger numbers of very old
people, a possible 40 per cent increase in dementia cases by the year 2020,
and a much smaller proportion of working people to pay for the older
generation's care.
According to the report, traditional patterns of care are changing, too. At
the moment, family members - mainly middle-aged female relatives - provide
more than two-thirds of care for the elderly.
Already, though, the number of women aged 45-69 for each person over 70 in
Europe has fallen from 2.4 in 1960 to 1.6 now, and will drop much further.
Higher divorce rates and more working women also will reduce the number of
potential carers.
Perhaps surprisingly, the report found that an increasing number of elderly
people expressed a preference for professional rather than family care. But
it notes: 'Despite the evidence that the family may not be there to care for
Europe's ageing population, member states are increasingly stressing family
care over state care.'
One possible exception is Germany, which recently introduced a compulsory
insurance scheme under which employers and staff share a 1 per cent tax on
gross earnings to pay for long-term care. Francis McGlone, one of the
report's authors, says: 'Germany's new legislation . . . is something we
should consider. It would not only meet the financial cost of long-term
care, but would also help to ensure that older people no longer became
dependent on their families or means-tested benefits.'
In the UK, the state health-care system no longer covers care of the elderly
automatically. Anyone with assets of more than Pounds 8,000 has to meet the
full cost of their own care. And although private insurance to cover
long-term care has been available in the UK for several years, only a few
thousand policies have been sold.
The cost can be a deterrent, particularly as the people most likely to
consider long-term care insurance are around retirement age. For a man aged
65, wanting cover for nursing home fees of Pounds 300 a week, PPP Lifetime
charges Pounds 117 a month for its most comprehensive policy. Alternatively,
it would cost another Pounds 39 for a top-up policy to cover a Pounds 100
weekly short-fall between pension income and nursing home fees.
Unlike private medical insurance, there are no automatic age-related
increases once the policy is in force. But premiums usually can be reviewed
at any time if the insurance company finds claim levels are greater than it
expected.
PPP has just introduced a guarantee promising that premium and benefit
levels will not be altered for the first 10 years, no matter what the claims
experience turns out to be. Commercial Union, the other main provider of
long-term care insurance, offers a five-year guarantee.
