FT  04 MAY 94 / Identity crisis for Asian Development Bank: Alexander Nicoll
on a debate about the role of 'soft' public funds in a less than poor region
What should a regional development bank do when its region has become - at
least partly - developed?
The question has occurred to the governments which support the Asian
Development Bank with taxpayers' money. Many industrialised countries feel
that, since borrowers have growing resources and access to private capital,
the ADB should focus on alleviating social problems - for example, reducing
poverty and improving the environment.
Zealous championing of this issue, particularly by the US, has dominated the
ritual discussions over a capital increase for the ADB over the past two
years and has upset some Asian countries even if they broadly agree with the
US arguments.
An even broader questioning of the modern role of international development
banks came from Sir William Ryrie, former head of the World Bank's private
sector arm, the International Finance Corporation, and now a director of
Barings, the merchant bank, during a seminar at the ADB's annual meeting in
Nice.
Massive private investment pouring into economies which were increasingly
market-oriented had made official lending, he said, 'less necessary and
sometimes undesirable'. Official lending could retard development of private
markets by introducing capital which was not subject to the same risk
discipline as private money. Development banks should lend to governments
for sound projects only when the private sector would not meet the need.
Though the debate about a capital increase is virtually over - negotiations
have been completed and ADB governors must vote on a doubling by May 22 -
discussion of the ADB's function continues to swirl.
The bank's new president, Mr Mitsuo Sato, faces a big challenge in
implementing the new strategy set by shareholders while at the same time
seeking to restore bruised dignities in an organisation which, in the Asian
manner, has a strong tradition of operating by consensus.
Simply interpreting the new conditions which are being attached to the ADB's
lending will be difficult. About half of lending from ordinary capital
resources (separate from soft loans) is to be devoted to social-sector
lending. Instead of just financing a road, the ADB should now ensure that
the road is of particular benefit to poor communities, or for example that
the borrowing government charges appropriate fees to trucks to limit
environmental damage.
Most sensitive is a demand by donor countries that loans be linked to 'good
governance' - a phrase with political overtones which alarm many borrowing
countries, particularly those with memories of past colonialism.
Mr Gunther Schulz, an ADB vice-president, says: 'We feel as a bank that we
can only use this term in an economic context, not a political context.'
ADB officials concede, however, that not all donor countries agree with this
interpretation. 'How can we judge human rights in a country?' asked one. 'We
are not Amnesty International. We do not have the tools.'
Mr PK Lahiri, Indian executive director of the bank, said India, while
supporting the capital increase, had reservations about its linkage to
policy and operational guidelines.
India and China also feel that if a high proportion of ordinary ADB lending
is to be devoted to social sector concerns, then they - the borrowing
countries with social problems on the biggest scale - should have access to
concessional loans from the Asian Development Fund which are naturally
targeted at such problems. India and China are denied access to the ADF on
the grounds that their sheer size would swamp the fund's resources.
The changes in policy take place just as the ADB is in any case tightening
up its practices so that loans are better prepared and monitored. The bank
has admitted that it suffered from an 'approvals culture' in which the
primary concern was to pump out loans rather than the quality of projects -
though it does not feel the performance record of projects it has financed
is any worse than that of other similar lenders.
ADB executives insist the bank still does have a valuable role to play. Mr
Sato told the annual meeting yesterday the bank's regional presence acts an
an incentive to others 'to participate in a broad-based portfolio of
investment for sustainable development'.
Mr Schulz said the bank will be much more selective in future lending and
that it should not compete with the private sector. He said the bank could
act as a catalyst by taking small stakes in, for example, big
infrastructural projects, and could also assist longer-term development by
financing education and health.
Donor countries will be closely watching the ADB over the next two years as
they discuss the next replenishment of the ADF - negotiations which, given
the present debate, promise to be difficult.
