FT  15 JAN 94 / Men in the News: Gladiators in a war of words - Berlusconi,
Agnelli and De Benedetti / Italy's media magnates are spoiling for an
election fight along new political battle lines
By walking uninvited into an editorial meeting last week, Silvio Berlusconi,
the media magnate, broke one of the unwritten rules of Italian journalism:
newspaper proprietors can call the shots, but should never be seen doing so.
Berlusconi's blunder prompted the resignation of the octogenarian Indro
Montanelli, one of Italy's most respected journalists, who has edited
Milan's Il Giornale since he founded it in 1974. Berlusconi sold control of
the paper, in which he retains a minority stake, to his younger brother
Paolo after a law limiting media ownership came into effect in 1992.
For Montanelli, Berlusconi's appearance was 'a colossal gaffe', which made a
mockery of the law. 'By implicitly linking new investments in the
loss-making paper to a change in its style, he was virtually inviting the
editor to resign,' said one Il Giornale journalist.
Berlusconi's behaviour has thrown into relief the flimsy laws governing
ownership of Italy's press in the face of the powerful business interests
which dominate the media.
Owning a newspaper is not just a symbol of joining the ultra-rich in Italy.
It is also the most important way in which industrialists try to influence
public opinion and to exert pressure in the political arena. As a general
election looms, swaying the debate has become a priority for Berlusconi,
Gianni Agnelli and Carlo De Benedetti - the country's wealthiest men - who
control three of the four top-selling newspapers. Together, they also
exercise enormous clout over coverage in Il Sole 24 Ore, the leading
business daily, which is owned by the Confindustria employers' federation
they dominate.
Agnelli, the patriarch of Italian business, owns more papers than the other
two men combined. Through Fiat, the country's biggest private company, in
which his family is the largest shareholder, he dominates La Stampa, the
respected Turin paper. Separately, Fiat is the dominant shareholder in the
Gemina holding company, which controls Corriere della Sera, the prestigious
Milan paper. Corriere is locked in a gruelling circulation war, amid falling
advertising revenues, with Rome's La Repubblica for the title of Italy's
best-selling daily. La Repubblica, along with L'Espresso, the number two
newsmagazine, is controlled by De Benedetti through L'Editoriale L'Espesso.
Berlusconi's newspaper interests have been limited by the media ownership
laws which ended a free-for-all, restricting cross-holdings of newspaper and
television companies. However, he retains control of three of Italy's most
popular television channels, and Panorama, the number one news magazine.
Last week's appearance at Il Giornale showed he remains the paper's dominant
commercial influence, in spite of the formal transfer of power to his
brother.
While the media interests of Agnelli, De Benedetti and Berlusconi symbolise
material success, they also act as protective shields against potential
rivals, who can be deflated or ignored in newspapers or on television.
Antonio Pilati, who runs a media research institute funded by the
Turin-based charitable Rosselli foundation, says business considerations are
paramount. 'Ownership of papers by non-media groups is very much an Italian
phenomenon,' he says. 'Its roots lie in the structure of our economy, in
which the state plays a much bigger role than in Anglo-Saxon countries.
Because so many important decisions affecting entrepreneurs rest in the
hands of politicians, being able to influence public opinion has become an
important business tool.'
It is only since the late 1980s, however, that the media has been used by
its proprietors so blatantly. For instance, growing financial pressures on
Fiat, which has seen its share of the domestic car market fall sharply,
coincided with a much less critical line on the company at La Stampa.
The biggest change, however, has come in the De Benedetti and Berlusconi
camps, where media interests have become more partisan as the business
rivalry between the two has grown. The battle started in 1990 over control
of Mondadori, Italy's biggest publishing group, which they finally split
between them. Since then, weekly news magazines have been the main vehicles
for the men's vitriol.
Berlusconi's Panorama carries extensive coverage of De Benedetti's legal
difficulties in the long-running Banco Ambrosiano affair, in which he is
appealing against a six-year prison sentence. Recently, it revelled in De
Benedetti's discomfiture at the hands of Rome magistrates probing political
corruption.
The corruption scandal has also given De Benedetti's L'Espresso a
springboard from which to attack Berlusconi. The magazine regularly attempts
to link Berlusconi to the now discredited Socialist party in Milan. Of late,
it has focused on the complex ownership structure and finances of
Berlusconi's Fininvest holding company amid reports that its debts are
higher than stated.
But defending business interests is rapidly taking a backseat to political
attack and counter-attack for Italy's media magnates. As traditional party
allegiances collapse amid the unfolding scandals, Agnelli, De Benedetti and
Berlusconi are anxious to ensure their political ideas and influence have as
wide an impact as possible.
Berlusconi's recent decision to enter politics has been the catalyst for a
reassessment of the role of media ownership by leading commentators and has
raised doubts about the pluralism of the press.
Berlusconi is trying to regroup the tattered centre of Italian politics,
devasted by the effect of the corruption investigations on the once dominant
Christian Democrat party. He also aims to halt the rise of the Democratic
Party of the Left, the former communists, who are expected to do well at the
forthcoming election.
While nobody in public life has questioned Berlusconi's right to express
opinions, his manipulation of media interests for self-promotion has caused
a furore. The first blast came when two of the three Fininvest channels
interrupted regular broadcasting recently to carry a 90-minute press
conference Berlusconi held with foreign journalists.
Berlusconi's political ambitions have since developed from an apparent whim
into a clear-cut strategy. 'I think he has fallen prey to a rapture which
will cause him a lot of trouble,' said Montanelli after he quit. 'When he
gets a few of his men into parliament, which he will, they will be jeered
every time they get up to speak. They won't be able to escape the idea that
they are doing their boss's bidding.'
On Thursday, Mario Segni, the popular leader of Italy's referendum movement,
joined the fray. He said Berlusconi had no place in politics because he
controlled three national television channels. 'I hope Berlusconi does not
involve himself directly in politics. The entry into politics by someone who
controls such powerful means poses grave problems. He wants to unite the
liberals and democrats, but risks fracturing them instead.'
Fedele Confalonieri, a senior Fininvest executive and one of Berlusconi's
closest advisers, rejects charges that his boss is using his media interests
to bolster a political career. Potential conflicts of interest will be
eliminated, because Berlusconi will relinquish his media boardroom positions
when he is elected, argues Confalonieri.
'Berlusconi is a publisher who gives his editors the maximum liberty,' he
adds. For Confalonieri, the embarrassing public sniping which has emerged
among Fininvest journalists this week indicates the scope for free thinking
among the group's employees.
Critics of the concentration of media ownership are unimpressed by such
arguments. Berlusconi's intervention at Il Giornale showed his influence had
not been curtailed by legal changes. As for freedom of expression, many
journalists suspect Berlusconi prefers to exert power through proxies. This
week, Emilio Fede, a senior journlist who is close to Berlusconi, threatened
disciplinary action against Fininvest journalists who participated in a
televised debate on a rival channel criticising the group.
Berlusconi's political emergence has highlighted long-standing limits on
pluralism in the press. Riccardo Franco Levi, former editor of
L'Indipendente, a paper that tried unsuccessfully to break the grip of a few
big media owners, is sceptical about the chances of a swift change.
'As long as Italian capitalism remains dominated by a handful of large
companies, standing above thousands of minnows, then ownership of the press
is likely to remain the same,' he says. 'After all, for good or for bad, our
newspapers are just a mirror of our society.'
