FT  11 NOV 94 / Clinton blames defeat on message of hostility
President Bill Clinton yesterday attributed the Republicans' crushing
victory in this week's mid-term elections to the party's success in
fostering hostility towards government. Their message is no longer as it was
in the 1980s that government is the problem, 'now government is the enemy',
he said.
Speaking at Georgetown University, his alma mater and the site of many of
his most defining campaign speeches, the president seemed more philosophical
than bitter about the huge Democratic losses on Tuesday.
He ticked off his administration's domestic and foreign policy achievements,
concluding that 'in an ordinary time, that record would have generated
support for the congressmen and women who made it'.
But these are not ordinary times, he said. Voters are made insecure by the
'relentless and dynamic' pressures of the global economy. 'On Tuesday, the
voters reflected their frustration with the pace of change and the messy and
often, to them, almost revolting process by which it was made,' he said. The
president again took some of the responsibility 'for policies and political
decisions that hurt our candidates'. Term limits - a key point in the
Republican's mid-term platform - are 'looking better every day', he joked.
On trade, Mr Clinton said that the US has 'never been in a stronger economic
position' to meet the challenges of foreign competition. However, 'for many
people, trade still appears to be a gale-force wind, another threat ready to
blow away the prospects of a stable job at a good wage.'
Mr Clinton expressed confidence that the Uruguay Round implementing
legislation would be approved by Congress later this month. He likened it to
the League of Nations which the US Congress failed to approve after the
first world war. 'When the US failed to engage we paid a terrible price and
so did the rest of the world in economic stagnation, isolation and
eventually another world war,' he said.
Next week, at the meeting of the Asian Pacific Economic Co-operation group
he hoped 'to move from a common vision to a common direction . . . to set
concrete goals to open the way for doing business in Asia'. He expected the
leaders to set a 'target date' for achieving free trade in the region.
He would take up human rights questions during the visit but did not expect
any 'sudden' breakthrough.
