FT  07 JAN 94 / Tajikistan swaps Soviet roubles for Russian ones
Most shops closed and goods were in short supply in the Tajikistan capital
of Dushanbe this week as the ex-Soviet republic began converting to the
Russian rouble. With its three-day phasing in of the rouble, to be completed
tomorrow, the Central Asian republic of 5.3m people is taking the final step
in ceding to Moscow almost complete control of its economy.
At Dushanbe's main bazaar, the republic's former currency, the old Soviet
rouble, plummeted against the dollar to 20,000 to 1, down from 8,000 Soviet
roubles to the dollar on Monday.
Residents of the capital crowded into banks to deposit up to 200,000 old
Soviet roubles, the maximum permitted without a depositor explaining the
source of the money.
The government did not set an official conversion rate of Soviet to Russian
roubles, contributing to the uncertainty about the new currency. Instead,
the government said it would issue a half-month's salary or pension in
Russian roubles to everyone yesterday. Money changers with inside contacts
in banks bought up the old currency, presumably expecting a windfall once
the conversion rate is announced.
Already Moscow decides every part of Tajikistan's budget, a step to which
the republic agreed because of the war that has shattered its economy. It is
supported by more than 25,000 Russian troops, and Moscow also has promised a
credit of Rbs100bn (Pounds 54m) to start its money supply, and thus far has
delivered Rbs40bn.
With the launching of the currency, Tajikistan becomes the only ex-Soviet
republic to adopt the Russian rouble. Belarus has not yet decided what to
do. But, in binding itself closely with Russia, Tajikistan could have been
encouraged by the mostly dismal performance of the national currencies
launched elsewhere in the ex-Soviet southern belt.
In the eight republics of the former Soviet Caucasus and Central Asian
regions, currency launches have been characterised by old style command and
control. Those who have tried the most to set their currency's value - or
those with wars, such as Armenia and Georgia - have generally had the worst
experience.
One example is Turkmenistan, which launched its 'manat' on November 1,
backed by Dollars 300m in European bank deposits. Foreign analysts expected
the currency's value to fall somewhat, but to be basically sound. Within
days, however, the Turkmen president, Mr Sapurmurat Niyazov, appeared on
national television, threatening to sack his national bank chairman, Mr
Khudaiderdy Ozerov, if the manat did lose value. Mr Ozerov has taken the
president at his word - the manat's official rate has hovered at about two
to the dollar. The street rate, meanwhile, has plummeted to 25 to the
dollar.
Mr Islam Karimov, the Uzbekistan president, has been so upset by the
divergence in the official and street rates for his som coupon - the
official rate is 1,150 som to the dollar, about one-fifth of the street rate
 -that his police have been rounding up citizens trading money in Tashkent
bazaars and parading them before nightly national television audiences.
The Kazakhstan tenge and Kyrgyzstan som have been the southern rim's
greatest successes, largely because the authorities have intervened the
least, but also because they have had a lot of help. For one, Kurdistan  -
the first non-Russian CIS country to launch its own currency - is backed by
an International Monetary Fund standby facility, and Kazakhstan appears
poised to be the second to be granted one.
The Kazakh government is still not conceding itself completely to the
market. 'The government promised floating exchange rates, but the auctions
seem relatively controlled,' said a western economist in the capital,
Alma-Ata.
