FT  11 MAR 94 / Hungary protest fuels media row
Protests intensified yesterday in Hungary against the dismissal of
independent broadcasters ahead of May elections which polls say the
governing conservatives are going to lose.
Thousands of people gathered outside the state radio to object to the
sacking by the broadcasting authorities of leading journalists, particularly
those producing '168 Hours', a popular and influential political magazine
programme.
The government insisted yesterday it was not directing the dismissals, but
the clampdown on the media coincides embarrassingly with Hungary's impending
application for membership of the European Union. Critics say the dismissals
undermine Budapest's claim that Hungary's democratic maturity entitles it to
accession before less advanced east European neighbours.
Opposition politicians accused the governing conservatives, which trail a
resurgent Socialist party in the polls, of a partisan purge to win control
of the airwaves for the campaign for elections on May 8.
The government, while denying any direct involvement in the dismissals,
responded that 80-85 per cent of the press followed an opposition, usually
left-wing line.
The office of Mr Peter Boross, the prime minister, said: 'There are only a
few papers and programmes in Hungary in which government officials can speak
in the awareness that they will not be subjected to deliberate and biased
distortion.'
Polarisation of opinion, so sharp that it is described as the 'media war,'
threatens to embitter electoral debate and crowd out discussion on how to
pull Hungary out of its four-year economic recession.
While the largest newspapers are generally hostile to the governing
Hungarian Democratic Forum and its coalition allies, the broadcasting
authorities have now neutralised the last remaining critical programmes in
national broadcasting. Last year an overhaul of state media prompted
resignations of the independent presidents of national television and radio.
The US State Department's latest report on human rights in Hungary held that
the electronic media were 'subject to increasing political pressure'.
