FT  17 NOV 94 / World Trade News: China the big prize in Asian beer sales
contest - The market of the future
Heineken, the Dutch brewer, has until now had the Asian beer market largely
to itself as other big European or American brewers were content with their
domestic markets.
But with home markets stagnating and Asian countries offering the fastest
rising beer consumption in the world, Heineken is racing against the likes
of Anheuser-Busch and Philip Morris of the US, Kirin of Japan, Molson of
Canada and San Miguel of the Philippines to establish its brand in new
markets.
The prize is China, already the third biggest beer market after the US and
Germany. Demand is largely met by a highly fragmented domestic brewing
industry. But consumption is growing so fast that additional sales each year
amount to 20m hectolitres, equivalent to the total yearly beer consumption
of a much more mature market such as France.
To cope with this growth, the Chinese government has already opened up the
industry to a handful of foreign investment projects with more to come.
Heineken, for example, already has a stake in Fujian Brewery in Fuzhou and
hopes it can establish up to four more ventures in China by the end of next
year.
In common with its competitors, the Dutch brewer is also pushing into small
countries. Following on from deals in Vietnam and Thailand, its latest
project is a brewery in Cambodia where per-capita beer consumption is a
fraction of that in Heineken's Netherlands home market.
Some of Heineken's rivals are larger but the Dutch company has advantages
gained from its experience abroad. Anheuser-Busch's revenues, for example,
were Dollars 13.2bn last year but only 3.8 per cent came from outside its US
home market. Heineken's revenues were less than half that but Europe
accounted for only 49 per cent with a further 25 per cent from elsewhere in
the western hemisphere, 15 per cent from Africa and 11 per cent from Asia.
To further its Asian ambitions, Heineken is drawing on its 63-year-old joint
venture with Fraser &amp; Neave, the Singapore-based drinks group. Asia Pacific
Breweries (APBL) is 42.5 per cent owned by Heineken which looks after
technical aspects while sales are the responsibility of its Singapore
partner.
The two partners, who have already invested through APBL in Vietnam, China
and Thailand, expect to invest another Fl800m (Dollars 475m) in Asia over
the next five years, nearly four times as much as they spent in the
preceding five-year period.
For Heineken, the attraction of APBL lies in its local expertise in Asian
markets and its Tiger beer brand. This allows Heineken to pursue a
two-pronged approach using national and regional brands plus its
international Heineken brand. The Cambodian brewery, for example, will
produce Tiger as well as another APBL brew, ABC Stout while Heineken will
export its own premium lager to the country.
Heineken usually begins to build brand awareness in a country in this way.
Once the brand is established, it often switches to producing it locally.
Thailand will be one of the next countries to begin brewing the lager.
For all its success in emerging Asian markets, Heineken has not always
succeeded in more mature ones. In Japan, where Heineken is brewed under
licence by Kirin, and in South Korea, where Heineken is imported, the
company has had to admit that sales are disappointing.
