FT  31 AUG 94 / Dublin optimistic on permanent end to IRA violence
There was rising optimism in Dublin last night that an imminent IRA
ceasefire announcement would go further than anticipated and be a
declaration of IRA intent to permanently end its 25-year military campaign
against Britain's presence in Northern Ireland.
The Irish cabinet was briefed yesterday afternoon by Mr Albert Reynolds, the
prime minister, and Mr Dick Spring, the foreign minister, who through
informal channels have been informed of the latest developments in
republican thinking.
After the meeting a government spokesman said: 'We are hopeful that what we
are going to hear will be a permanent cessation of violence.' He said that
Dublin's understanding of the announcement was that it would be permanent.
The spokesman added: 'There are no pacts, no deals and no terms. They are
making their decision in the light of the current political situation.'
Mr Reynolds said last night: 'I believe we are poised for peace and that in
a very short time we will be able to make an entirely new beginning in the
island . . . a complete cessation of violence and the principles of the
Downing Street declaration are our new starting point.'
The growing hopes follow Monday night's comments by Mr Gerry Adams that he
had told the IRA leadership he believed the time was right for a truce.
Mr John Hume, the leader of the mainly Roman Catholic Social Democratic and
Labour party who held talks with Mr Adams at the weekend, said yesterday:
'Our objective is a total cessation of violence and surely everybody wants
to see that.'
Dublin now has a delicate balancing act to play in the event of an IRA
ceasefire. It must try and reassure the Northern Ireland unionists that they
are not about to be forced into a united Ireland.
At the same time Dublin must also reassure Sinn Fein and the IRA that a
permanent cessation of violence will bring a rapid incorporation of Sinn
Fein into negotiations through the Forum of Peace and Reconciliation, as
laid out in last December's Downing Street declaration.
The aim of the forum will be to bring together the different strands of
nationalism throughout Ireland and attempt to create a united front for
future all-party negotiations.
A statement by Mr Reynolds last Sunday clearly alluded to this. He said: 'It
remains my view, both as Taoiseach (prime minister) and as leader of Fianna
Fail that in the longer term a united Ireland achieved by agreement offers
the best and most durable basis for peace and stability.' He went on to rule
out any return to 'majoritarian rule' in Northern Ireland.
The tone of that statement is being seen as a firm message to Sinn Fein that
the nationalist agenda will be vigorously pursued by the Irish government,
the SDLP and Sinn Fein, in the event of an end to violence.
That scenario has alarmed unionists however, who are already divided in
their approach to the peace process. They fear that a deal has been done
between London and Dublin, and that they will be left isolated.
In an attempt to allay these fears, the Irish government, Mr Hume and Mr
Adams have all stressed in recent days that any future constitutional
changes in Northern Ireland would require agreement with the unionists
through a process of negotiation and dialogue.
Mr Spring said yesterday: 'Nobody has anything to fear from a cessation of
violence.'
