FT  01 SEP 94 / Forecasting index points to US economic slowdown
The US government's principal economic forecasting measure stayed flat in
July, adding to economists' growing certainty that the economy is slowing
down and could avoid the sort of boom and bust that has plagued most past
expansions.
The Commerce Department said its index of leading economic indicators, a
composite of eleven statistics such as manufacturers' orders and stock
market prices which is intended to gauge the strength of the economy roughly
six months ahead, was unchanged in July at 101.5. The index has risen
steadily for the last 12 months but, after going up by more than 2 per cent
in the last half of 1993, it has gained only a little over 1 per cent in the
first half of this year.
A large majority of economic forecasters, ranging from the Clinton
administration to the consensus of private-sector economists, now expects
some form of soft landing for the economy over the next two years. Instead
of rapid growth - leading companies to raise the prices of their products
and workers to increase their wage demands - the Federal Reserve's policy of
raising interest rates in five steps this year is expected to have taken
enough steam out of the economy to prevent overheating.
But the expansion is then expected to continue, though at a steadier pace,
for some time, with the Fed not needing to raise interest rates dramatically
to choke off inflation.
Yesterday's economic data added to the view in the financial markets that
the economy is losing speed, and that growth in the third quarter of this
year is likely to be slower than in the second.
Only three of the index's components - changes in the price of sensitive
materials, building permits, and average weekly claims for unemployment
insurance - increased in July, while six elements fell.
At the same time, the Commerce Department said new orders for manufactured
goods fell by 2.3 per cent in July to a seasonally adjusted level of Dollars
273.3bn. This takes manufacturing orders to their lowest level since
February.
One other indicator, the Chicago purchasing managers' index, dropped to 61.6
per cent in August from 63.0 per cent in July, but showed a sharp increase
in prices paid for materials.
The closely watched National Purchasing Managers' index is due to be
published today. But the attention of the financial markets is most closely
focused on the employment statistics, to be announced tomorrow, which Mr
John Lipsky, chief economist at Salomon Brothers in New York, called 'the
bedrock of indicators for future demand growth'.
When it announced its latest tightening of monetary policy on August 16  -
an increase of half a percentage point to take the discount rate to 4 per
cent - the Fed said it expected this action 'to be sufficient, at least for
a time, to meet the objective of sustained, non-inflationary growth'.
Unless there are signs of continued rapid growth in employment, most
economists expect the Fed to wait at least until November before considering
any further tightening.
