FT  14 OCT 94 / Palestinian police arrest 200 in search for soldier
Palestinian police in the Gaza Strip yesterday arrested more than 200
members of the Hamas Islamic fundamentalist movement in an attempt to find a
kidnapped Israeli soldier ahead of the deadline set by his captors.
Hamas has said it will kill 19-year-old Corporal Nachshon Waxman at 9
o'clock this evening unless Israel releases about 200 Palestinian prisoners.
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the Israeli prime minister, reiterated yesterday that the
whole peace process could suffer unless Mr Yassir Arafat, the Palestine
Liberation Organisation leader, is able to bring about Mr Waxman's release.
Mr Rabin has already suspended talks in Cairo between Israeli and PLO
delegations on the next phases of the autonomy programme, and has placed the
Gaza Strip under a closure order that is keeping 30,000 Gazans away from
their jobs in Israel.
Mr Warren Christopher, the US secretary of state, has said he considers the
kidnapping a test of Mr Arafat's authority in the autonomous Palestinian
areas.
Mr Arafat yesterday ordered almost 9,000 Palestinian policemen in the Gaza
Strip to mount searches for Mr Waxman. But although the PLO said that
contacts with Hamas indicated that Mr Waxman was still alive, there were no
leads as to where he might be being held.
Indicating that he held Iran to be at least indirectly responsible for the
kidnapping, through its encouragement of Islamic extremism in the occupied
territories, Mr Arafat vowed that he would 'not allow any defiance' of the
rule in Gaza of his Palestinian National Authority. Hamas meanwhile accused
Mr Arafat of doing Israel's 'dirty work'.
Mr Yehuda Waxman, the missing soldier's father, offered last night to pay
for his son's freedom.
But a leaflet released by the Hamas military wing, which has claimed
responsibility for the kidnapping, offered no hope of compromise. If Israel
did not meet the demand for the release of Palestinian prisoners, headed by
the Hamas founder Sheikh Ahmad Yasin, 'then the soldier will be executed a
short while after the deadline'.
It claimed that Mr Waxman 'is in an area you (Israel) are occupying, and not
in a silly autonomous zone'.
Mr Christopher flew to Damascus from Jerusalem last night for his second
meeting this week with President Hafez al-Assad of Syria. Mr Rabin said Mr
Christopher had briefed him on some minor softening of Syrian positions on a
peace deal, but that the large gaps blocking an accord had still not been
bridged. Mr Rabin, who flew to Amman late on Wednesday to meet King Hussein,
said he hoped a full peace accord with Jordan could be signed by the end of
the year.
