FT  18 JUL 94 / Survey of South Africa (32): Generous Gatt 'window' -
Exporters are finding new markets open for trade
South African exporters are a little overwhelmed by their new-found
international respectability. After years of developing expertise in such
arcane skills as transhipping and re-labelling to try and counteract
sanctions imposed as a result of apartheid, companies find that many
countries are now rolling out the red carpet, and new markets from Asia to
eastern Europe to Latin America - long out of bounds - are now open for
trade.
As part of this new order, the South African government is starting to
formalise its trading relationships. At the top of the list comes
readmission to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. South Africa's
formal submission to the Uruguay Round was accepted late last year and a
fundamental restructuring of its tariff structure will shortly get under way
to bring the country more in line with international norms.
The adjustments required by Gatt will involve pain for some highly protected
industries but, by securing classification as an 'economy in transition',
South Africa has managed to get a generous eight-year window for leading
employment-oriented industries, such as textiles and motor vehicles, to
adjust to the new arrangement. The deal also allows some leeway in the
reorganisation of South Africa's contentious, and widely abused, General
Export Incentive Scheme.
Meanwhile, new trade agreements are giving further impetus to trade growth.
President Clinton gave South Africa GSP status in May, allowing preferential
access to the US market for a wide range of goods, and the European Union
has announced its intention to do the same by the end of the year. A more
formal, separate trade treaty with the European Union is under discussion,
as is the possibility of some kind of associate member status with the Lome
aid group.
Also on the agenda are a set of new regional trade arrangements. At the
World Economic Forum meeting last month, President Mandela and other
southern African leaders signalled their intention to work towards a
regional free trade agreement. As a first step towards this goal, in August
South Africa will join the South African Development Community, a grouping
of 10 southern African states originally formed to try and reduce dependence
on South Africa.
In the shorter term, Mr Trevor Manuel, trade and industry minister, has
already signalled his intention to restructure the South African Customs
Union, which South Africa shares with Namibia, Botswana, Lesotho and
Swaziland and in which it currently pays out some R5.6bn of a customs and
excise revenue pool of R16.3bn to its partners. It is also seeking to renew
a bilateral trading arrangement with Zimbabwe.
Reflecting all this activity, exports have been soaring, and in 1993
totalled R78.3bn as the country ran a current account surplus of R5.9bn  -
although this year's surplus is likely to be lower due to a higher import
bill. But despite this success, the majority of exports are still primary
products and while the proportion of manufactured goods has been increasing
there is still a lot of room for improvement.
A survey of exporters by the South African Foreign Trade Organisation
estimates that South Africa's manufacturing industry is at a 15 per cent
cost disadvantage to Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
countries, with its only comparative advantage in electricity. In addition,
the report notes that after years of focus on the domestic market, local
manufacturers have a 'tendency to blame external factors' for failures, and
many fail to take export promotion and planning seriously.
'South African manufacturers still lack an export culture,' acknowledges one
senior trade official. 'Until that changes, growth will be disappointing.'
