FT  04 MAR 94 / Survey of World Tyre Industry (8): Where bicycles rule the
roads - China's huge potential is hampered by regulations
China's tyre industry - designated a future cornerstone of the national
economy - is facing uncertain times.
It is at once a market offering huge potential - the number of cars per
person is one of the lowest in the world, at just 6.5 per head, and local
production is heavily bent towards the older bias tyres - and a market
hampered by the government's credit squeeze and measures to protect the
domestic industry.
The market is split in two - bicycle tyres, where demand is seen to be
flattening (although there are still around 38m to 40m bikes being made and
sold each year), and the burgeoning market for motor vehicles. Even
China-based tyre makers are starting to reduce their dependence on bicycle
tyres which offer only thin margins.
However, Mr Stephen Codron, executive director with Shenzhen China Bicycles,
reckons demand for two-wheeled vehicles will remain a feature of the
mainland market - albeit with 50cc motors attached. His company, which
churns out some 2.6m bikes a year, buys tyres from three manufacturers in
Guangdong province. Two of these are Taiwanese joint ventures.
The replacement tyre market is enormous, he says. 'Just look at the roads.
They are not up to the standards of the west and tyres are always bursting
so there is a great market for spares, especially in bicycle tyres.'
Car sales were among the first to crack when Beijing launched measures to
tighten credit in a bid to cool the economy. In August, 79,800 vehicles were
sold, 10,000 fewer than in July and 27,000 fewer than in June. Prices also
came tumbling down: by last October Santanas were going for little more than
Yn180,000 (USDollars 20,672), compared with Yn220,000 three months earlier.
Mr Frank Jiang, sales manager at General Motors Beijing office, said: 'Sales
are not very good at present, because of the effect of the crackdown on the
vehicle market.'
The group is assembling 2,000 vehicles a year in China for domestic usage.
However, potential demand for passenger cars in China is estimated to reach
1.2m units by 2000.
Of the foreign tyre producers, Bridgestone has the dominant market share in
Asia as a whole. China's own output of tyres is far lower than that in the
US, Japan, former USSR and South Korea.
According to Swiss Bank Corporation, total industrial output by the tyre
industry is around Yn25bn (USDollars 2.9bn). The ratio of the newer, more
technologically advanced radial tyres to bias tyre production is around 1:9.
Mr Lawrence Ang, China analyst with SBCI Finance Asia, says most of the
foreign auto tyre makers' participation in China is limited to technology
transfer arrangements with domestic counterparts.
He says that while Michelin and Goodyear have been searching for suitable
China partners for some time, only Pirelli is reported to have set up a
venture with Beijing Tyre Factory.
The only other active foreign investor in the industry is China Strategic
Investment (CSI), a Hong Kong-listed company specialising in asset trading,
which has invested in five tyre ventures - two of which were listed under
holding company China Tire on the New York Stock Exchange last year.
Foreign manufacturers without a China partner face crippling import duties
of up to 45 per cent in addition to a strict permit system, according to
SBC, and - thanks to the high accord placed on the sector by Beijing - this
is unlikely to diminish hugely even as China attempts to rejoin the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
Mr Ang said: 'China will do some things to reduce barriers, but what tends
to happen even in other countries is that joining GATT does not necessarily
mean a reduction in tariffs. It is not necessary to open up the whole market
to foreigners.
'Especially with the tyre and auto industry, which the government terms a
cornerstone industry, partly because of its military importance. They would
abolish the permit situation, but that does not mean that foreigners can
export tyres into China freely: other administrative measures will come into
force.'
He said it is a belief in this programme that is prompting foreign
manufacturers to tackle the market from a different angle, mainly by setting
up joint ventures.
In China, tyres are classed as one of the 29 strategically important
production materials and their production therefore receives considerable
attention and support from the government.
