FT  30 APR 94 / Indians lobby White House
Leaders from more than 500 American Indian tribes gathered at the White
House yesterday for a rare chance to press their concerns at the highest
levels of the US government.
At a breakfast meeting with Vice-President Al Gore, and a subsequent meeting
with President Bill Clinton, delegations from almost all the 545 federally
recognised tribes argued for more freedom for native American religions,
more money for Indian health and education services and more respect for
tribal sovereignty.
'For so long, from the Indian perspective, the doors of the White House have
been closed to us. The symbolism is that the gates are open to us,' said
Gaiashkibos, president of the National Congress of American Indians.
An estimated 80 per cent of native American voters backed Mr Clinton in the
1992 presidential election, but tribal leaders have been disappointed at the
Democratic administration's plans to cut the budget for the Indian Health
Services  - which administration officials have now indicated they are
rethinking  - and at delays in naming a new chairman for the National Indian
Gaming Commission.
'Indian people always expect a greater understanding and commitment from
Democrats. Instead, what's hit us in the eye is budget cuts,' complained Mr
Peterson Zah, president of the Navajo nation, the largest American Indian
nation.
Indian nations range from the 220,000 Navajo, faced with poverty, ill health
and inadequate sanitation, to the 300 Massantucket Pequot, who have grown
rich on the profits from their casino, which is not subject to Connecticut's
ban on gambling.
Sovereignty rights, supposedly guaranteed by hundreds of federal treaties
that the US has honoured more in the breach, have generated conflicts
between Indian nations and states from South Carolina to Montana.
But some Indian leaders argue that the greatest burden on the native
American peoples is the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the federal bureaucracy
that oversees the tribal reservations and which critics describe as one of
the world's last surviving examples of socialist central planning.
