FT  17 OCT 94 / Troubled gestation for new entitlements: Bringing UK
maternity rights in line with EU law
Employers' organisations are reporting confusion among companies over new
maternity rights introduced yesterday.
There are also fears that the changes, designed to bring UK law into line
with the European Union directive on the health and safety of pregnant
women, might deter some companies from employing women.
Ms Dianah Worman, policy adviser on equal opportunities at the Institute of
Personnel and Development, said: 'The worry is that some companies may see
the changes as too much hassle for them and that there may be a backlash
against employing women as a result.'
The complexities of the system are also leading to concerns among employers
that if they make an administrative mistake in the way they interpret the
rules they could expose themselves to legal challenges.
The new system means that where previously women had to work for two years
before they qualified for their legal rights to maternity leave, they now
have a statutory right to at least 14 weeks' maternity leave regardless of
their length of service or hours of work.
Protection against dismissal and the right to alternative work or suspension
on full pay where a job is harmful to health is also guaranteed.
The changes are made more complex, however, because of higher entitlements
for women with longer service. Full-time women workers who have two or more
years of continuous service with their employer and women with five years'
service who work fewer than 16 hours a week but more than eight hours are
entitled to 40 weeks' leave - 11 weeks before the birth and 29 weeks
afterwards.
The new arrangement also gives women employees up to 18 weeks' pay while on
maternity leave if they have worked for at least 26 weeks prior to the 12
weeks before the baby's birth.
Maternity pay entitlement is 90 per cent of their average earnings for six
weeks and Pounds 52.50 a week for the remaining 12 weeks. The Trades Union
Congress points out that the deal, which it says adds up to an equivalent of
eight weeks on full pay, trails other European countries. New mothers in
Denmark get 22 weeks' pay. In Italy they get 17 weeks' pay and in Greece 16
weeks' pay.
The TUC has accused the government of contributing to the confusion by
providing too little information. Mr John Monks, TUC general secretary,
said: 'These new maternity rights are a step in the right direction but they
don't go far enough. Britain still has the worst record on maternity rights
in Europe.'
Many working women will remain excluded from the new rights. About 2.25m
women who earn less than Pounds 57 a week will fail to qualify for statutory
maternity leave, and part-timers with less than five years' service will
also have no access to maternity leave.
At present about one in four UK employers provides more than statutory
minimum entitlements.
Some, including the Civil Service and the National Health Service, offer up
to 52 weeks' leave and employers such as Thames Water make no distinction
between full time and part-time employees.
Employers are to be reimbursed with up to 92 per cent of the cost of
maternity pay. Small companies - which pay Pounds 20,000 or less a year in
gross National Insurance contributions - will be fully reimbursed.
The combined costs of the changes could amount to Pounds 65m a year to
employers.
The Federation of Small Businesses warned that the new maternity rights were
placing one more social burden on employers that could deter small employers
from recruiting more staff. Mr Stephen Alambrits, parliamentary officer,
said: 'If this sort of thing continues we will end up with a jobless
recovery.'
