FT  24 SEP 94 / Minding Your Own Business: Trains on the school timetable -
Paul Cheeseright visits a station and travel agency run as a going concern
by Shropshire schoolgirls
Moreton Hall Travel defies the canons of business orthodoxy. No business
plan, just an idea or two about expansion. No stable management, just
executives passing through. But, as its first financial year comes to an
end, it shows a profit.
At one level, Moreton Hall Travel is an educational plaything. At another,
it is a serious concern: serious enough to have handled Pounds 262,000
during the year to July.
It is in fact a business run by students of Moreton Hall, a Pounds
10,000-a-year girls school near Oswestry, Shropshire. The students, under
the eye of David Lloyd, a geography teacher, operate primarily as agents for
British Rail but are starting to diversify the business into other forms of
travel.
'Everything has been going slowly, one step at a time, so that if we got
into financial difficulties, we could ease out of it,' said Lloyd.
The first step was taken eight years ago. The school booked rail tickets for
the pupils, the youngsters paid and British Rail sent the tickets back, plus
9 per cent commission. The funds accumulated to the extent that the school
had enough money to construct a little travel agency in the geography room.
That provided an opportunity for work experience in an undemanding
environment. But a year ago, the school made a leap into the wider
commercial world. It kept the geography room travel desk working, but took
over the booking office at nearby Gobowen station.
Gobowen, on the Shrewsbury-Chester line, is the railhead for Oswestry. The
buildings at the station are owned and have been refurbished by English
Partnerships, the government regeneration agency. The school provided Pounds
1,000 to help equip the booking office.
'We lease the booking office. We have no jurisdiction over the platforms,
but the Women's Institute provides the flower tubs. We haven't taken over
the station as such,' Lloyd explained.
With the booking office Moreton Hall Travel found itself with
responsibilities. It needs, for a start, to find Pounds 3,500 to rent the
building. It pays Pounds 170 a week to the booking office manageress,
Ceinwen, Lloyd's daughter who is spending a year at Gobowen before going to
university. There are the water, electricity, telephone and rates bills.
The responsibilities shift from year to year. Girls from the upper sixth
direct. Most of the work is done by the lower sixth, which trains the upper
fifth. The inner circle of current directors is Sabrina Hartshorn, Deborah
Pratley, Emma Sharp and Emma Sherrard.
'We're being shadowed by Mr Lloyd but we have a large say in what goes on.
We can take the initiative. The decisions are taken as a team,' said
Hartshorn.
This team is of an expansionist frame of mind. 'The first thing is to get
into a larger building so we can get more people working here,' Sharp said.
'With more room we could attract larger support,' added Hartshorn.
The immediate snag is the railway timetable. 'At the moment with British
Rail in such disarray, you're not sure where you stand,' said Pratley.
'Future revenue depends on the timetable. It's not too good so it loses us
customers,' said Sharp.
The railway agency business accounts for 90 per cent of Moreton Hall
Travel's revenue. The only British Rail services which Moreton Hall Travel
cannot sell are season tickets and warrants for the armed forces. But the
railway traffic provides a public which may buy other travel needs and forms
one part of a firm customer base.
Another part of that base is the mass of the pupils' parents and parents'
friends. With such a base, hopes of diversification, nursed by the
directors, look encouraging.
An obvious step is expansion into forms of travel other than the railways.
Moreton Hall Travel takes air bookings but places them through Brian Bass,
the Shrewsbury travel agent. The difficulty is that the commission is just 2
per cent.
There are plans to use Gobowen station as a tourist information point for
Oswestry Borough Council, which would generate income from the provision of
the service, and to establish an extension of Oswestry's railway and bicycle
museum. This is where the need for extra space comes in.
Leasing a second building at Gobowen, which Lloyd thinks would add 50 per
cent to the rent bill, would provide the scope for the additional
enterprises and provide a place where pupils could study for vocational
qualifications in leisure and tourism, while gaining their work experience
on the spot. 'We need to start creating some employment ourselves,' said
Sherrard.
All of this is going to make Moreton Hall Travel a more complicated
enterprise. The business, which has no capital structure, has never had a
loan. In this financial year it will make a surplus of around Pounds 5,000,
and will have to abandon informality.
The school is appointing an enterprise manager who will take formal control
of Moreton Hall Travel and run the other little businesses associated with a
boarding school, such as the tuck shop. A holding company will be set up.
Moreton Hall Travel will have to come to terms with VAT and the requirements
of Companies House.
That will pose interesting questions for the schoolgirl directors. How will
they pay the school for Lloyd's time, how will the school pay the company
for the use of its premises to study for the leisure and tourism NVQ?
Expansion carries with it the loss of innocence.
Moreton Hall Travel, The Gatehouse, Gobowen Station, Oswestry. Tel and fax:
0691-679143.
