FT  31 MAR 94 / Technology: Deadly challenge proves costly - Daniel Green
examines the continuing search for an effective sepsis treatment, in a
series on drugs
Sepsis kills more than 200,000 people a year in Europe and North America and
has been almost as lethal for at least three large US biotechnology
companies.
Each tried to develop drugs to treat sepsis, which literally means
infection. The drugs promised much in early development but eventually
failed to fulfil their promise at a cost of millions of dollars.
The demand for a sepsis treatment nevertheless remains strong. Sepsis
victims can spend weeks in intensive care where costs can exceed Pounds
2,000 a day. With no clear cure yet, the financial rewards for any company
that develops a successful sepsis drug are enormous.
The medical challenge is just as large, because of the condition's
complexity. Sepsis is difficult even to define. Doctors variously describe
it as a bacterial infection of the blood, acute low blood pressure (which is
why it is sometimes called septic or toxic shock) or a body-wide
inflammation of vital organs.
All three are correct in their way. A sepsis drug is one that tries to deal
with the kind of overwhelming infection that sends people into intensive
care wards.
Once there, the problem is not only the infection, but the body's response
to it. As the infection spreads, the body releases scores of chemicals,
called cytokines, to try to fight it. The effects of these include a rapid
fall in blood pressure, leading to shock, and inflammation in many parts of
the body - systemic inflammation.
This combination of infection by poison-exuding bacteria, low blood pressure
and systemic inflammation leads to the failure of vital organs and
eventually death.
One doctor working for a health regulatory body says: 'The body is simply
overwhelmed. Even heavy doses of antibiotics do not work.' About half of all
sepsis sufferers die within 28 days of diagnosis.
Infection, shock and inflammation affect each other in the human body by a
variety of biochemical mechanisms called a cascade. The precise mechanism is
not yet clear, and there may be more than 100 cytokines involved.
This means that even if a drug succeeds in blocking part of the cascade, the
step could be bypassed and shock or systemic inflammation arise by another
route, according to intensive care specialist Dr David Bennett of St
George's Hospital, Tooting, London.
As if that were not enough, sepsis victims can range from a young person in
a car accident to a mother in childbirth or a pensioner suffering from a
chronic disease such as diabetes or cancer. Not surprisingly, these patients
can react differently to the sepsis and any drugs they receive. A typical
large hospital may have only one sepsis victim a week, so conducting
statistically significant clinical trials is difficult.
With such uncertainty over the mechanism of sepsis and how to test potential
treatments, drug companies follow any of a score of different approaches to
controlling the condition. The three US biotechnology companies that have so
far failed to demonstrate the effectiveness of their drugs illustrate two
such approaches. Centocor and Xoma developed anti-endotoxin drugs which
block some of the poisons produced by bacteria.
Last year, Centocor had to stop clinical trials of its drug Centoxin after
data showed that patients on a placebo lived longer than those on the drug.
Most of the company's huge sales and marketing team, built up for Centoxin's
launch, lost their jobs. Six months earlier, the US Food and Drug
Administration decided that trials of Xoma's E-5 drug did not prove its
efficacy.
But in the third case, that of Synergen, the evidence is more ambiguous. Its
drug, Antril, is designed to block the effects of interleukin-1, a chemical
involved at an early stage in the onset of sepsis. A year ago the company's
chief executive left after Antril's apparent failure in clinical trials.
The three companies had a combined peak market capitalisation of Dollars
4.5bn (Pounds 3.1bn) two years ago. The figure now is less than Pounds 1bn.
Further analysis of the Antril trials, published two months ago, shows that
it may be effective in especially sick patients, says Bill Sibbald, a
professor of medicine and head of the critical care programme at the
Victoria Hospital in London, Ontario, Canada.
Sibbald acknowledges, nevertheless, there needs to be more data from
clinical trials before there is strong evidence of whether Antril works.
That applies to a greater extent to those drugs yet to face the full rigours
of large clinical trials.
One popular alternative to tackling interleukin-1 is to block the action of
another protein - tumour necrosis factor (TNF) - involved early in the
sepsis. Companies that have followed this route include Celltech, one of the
biggest UK biotechnology companies, Bayer, the German pharmaceuticals group,
Chiron, one of the largest US biotechnology companies, and Centocor with
another drug.
However, this method may not solve the problem of sepsis either. At least
one set of clinical trials with an anti-TNF drug has been stopped in recent
months because there appeared to be no benefit to patients. 'TNF may not be
in the right place in the cascade to be the right target,' says the deputy
chairman of one biotechnology company.
British Biotechnology, which announced plans this week to raise Pounds 93m
from its shareholders, has a drug called Lexipafant. It acts against
platelet activating factor (PAF), yet another part of the cascade. PAF
activates the body's defensive white cells, but when over-produced
encourages the white cells to attack healthy tissue.
But PAF combatting agents have also had mixed fortunes in trials. A number
of established drug companies on both sides of the Atlantic are thought to
have abandoned or cut back on PAF research.
Another route is being followed by Cortech. The US company has a compound
called Bradycor which interferes with the action of bradykinin, part of the
inflammatory cascade. Other companies, such as the UK's Wellcome, are
tackling nitric oxide (a corrosive chemical produced during sepsis that
lowers blood pressure), chemicals that bind bacterial poisons to cells and
those that attach the body's defensive white blood cells to otherwise
healthy tissue. Wellcome announced yesterday that it had licenced a nitric
oxide fighting chemical from Fujisawa USA and hopes to start clinical trials
later this year.
Yet more approaches are being followed by companies from small biotechnology
businesses like California's Gilead through to drug industry giants such as
Eli Lilly of the US and Japan's Eisai.
Sepsis is an example of a high-risk, high-reward therapeutic area in
healthcare. That combination virtually guarantees that there will be no
shortage of companies trying to find the solution.
But one thing independent observers agree on is that if an effective drug is
identified in the short term, this will have as much to do with luck as
science.
As Sibbald concedes, each of the clinical trials is also a test of theories
of how sepsis works: no-one yet knows precisely which part of the cascade is
crucial.
The difficulty of conducting statistically meaningful clinical trials
remains. Bennett says perhaps 5,000 patients have been the subject of
trials, compared with the tens or even hundreds of thousands normally
demanded by government regulators of the healthcare sector. This is
indirectly acknowledged by the drugs companies.
Robert Thompson, Synergen's vice-president for research and clinical
affairs, says the right treatment for such a complex condition may have to
be a combination of drugs.
There is still room for optimism, however. 'We are not more than five years
off from having therapies which modulate the inflammatory response syndrome
in a beneficial way,' says Sibbald. And then, he says, we can move from cure
to prevention.
Next month, treatments for multiple sclerosis
Articles over the last six months have looked at pharmaceutical advances in
the following areas:
Prostate 25 February
Wound healing 21 January
Obesity 23 December
Contraceptives 12 November
Anaesthetics 15 October
Diabetes 17 September
