FT  26 APR 94 / Incentive bid values Cardo at SKr8.4bn
Incentive, a key company in the Wallenberg family empire, yesterday launched
a bid for Cardo, a Swedish investment group, after buying a 44 per cent
stake in the company from Volvo for SKr3.7bn.
The offer, which values Cardo at SKr8.4bn (Dollars 1.07bn), is designed to
give Incentive control of Gambro, one of the world's leading medical
equipment groups. Cardo has a 58 per cent voting stake in Gambro and 43 per
cent of the capital.
Mr Mikael Lilius, Incentive managing director, said the group wanted to
invest aggressively in medical technology.
'This is a market leader with a substantial growth potential,' he said.
Gambro is particularly strong in the renal care field.
With an annual turnover of SKr16.7bn, Cardo is a bigger company than
Incentive which has sales of SKr12.3bn. Apart from its holding in Gambro,
the company has industrial operations spanning industrial doors, pumps, and
train brakes, and a significant investment portfolio.
Mr Lilius said Incentive planned to reintroduce Cardo as a public company,
but it would also sell the company's equity portfolio. The portfolio, which
includes a 4.8 per cent voting stake in Volvo, has a total market value of
some SKr2.7bn.
Mr Lilius said Gambro fitted well with Incentive's diversified engineering
operations, which include transport, materials handling and processing. But
he said there were no plans to bid for the rest of Gambro, which last year
achieved profits of SKr976m on turnover of SKr9.05bn.
Terms of the Incentive offer are SKr500 per Cardo share and SKr325 per
warrant.
The Volvo disposal is a swift demonstration of the vehicle group's new
strategic focus on core transport operations, following last week's
announcement that it planned to shed around SKr40bn worth of non-core
assets.
Mr Soren Gyll, Volvo's chief executive, said yesterday that the disposal was
'fully in line' with its new strategy. 'At the same time, I believe this is
a favourable solution for Cardo, industrially and in terms of ownership.'
The disposal, which will generate a SKr2.6bn capital gain, represents a
further dismantling of tangled cross-ownership links designed to protect
Volvo from takeover during the 1980s.
