FT  28 JUN 94 / Bretton Woods 50 years: Mission statement for a liberal
order - Deepak Lal continues the series on the anniversary of Bretton Woods
The twin Bretton Woods institutions (the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund) were conceived when world capital markets had been virtually
extinguished by the tribulations of the inter-war period. Plaudits on their
50th birthday are justified for their role in creating a new liberal
international economic order, underpinned by an increasingly integrated
world capital market. But this very success poses questions about their
future. Once the universal move to market economics is completed, will there
be any need for the short- and long-term lending of these institutions?
The answer is bleaker for the IMF, which has no ostensible role with the
collapse of the Bretton Woods system.
As far as the World Bank group is concerned, it has moved seemingly
effortlessly from providing long-run capital to the war-devastated economies
of Europe and Japan, to supporting developing countries shut out from the
long-term bond market since their widespread default in the 1930s, and most
recently to the capital-constrained ex-communist 'economies in transition'.
It has also evolved many roles - as a financial intermediary, an aid
institution, a provider of technical assistance, a credit rating agency for
sovereign risk, and a major development research institute.
Financial intermediation through the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development remains the group's major business. It differs from
commercial banks in three ways: first, the assurance provided to its bond
holders by the capital that is callable from member governments; second, the
'gift' represented by its paid-in capital, on which it does not have to pay
a dividend to its shareholders; and, third, its preferred creditor status
with its borrowers, which leads to few arrears on its loans. These features
have given its bonds triple-A rating.
Before the opening of the global capital markets to the developing countries
in the 1970s, these IBRD loans at near commercial interest rates would have
been justified on grounds of global efficiency. But with more countries able
to gain access to world capital markets, is there a financial intermediation
role left for the Bank, whose loans, though cheaper than from private
sources, come with 'conditionality'? This cost could encourage borrowers
with alternatives to reduce their demand for IBRD loans, leaving it mainly
with 'lemons'.
The debt crisis demonstrated that it is the willingness, rather than
ability, of borrowers to pay which determines sovereign risk. The positive
net cash flow historically associated with Bank lending has reinforced the
willingness of borrowing governments to meet their debt service obligations
to the Bank. This growth in net lending can only occur with a continued
growth in the Bank's capital. If it were to cease growing - a political
decision - its intermediation operations might be shown to have been a vast
Ponzi scheme.
With a deterioration of borrowers' expectations of future lending, arrears
could accumulate. This might worsen the rating of Bank bonds, leading to a
rise in the interest rate on its loans, making them even less attractive for
the good borrowers. The only way to avoid this is to keep good borrowers by
giving up conditionality. The bank would then be a true merchant bank,
which, because of its unique advantages and reputation, can raise money more
cheaply for its borrowing governments than they could. It would also have to
be concerned like any other bank by the quality of its borrowers. Its
advantage over commercial rivals would be the implicit subsidy and insurance
elements provided by its intergovernmental owners.
The Bank's role as a financial intermediary has been clouded over the years
by its role as a foreign aid agency through its soft loan window
(International Development Association). Foreign aid remains a contentious
and highly politicised issue. It is debateable whether the Bank has been
wise (since Robert McNamara's tenure) to identify its mission so closely
with the business of aid, rather than with the less contentious and more
viable business of international financial intermediation. A radical
departure in this area is required.
The Bank's objectives in providing foreign aid have changed over the years;
the most recent is to alleviate poverty and the public financing of the
merit goods (education and health). These social policy concerns are
necessarily more contentious than the technical engineering and economic
issues that have been the Bank's bread-and-butter in the past. Moreover,
whereas more general principles govern the latter, the design of effective
social policy is determined much more by local circumstances, culture and
politics. A multilateral bureaucracy is unlikely to have a comparative
advantage in their design or implementation.
Private charities (national or international) with grass roots organisations
can both identify potential beneficiaries, and target and monitor benefits
to them much better than governments. For the heterogeneity of these
beneficiaries makes it difficult to lay down simple bureaucratic guidelines
for the targeted benefits that are required. The alternative of a
universalisation of benefits (as in western welfare states) is fiscally
ruinous and less efficacious, because the middle classes always benefit most
from universalised benefits.
A radical solution would be for the Bank to consider transferring its IDA
funding to audited national and international charities. As a spur to
private charity, such IDA transfers to these charities could be made on a
matching basis.
As regards the role of the Bank in providing technical assistance, credit
ratings, and development research: since the last two are public goods,
their subsidisation through Bank profits would be justified. Technical
assistance provided could be charged for, as by private consultants, with
Bank profits being paid as explicit subsidies to poorer countries, to
purchase Bank consultancy services in competition with their commercial
rivals.
This package of reforms could provide the Bank with a more clear cut and
depoliticised mission in the liberal economic world order it has helped to
recreate.
The author is James Coleman, professor of international development studies
at the University of California, Los Angeles, and professor emeritus of
political economy, University College, London. Between 1984 and 1987 he was
research administrator at the World Bank.
The first article in this series was published on June 21
