FT  23 MAY 94 / FT Guide to the Week
MONDAY 23
Germany elects president
The federal assembly, composed half of members of the federal parliament
(the Bundestag) and half of deputies from the 12 state parliaments
(Landtage) convenes in Berlin to choose Germany's next state president. The
quest for a successor to the distinguished Richard von Weizsacker (above)
looks set to go through three full rounds of voting.
Roman Herzog, president of the constitutional court, is Chancellor Kohl's
choice, and the man most likely to succeed. But Johannes Rau, the Social
Democrats' nominee, is the popular choice, and could yet give him a run for
his money.
Nigerian democracy: Local polling begins in Nigeria to elect 270 delegates
to the national constitutional conference, due on June 27.
Campaigners for democracy have denounced the conference as a sham, as a ban
on all political parties and associations is in force until 1995. Large
parts of southern Nigeria are expected to boycott the polls and the
conference.
UK economy: The deficit with non-European Union countries is expected to
have widened slightly to Pounds 700m in April, from Pounds 675m in March.
While the UK's trade deficit has been broadly stable in money terms over the
past few months, the trend of import and export volumes has deteriorated.
Some analysts see that as a worrying sign, although doubts remain over the
accuracy of the figures, particularly the price/volume split.
Crimea: Victor Chernomyrdin, the Russian prime minister, meets Ukrainian
counterpart, Yefim Zvyagilsky, in Moscow to discuss the worsening situation
in Crimea. The Crimean parliament voted on Friday for virtual independence
from Ukraine.
Douglas Hurd, UK foreign secretary, is also in Moscow to meet Mr
Chernomyrdin and Russian president Boris Yeltsin.
Romania issues a 10,000 lei (USDollars 6) banknote after three years of
triple digit inflation. Before the end of communism in 1989, the largest
denomination banknote was 100 lei.
Tennis: The French Open begins at Stade Roland Garros in Paris (to June 5).
Holidays: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Hungary, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland (Whit Monday). Canada (Victory
Day). Egypt, Jordan, Kuwait, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Syria, (Eid al-Adha).
Morocco and Turkey.
TUESDAY 24
Russia outlines Nato policy
General Pavel Grachev, Russia's defence minister, visits Nato headquarters
in Brussels. He will give a speech which is expected to present Russia's new
military doctrine and lay out the terms on which his country wants to
co-operate with Nato in such areas as peace-keeping and the exchange of
know-how.
Baltic Council foreign ministers gather for a two-day meeting in the
Estonian capital, Tallinn. Worsening relations between Estonia and Russia
will be on the agenda. The ministers will also discuss joint initiatives
including the so-called 'Eurofaculty', the Riga-based university
specialising in law and economics, and the Via Baltica motorway to link
Helsinki and Warsaw.
The Council, set up in 1992, includes Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Finland,
Norway, Poland, Russia, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia and the European
Commission.
South African president Nelson Mandela makes a state of the nation speech to
a joint session of the two houses in the new all-race parliament. Following
a cabinet meeting on Monday he is due to set out plans for spending on
reconstruction and development.
EU fraud: Jo Carey, a former official in the UK Treasury who worked for nine
years at European Court of Auditors, the EU's financial watchdog, is quizzed
at Westminster by the House of Lords European Affairs Committee on the
extent of EU fraud.
UK competitiveness: Plans to privatise the Civil Aviation Authority's air
traffic control services are expected to feature in a government white paper
on competitiveness out today.
BBC strike: A series of twice-weekly strikes by journalists and technicians
starting today could hit the programmes of both BBC World Service Radio and
World Service Television as well as live programmes in the UK. The stoppages
could last for 24 hours - or 10 minutes.
The immediate cause of the dispute is plans for performance-related pay and
for different rates of overtime pay and allowances in different parts of the
Corporation.
Chelsea Flower Show:
ticultural Society's annual bash opens to members, after a royal gala
opening on Monday. Open to non-members from Thursday. It finishes on Friday.
Holidays: Ecuador (Independence Day). Jordan, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Syria
(Eid al Adha). Thailand, Turkey.
WEDNESDAY 25
Greenspan on derivatives
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the US Federal Reserve, and Arthur Levitt,
chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, today give evidence to a
Congressional hearing about the impact of derivatives on financial markets.
Last week, regulation of derivatives (financial instruments such as swaps
and options) was criticised in a report to Congress from the General
Accounting Office. The report said that inadequate regulation posed a threat
to the US and international financial system.
Argentina's constituent assembly convenes to begin rewriting the country's
constitution. The main aim is to lift the 1853 constitution's ban on
successive presidential terms, allowing President Carlos Menem (below) to
stand for re-election next year.
An agreement that Mr Menem's Peronist party signed with ex-president Raul
Alfonsn's opposition Radical party last December ensures that this and other
reforms strengthening the legislature and judiciary will be passed by a big
majority.
Energy ministers from the European Union meet in Brussels to discuss the
direction of energy policy. They will discuss energy liberalisation and the
introduction of competition into the supply of electricity.
Nato defence ministers consider the future of the alliance against a
background of uncertainty over its post-cold war role. There are differences
over Nato's role in Bosnia, and over how far it should go in extending
security guarantees to former members of the Warsaw Pact.
Labour's National Executive Committee meets in London to decide the timing
of the leadership contest following the death of John Smith.
The Tokyo Stock Exchange holds a general meeting to elect Mitsuhide
Yamaguchi, ex-president of the Export-Import Bank of Japan as president.
UK National Lottery: The winner of the contest to run a lottery that could
have revenues of Pounds 3bn-Pounds 4bn within the next few years will be
announced. Bids were accepted from eight consortia for the private sector
lottery, designed to raise money for the arts, charities, a millennium fund,
the national heritage and sport.
FT Surveys: Ireland and Tennessee.
Holidays: India (Bombay only), Indonesia, Jordan (Independence Day),
Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Zimbabwe.
THURSDAY 26
Quest for a stable Europe
Foreign ministers from most European countries, the US and Russia are
expected in Paris for the formal opening by France's prime minister Edouard
Balladur of 'the conference on European stability' (to May 27). Mr Balladur
proposed the idea a year ago as a means of trying to prevent 'a second
Yugoslavia' in other parts of central and eastern Europe. The aim of the
conference, chaired by the EU presidency, is for countries to reach accords
of 'good neighbourliness', settling frontier and minority differences.
Finns into Europe: Two decisions affecting Finland's hopes of joining the EU
next January will be taken today. The government will set a date for a
referendum on EU membership, and decide on how to compensate the country's
agriculture and food industries for adjusting to EU price levels.
The poll is likely to be in October before similar votes in Sweden and
Norway. This would secure the voting sequence seen as the best way of
bringing all three Nordic states into the EU. Support for membership is
strongest in Finland and weakest in Norway.
Russia's foreign minister Victor Chernomyrdin begins a trip to Beijing (to
May 29) to discuss trade and security issues, including North Korea's
reluctance to allow international inspections of its nuclear facilities.
The Bundesbank council's last meeting, on May 11, saw a cut of half a
percentage point in the key Lombard and discount rates, to 4.5 and 6 per
cent respectively. As a result, traders are not expecting today's meeting to
lead to a rate change, especially after Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank
president, said last week that 'as far as central bank interest rates are
concerned, the horizon has now been cleared for a fairly long time'.
Saleroom: Sotheby's auction of musical manuscripts contains a great rarity:
a small calf bound volume containing the only keyboard music surviving in
the hand of Henry Purcell, the late 17th century English composer. Found
last year in another auction house in a bundle of music, it is considered to
be the greatest British musical discovery of recent years.
Among the 21 pieces are hitherto unknown works and Sotheby's anticipates
bids around Pounds 300,000. Purcell is one of the few British composers with
an international reputation, and attributed music of this early date is
extremely rare.
FT Surveys: International Capital Markets and Brazil.
FRIDAY 27
Solzhenitsyn returns home
Alexander Solzhenitsyn, Russia's greatest living writer, returns home after
20 years in exile.
The 75-year-old Nobel laureate will fly to Vladivostok from Alaska and then
travel across Russia to re-acquaint himself with his homeland.
Fed chairman Alan Greenspan testifies on monetary policy before a
Congressional hearing.
The same morning the US Commerce Department releases preliminary GDP figures
for the first quarter. Little change is expected from its initial estimates
of 2.4 per cent.
The Keidanren, Japan's Federation of Economic Organisations, holds a general
meeting to elect Shoichiro Toyoda, chairman of Toyota, as its new chairman.
Bath Music festival begins (to June 12). The theme 'Ancient Echoes' links
modern music with music of the past. Henryk Gorecki and Michael Nyman are
the featured 20th-century composers.
FT Surveys: Relocation in the UK.
Holidays: Sri Lanka.
WEEKEND 28-29
Hungary goes to the polls
The second and decisive round of Hungary's parliamentary elections takes
place on Sunday. The Hungarian Socialist Party, successor to the communist
regime, took a commanding lead in the first round and is poised to win an
absolute majority.
Colombians vote in the first round of presidential elections on Sunday. If
no candidate wins a majority, there will be a run-off on June 19. Opinion
polls put the Liberal Ernesto Samper and the Conservative Andres Pastrana
very close, with the other candidates trailing far behind.
Glyndebourne Opera House, near Lewes in Sussex, re-opens on Saturday in its
new Pounds 33m auditorium with a performance of Mozart's Le Nozze di Figaro,
the opera with which it was launched 60 years ago.
Motor racing: The Spanish Grand Prix takes place in Barcelona, while the
Indianapolis 500, part of the Indycar World Series, is run in Indianapolis,
Indiana.
Compiled by Patrick Stiles and Ian Holdsworth. Fax: (+44) (0)71 873 3194.
