FT  17 NOV 94 / Arts: Emotionally arrested - Cinema
SECOND BEST (12)
Chris Menges
THE SHADOW (12)
Russell Mulcahy
AIRHEADS (15)
Michael Lehmann
MY FAIR LADY (U)
George Cukor
Owing to the indisposition of Oliver Stone's Natural Born Killers, My Fair
Lady is the surprise addition to the week's release schedule. What it is to
have our censor to guide and guard us. Spared NBK's depraving modernism, we
can bask in a week where the sun seems never to have set on Nice Anglo-Saxon
Values; or never to have risen on challenge, disorientation or originality.
Screen violence has become an all-purpose scapegoat today. A well-known
movie reviewer on TV said recently, with a cosmic shrug, 'A hundred years of
cinema and we end up with Arnold Schwarzenegger.' But I am more concerned
that after 100 years we end up with Second Best, Airheads, and The Shadow;
not to mention a 30-year-old revived musical.
Violence is not the enemy of art or morality. In a grown-up world both these
arenas should be strong enough to accept the challenge of lively debate. The
enemy of art, and of thinking morality, is the apathy of demure
traditionalism or brainless trend-following: both of which are written
through this week's films.
We see the first in Second Best, the potentially touching tale of a Welsh
sub-postmaster (William Hurt with accent and curly-red wig) who seeks to
adopt a disturbed youngster (Chris Cleary Miles). But he has many battles to
fight: not least with the uneven style and tone adopted by the British
director and former cinematographer (The Mission, The Killing Fields) Chris
Menges.
As in A World Apart, his anti-apartheid directing debut, Menges has a
maddening ability to outline main characters with a sharp, compassionate
light while letting the rest of the film dissolve into miasma. Miles is very
moving as the boy, his large, hunted eyes ranging from bleak defence to
tearful self-surrender. And Hurt's pained precision in the older role is
masterly. The face is a transparent mask of perplexity: a kind of
physiognomic fish tank through which we watch his restless thoughts.
But this central tale of bonding between two emotional cripples - both
maimed by lack of parental love, as illustrated in the the epidemic of
flashbacks in David Cook's script (from his own novel) - takes place in a
social and moral void.
Where are Hurt's fellow villagers? How - apart from some brief rhubarbings
from gossipy shop customers - do they react? And how should we react to a
story in which a single man with no sex life, apart from the 'DIY' option
that probing social worker Jane Horrocks compels him to admit to, seeks an
11-year-old surrogate son? It surely arouses a suspicion, at least, of
substitute sexual passion.
The movie stutters around this question as it does around the dainty,
ever-flowing tea table in Hurt's low-ceilinged home. Menges and Cook behave
towards us like parents failing to get up the nerve to tell their child the
facts of life. And as other characters, from Uncle John Hurt via adoption
therapist Prunella Scales to Keith Allen as the boy's ex-convict Dad, pop up
even the brave naturalism of the central duo starts to look like part of the
dramatic evasiveness.
Second Best ends up as second best itself to Cook's 1980s TV play Walter,
another, tauter case study of emotional arrest. That one starred Ian
McKellen. And where is Sir Ian?
The finest Shakespearean actor of his generation balances a pair of specs
and a wobbly American accent in The Shadow. He plays a bomb-designing boffin
caught in a tug of war between the hero (Alec Baldwin as caped wrong-righter
Lamont Cranston) and the villain (John Lone).
This is another film that makes us long for the impious, millennial anarchy
of Stone's mayhem opera. Time-warped in 1930s New York, we stutter through
yet another romp about a comic-book crusader filmed in a style that Batman
popularised as 'retro-noir': dimly lit and stuffed with yesterday's
iconography. A Fu Manchu-style baddie; a Gotham City sketched in swift,
cliche strokes of post-Depression Gothic; and Baldwin leaping into
invisibility with all the ease of an actor who has scant discernible
presence even when we can see him.
At the start it looks hopeful. The director is Russell 'Highlander' Mulcahy,
so the camera swoops and soars. The special effects boast a flying
ornamental knife with an animated face grimacing on its hilt. And we like
the museum security guard who when confronted with a close descendant of
Genghis Khan stomping towards him, after emerging from a sarcophagus, says,
'Er, we're closed.'
But a little post-modernism goes a long way; a lot can end up going
absolutely nowhere. The Shadow is auto-erotism as style: the cinema's form
of DIY love play, losing itself in reflected reveries of past glory. How apt
that it ends with another of those hall-of-mirror shoot-outs plundered from
Orson Welles's The Lady From Shanghai. Or is this another in-joke? Welles,
after all, was the original radio voice of Lamont Cranston.
Airheads is the week's third distress call from Anglophone cinema. This time
a Los Angeles radio station is comically hijacked by a fame-seeking rock
group calling themselves The Lone Rangers, led by Brendan Fraser, last seen
as a defrosted Neanderthal in California Man. They try to force the station
boss (Michael McKean) and the DJ (Joe Mantegna, mugging away in a wig as if
he had never been America's leading Mamet actor) to play their demo tape
over the air.
Director Michel Lehmann's early career was a downhill slalom from Heathers,
his sweetly malicious comedy about a girls school, to Hudson Hawk, his Bruce
Willis superflop. Lehmann still seems to be wearing runaway skis. The plot
does not so much progress, more zigzag between deadly marker-posts. Blunt
gags snap at the ankles; tone-changes are tried and discarded; finally the
film ends in a heap at the bottom of the piste.
At least My Fair Lady has grace and a sense of presentation. We still look
at this large, creamy epic made from the Lerner-Loewe stage musical and
wonder if less would not have been more. (Did they keep saying to designer
Cecil Beaton, 'More frou-frou, Cecil]'?) But when the film is tuneful it is
very tuneful. And even when it is tuneless we have Rex Harrison,
master-croaker, in charge of the sprechtgesang.
The other pleasure for revival buffs is Vittorio De Sica's Bicycle Thieves:
neo-realism on wheels. The 1948 Italian classic is proof that all you need
to make a great film is a camera, a few streets, and a group of characters
tested by credible extremity.
Much like Natural Born Killers. Oliver Stone's film is not a great one, but
at least, unlike any other new film this week, it is in touch with real life
and raw emotion. It looks like a work of cinema made today for audiences of
today. But in Britain, thanks to a movie-vetting system based on bowing to
yesterday's moral mandates, we shall have to wait till tomorrow, or longer,
to see it.
