FT  27 JUN 94 / Brewers fight for China's potential: A growing beer market
Last week's tie-up between Foster's of Australia and Wheelock of Hong Kong
to seek joint brewing ventures in China marks a new stage in the struggle
for the country's beer market.
US, European, Asian and Australasian groups are striving to develop brewing
and distribution networks for their flagship brands such as Becks, Kirin,
Foster's and Budweiser as China emerges as the potentially biggest
international beer market.
Mr Nick Norgard, managing director of Foster's China, was euphoric after
signing the agreement with Wheelock, the Hong Kong merchant house.
'The China market is growing at an enormous rate on an enormous base,' said
Foster's. 'In 1993, it grew by 23m hectolitres which is 140 per cent of
Australia's entire brewing capacity of 17m hectolitres.'
This explosion explains why international brewers are drooling over China.
Anheuser-Busch, the world's biggest brewer, announced earlier this month
that it was planning to take over the Zhongde brewery in Wuhan (a joint
venture involving Steinbrau) as a step towards building a national presence
with its Budweiser brand. Foster's, too, is eyeing opportunities in Wuhan as
part of its strategy to establish nationally-accepted brands.
In a highly fragmented market - China boasts some 800, mostly tiny,
breweries - there are no identifiable national brands with the possible
exception of Tsingtao which has just 2.5 per cent of the market. National
distribution is hampered by a clogged and crumbling transport system.
Ms Helena Coles, an investment analyst at Kleinwort Benson in Hong Kong,
said: 'Distribution and marketing is going to sort the men from the boys.
Excess demand is not going to last forever.'
But at this early stage China's thirst would seem unquenchable. Average per
capita consumption is around 8 litres per annum compared with 158 in
Germany, 92 in the US, and 50 in Taiwan.
According to a Kleinwort Benson survey of Asian beverages, the China beer
market will double by early next century to become the biggest in the world.
Growth is running at 20 per cent, but long-term average growth rates of 10
per cent are 'achievable'.
Since 1984 China has moved from seventh place to second behind the US as a
beer producer with output in 1993 of 12.25m tonnes. The number of breweries
in that time has doubled. But this proliferation of brewers is coming to an
end, and evidence of a shake-out is already surfacing, with takeovers of
near-bankrupt smaller brewers in increasingly competitive local markets.
Mr Norgard said Foster's strategy was to proceed as quickly as possible in
establishing a national brewing network. Foster's last year formed joint
ventures with brewers in Shanghai and in Guangdong province.
Its aim, in alliance with Wheelock, which has experience in Chinese property
and infrastructure, is to develop five regional hubs for production,
marketing and distribution based on Guangzhou in the south; Shanghai and
Wuhan on the Yangtze; Chengdu/Chongqing in Sichuan province in China's
south-west; and Beijing/Tianjin in the north.
Foster's and Wheelock are looking at establishing 'greenfield' breweries in
Tianjin, Wuhan and Chengdu. Mr Norgard said it would 'depend on
circumstances' whether these were joint ventures with local producers.
International brewers are pursuing widely differing strategies. According to
China's Ministry of Light Industry, some 30 separate partnerships have been
established with foreign entities.
There is also Anheuser-Busch's 5 per cent stake in Tsingtao, purchased last
year when the Chinese brewer floated on the Hong Kong market.
Others seeking to position themselves in the market either through joint
ventures or licensing are Asia Pacific Breweries, a venture between Fraser
and Neave of Singapore and Heineken, the Dutch brewer; San Miguel of the
Philippines; Becks of Germany; Kirin of Japan; Carlsberg of Denmark; Pabst
Brewing of the US; and Lion Nathan of New Zealand. Notable by their absence
at this stage are the larger UK brewers.
Hong Kong-listed companies, including China Strategic and China Resources,
are also investors in China ventures. Mainland-backed China Resources has a
majority stake in a Shenyang brewery in the north-east, and China Strategic
has ventures with brewers in Bejing and Hangzhou.
With all this activity it would be hard to disagree with Kleinwort Benson's
assessment that the beer industry in China is 'at a crossroads'. The
penetration of foreign beers and premium local brands is certain to gather
pace as Chinese consumers become more discerning and affluent.
