FT  18 JUL 94 / Survey of South Africa (35): Net benefit may prove marginal
 -Foreign aid
Few international aid causes are more popular than South Africa's appeal for
assistance in redressing the legacy of apartheid. Raising funds, however,
may prove to be easier than putting them to efficient use, and if aid is
seen as a substitute for investment the net benefit may prove marginal.
If pledges are taken at their face value, South Africa can expect up to
R10bn over the next five years, from a variety of bilateral and multilateral
donors.
Leading the field is Japan, which earlier this month unveiled what it called
its largest aid package to a single country - Dollars 1.3bn over two years.
Mr Katsumi Sezaki, Japan's ambassador to South Africa, said that almost all
the aid was untied, bar a Dollars 100m export-import credit facility aimed
at promoting trade between the two countries. But a further Dollars 400m
worth of export-import bank loans were untied, he said.
Of the balance, Dollars 250m would be in the form of soft loans - seven
years' grace and a 25-year repayment period at 3 per cent interest. A
further Dollars 500m in the package represented the amount of private
investment and commercial credits the Japanese government was prepared to
guarantee.
Next on the list is the US which has offered R2bn over three years, while a
host of other bilateral donors have chipped in including Australia (R700m
over three years), the European Union is offering over R400m; the UK will
provide R560m over three years.
Meanwhile the African Development Bank says it can release between R720m and
R1,200m of project-linked finance over five years.
Past experience in Africa has shown that aid has mixed results and even
allowing for South Africa's considerable pool of skills, handling resources
on this scale will not be easy. The amount on offer, however, may not be as
much as it seems. As is so often the case, assessing what may be termed the
'real money' - that is assistance that is readily available and which can be
rapidly disbursed - is not straightforward.
Although trade cover and investment guarantees can be put to good use,
including them in the category of 'aid' can give a misleading impression of
what is available for conventional aid projects - health, housing,
education, and so on.
Development packages almost invariably include aid tied to purchases from
the donor country, which can prove expensive. A recent study by a British
development charity calculated that the resulting lack of competition can
add anything from 10 to 15 per cent to the price of the items ordered from
the donor country.
Another way of boosting bilateral aid figures in press releases is to
include the contributions made by western governments to multilateral
lending institutions, United Nations agencies, or money that would be
channeled through European Union aid schemes.
A further device used by some donors is to include estimates of the benefits
for South African exporters from introducing favourable tariff changes made
in the wake of President Mandela's inauguration.
Given the competition between donors as to who will appear the most generous
 -which in turn may influence the South African government when it comes to
allocating contracts for state-backed or funded projects - the donors
themselves are often reluctant to make clear the precise benefits and terms
of their offers.
In short, the arithmetic of aid is complex and South Africa, unused to being
a recipient, may sometimes be too inclined to take promises at face value.
Significantly, the World Bank, potentially South Africa's largest
multilateral donor, is reluctant to put a figure to planned lending,
although some officials have suggested a figure of about Dollars 1bn a year
in the initial phase.
Mr Isaac Sam, the Bank's resident representative in South Africa, says that
foreign aid is 'rather crucial' in South Africa's development. What is more,
fund raising 'has to be done fairly rapidly' in order to take advantage of
the goodwill South Africa presently enjoys.
But Mr Sam cautions that aid alone cannot deliver the economic growth that
the country needs. While the Bank plans to provide substantial aid, foreign
and domestic investment are the keys to post-apartheid growth: 'The real
resources for South Africa are in the international capital market, not
donors', says Mr Sam.
