FT  21 JAN 94 / Braer report accuses captain of dereliction
The Greek captain of the Liberian-registered tanker Braer, which caused an
oil spill when it ran aground on Shetland last January, is accused in the
official report on the incident of 'serious dereliction of duty'.
Captain Alexandros Gelis is blamed for not taking action to deal with pipes
which had broken free on the deck of the tanker in stormy seas during the
voyage. These pipes damaged air pipes to the ship's fuel tanks, allowing
seawater to enter and contaminate the fuel supply. This eventually caused
the engine to stop and the ship to drift on to the shore.
The report, by the Marine Accident Investigation Branch of the Department of
Transport, says that Captain Gelis failed to have the loose pipes re-secured
or jettisoned, and failed 'simply to observe them to see the damage they may
have been causing'.
It also criticises him for allowing officers and ratings to spend all their
bridge duty inside the wheelhouse, which meant that they were not aware of
what was happening out of view on deck.
The Braer, which was carrying 85,000 tonnes of crude oil from Mongstad in
Norway to Quebec city in Canada, broke down at 4.40 am on January 5 1993.
Its crew was evacuated by helicopter just before the Star Sirius, a tug sent
from Lerwick, arrived at 9.15 am. The ship ran aground at Garth's Ness at
11.20 am.
The quality of the senior crew on the ship, 'while no doubt typical of many
hundreds of other vessels trading at sea today, left much to be desired',
the report states. In most other respects, however, the Braer's captain and
officers made correct decisions and displayed excellent seamanship.
However the report rejects allegations that the ship was defective and that
she should not have been sailing through the 25-mile-wide Fair Isle channel
between Shetland and Orkney. It says the ship was 'structurally sound with
no known significant deficiencies' and that her planned route was a normal
one.
The coastguard in Shetland is criticised for not responding with sufficient
urgency to the request from the tanker for a tug to take it in tow, even
though the captain did not use the appropriate urgency prefixes in making
the request. However it says that even if the tugs had been despatched with
minimum delay they would have been too late to prevent the ship grounding.
The government says it has issued new guidelines to coastguards to relay
immediately a request for tug assistance from a ship carrying oil or
dangerous cargo, whether or not the ship has declared an emergency
situation.
Ms Joan Walley MP, a member of Labour's transport team, said: 'It is no good
scapegoating the captain of the Braer when government shipping policy over
the last 15 years has effectively been to accept the practice, by some
countries, of prostituting their flags for a few pieces of silver.'
B+H Shipmanagement of Stamford, Connecticut, US, the Braer's operators, said
the report did not give enough weight to the severity of the weather at the
time. It relied 'excessively upon hindsight' in criticising the officers.
Mr Jim Wallace, Liberal Democrat MP for Orkney and Shetland, urged the
government to act to ensure there was 'proper radar surveillance' of
Britain's coastline.
