FT  06 DEC 94 / Authorities net half a win by uniting on staff: The bitter
battle over redundancy packages
County and district councils have fought an increasingly bitter battle over
local government reorganisation, but in the matter of staffing they have
managed to speak with one voice.
Yesterday Mr David Curry, the local government minister, announced
provisions for personnel policy which addressed one of the main problems
authorities had identified, but left another untouched.
The big concession is to make redundancy packages mandatory. Previously, the
proposal was that redundancy pay should be at the discretion of local
authorities, within strictly defined limits set by government. Councils
themselves believed that this would be unworkable.
However, the government has not conceded on the total package of money
available in compensation, which remains at pay equivalent to 66 weeks.
This decision, described as inadequate by the Local Government Staff
Commission, the independent body set up by the government to advise on the
staffing issues of reorganisation, could ensure intense political
opposition.
Mr Frank Dobson, Labour's local government spokesman, said his party would
vote against all reorganisation orders in parliament unless the compensation
package was improved, and described the process of the local government
review as a 'shambles'.
Both districts and counties called for a package at least in line with the
1986 reorganisation of metropolitan counties, when 84 weeks were on offer.
Local authorities also claim that the tough financial settlement from the
government this year, which saw a cut in all central government finance for
councils of 0.4 per cent, will make reorganisation harder to achieve. The
proposed strict 'capping' measures to stop excessive rises in council tax
will further limit their room for manoeuvre.
Analysis by authorities since the settlement was announced last Thursday
shows that the 'cap' will allow them to spend an extra Pounds 1.1bn in
excess of the government's projected level for total standard spending of
Pounds 43.5bn. Their current total spending (once changes in
responsibilities for community care are taken into account) is about Pounds
45bn, so this could be met by drawing Pounds 400m from reserves.
However, this makes no allowance for the effect of inflation, wage rises, or
increased numbers of clients.
Four councils must cut their budgets to meet the proposed cap. They are
Derwentside, in County Durham, faced with a reduction of 3.07 per cent on
current levels, Watford in Hertfordshire, down 1.27 per cent, Leicester,
down 2.4 per cent, and Ipswich, down 5 per cent.
Several others have scope to do much more. For example, East Cambridgeshire
can increase spending by 48.02 per cent without incurring a cap, while South
Cambridgeshire can raise it 69.74 per cent.
The shift in grants has still produced winners and losers. Grants for fire
authorities will now be allocated on measures including the length of a
county's coastline. Previously, the Isle of Wight had been underfunded
because the allocation formula assumed that fire brigades could draft in
reinforcements from neighbouring counties.
The new formula means rises of 30 per cent in funding for the Isle of
Wight's fire service, and of 40 per cent for Cornwall's, but landlocked
counties have suffered significant reductions. As the total grant for fire
services was unchanged from last year, every winner from the process had to
be balanced by a loser elsewhere.
