FT  03 DEC 94 / Big economic research bodies see grants cut
The National Institute of Economic and Social Research and the London
Business School were told yesterday of large cuts in their government grants
under a new package of funding for economic research.
Cash that would have been taken by two of the country's biggest economics
research establishments is being channelled to smaller groups as part of an
effort by the Economic and Social Research Council, a government funding
agency, to increase diversity and competition.
The two organisations' combined share in the next phase of the council's
funding programme will be about 42 per cent, down from 70 per cent
previously. In effect this means their grants are cut by about 23 per cent
and 29 per cent respectively.
However, overall funding under the council's economic modelling programme is
being increased by 23 per cent in real terms. Economic models consist of
software which simulates the economy. They help with forecasting and, for
example, understanding how currency changes affect exports.
In the latest four-year phase of the programme, starting next September,
Pounds 3.2m is being earmarked for a group of between eight and 12 academic
researchers. The cash is up from Pounds 2.6m spread among four groups for
the period 1991-95. Of the Pounds 3.2m, some 75 per cent is coming from the
council, 20 per cent from the Treasury and 5 per cent from the Bank of
England.
The boost to funding was welcomed by economists, who had feared large cuts
following exasperation about the lack of accuracy of economic forecasts. Mr
Richard Freeman, chief economist at Imperial Chemical Industries, who
chaired a council panel evaluating the modelling bids, said: 'The UK has a
world lead in economic modelling. This programme aims to build on it.'
However, the extra cash only partly compensates for a 57 per cent real-terms
cut in support in the modelling programme four years ago.
The National Institute and London Business School said they had expected the
cuts and could probably make up shortfalls by getting more cash from the
private sector.
