FT  05 FEB 94 / How To Spend It: It's lovely money for old rope - Lucia van
der Post finds some treasures in the world of scrap art
Back in the 1980s when saving-the-whale and the rain forests were
fashionable concerns, eco-chic took many forms; one of its leitmotifs was
worry about the growing problem of waste. Eco-chic may be less talked about
these days, but some designers still turn to the rubbish dump for
inspiration. Partly they do so from a dislike of waste, of a sense that the
world's resources are not infinite, and partly they are intrigued by the
random nature of 'found' materials. No piece of driftwood, no chunk of scrap
metal, no shard of broken glass is exactly like another, so designers
working with them are often inspired to produce strangely beautiful and
certainly original pieces of art.
Some use waste material of almost no inherent worth - Guy Taplin's ducks,
for instance, are usually made from driftwood found along the East Anglian
shores. The artist Frances Baruch uses polystyrene, discarded from
supermarkets, garden centres and domestic products, to create weird and
wonderful sculptures. Jane Atfield uses recycled industrial felts as well as
little plastic chips formed from thrown away plastic bottles to make her
striking-looking chairs.
Deborah Thomas and Patrice Butler uses fragments of glass to create
sumptuous chandeliers. Julienne Dolphin-Wilding uses driftwood, old wood and
old cable and rape to create chairs that are half-utilitarian domestic
object, half giant sculpture.
Taking worn-out, dilapidated pieces and making them newly beautiful is not
new. Those who scrub up and redecorate an old and battered chest are
conserving and recycling. Those who have the energy and the enterprise can
learn to do this for themselves. Others can buy refurbished pieces
ready-made.
Scrap Scrap of Endurance Works, High Street, Coalport, Telford TF8 7HX (tel:
0952-586754) will take your old and dilapidated pieces and, by decorating
them, turn them into fresh-looking objects. Prices are beguilingly vague -
they charge Pounds 30 for small pieces, Pounds 50 for medium ones and Pounds
70 for large ones (exclusive of VAT but inclusive of delivery).
Cath Kidson, of 8 Clarendon Cross, London W11, on the other hand, takes
junk-shop finds and sells them already smartened up - putting, say, a zinc
top on a battered chest, repainting them, changing the handles and so on.
Tom Dixon and Mark Brazier-Jones were the fore-runners of what might be
called the brutalist school of furniture design. In their early work, they
specialised in taking old metal and using it to create works of great
strength, originality and high cost.
Both have since moved on to use specialist bought materials but both have
retained a lot of the aesthetic of the brutalist furniture that the
blow-torch and scrap-metal school seemed to produce. Tom Dixon changed his
way of working because 'apart from anything else it was difficult to
produce, say, four matching dining-room chairs which customers seemed to
want, when you are depending on waste materials. Then there are no quality
scrappies around any more. I gave up using scrap-metal when the best of them
were driven out of London by the property boom but one day, when I find a
good dealer, I'll go back to it.'
His furniture can be seen at his new gallery, Space, 28 All Saints Road,
London W11 which will open on April 1st. Also in the gallery will be Jane
Atfield's extraordinary chairs and shelving.
Two designers, Patrice Butler and Deborah Thomas, could be said to be the
Steptoe and Son of the lighting world. Both create magical chandeliers, what
Patrice Butler calls 'jewels for houses.' Patrice Butler's chandeliers have
become icons in certain circles. The Duke of Westminster, Princess Gloria
von Thurn und Taxis as well as Mick Jagger all own one and he is now busy
working in collaboration with the grand old French company of Baccarat. He
makes chandeliers from old beads, Perrier bottles, old glass, almost
anything that catches his decorative fancy. They are not cheap, selling at
somewhere between Pounds 750 and Pounds 3,000 through the David Gill
gallery, 60 Fulham Road, London SW3 (tel: 071-589-5946) which always has
some examples on show.
The David Gill gallery also always has a selection of silent butlers or
dressing-room stands made from chrome and 'found' bits and pieces which have
the spare elegance of a sculpture. They range in price from Pounds 275 to
Pounds 500.
Deborah Thomas's chandeliers made from shards of glass from old ornaments
(from carboot and jumbles sales) as well as milk and other everyday bottles
(she bashes them up with a hammer) range in price from about Pounds 1,000,
and they can be seen at Themes and Variations, 231, Westbourne Grove, London
W11. (Tel. 071-727-5531).
Frances Baruch makes no pretence of using discarded polystyrene to any
practical or functional end - she is simply intrigued by their shapes and
possibilities and tries to alter the original 'found' material as little as
possible. The art lies in the combinations she uses and the colours she
paints them. Most of them are strong, geometric, almost Dalek-like
creatures, exuding immense presence. Her bird trees (photographed here) are
perhaps the most accessible of her pieces and echo the brilliantly-coloured
naif Mexican art. An exhibition of her work called Package Deal will be at
the FHAB Gallery, 106 Boundary Road, London NW8 0RG from March 1st - 26th,
and prices will range from Pounds 75 to Pounds 200.
