FT  26 JAN 94 / Japan price cuts anger drugs groups
Japan's Ministry of Health and Welfare has told domestic and overseas drugs
groups that prices of some medicines will be cut. The surprise cost-saving
move is in addition to regular price cuts implemented every two years and
previously announced price cuts on fast-selling medicines.
The ministry's decision, which has angered the pharmaceuticals industry, is
likely to undermine further the growth of Japan's drugs market, the world's
second most important. Foreign pharmaceuticals companies will today set out
their complaints at a meeting with the ministry.
Analysts had forecast that healthcare reforms and previously announced price
cuts would limit annual growth of Japan's pharmaceuticals market to between
zero and 3 per cent for the rest of the decade. Domestic groups will be hit
particularly by the new measures because of their dependence on the local
market.
Ministry officials are understood to have told Ono, the Japanese group, and
Roche Nippon, the subsidiary of the Swiss company, that prices of at least
one of their drugs would be cut because of their rapid sales growth.
The health ministry is under pressure from the finance ministry to contain
its spending after a sharp fall in tax receipts during the recession.
Pharmaceuticals represent about 28 per cent of Japan's health expenditure.
Ono's treatment for diabetic neuropathy, Kinedak, responsible for most of
the group's sales growth last year, is understood to have been targeted.
Nippon Roche said one of its successful anti-infective drugs was involved.
The group's wide spectrum antibiotic, Rocephin, has proved highly successful
since its recent launch.
Mr Hiroaki Shigeta, president of Nippon Roche, said: 'We're terribly upset
because of its lack of consistency. They keep changing the rules. It does
little to encourage innovation if every time you launch a successful product
it's hit by a special price cut.'
The Swiss company had already been hit by arbitrary price cuts late last
year when it was told the price of Roferon-A, its interferon product for
hepatitis C, would be reduced.
Other interferon makers, such as Sumitomo Pharmaceuticals, Daiichi and
Yamanouchi, were also told of reductions then. The cuts for interferons are
expected to range from 13 to 20 per cent.
Makers of cholesterol-lowering products were told last year that prices
would be slashed. The drugs involved were Mevalotin - Japan's top-selling
medicine, made by Japan's second largest drugs company, Sankyo - and
Lipovas, a drug from Banyu, Merck's Japanese subsidiary. Their prices are
expected to be cut by about 12 per cent.
