FT  17 JAN 94 / PM to be pressed on accountability: Scott to probe
ministerial knowledge of departments' organisation
The question of ministerial accountability - what was known and if it was
not, why not - could prove the biggest test for Mr John Major when he
appears before the Scott arms-for-Iraq inquiry today.
The prime minister is reported to be 'entirely convinced' that the mass of
Whitehall documents covering the period under investigation by Lord Justice
Scott confirm his complete innocence of any misconduct.
But today's public hearing will range wider than the precise details of
Whitehall decision-making.
According to inquiry officials, Lord Justice Scott wants to press Mr Major
on whether he subscribes to a set of guidance notes on ministerial
accountability that the judge has been using as a working tool to test the
evidence of previous witnesses.
The judge has taken a keen interest in existing procedures for ministers
which were set out by the head of the civil service in 1988. He is likely to
put to Mr Major the broad premise that accountability concerns not only
accountability in parliament 'after the event' but also requires ministers
to take an active interest in the organisation of their departments,
including the efficient dissemination of intelligence.
The judge is likely to focus initially on Mr Major's short spell as foreign
secretary - July to October 1989.
This period coincided with an inter-departmental row between Mr William
Waldegrave, then foreign minister and in effect Mr Major's number two, and
Mr Alan Clark, then defence minister, and Lord Trefgarne, then trade
minister, over whether export licences should be granted to British
machine-tool manu-facturers such as Matrix-Churchill. Intelligence at the
time showed that machine tools were being used to build up Iraq's military
capability.
Mr Major has told the Commons that as foreign secretary he was not aware of
the row, nor was he briefed on the Matrix-Churchill affair before a meeting
in New York with Mr Tariq Aziz, then Iraqi foreign minister, in September
1989.
The Scott inquiry has heard that the government was clearing export licences
for defence-related goods to Iraq right up to the invasion of Kuwait in
August 1990, when Mr Major had already succeeded Mr Nigel Lawson as
chancellor and thus attended important cabinet meetings.
In January 1991 - two weeks after the Gulf war began - Mr Major, by then
prime minister, told MPs that 'for some considerable time we have not
supplied arms to Iraq'.
Mr Major also told the Commons that ministers who signed public interest
immunity certificates withholding disclosure of documents in the
Matrix-Churchill trial 'were doing what they were obliged to do by law' and
that there was therefore no deliberate cover-up.
