FT  27 APR 94 / BAT buys American Tobacco for Dollars 1bn
BAT Industries, the UK tobacco and insurance giant, is to buy American
Tobacco of the US for Dollars 1bn (Pounds 600m) cash. The deal turns the
tables on almost a century of history, since BAT was formed in 1902 as a
joint venture between American Tobacco and Imperial Tobacco of the UK.
The purchase gives BAT control in the US of the Lucky Strike and Pall Mall
cigarette brands, which it already owns elsewhere in the world. It also
obtains the rights to the Silk Cut brand outside Europe.
American Tobacco, owned by the diversified US group American Brands, is the
fifth largest tobacco company in the US, while BAT is third largest. The
deal will increase BAT's US sales by some 50 per cent, while still leaving
it in third position.
BAT's move comes at a time when the US tobacco industry is under heavy
pressure. The Clinton administration is threatening far-reaching legislation
to curb cigarette smoking, while the market has been fiercely competitive
since Philip Morris, the market leader, slashed the price of its Marlboro
brand a year ago.
BAT's move is also seen as unexpected, as in recent years it has
concentrated on diversifying away from tobacco, using tobacco cash flow to
expand in financial services in the UK and US.
Mr Martin Broughton, BAT chief executive, said that policy remained in
place. BAT is known to have been searching recently for an insurance
acquisition in continental Europe, and has expressed interest in buying a UK
building society. Mr Broughton said BAT was still looking for opportunities
in both areas.
While the American Tobacco purchase will bring BAT's balance-sheet gearing
to 50 per cent, Mr Broughton said he would be happy to raise the figure to
70 per cent for the right purchase. 'We don't see this as inhibiting us,' he
said. 'We could easily cope with another Pounds 1bn-plus of borrowings as of
now.'
Referring to a US broker's circular this week suggesting that a BAT-American
Brands merger might result in cost savings of Dollars 200m, Mr Broughton
described that figure as 'a bit aggressive'.
BAT said the deal, which will be financed from its existing resources, would
improve its earnings from the outset. The price represented between nine and
10 times American Brands' earnings.
American Brands will retain Gallaher, its international operation, which is
the largest tobacco company in the UK and Ireland.
The group said transaction would 'remove potential uncertainty' from the
group - a reference to anti-smoking pressures - and that the move would
enable the group to focus on businesses with greater long-term profit
potential.
Lex, Page 24
Background, Page 26
American Brands' results, Page 32
