FT  13 JUN 94 / Nadir chase leads to dark side of Cyprus
In a week when much of the Turkish press has been following Mrs Aysegul
Nadir and her alleged connections with antiques racketeers and shadowy
Moslem terrorists, her former husband, the founder and former head of Polly
Peck International, has gone largely unnoticed.
But the administrators trying to gain control of Polly Peck International,
the collapsed fruit-to-electronics group, believe Mr Asil Nadir has been far
from idle. They suspect the fugitive tycoon, who jumped bail in the UK where
he faces theft and false accounting charges, has been trying to obstruct
them.
That is how they see the mugging in Istanbul last week of their man on the
spot. Mr Christopher Howel, a Coopers &amp; Lybrand accountant, was left with a
head wound that needed six stitches. The attack might have been far worse
but for the intervention of Mr Howel's concierge.
In Cyprus business has long had its dark side and in such a close-knit
community anyone who has co-operated with the UK investigators has been a
potential target. Voodoo-style warnings - using headless chickens and dead
cats - have been used to frighten off the local officials who have
co-operated with the administrators and the car of the administrators' local
lawyer was blown up - without injuring any-one.
If the latest incident is connected to this intimidation it would suggest
the campaign is being taken to the mainland.
What exactly is at stake in the battle for Polly Peck's assets is hard to
judge. In PPI's 1989 accounts the 'near and Middle East' companies accounted
for profits of Pounds 107m out of a group total of Pounds 161m. The
administrators have been unable lay their hands on the Turkish and Cypriot
assets. As a result the value of the assets - and the likely remuneration
for PPI's 20,000 creditors - has remained a mystery.
Some progress is being made. This month, after 23 different injunctions
preventing their access to the local companies, a Cypriot court found in
favour of the administrators and prevented Mr Nadir from disposing of the
Crystal Cove Hotel, a former Greek property which PPI leased from the
Saudi-based Dar al Maal al Islamia foundation.
The Cypriot assets comprise a packaging business, a fruit trader and three
hotels. However, the lease for the Crystal Cove - unlike the other PPI
assets on the island which are owned through local companies - is held
directly by PPI. The hotel remains half-built after suffering bomb damage
during the Turkish invasion in 1974. The court action means that Mr Nadir's
plans to obtain a casino licence for the property, which would provide the
money for new owners to be able to rebuild, have been blocked.
And earlier this month the appeal court in Ankara allowed the administrators
to take control of printers AN Graphics, worth several million pounds.
Bribery allegations against the administrators issued by Mr Nadir's lawyers
have been thrown out by the courts. Mr Nadir's legal efforts are not
exhausted, however. The administrators now face criminal charges, after an
investigation by the Istanbul public prosecutor into the sale of Media
Print, an Istanbul publisher.
The case still stands after a hearing last week demanded that the
administrators give evidence. Because of the attack on one of their
officials the administrators are unlikely to want to appear in Turkey in
person, instead they will use sworn depositions.
Their hope is that the attack will refocus the attention of Turkish and
Cypriot authorities on the unco-operative behaviour of a man whom one senior
Turkish official described as the Robin Hood of the eastern Mediterranean.
