FT  11 AUG 94 / Bangladeshi author flees to Sweden in fear for her life
Ms Taslima Nasreen, the controversial Bangladeshi feminist writer subjected
to death threats by Moslem fundamentalists, has fled Bangladesh out of fear
for her life.
Ms Nasreen arrived in Sweden yesterday after leaving Bangladesh secretly on
Tuesday. Her departure could harm Bangladesh's international reputation by
highlighting the fundamentalists' power to inflame popular passions and
incite violence.
It could also embroil the government of Mrs Khaleda Zia, the prime minister,
in a dangerous row with fundamentalist groups because government officials
appear to have helped arrange Ms Nasreen's departure.
Ms Nasreen, 33, a divorced former doctor, urged women to fight for economic,
social and sexual equality with men. In one poem, she described men as
cockroaches, wasps and poisonous ants.
While these views angered Bangladesh's Moslem clergy, they only became
widely known last year after Ms Nasreen published Lajja (Shame), a novel
about the plight of Bangladesh's Hindu minority who suffer discrimination
from Moslems. The Bangladeshi government banned the book, but it became a
best-seller in India.
The final straw for the fundamentalists was the publication of an interview
in May in the Indian newspaper The Statesman in which Ms Nasreen was quoted
as calling for revision of the Koran. Ms Nasreen said she was misquoted, but
radical clerics called for her public execution.
On June 4 the authorities ordered Ms Nasreen's arrest on blasphemy-related
charges. Thousands of fundamentalists demonstrated almost daily demanding
her punishment.  Secular student groups arranged counter-demonstrations. Ms
Nasreen went into hiding and surrendered to the courts only last week. For
her own protection, she was placed under heavy police guard at her home in
Dhaka.
Her departure leaves Bangladesh in turmoil. Yesterday fundamentalist groups,
led by Jamaat-e-Islami, the leading Islamic political party, vowed to attack
Mrs Zia's government for letting Ms Nasreen leave. Jamaat-e-Islami has had
little support from voters, unlike Mrs Zia's Bangladesh National Party and
the Awami League, the main opposition party. But this has not stopped
Islamic clerics trying to extend their influence.
