FT  14 JAN 94 / Technology: Back on track - Monoclonal antibodies are in
favour again, thanks to new approaches to their use
Just 18 months ago, antibody clones made in laboratories were considered the
bane of the biotechnology industry. Known as monoclonal antibodies, they
destroy disease-causing cells by binding to targets such as cancer.
The earlier hype surrounding antibodies in the 1980s was silenced in 1992
when the US Food and Drug Administration unexpectedly refused two
biotechnology groups, Zoma and Centocor, approval for drugs based on
monoclonals, on the grounds that their effectiveness had not been
convincingly demonstrated. 'The FDA's denial gave not only monoclonals a bad
name, it gave the entire biotechnology industry a bad name,' one
biotechnology executive says.
But rumours of monoclonals' demise may, in the words of Mark Twain, have
been greatly exaggerated. Monoclonal antibodies are making a strong
comeback. Cytogen has won approval for a monoclonal antibody product for use
in imaging ovarian and colon cancer, and other antibody-based drugs -
including a cardiovascular product by Centocor and an infectious disease
diagnosis aid by Immunomedics - are in phase three trials, the final stage
before the FDA hearing.
The industry predicts that within a few years many monoclonals should be on
the market. 'We'll see a few approvals in 1995, and by 1997 there will be a
slew of new products based on monoclonals,' says Samuel Waksal, chief
executive officer of ImClone Systems, the New York biotechnology group.
Since monoclonal-based antibodies target diseases as diverse as cancer,
asthma, Aids and cardiovascular disease, the potential for new drugs is
enormous.
Monoclonal antibody research has grown up in the past few years. In the
1980s, most attention was focused on mouse antibodies.
But these gave disappointing results in humans. The body's immune system
often recognised the antibodies as foreign and attacked them, at best
rendering them ineffective and at worst causing adverse reactions.
For these reasons, mouse antibodies are probably nearing obsolescence. In
their place is a far more flexible approach.
'People have figured out much better how antibodies work, and that gives us
a lot more leeway,' explains Donaldo Drakeman, president of Medarex, based
in Princeton, New Jersey. 'We can chop them up, glue different fragments
together, create our own versions.'
One problem with the original monoclonal research, according to James
Rusche, vice-president of discovery research at Repligen in Boston, was that
companies were pursuing the wrong targets. 'Originally, the focus was on
antibodies found on solid organs like lungs and kidneys,' he says. 'But it
is hard for an antibody to get inside a solid mass like a tumour. It is much
easier to target circulating cells, those found in the blood like platelets,
T-cells or circulating cancer cells like leukaemia.'
One trend is towards the use of antibody parts, either in the form of
fragments (antibodies broken into pieces through the use of enzymes) or
single chains (antibody pieces cloned in the laboratory). Many scientists
believe that by chiselling the antibody down to the section responsible for
binding, they can get a more effective response.
'The advantage of using fragments is that they are lighter, can move faster
in the body and therefore have a faster effect,' says Rusche. 'The
disadvantage is that they have a shorter life, so you have to administer
them more often.'
Many of the antibody products now in development - such as the Aids
treatment of Medarex, also in Princeton - are fragments.
Some scientists believe the smaller pieces will be able to penetrate large
masses like tumours. 'Fragments and single chains are the best hope for
entering organs,' says Douglas Hulse, vice-president of business development
for Enzon, a biotechnology group. 'Intact (whole) antibodies are just too
bulky.'
However, sceptics point out that most fragments are also too large to
penetrate organs and tumours effectively.
Antibodies can be 'designed' for specific functions. An extra binding
capacity, for instance, can be added to produce a 'bispecific' antibody.
Many companies hold 'libraries' of different antibody designs that they
screen for various effects.
Researchers believe the trend will continue away from mouse antibodies
towards humanised or human antibodies. Mice can now be genetically altered
to produce human antibodies, and through laboratory engineering, companies
have come up with a number of hybrid 'chimerics', half-mouse, half-human.
'Intact mouse monoclonals are probably a thing of the past, but intact
humanised or human antibodies are an important new trend,' says Hubert
Schoemaker, chairman of Centocor. By humanising the antibodies, scientists
hope they will be more acceptable to the human immune system. A number of
companies - including Centocor and Genentech - are making use of chimerics
in research to fight cancer, asthma and inflammation.
At the same time, companies are trying to bring down costs through more
efficient production methods. Enzon, for example, is developing a way to
produce antibodies through fermentation. 'By eliminating the mouse part of
the equation, the cost of antibody production can be heavily reduced,' says
Hulse.
The next step in antibody research, according to Waksal of ImClone, is to
induce the body to make its own antibodies. ImClone is working on what it
calls 'anti-antibodies'. By using antibodies to mimic certain diseases, the
company's scientists hope they can induce the body to produce its own immune
response.
'The antibody would be fooled into thinking that it is a cancer cell, for
example,' Waksal explains. 'The advantage of this approach, as opposed to
constantly injecting the patient with antibodies, is that the medicine has a
longer effect, working like a vaccine against cancer.'
Most monoclonal antibody products still have a number of hurdles to clear
before they reach the market. Their short life span in the body poses
serious problems for treatment. Whole antibodies, for instance, would
probably have to be administered intravenously every few days, and fragments
every few hours. Obviously, they are not practical for any long-term
treatment.
Moreover, it is not certain how efficiently some of the new monoclonals will
bind to their targets, or whether they will cause any adverse effect in
humans. Still, scientists have a far better understanding of antibodies than
they once did, and have far more options in their development. From the dark
days of being an embarrassment to the entire industry, monoclonal antibodies
may soon emerge as a big impetus for the biotechnology sector.
