FT  31 OCT 94 / UK Company News: Caparo secures Sharon assets in Dollars 26m
deal
Caparo Group, the private UK steel and engineering concern, has clinched its
bid to become a big player in the US steel market by buying most of the
assets of Sharon Speciality Steel for Dollars 26m (Pounds 16.4m) cash.
A US court has finally approved the offer for Sharon, which has been in
Chapter 11 of the US Bankruptcy Code since November 1992.
The UK group, founded and chaired by Dr Swraj Paul, the Anglo-Indian
businessman, has paid a Dollars 3.5m deposit and expects to complete the
deal on November 15.
The purchase will end a long battle by Dr Paul to buy Sharon, based in the
steel town of Sharon, Pennsylvania.
In late July Caparo signed a letter of intent to buy Sharon, but slipped out
of the running this autumn when a rival Dollars 35m bid emerged. When this
fell through, however, Caparo was left with the field clear.
Caparo already has some steel products businesses in the US, notably Bull
Moose Tube, acquired in 1988. The Sharon acquisition, however, will give
Caparo its first steelmaking facilities anywhere In the world.
Dr Paul estimates that Caparo will become a Dollars 1bn company by 1986,
with Dollars 400m coming from Sharon. Last year, Caparo had world-wide group
sales of Pounds 360m .
Sharon, which has had a chequered past and formerly employed 2,000 people,
is not currently producing steel. Dr Paul says he hopes to restart
production by April, with about 500 workers.
'I am delighted and relieved that we have finally bought Sharon,' said Dr
Paul, who has negotiated an agreement with the United Steelworkers of
America on representation at the plant.
Apart from the purchase price, Caparo will spend an initial Dollars 20m to
restart production at Sharon. The plant will produce about 1.25m tons of
steel a year, with 900,000 tons coming from its electric arc furnaces and
the rest, initially, from bought-in slabs.
Electric arc furnace capacity will subsequently be increased. Caparo is not
buying Sharon's blast furnace - Dr Paul says he does not want to inherit any
environmental problems.
