FT  23 SEP 94 / UK Company News: Jeyes falls Pounds 1.3m into red and chief
executive replaced
Shares in Jeyes Group plunged to their lowest levels in almost six years, as
the cleaning products company fell into the red for the first half and
announced the resignation of the chief executive who led the Pounds 5m
buy-out from Cadbury Schweppes in 1986.
Mr Jimmy Moir, the Scottish entrepreneur credited with turning round Jeyes
after the buy-out, is to be replaced by Mr David Callear, former deputy
chief executive and finance director. Mr Moir will remain deputy chairman.
Mr Callear was brought in to Jeyes after the May profits warning which took
11 per cent of the group's share price.
Yesterday, the market knocked a further 25 per cent off the shares which
closed at xxx. This is the lowest since January 1989, and compares with a
high over the last 18 months of 471p.
Mr Callear said the first half results had been disappointing. Jeyes
announced pre-tax losses of Pounds 1.27m, against profits of Pounds 374,000,
after exceptional charges of Pounds 1.7m for marketing expenses and stock.
Sales were 2 per cent higher at Pounds 59m for the 28 weeks to July 16.
He warned that the long-awaited recovery was still some way away. 'Trading
remains difficult,' he said. 'We are still under pressure.'
Jeyes has suffered from intense competition from supermarkets and
discounters selling cheaper own label and generic products. The group
undertook a restructuring 18 months ago, which was now largely complete.
In the first half, the group had realised savings of about Pounds 1.75m, Mr
Callear said. However, increasing costs of operations such as logistics
meant savings for the full year might not be much greater.
Mr Callear said Jeyes was confident that in spite of the tough trading
environment it would be able to make progress. 'We are able to see the light
at the end of the tunnel,' he said. 'There might have been a time when it
was difficult to locate the tun-nel.'
Margins, which fell by about 2.5 percentage points in the first half, had
begun to stabilise, but at lower levels.
The interim dividend was held at 3.3p. Losses per share were 4.3p against
earnings of 1.2p last time.
