FT  31 AUG 94 / Business and the Environment: Simply take one washing
machine - Hard plastic waste can now be recycled into gasoline and heavy oil
If plastics are made from petroleum, why not turn plastic waste back into
fuels? For the environmental engineers at Toshiba, the Japanese electronics
group, the concept was easier conceived than done.
Many Japanese companies have managed to turn non-chloride plastics, such as
polyethylene, into petroleum fuels through heat processing.
But breaking down chloride-based hard plastics, such as those used for
computers and refrigerators, is more difficult because the process gives off
harmful hydrogen chloride gas as a by-product.
The demand for plastic recycling technology has risen in the past few years
in Japan with the gradual decline in landfill space for garbage and the rise
in industrial waste, of which over 5 per cent is plastics.
Moreover, electronics makers face increasing pressure from the government to
dispose of their own products thrown away by consumers.
From next March, electronics companies are required to help municipal
governments which do not have the capability to dispose of discarded bulk
consumer electronics goods such as refrigerators and washing machines.
In 1990, Toshiba initiated a development programme for recycling chloride
plastics, which account for 25 per cent of all plastics. Researchers at its
environmental technology laboratory, set up a year earlier to answer the
government's call for industry's greater involvement in waste disposal, led
the technology development.
'It's the same as throwing away an energy source,' says Kazuo Suzuki, head
of the environmental engineering lab.
After two years of experimental work, Toshiba's environmental researchers
discovered that adding a high-density alkaline solution when heating the
chloride plastics turned the hydrogen chloride into a harmless salt.
The solution also removes plastic additives which prevent heat
decomposition, increasing the fuel obtained from the heating process.
The new technology can be applied to more than 90 per cent of all plastics,
the proportion that decomposes when heated. In addition, small metal parts
which are difficult to detach from hard plastics do not need to be removed.
Earlier this month, Toshiba's environmental engineers launched a
demonstration plant that breaks down the plastics into fuel, salt, soda and
carbon dioxide.
Toshiba's development also solves the problem of having to separate chloride
and non-chloride plastics. In spite of the previously developed technology,
reclaiming fuels from non-chloride plastics had not been practical since
many products use both types of plastics and separating the two took time
and was costly.
The prototype system produces more than 200 litres of fuel out of 250kg of
plastic in 11 hours. After the plastics are decomposed, pressures and
temperatures in the combustion chambers can be adjusted to create several
kinds of fuel, including heavy oil, kerosene and gasoline.
Toshiba says there has been great interest in its new technology. The
company has received inquiries from German and other European companies in
plastic moulding and plastic board manufacturing industries.
Aside from the environmental benefits, there are also cost advantages. For
example, Toshiba currently pays Y50,000 (Pounds 330) to dispose of 1 tonne
of industrial waste. Since the company throws away 4,000 to 5,000 tonnes of
plastic garbage a year, it could save up to Y250m a year by using the fuel
reclaiming technology.
The company expects it to take a year to refine the demonstration plant
further into a smaller and more durable device and sell the product
commercially.
Toshiba says it will use the reclaimed fuel in its plants, and will also
sell it to its chemical manufacturing affiliates. The company believes its
system will be appropriate for medical equipment makers and hospitals, which
use large amounts of chloride plastics. Disposable plastic medical equipment
used in the company's in-house high-technology hospital will also be turned
into fuels.
