FT  26 AUG 94 / International Company News: Dell Computer back to profit in
second quarter
Dell Computer, the US personal computer manufacturer, staged a recovery in
its second quarter, as it refocused its operations on direct sales via
telephone and mail order.
Sales increased to Dollars 791.5m, up 13 per cent from Dollars 700.6m a year
ago, and up 3 per cent from this year's first quarter.
Net income for the latest quarter was Dollars 28.6m, or 65 cents a share,
after a Dollars 6.2m after-tax charge related to the company's closure of
its investment derivatives and short-term investments with principal
exposure. This compared with a net loss of Dollars 75.7m, or Dollars 2.03,
in the same period last year after charges of about Dollars 75m.
'We have begun to reinvigorate our customer-direct (sales via telephone and
mail order) business with more aggressive pricing,' said Mr Michael Dell,
chairman and chief executive. Last month Dell announced that it would
withdraw from the retail sales channel to concentrate on direct sales.
The shift appears to be paying off for Dell. Retail consumer sales declined
to 3 per cent of revenues in the second quarter, down from 8 per cent in the
previous quarter and 9 per cent in the second quarter last year, the company
said. Excluding consumer sales, worldwide sales increased 9 per cent
sequentially and 19 per cent on a year-on-year basis.
During the second quarter Dell re-entered the portable computer market with
the introduction of new notebook models. Last year the company was forced to
withdraw its notebook computers due to design flaws.
'Our portables plan is on track and on time,' Mr Dell said. Sales of
notebook computers represented 5 per cent of systems revenue in the quarter,
he said.
Gross margins declined only modestly, in spite of more aggressive pricing,
the company said. It cautioned, however, that following price cuts by Compaq
Computer and IBM, 'the industry pricing environment continues to be dynamic
and Dell intends to retain a competitive pricing position'.
For the first six months of fiscal 1995, sales increased 13 per cent to
Dollars 1.56bn from Dollars 1.37bn in the first half of fiscal 1994. Net
income was Dollars 47.5m, or Dollars 1.06 a share, against a loss of Dollars
65.5m, or Dollars 1.76.
