FT  05 SEP 94 / Business Travel: Airlines keep their guard up - Charles
Jennings looks at the security implications of declining terrorism
Carlos the Jackal may be behind bars, Israel may be entering into peace
agreements with its neighbours and the IRA may have declared a ceasefire;
but there is to be no slackening of airline security procedures.
As a spokeswoman for United Airlines puts it: 'Security won't change. We'll
keep operations absolutely 100 per cent as they are.' This is a theme echoed
by El Al, which delares itself 'probably more on our guard than before.
We're certainly not relaxing, with peace in the air. Indeed, there may be
more splinter groups forming as a result of the peace process, so we have to
redouble our efforts.'
The big dates in the world of airline security, are September 12 1970 - when
Palestinian terrorists blew up three airliners in Jordan, and simultaneously
attempted to hijack an El Al jet at Heathrow; and December 21 1988 - the
date of the Lockerbie bombing. The first prompted the worldwide introduction
of X-ray scanners and metal detectors; while the second led to the present
mish-mash of regulations, concerning inter alia the carrying of electrical
items and the problem of identifying which passengers are responsible for
which pieces of luggage.
Events like these also imprinted the notion of airline security on
travellers' minds. Other aspects of aviation safety (such as airworthiness)
are easier to forget about; but airlines now work on the basis that security
must not only be done, it must be seen to be done. That it is, in fact, a
matter of customer comfort to make them go through the security checks
involved in an international flight. El Al's famous lengthy
cross-questioning of passengers before they get on a flight, for instance,
manages to be both irksome (it takes ages) and at the same time profoundly
comforting (at least a Leila Khaled is less likely to be on board).
Some airlines are so uneasy at the prospect of even discussing security  -
in conditions of reduced global tension or otherwise - that they can barely
allow the word to cross their lips. As Air France (which has recently
re-introduced scheduled flights into Beirut) says: 'There's one subject that
airlines won't talk about, and that is security.'
A British Airways spokesman did break ranks, and promptly tied himself in
knots trying to say something without actually revealing anything: 'The only
answer I can give is that a large part is intelligence. We liaise with all
the intelligence authorities around the world and adjust our measures to
suit.' Meaning? 'You've got a very high level of security measures at all
times anyway and we can go up two or three notches from that and then go
down a notch or two. But it remains at a very high level.'
For the airport authorities, as well as the airlines, the fact is that to
talk about security is to some extent, to breach security. And no one in
their right mind is going to advertise, say, a slimming-down of baggage
checks, even if such a thing were on the cards. According the British
Airport Authority: 'The thing about security is that we review it constantly
and we certainly wouldn't be making any reductions. The process of review
never stops, it's an ongoing situation.'
In fact, much of Britain's airline and airport security is mandated directly
by the Department of Transport. There is a bottom line imposed by the DoT,
below which carriers may not go; although they can add further procedures as
they choose. Some of the more recent DoT regulations include checks on
baggage going into the holds of aircraft (in addition to the hand luggage
searches introduced some years ago); tougher security arrangements for
airport staff; and making it an offence to give false information about the
contents of one's baggage.
Having raised the stakes to their current height, there is clearly no easy
way to lower them again. In Japan and the US, where the IRA, the Red Brigade
and the PFLP have not been so active, flight security can sometimes seem
extremely relaxed. But elsewhere air travellers will continue to face the
same hours of tedium that they have come to know so well over the last two
decades.
