FT  30 JUN 94 / Raising Brazil's poorest - Education
The mayor of Aracati, a small town on Brazil's north-east coast, recently
took office, then closed a local school because its teacher had opposed his
election.
The political use of education is not new in Brazil's poor north-east. But
such interference, mixed with government mismanagement and corruption,
produces illiteracy and poor learning, and threatens to prolong greatly the
region's underdevelopment.
Brazil cut national illiteracy from 51 per cent to 18 per cent in 1950-1990
but, in the north-east, the rate remains at 39 per cent.
The federal government in Brazil is obliged by law to spend at least 18 per
cent of its budget on education, while states and municipalities have to
spend 25 per cent. So there should be ample funds to improve education
nationally.
The problem is less the amount of resources, rather what they are spent on.
Too many governments have used their budgets to recruit 'teachers' at
election time in return for votes or to award school building contracts to
political backers. As a result, too little money is left for what is needed,
long-term investment in the quality of teachers and education standards.
The poor quality of the state system is most visible in figures on children
having to repeat school years and on truancy. For the north-east in general,
less than half the children who start primary school complete the first-year
requirements and progress to the second level.
There is a further sharp shake-out between the fourth and fifth level, about
age 11, since many rural teachers are unable to teach the more demanding
syllabuses.
In Maranhao, only 10 per cent of children complete the eight levels of
primary school which are meant to be compulsory. Officials from the state's
education department say many rural teachers earn less than the equivalent
of Dollars 10 (Pounds 6.45) a month, hardly enough to buy basic food for a
week. One teacher in three has only completed primary school; some are
barely literate.
Faced by such problems, improvements will take many years. But at least two
states are attempting reforms and initial indications are encouraging. An
education ministry programme to improve management and teaching, which
includes Dollars 418m of World Bank money, will also help press states to
raise standards and reduce corruption.
In Piau, one of Brazil's poorest states, a five-year programme is under way
and has lifted spending on education to 33 per cent of the state budget,
well above the legal minimum.
The results are mixed so far - the programme only started in 1991. However,
in interior areas, pass rates have risen slightly and truancy is down. In
Teresina, the state capital, though, pass rates have fallen because of
teachers' strikes against government plans to introduce public examinations
for all teaching jobs.
In neighbouring Ceara state, rapidly developing a reputation for good - and
clean - government, public exams have also been reintroduced.
In previous administrations, teachers were appointed through patronage.
Ceara is also, with several other states, trying to decentralise primary
school administration to the municipalities, who have closer contact with
parents and children. But this will take many years, especially since poorer
municipalities cannot afford to increase education spending.
This article is the second in a series. The first article, Latin America:
Chance to break the cycle of sorrow, was published on June 24 1994.
