FT  19 NOV 94 / Private View: InFidelity of a Cuban exile - Christian Tyler
meets Guillermo Cabrera Infante, writer and punster, who fled Castro's
'Caribbean Albania' for freedom on Gloucester Road
We are in a writer's room, a hermitage. On one side is a wall of books on a
scaffold of heavy iron shelving. On the other are cupboards stuffed with
manuscripts and 2,000 videocassettes (for this writer is also a film
critic.)
A giant monstera plant is splayed in tropical profusion across the bay
window, obscuring a dowdy London street of cheap hotels and pizza parlours.
The writer is short, tubby and somewhat stiff in the neck. He is smoking a
big cigar. His manner, like his writing, is humorous but his jokes are acrid
and melancholic. He is a ferocious punster with a technicolour writing style
 -it reminds one of a muscular Gore Vidal.
Guillermo Cabrera Infante is an exile, or rather political refugee, from
Fidel Castro's Cuba.
In Mea Cuba, a collection of political essays just published in England, he
caricatures Castro as 'Mefistofidel', as 'the world's most expensive
agronomist', as the man who spreads 'Castroenteritis'. Cuba, he writes, is
'the Albania of the Caribbean', ruled over by a tropical Stalin, a 'beastly,
power-hungry egomaniac'.
'I know him very well,' he told me. 'He has something you and I fortunately
don't have, which is a lust for power. He doesn't care about food, he
doesn't care about sex, he doesn't care about comforts. He only cares about
power.'
Castro, he added, is a great actor whose propaganda has been swallowed by
all but a handful of outsiders. Not until after his death would the
atrocities committed by the regime be known.
This writer, it is plain, pulls no punches. Perhaps he is lucky that his
enemies do. Eight years ago, while he and his wife were out, the door to
their flat was prised out its frame. Nothing was taken, not even money or
manuscripts.
'No, I'm not afraid,' he said. 'But I am concerned because I know what
happened to Georgi Markov.' Markov, an exiled writer who attacked the then
communist ruling family of Bulgaria, was killed with a poison-tipped
umbrella on Waterloo Bridge in London.
However, Cabrera Infante is a novelist and screenwriter rather than a
polemicist; as such, he has been largely ignored in Cuba even as his
literary reputation in the world outside has soared. 'Until this book
appeared in Spanish, they were trying to create a void around me, killing me
by silence.'
He was born into a poor family in Oriente province, 25 miles away from the
birthplace of the former dictator Batista and 20 miles from that of Fidel
Castro. His parents were founders of the Cuban communist party; this, he
said, was vaccination. 'My father was only concerned with saving the world,
not saving his family. Believe me, the political education of a man can
begin very early.'
Infante first knew Castro in 1948, when the future revolutionary wore a suit
and tie. Later, as editor of Lunes, the party newspaper's literary
supplement, Infante saw Castro and Che ('Chaos') Guevara at close quarters.
It was while serving as Cuba's cultural attache in Brussels that he flew
home for his mother's funeral and decided to leave for ever. He wrote: 'In
an incredible Hegelian capriole, Cuba had taken a great leap forward - but
had fallen backward.'
Despite the head of internal security, and with the help of highly-placed
friends, he succeeded in leaving with his wife Miriam Gomez, an actress, and
the two daughters of his first, short marriage to Marta Calvo.
First they went to Spain, but Franco's police declined to give them visas.
The writer was invited to London to script a film, and there he has lived
ever since.
'I know you British are very derogatory of London,' he said. 'But I like it
here. I work very well here. You see where I work. You see those windows.
When the weather is really foul, I see people hurrying to and fro with big
overcoats, umbrellas, cursing the weather. I don't curse, because I am very
cosy there writing.' He pointed to a big IBM electric typewriter planted
across the room.
And when the sun is shining . . ?
'That's a temptation because it then resembles Havana. When I came in June,
1966 there were girls everywhere, almost naked, in see-through dresses.
London was singing - swinging - and I thought it was going to last for
ever.'
About six years after settling in South Kensington, Infante suffered what he
calls a 'massive breakdown'. They gave him electric shock treatment until
his doctor intervened to say the writer's memory could be permanently
damaged. He takes lithium salts for manic depression.
I asked him if his exile was the cause. No, he said, because he had been
happy to leave. 'I myself think it is an effect without a cause.'
Perhaps you are super-sensitive?
'I am very sensitive, yes. But I've been like that all my life and nothing
happened. My wife is more sensitive than I, and she has never been crazy.'
He lit a cigar. I thought of the title of his book and said: I'm very struck
by your use of puns.
'You think that's a sign of madness?'
No, I said hastily. Do you use them when you're angry as well as amused?
'I don't want to sound too pretentious but I think it's some sort of poetic
system, the way you use rhyme or rhythm. Of course most of them are
conscious, but some are very unconscious. It's a mechanism inside your head.
'I was probably born with it. I probably was born mad. That's the way it is.
Some people get very angry with me. I say one man's pun is another man's
poison.'
He quoted Goethe's verdict on a fellow-writer: ''Whenever he made a pun, a
pain was hidden.' It's better in English than in German. Anyway, English is
a better language for puns - otherwise you wouldn't have Lewis Carroll or
James Joyce or Flann O'Brien.'
Cuba, he said, was like Ireland: a small country which had produced a
disproportionate number of celebrated writers. 'They have the gift of the
gab. Havana is 'Habana' in Spanish, and I coined the pun the hablaneros, the
talkers.'
Does writing give you the identity denied you by exile?
'I don't think so, not really. I'm not in search of an identity. I'm more in
search of a given expression, which I haven't attained yet.'
Do you write novels to keep your Cuba alive?
'No. I am trying to rebuild Havana with words.' To the peasant boy he once
was, he explained, Havana appeared an enchanted city. 'It was like some
miracle that stopped the night'.
Do you hope to see it like that again?
'Now, this is a vanity of mine. I only hope that they take my books as a
blueprint for a future Havana. I know it won't happen, but I long for it.
Some readers say my books have made them feel true Habaneros. That for me is
compliment enough.'
Would you go back if . . ?
'I wouldn't go back on the first plane if Castro died. I'll wait for them to
invite me. It's not a question of pride or vanity. It's that I don't feel
there's a place for me down there. I'm not a politician, I'm not an
economist, I'm not an entrepreneur. I'm only a writer. What am I going to do
in Havana? Write pamphlets and paste them on the wall?'
Cabrera Infante is a man who can put up with anything but being ignored. He
calls himself 'an invisible exile', a reference to the cold shoulder
treatment he has had from some left-wing intellectuals unable to concede
that Cuba was a place one had to leave. 'Who could be an exile from
Paradise?'
I referred to Castro's past denunciations of exiles as 'worms' and
'cockroaches'. If you are told that often enough, to you begin to believe
it?
'No. You know that 'worm' is gusano in Spanish. It means also 'caterpillar'.
So I devised a sort of metamorphosis. All the worms become butterflies.
Goebbels used to call the Jews 'vermin.' It means you can kill them because
they are not human.'
Are you angry that Castro has had such a hand in your life?
'All my reactions to Castro can be explained if you think of a Jew thinking
of Hitler.'
You have said exile is a form of martyrdom but also a rare privilege. What
do you mean?
'That's what the title of the book is all about. You have escaped from a
form of life which is for you inhuman. Therefore, to leave your country is a
liberation. Not many are able to do it. I was lucky.'
Talk of exile was clearly depressing the writer and he sounded tired.
However acute, however influential the penman may be, I thought, the
swordsman can always slice his feet from under him.
Does exile become a sort of profession? I asked finally.
'I have just come back from a symposium in Spain,' he said. 'They asked me
about writing. I said I find writing easy. It is life that is difficult, and
the life of an exile is even more difficult than life.
'And you can guess why. You have to rebuild a life that is totally false.
We're not English. We live in London but we don't live in England.
'Many people ask me where I'm from. I say 'Gloucester Road.' You cannot say
that unless you are an exile. If you are an emigre you talk about your
country. But if your country doesn't exist any more, what do you say? My
only country is this flat.'
