FT  15 SEP 94 / Investigators widen probe on ferry walkway collapse
Accident investigators will today widen their inquiries into the collapse of
a passenger walkway which killed six people and injured seven others
boarding a ferry at the Kent port of Ramsgate.
The collapse of the walkway happened as passengers were boarding a Belgian
ferry, the Prins Filip, just before 1am yesterday. The end of one section of
the walkway fell 50ft beside a vehicle ramp leading on to the ferry.
The incident occurred less than three weeks after a blaze on a cross-Channel
ferry and raised once again the issue of ferry safety. Port Ramsgate, which
is responsible for quayside equipment at the port, and Sally Line, which
operates the ferry hit by the earlier blaze in which one person was injured,
are both part of Sally UK, a Finnish/Swedish shipping group.
There have been concerns in recent years about the safety of ferries at sea
and regulations were tightened after the capsize of the Herald of Free
Enterprise with the loss of 193 lives in 1987. But there had been no fatal
failure of shore-based equipment in recent memory, ferry industry officials
said.
An initial examination of the structure was completed yesterday by the
Health and Safety Executive, which recovered a large metal pin from the
seabed. A second team of health and safety inspectors will today start
detailed inquiries and a team from the walkway's Swedish manufacturers will
start their own review.
Mr Reg Cooper, managing director of Port Ramsgate, said: 'We had no
indication that anything was wrong.'
The walkway was installed in March by FEAB, part of the Mattsson Foretagen
group, a small, privately owned engineering company based in Uddevalla near
Gothenburg.
Mr Christer Utgren, finance director, said this was the only walkway of this
type to be built by FEAB but the technology was not new. He said: 'We have
never had a failure before.' The company has supplied vehicle ramps to
Ramsgate and three other UK ports.
Stena Sealink, another ferry operator on the cross-Channel route, said it
had ordered an inspection of its walkways and ramps although its equipment
was of a different design.
