FT  29 AUG 94 / Call for end to Iraq sanctions
Jordan and Turkey yesterday called for an end to United Nations sanctions
against Iraq and urged its return to the international fold, AP reports from
Amman.
In a joint press conference, King Hussein and visiting Turkish President
Suleyman Demirel also said that stability brought by an Arab-Israeli
settlement would lead to an increased co-operation between their countries.
On Iraq, Mr Demirel said: 'We do believe that the sanctions should be lifted
as soon as possible and then Iraq should return to the international
community.
'If Iraq continues to be isolated, its territorial integrity will be hard to
maintain,' he added at the end of a day of talks with King Hussein.
'Certainly, we hope that we will see Iraq once again taking a vital role in
this region,' said King Hussein, who was perceived as pro-Iraqi because of
his refusal to join a US-led coalition that expelled Iraq from Kuwait in
1991. The king advocated a diplomatic solution to the crisis.
In sharp contrast, Ankara gave solid support to the coalition. But economic
and political interests have led Turkey to renew ties with Iraq.
Ankara is the only non-Arab member of the coalition to have reopened its
embassy in Baghdad. Dozens of Turkish businessmen have visited Baghdad and
signed trade contracts.
Turkey and Iraq also have agreed to prepare an oil pipeline to export Iraqi
crude once the embargo against Iraq is lifted. Both countries are hoping to
flush out 12m barrels of Iraqi crude stuck there after borders were closed
during the Gulf crisis.
Mr Demirel said Turkey was negotiating with the UN some technical details,
including who would receive the oil from the pipeline and how it could be
sold off.
The president acknowledged that Turkish businessmen were making deals with
the Iraqis, but emphasised that none of the contracts would be carried out
until the sanctions were lifted.
Mr Demirel said Ankara, which is taking an increasingly influential role in
the Middle East, was ready to take a share in regional development projects.
He declined to elaborate.
Turkey is actively involved in regional peace discussions on energy, the
environment, economic co-operation and water.
Jordanian officials say Turkey, which has abundant water resources, could
contribute to resolving water problems in parched nations like Jordan.
