FT  01 FEB 94 / No. 10 denies split with Washington over Sinn Fein:
Congressmen say granting Gerry Adams a visa is a 'calculated gamble' for
peace
Downing Street last night played down suggestions of friction between London
and Washington over the visit of the Sinn Fein leader.
'I don't think Gerry Adams is going to split the US and the UK to put it
mildly,' a spokesman said. But it urged the US government to put pressure on
the Sinn Fein president to use the controversial visit to announce an end to
violence.
In New York Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, said it was 'an American
decision entirely'.
Last week London said it hoped a visa would not be given to Mr Adams unless
he made 'a clear and unequivocal renunciation of violence'.
US officials believe Mr Adams's visit could strengthen his position within
the Irish republican movement thereby helping those willing to move towards
peace talks to control the more extreme members of their organisations.
A group of about 40 members of Congress had been pressing President Bill
Clinton to grant Mr Adams a visa to attend a conference in New York today on
the prospects for peace in Northern Ireland, arguing that this could
contribute to the peace process by enhancing his influence over the rank and
file membership of the IRA.
'The visa won't ensure that, but it's a calculated gamble to raise his
prestige against some of his party's extremists,' a congressional official
said.
'What is the worst that can happen? If it doesn't work and they go back to
terrorism he doesn't get in again,' he added.
White House officials said the intention behind the visa authorisation was
to 'reach out to him and his organisation to encourage them to work within
the peace process'.
The House of Representatives' Speaker Thomas Foley, Congress's most
prominent member of Irish extraction, was opposed last week to granting Mr
Adams a visa. However most of the Friends of Ireland, a congressional caucus
whose leaders include Congressman Frank McCloskey of Indiana and Senator
Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts, have strongly urged Mr Clinton to agree to
Mr Adams's visa request.
In 1992, during a hard-fought primary election in New York state, Mr Clinton
told a gathering of Irish-Americans he thought it would be 'totally harmless
to our national security and would widen the political debate in this
country' to grant a visa to Mr Adams.
Two days later, however, Mr Adams lost his seat in the British parliament,
offering Mr Clinton an excuse for not fulfilling that promise when Mr Adams
applied for a visa last summer.
While US officials maintain a degree of scepticism about the likelihood of
any imminent breakthrough towards peace in Northern Ireland, they also see
real hope in last month's joint declaration by Mr John Major and Mr Albert
Reynolds, the British and Irish prime ministers.
'It is by no means gilded excitement but for the first time in a long time
people aren't just saying 'this is all balderdash',' a US official said.
