FT  19 DEC 94 / Survey of the Czech Republic (17): Facilities stretched by
the tourist rush - Visitors numbers are swelling
Guide books gushingly refer to Prague as the Golden City, but it was a grey
and shabby place five years ago when it emerged from four decades of
communist neglect.
Apart from a six-lane motorway running along the top of Wenceslas Square,
the communists left the city centre structurally more or less unscathed and
spent their money building monolithic blocks of panelak high-rise apartments
in the suburbs.
But by the time of the Velvet Revolution 50 years of neglect had left the
city's urban fabric in urgent need of repair. Many monuments and fine
buildings were propped up by rickety scaffolding whose main function was to
prevent pedestrians being injured by falling tiles or gutters.
Now, thanks to the restoration of private property, private capital is
leading a reconstruction boom. Streets that even two years ago were dull and
lifeless have been transformed by new shops, restaurants and cafes. The
city's generally relaxed atmosphere is immeasurably enhanced by its beauty.
The investment is paying off. Tourists are flocking to the Czech Republic in
unprecedented numbers, and the industry has become one of the country's
biggest foreign exchange earners. In the first nine months of this year,
according to the Czech National Bank, 76m people visited the country, more
than in all of last year. Tourist earnings in that period also soared to a
record Dollars 1.51bn, compared to Dollars 1.57bn for the whole of 1993.
Tourist traffic moves in both directions. Czech tourists spent Dollars 900m
abroad over the same period, nearly double the amount in all of 1993,
although the CNB warns that the figure includes for the first time the value
of consumer goods brought back by returning locals.
In 1989, the last year of communist control, tourist receipts amounted to
less than Dollars 250m. By 1991 the figure had swelled to Dollars 700m and
exceeded Dollars 1bn in 1992. Last year's receipts represent about 5 per
cent of gross domestic product and the proportion in 1994 is likely to be
substantially higher.
These figures are impressive for a country that on an official level does
not take the tourist industry seriously. The Czech Tourist Authority, set up
only last year, is run on a shoestring from dingy offices on the Old Town
Square, in the heart of Prague's historic centre. It has just seven staff
and two offices abroad, in Berlin and Vienna, although more are planned.
Karel Nejdl, the authority's director, says the official attitude is that
the Czech Republic already receives enough tourists and that encouraging
more would simply push overstretched amenities to breaking point.
The tourist industry's main problem, Mr Nejdl says, is not government
indifference but a dearth of quality accommodation. Prague has 38,000 hotel
beds and can count on 12,000 rooms in private accommodation, but many of
them are rudimentary. Plans to build at least two new luxury hotels in the
city have outraged conservationists, including President Vaclav Havel, who
has expressed his dismay at what many see as a threat to Prague's delicate
urban fabric.
The tourist boom has led inevitably to cases of over-charging and double
booking and in 1993 the post-revolutionary surge in numbers appeared to
level off. Hotel occupancy rates last year fell to 70 per cent, compared to
80 or 85 per cent in 1991 and 1992. The slump was partly a reflection of the
recession but also of exorbitant room prices at hotels that were little
better than two or three star establishments. Hoteliers appear to have
learned their lesson, and this year prices were pegged at 1993 levels,
resulting in a rise in bookings.
The CTA aims to convince visitors that there is more to the Czech Republic
than Prague. Many Czech towns are following the capital's lead in renovating
their ancient centres, and the country boasts hundreds of castles, many of
them in excellent repair.
The exquisite little town of Cesky Krumlov in southern Bohemia, for example,
was for years a secret known only to Austrian visitors. Now it is on most
tourist itineraries, helped by its designation by Unesco as a site of
special architectural importance.
The spa towns of Karlovy Vary (Karlsbad) and Marianske Lazne (Marienbad), in
western Bohemia close to the German border, were among Europe's most popular
resorts in the days when taking the waters was the aristocracy's favourite
pursuit. After falling on hard times during the communist era these quaint
little towns are trying to attract the new Czech elite and to wean
themselves off the German market on which they are heavily dependent.
Slovakia inherited most of Czechoslovakia's natural beauty when it split
from the Czech Republic two years ago. Nothing in the Czech Republic matches
the grandeur of the High Tatra mountains in eastern Slovakia. The Sumava
mountains in southern Bohemia are scenic and climbable, but their skiing
attractions do not live up to the Tatras or the Alps across the border in
Austria.
There is also a downside to the Czech tourist boom. Locals, especially in
Prague, complain that they can no longer afford to visit the centre of town,
where prices have risen in anticipation of high-spending foreigners. A
visitor is unlikely to meet an authentic native in the Old Town Square in
high summer, excepting those peddling souvenirs. Meanwhile the Prague of
bleak suburban high rises where the majority of the city's residents live is
definitely off the tourist map.
For many Czechs, however, weekends and holidays mean retreat to the family's
country house, which can be a palatial mansion or a little wooden hut in a
secluded spot by a river. Living in one of the world's great cities is fine,
but it means little unless one can escape from it every now and then.
