FT  19 SEP 94 / Cuba acts to end chronic food shortfall
Cuba, moving to resolve chronic food shortages which have caused discontent
among its population, will soon introduce markets where state farms and
individual farmers will be able to sell excess produce after fulfilling
established government production quotas.
The weekend announcement of the change in policy was made by Cuban defence
minister General Raul Castro, brother of President Fidel Castro and the
number two in the ruling Cuban communist party hierarchy.
The announcement signalled another step in Cuba's cautious moves to
introduce limited market reforms to its centrally run state economy.
The changes are expected to follow the lines of similar farm reforms already
introduced by China and Vietnam. Gen Castro said solving the food crisis was
a priority for the government. While the agricultural markets would have
regulations and taxes, 'supply and demand should basically operate', said
Gen Castro, saying the government would not involve itself in setting
prices. Prices would in any case be much lower than those existing on the
black market, he said.
The production of food, especially staples like meat, rice, beans, fruit and
vegetables, has been a particular black spot in the Cuban economy since the
collapse after 1990 of trade and aid ties with the former Soviet bloc.
Starved of inputs like fertilisers, herbicides and tractor spares, farm
production, including strategic sugar exports, has fallen sharply, a
situation made worse by adverse weather.
Other factors were inefficiency, wastage of resources and lack of price
incentives for farmers obliged to sell exclusively to the state, foreign
diplomats said.
Popular pressure had grown for the liberalisation of food production, but
the topic was surrounded by agonised ideological debate at the highest
levels of the party.
In the first half of the 1980s, Cuba introduced a similar experiment with
so-called 'peasants' markets' where farmers could sell vegetables, fruit,
pork and chicken.
But these were shut down after President Castro complained they led to the
excessive enrichment of some individuals, especially middlemen who bought
and re-sold produce. Raul Castro's announcement was the first public
acknowledgement that the farm reforms were imminent, but senior officials
said more than 70 markets were already operating experimentally around the
island, excluding Havana city.
One such 'pilot' market was operating at San Nicolas de Bari in Havana
province, where farmers at the weekend directly sold rice, avocado, bananas
and yucca (manioc root) to the public.
Since the 1960s, small private farmers have made commitments to sell
previously agreed upon quantities of produce each year to the government.
