FT  26 FEB 94 / Crisis talks after Mideast massacre: West Bank violence
erupts as more than 40 die in mosque shooting
President Bill Clinton appealed to Israel and the Palestinians last night to
try to save the Middle East peace process after a Jewish settler shot dead
more than 40 Palestinians in a West Bank mosque and injured scores more.
He said Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the Israeli prime minister, and Mr Yassir Arafat,
the Palestine Liberation Organisation chairman, had agreed to his request to
send negotiators to the US as soon as possible 'and to stay here in
continuous session until their work is completed'.
Mr Rabin condemned the murders and called on Israelis and Arabs to show
restraint. The violence would not stop efforts to reach peace.
Early this morning the PLO sought an emergency meeting of the United Nations
Security Council to condemn the killings, alleging that as many as six
people may have been involved in the massacre and not just a lone gunman. Mr
Arafat said the Israel-Palestinian peace agreement had lost credibility and
the PLO in Tunis refused to be drawn on whether they would go to Washington
for peace talks.
In the worst single attack on Palestinians since Israel occupied the West
Bank in 1967, an Israeli settler opened fire with an automatic rifle in the
packed Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron at the start of the morning's Moslem
Ramadan prayers. Enraged worshippers beat the gunman, Dr Baruch Goldstein,
to death.
During subsequent protests 11 Palestinians were killed by Israeli troops and
more than 100 wounded. As news of the mosque killings spread through the
occupied territories, first Hebron then the entire West Bank and Gaza Strip
erupted in clashes between Palestinians and Israeli troops.
The gunman, an American-immigrant doctor who lived in the nearby radical
Jewish settlement of Kiryat Arba, appeared to have planned the attack to
torpedo the peace negotiations.
In Beirut, the radical Islamic Jihad Movement in Palestine vowed vengeance
for the deaths, saying revenge operations on Israeli targets worldwide would
start within 24 hours.
President Clinton warned that extremists on both sides were 'determined to
drag Arabs and Israelis back into the darkness of unending conflict'. He
added: 'The answer now is to redouble our efforts to conclude the talks
between Israel and the PLO and begin implementation of the agreement they
have made as rapidly as possible.' No date has been set for the talks.
Mr Arafat summoned Palestinian leaders to the crisis meeting in Tunis. 'What
has happened today in the mosque is a real tragedy and will make a very
negative backfire on the whole peace process,' he said.
Mr Rabin said in a telephone call to Mr Arafat that he condemned the
massacre and promised to investigate eyewitness claims Dr Goldstein had not
acted alone. He also offered to speed up the transition to Palestinian
self-rule.
'As an Israeli, I am ashamed,' he told Mr Arafat, according to an Israel
Radio report. Earlier Mr Rabin had said he hoped the 'loathsome criminal act
of murder' would not be followed by Arab attempts at revenge.
Several Israeli ministers proposed banning the racist Kach movement of which
Dr Goldstein was a member, and disarming its supporters. The shooting took
place after 5am, when the vast mosque that covers the tomb of biblical
patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, was crammed with about 500 Moslems
marking the month-long Ramadan fast.
Dr Goldstein, a 42-year-old Brooklyn-born father of four who had spoken out
publicly about his hatred of Arabs, burst into the mosque in his army
reservist's uniform, and opened fire.
Eyewitnesses claimed Israeli soldiers on duty at the site allowed him to
keep firing for over 10 minutes. An army spokesman insisted no soldiers had
been inside the mosque.
Murdered at morning prayers, Page 2
Talks smothered by cry of outrage, Page 10
