FT  08 APR 94 / Sales of AZT fail to meet great expectations
Seven years ago AZT was launched into a world alarmed at the prospect of an
Aids plague. Sales forecasts - not from Wellcome which developed the drug -
ranged up to Dollars 2.5bn a year.
But in the first six months of Wellcome's current financial year, AZT
brought in just Pounds 110m. In the world league table of best-selling
drugs, it is about 70th.
The main cause of the drug's mediocre performance is that it is not
prescribed to people infected with HIV who do not have Aids. Although
figures are difficult to confirm, it is widely accepted that fewer than 10
per cent of people with HIV are suffering from the disease at any one time,
though almost all will eventually contract it.
Asymptomatics - patients without symptoms - are regarded as a more lucrative
market for the simple, if unpalatable, reason that they live longer. The
Concorde study published today confirms that such patients have little if
anything to gain from taking AZT. It will not, therefore, be the
'blockbuster' Wellcome must have once hoped for.
Although the preliminary report of the trials, published a year ago, were
attacked by Wellcome, the company took a more emollient line yesterday.
Mr Trevor Jones, director of research and development, argued that the final
version of the report was essentially positive because it said there was
some transient benefit for asymptomatics. This, he said, allowed the choice
to use the drug to be made according to individual cases.
Mr John Robb, chairman and chief executive, insisted that the fortunes of
AZT were vital for the company. 'It is our second biggest-selling product
and is very important for the company,' he said.
He said the company's strategy would remain unchanged: to pursue combination
therapy - the use of the drug in combination with others. The company has
just signed a deal with Glaxo, the UK's biggest drugs company, that gives it
the option to use an experimental drug called 3TC that seems to work well
with AZT in laboratory tests. The trials results nevertheless come at an
awkward time for the company. Last month its shares fell 8 per cent after it
reported slower than expected first-half sales growth and revealed that it
was dropping development of a new anti-herpes compound. The company also
announced plans to cut its UK staff of 5,400 by about 350 during the next 12
months, with further cuts to come in the US.
City analysts remain unconvinced both about the ultimate importance of the
drug and its growth prospects. 'Sales of this drug have stopped growing
because of Concorde,' said Mr Paul Krikler, analyst at securities house
Goldman Sachs. They say AZT is significant to Wellcome but argue that it is
not central to the company's fortunes. Another drug, the herpes treatment
Zovirax, has first-half sales of sales of Pounds 418m, up from Pounds 369m a
year earlier. Zovirax is in the world's top 20 drugs and has sales of more
than Dollars 1bn a year.
AZT, in contrast, has gone into a decline, said Mr Stewart Adkins of Lehman
Brothers. He forecasts current-year sales of it to fall to Pounds 218m from
last year's figure of Pounds 248m.
