FT  27 APR 94 / Business and the Environment: All eyes on efficiency - Can
electricity companies be serious about saving energy if profits are tied to
volume sales?
Mention energy efficiency to an electricity distribution company executive
in the UK and he is likely to wax lyrical about his company's initiatives in
the field. But behind the bluster, he might look a touch nervous.
Not everyone agrees that the industry is doing all it should to help both
customers and the system to improve energy efficiency, and the pressure for
change is growing.
Offer, the industry watchdog, is conducting a fundamental review of the way
it regulates the distribution businesses of the 12 regional electricity
companies in England and Wales and Scottish Power and Hydro-Electric in
Scotland. Energy efficiency is a key consideration.
The issue is dividing the industry. There is no mood within the sector to
abandon the form of regulation, favoured by Offer, which limits prices the
companies charge rather than their profits. Offer and the companies believe
this encourages the industry to be more efficient than would be the case
with profit regulation.
However, some regional electricity companies, backed by environmentalists,
say the way the prices are curbed encourages companies to increase sales
volumes rather than sell their customers energy-efficient measures.
Others argue that introducing a system that leaves companies indifferent to
the amount of electricity they sell would lead them to ignore customer
needs. This would increase prices and eventually sideline the industry at
the expense of competitors such as gas companies.
There is a consensus in the industry on the need to promote energy
efficiency. As Offer says, it helps keep customers' bills down and
potentially reduces the harmful sulphur and carbon emitted from electricity
generating plants.
But why should the industry care? John Roberts, chief executive of
Chester-based distributor Manweb, is refreshingly honest about the
industry's motives. 'It would be nice to say we are concerned about the
future of the globe and, of course, we are. But the fact is that we would
rather get into this in a voluntary way that we can control than have
something imposed upon us. We cannot stand back Canute-like while others
demand change.'
Manweb, in common with most other regional distributors, is receptive to the
idea of the regulator allowing regional companies to raise a specified
amount from customers to use on targeted demand-side management (DSM).
For example, companies could aim energy-efficiency measures at low-income
households which would otherwise not be interested in such activity. DSM
measures, common in the US, could reduce the costs of maintaining and
operating the distribution system to the benefit of all customers.
Even under the present price control arrangements, DSM can be cost effective
both for power companies and their customers - for example, where it enables
improvements to the network to be deferred.
However, as distributor Seeboard, based at Hove on the south coast, points
out, many DSM schemes are not pursued by distributors because they will
reduce the number of units sold. This is the crux of the debate over
regulation and energy efficiency.
Existing regulatory controls limit rises in use-of-system charges, which
form the bulk of distribution revenues. In England and Wales, these charges
can rise by up to 2.5 per cent above inflation a year, while in Scotland
they must fall by 0.5 per cent in real terms each year.
Crucially, however, the price control formula operates on a base price per
kilowatt hour (made up of a weighted basket of components). The effect is to
constrain the average revenue per unit distributed. This means total revenue
depends on the volume of sales.
Critics complain that this formula does not match revenues to costs, and
fails to supply the surrogate competition which is the point of regulation
in monopoly industries.
The current formula assumes that all distribution costs vary with the volume
of sales whereas in fact other factors include the number of customers and
fixed costs.
According to the Association for the Conservation of Energy, the result is
that regional distributors collect more distribution revenue from the sale
of the marginal unit of electricity than it costs to distribute. 'This
creates an inappropriate incentive to sell more.'
The association recommends there should be no volume incentive and
regulation should be based on fixed costs and the number of customers.
Seeboard, a regional power distributor, supports the idea that revenue
incentives should reflect underlying costs 'as this is consistent with the
aim of using regulatory measures to emulate competitive forces. The conflict
between the incentive to sell more units of electricity and the objective of
encouraging energy efficiency is clear and any revised price formula should
reduce or eliminate this conflict'.
Seeboard believes revenues should be linked to the number of customers
served and to fixed costs, as well as volumes. That proposal, however, is
anathema to companies such as Southern Electric. Henry Casley, Southern
chief executive, says: 'At the extreme, if the volume incentive was
eliminated, distributors would not want anybody to use electricity, since
extra sales would give rise to additional costs but no additional revenue.
The electricity industry could be sidelined.'
Southern denies that the industry has been lacklustre in promoting energy
efficiency. Over the past five years its energy marketing activities have
achieved cumulative sales of some 2,000 gigawatt hours which have displaced
6,000 GWh of competing fuels.
Bryan Townsend, chairman of Midlands Electricity, warns that if the link
between revenue and volumes is diluted, this would put a partial or full cap
on revenue and would reduce significantly the commercial incentive to
continue marketing energy efficiency. 'Inter-fuel competition, principally
between electricity and gas, would disappear,' he says. Electricity sales
would fall faster than revenue and prices would be allowed to rise.
The campaign by Southern and others for the 100 per cent volume incentive to
be kept seems unlikely to be fully successful. In its recent review of the
regional companies' supply businesses, Offer introduced a system which
related revenues to a mixture of volumes, fixed costs and customer numbers.
A private letter from Offer to the regional companies last week indicated
that this was likely to be the approach in the distribution review.
The question, to be answered on completion of the review in July, is how far
Offer goes.
