FT  11 JUL 94 / Equity Markets: Strategists put new emphasis on growth -
London
If only the US dollar can at least stay in line this week, the London market
can rely on support from most of the leading market strategists, even if the
buyers still appear somewhat less convinced.
The threat to global interest rates looks less menacing than a month ago,
and dividend and earnings growth reinforce forecasts of a gain of around 11
per cent on the Footsie by the year-end.
Not that the danger of renewed upsets in the bond markets is entirely
consigned to history. BZW uses bond market doubts as its reason for cutting
its 1994 Footsie forecast to 3,400. Its previous year-end target of 3,600
was at the higher end of what may perhaps be called the serious market
range. But BZW explains its move by saying it is 'putting greater emphasis
on the momentum from growth'.
'Growth' has strengthened its role as the underlying theme of most
strategists' views as the tensions surrounding global interest rates have
appeared to lessen.
SG Warburg, sticking with its 1994 forecast of Footsie 3,500, believes that
the response to last week's industrial output statistics indicates that the
market is no longer afraid that economic growth merely threatens higher
interest rates.
Dividend prospects are stressed by BZW, which estimates dividend growth of
10 per cent this year with the likelihood of similar improvement next year.
This would put the stock market yield at 5 per cent which would widen the
yield gap against bonds substantially, even without any retracement of the
rise in gilt yields seen so far this year.
BZW also points out that this month traditionally gives the institutions
their biggest injection of dividend income for the calendar year. With
dividends already showing growth of around 6 per cent this year, suggestions
of a liquidity squeeze on the institutions could prove a snare.
Strauss Turnbull, aiming for a Footsie of 3,200 - 3,400 this year, similarly
holds to its view that strong economic growth, backed up by accelerating
dividends and corporate earnings, will wipe away memories of the uninspiring
equity market performance in the second quarter.
A heavyweight defence of the bull case is presented by Hoare Govett which,
with a Footsie forecast of 3,500, is among the more aggressive market
champions. Hoare rejects bond market worries: 'Gilts . . . more than
discount the rise in inflation over the next two years,' core inflation
'only 3 per cent at the end of next year,' and the fashion for index-linked
gilt yields 'too high'.
This is all very encouraging. The question to be answered is whether it will
stand up if the dollar gets into trouble again.
