FT  05 DEC 94 / Poll shows wide opposition to single EU currency
Support for political and monetary union in Europe is even lower among
Germans than Britons, according to an opinion poll carried out for the
Financial Times.
Nearly two-thirds of adults in each of the two countries want a referendum
on a single European currency.
Only 33 per cent of Britons and 24 per cent of Germans support a single
currency, while 27 per cent of British voters and just 23 per cent of
Germans say they favour closer political links among EU members. Strong
opposition in Germany to a single currency is caused above all by Germans'
anxieties that a future European money might be less stable than the D-Mark.
The poll - the most comprehensive survey ever made of British and German
attitudes to European integration - consulted 1,919 respondents in the UK
and 2,455 in Germany. It was commissioned by the FT, the German news
magazine Der Spiegel, the UK office of the European Commission and the
Anglo-German Foundation for the Study of Industrial Society, and carried out
by MORI in Britain and Emnid in Germany.
In a result that may influence Euro-dissent in the British Conservative
party, a referendum on whether the EU should adopt a single currency is
favoured by 64 per cent of Britons and 65 per cent of Germans.
Commenting on the suggestion, Mr Jacques Santer, the Luxembourg prime
minister and designated president of the European Commission, said he was
wary of the legal complexity of holding referendums on a single currency. He
pointed out the Maastricht treaty had already been ratified. 'What would
happen if (the people) said No?'
The survey shows that only 24 per cent of ordinary Germans support widening
the EU towards central and eastern Europe - a subject that will be high on
the agenda at this week's EU summit in Essen. By contrast, 42 per cent of
British respondents back the EU's prospective eastern enlargement.
According to the poll, the Germans are much more favourable to their own
country's EU membership than the British. A total of 28 per cent of British
respondents say their region has suffered as a result of EU membership,
against 14 per cent who say it has benefited. The equivalents in Germany are
15 per cent and 17 per cent respectively.
A total of 26 per cent of UK respondents, but only 9 per cent of Germans,
consider EU membership 'a bad thing'.
The poll shows how British and German voters want EU decision-making to be
carried out as much as possible at a regional level. On balance, British
respondents want local government to make the main decisions affecting
ordinary people, but most believe that European Commissioners have more
power over such decisions than either local councils or British ministers.
Commenting on the findings, Mr Geoffrey Martin, head of the European
Commission's office in London, said, 'British ministers should be seen more
openly to be taking responsibility for European-level decisions.'
Full opinion poll details, Page 2
Industry backs pro-EU Tories, Page 6
