FT  05 JAN 94 / Leading Article: Multi-media regulation
Following a year in which US media markets have been convulsed by a series
of massive takeovers, the UK government has finally got round to reviewing
its own policy towards the broadcasting, newspaper and other related
industries. One does not have to be swept up in multi-media mania to welcome
the review announced this week by Mr Peter Brooke, the national heritage
secretary. The UK's media industries are hamstrung by a hotchpotch of
policies that have been adopted without a strategic overview.
Prime among these is the law preventing national newspaper groups owning
more than 20 per cent of an ITV company and vice versa. Newspaper
proprietors such as Pearson, owner of the Financial Times, and Associated
Newspapers, the Daily Mail's owner, have lobbied against the rule on the
grounds that it prevents them taking advantage of synergies between the two
industries.
Much of the talk about multi-media convergence may be fuzzy and shareholders
could suffer if over-ambitious chief executives go on wild spending sprees.
Nevertheless, technological advances have opened up opportunities for
cross-fertilisation between different parts of the media sector and new ways
of distributing its products. There is a danger that government restrictions
could stop healthy and internationally competitive companies emerging in
this area.
The lack of a comprehensive approach to media regulation has also created
anomalies. For example, despite being Britain's largest newspaper owner, Mr
Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation has been able to dominate BSkyB, which is
rapidly developing into a major force in broadcasting. This is because
BSkyB, in which Pearson is also a shareholder, is not treated as a UK
broadcaster in terms of ownership rules.
The government's review will need to be wide-ranging if it is to avoid the
piecemeal approach that has characterised its policy to date. In particular,
it will need to re-examine restrictions preventing British Telecom, the UK's
most highly capitalised company, providing entertainment over its network.
Ministers should also ask how the BBC can more fully exploit its
world-renowned brand, and whether privatisation has any role to play.
In general, the best policy will be for the government to cut back
regulation and leave business decisions to private enterprise. There is,
however, an important caveat. Deregulation must be accompanied by a strong
competition policy. Otherwise, the unhealthy concentration of ownership that
is already apparent in the newspaper industry could extend to other media
markets.
Devising an effective competition policy for media markets will be hard,
because television and newspapers are central to the political process.
Ministers face a conflict of interest when deciding whether to stop press
barons who support their party in elections from expanding their empires.
Although the Monopolies and Mergers Commission's independence from
government provides something of a buffer, it is not ideal. Referrals to it
are not as automatic as would be desirable, its proceedings are not
transparent and ministers usually have the final say over what action to
take. Building it into an effective instrument for combating media
monopolisation should be an important objective of the review.
