FT  30 SEP 94 / Worlds apart on how to change world: The Bretton Woods
institutions and their persistent charity and interest group critics
They are concerned with the same issues, have offices in the same building,
but they are worlds apart.
The World Bank and to a lesser extent the International Monetary Fund are
under intense and persistent attack from a clutch of charities and interest
groups at this year's annual meeting of the two bodies in Madrid.
From a small suite of offices in the main meeting hall, household names such
as Oxfam, Greenpeace and Christian Aid are campaigning for the Bank to
change its policies. Smaller little-known organisations such as VLK, the
Slovak Forest Protection Group, are also represented, and seeking to stop
specific programmes.
The '50 years is enough campaign', a Washington-based lobby group, has
mounted a slick, well oiled crusade to cut the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund down in size.
It wants the International Development Association, the World Bank's soft
loan agency for helping the poorest developing nations, to be removed from
the Bank's control. It also is campaigning for a denial of future capital
requests to curb the Bank's ordinary lending operations and the IMF's loans
to the poorest countries through the Fund's Enhanced Structural Adjustment
Facility (ESAF).
Read the World Bank's annual report, with its account of lending operations
to promote development, and listen to the criticism from the 30-40
non-governmental organisations drawn to this year's annual meeting, and it
is difficult to believe that they have the same aims of improving the lot of
the poor of the planet.
Mr Lewis Preston, the World Bank president, yesterday declared that the two
Bretton Woods institutions had 'played a major role in co-ordinating and
financing' the development effort over the 50 years in which they have
existed.
Oxfam, by contrast, charged that the current IMF and World Bank policies
were 'actually jeopardising prospects for sustainable recovery and poverty
reduction'. Christian Aid has said that the structural adjustment programmes
of the IMF and World Bank 'are damaging the poorest people in debt burdened
developing countries'. It called for the phasing out of the IMF's enhanced
structural adjustment facility.
Greenpeace weighed in with a report saying that the World Bank was failing
to implement programmes to phase out ozone depleting substances in
developing countries and so hindering the restoration of the ozone layer.
Yet some non-government organisations also co-operate with the Fund and the
Bank. The Bank was involved in 114 projects with NGOs in its most recent
financial year to the end of June. According to Mr Preston, NGOs have some
involvement in 50 per cent of the Bank's lending activities in Africa.
Most NGO involvement is in the design, implementation and monitoring of
programmes. But they also helped finance 11 projects last year. This
involvement helps explain why critics of the Bretton Woods institutions
divide into a radical wing, such as the '50 years is enough campaign.'
They want to curtail the activities of the two organisations and more
moderate groups which hope to change their practices.
The influence of the NGOs has been increasingly apparent over the past
decade, with the Bank paying more regard to the environment and putting
greater emphasis on combating poverty.
On the evidence of this week's meeting in Madrid, their influence looks set
to grow as the IMF and the World Bank embark on their second half century.
