FT  02 APR 94 / Private View: The bishop with a different Easter
Millions of Christians will not be celebrating Easter this weekend. It is
not because they have stopped believing in the Resurrection but because they
belong to the Orthodox Church.
Easter follows the first full moon after the spring equinox. For this
calculation the Orthodox still cling to the old Julian calendar, according
to which the spring equinox occured on April 3. The result is that their
Easter is still a month away.
The discrepancy is just one symptom of the great schism between the churches
of Byzantium and Rome, usually dated to 1054 AD when a papal legate threw a
Bull of Excommunication on to the altar of Santa Sophia in Constantinople.
A thousand years later, Christian clergy of east and west are still looking
for reconciliation. If anyone understands what that involves, it is Bishop
Kallistos of Diokleia, assistant to the head of the Greek archdiocese of
Thyateira and Great Britain, university lecturer and author of a standard
work, The Orthodox Church.
For behind the black-rimmed spectacles and whiskery silver beard - an
accoutrement which does for an Orthodox priest what a full-bottomed wig does
for a British judge - there hides an Englishman.
Bishop Kallistos began life as Timothy Ware, the son of an English soldier.
His father was a brigadier in the Durham Light Infantry and fought in two
world wars. Both parents were churchgoing, middle-of-the-road Anglicans.
The boy was not military, not even athletic, but very precocious
intellectually: he suffered a bout of religious scepticism at the age of 13
when, arriving at Westminster School, he began to read philosophers such as
Bertrand Russell.
'I do remember thinking when I was 13 there is no proof for the existence of
God,' he said. (Russell made the same discovery at about the same age, but
with quite different results.)
By the age of 14, Timothy Ware had returned to religion. 'Not because I
found any single answer,' he said, 'but because I concluded there were a
great many things in this world that could not be proved, that almost all
the things by which we directed and guided our lives were attitudes for
which there was no proof. Then I also thought about why I have feelings of
right and wrong - not just conditioning, but going deeper than that.'
He considered becoming a Roman Catholic but found the Pope's claim to
supremacy inconsistent with his reading of early church history. A visit to
a Russian Orthodox church at 17 made a deep impression but it was six years
later, after taking a double First at Oxford and studying theology, that he
joined the Greek Orthodox. When he was ordained in 1966 he was the first
non-Greek priest in the British diocese.
'In the end I felt what mattered was not nationality, but truth,' he said.
'If Orthodoxy taught the Christian faith with a fullness not possessed by
other communities, shouldn't I join them, whatever the historical
limitations? Truth is universal.'
In the west, Orthodoxy is largely a church of immigrants. It is also
fragmented along national lines. Parish organisation has improved but there
are few western converts, and those tend to be from the university-educated
professional classes: John Tavener, the English composer, is one famous
example and Bruce Chatwin, the author, was on the point of joining when he
died.
In Russia, however, the church is enjoying a big revival following the
collapse of communism. 'People feel communism has let them down desperately
badly and are looking for some meaning to life,' the Bishop said.
But is there, I asked him, any sign of a general religious revival as we
approach the millenium?
'What I do think,' he replied, 'is that while there is deep disillusionment
with organised religion there is nonetheless considerable spiritual thirst
and interest in the inner resources of the human person.
'This may take different forms. Some 20 years ago people looked to India or
Zen Buddhism. Nowadays people are drawn often to the 'New Age' - a lot of
what that means makes me feel very unhappy. Nonetheless, I can see a
spiritual craving there, a rebellion against the values of a purely material
way of life. The interest in ecology is another aspect of it. But churches
don't seem to be responding.'
How, I asked, could a church as antique and traditionalist as the Orthodox
hope to respond?
'I would want to say that tradition has to be understood as a living
reality, not simply rigid conservatism. Real loyalty to tradition implies a
critical spirit. You've got to look at your past inheritance and say which
bit of it is essential, which just historically conditioned. I would like to
see the Orthodox Church living its tradition much more intelligently and
reflectively.'
The focus of his religious loyalty is the doctrine of the Trinity, which he
described as much more than a theoretical piece of complex speculation, and
of the Incarnation.
'I am very troubled by the great growth of an extreme radical, liberal
position within Anglicanism,' he said. 'I respect the sincerity of the
people who are grappling with great questions. But the way they set out to
answer those questions is not likely to bring the country back. It's not a
way to help people in moments of crisis and despair.'
Also important, he added, was 'the immediacy of the invisible world'.
Christianity should never become 'just a philosophical theory or a social
programme'.
Orthodox rank-and-filers tend to resist reunion with western Christians.
Where Orthodoxy is the national religion there is no need. Immigrant
communities of the diaspora take refuge in it. And western converts do not
convert in order to be brought back again.
I asked the Bishop whether secularism could provide the impetus.
'I wouldn't want us to unite because we both felt weak. When two businesses
do a merger because each is losing clients that's not necessarily a recipe
for commercial success. I would hope myself that in the west we can have
friendly relations with other churches but remain firm in upholding our own
position.'
The most likely, even imminent, reunion would be with the so-called Oriental
Orthodox of the Middle East, north Africa, Armenia and India which veered
off after the Council of Chalcedon in 451 AD.
Among western Christians, the Roman Catholics are doctrinally closest. But
there are some serious historical vendettas to be overcome. The Serbs, for
example, remember massacres at the hands of Croatian Catholic fascists
during the second world war, and have witnessed continuing destruction of
their churches even outside the fighting zones. In the Ukraine, there is
resentment against the Vatican-supported revival of the eastern Catholic, or
Uniate, church.
Bishop Kallistos said the chief doctrinal problem was the Pope's claim to
infallibility and jurisdiction over the whole of Christendom. But, he
argued, under another pontiff both claims might be susceptible to
redefinition.
So, too, might the filioque, an obscure but ancient theological argument
about the Trinity: the Latin church claims that the Holy Spirit proceeds
from God the Son as much as from God the Father.
Nor, the Bishop said, need there be much dispute about the real presence at
the Eucharist even though the Orthodox regard the Roman word
'transubstantiation' as a dubious piece of Aristotelian interpolation.
Orthodoxy is both more traditionalist, but also more mystical, fluid and
decentralised than Roman Catholicism. For example, its bishops do not take
the Vatican's hard line on artificial contraception, nor on divorce. They
permit married men to be ordained (but not priests to marry).
In relation to Anglicanism, the problem is reversed. There is no historical
legacy of hatred, but there are serious doctrinal obstacles.
'There are high-church Anglicans whose faith is really the same as ours,'
the bishop said. 'But over the past 50 years there has been a growing
liberalism too on the Trinity, the Incarnation and the bodily Resurrection.
We cannot envisage joining a body where such diversity of opinion is
possible.'
And women priests?
His answer was a surprise. For he thinks the gender of the clergy is 'an
open question' which has never been studied in theological depth. His
complaint about the Church of England's decision to ordain women is not that
it was done, but that it was done without a proper theological debate. 'Is
the difference between men and women only a matter of procreation? Or is it
much deeper, about different ways of thinking, working and feeling?'
The doorbell rang and the Bishop went out to meet another visitor. After a
few moments he came back and said: 'There is something else I would like to
say.
'I do believe that Orthodoxy makes demands on people. I would never say it
offers a soft option. But I also believe it is a faith as much for English
people as for Greeks or Russians. I didn't become an Orthodox just because I
like things Greek and Russian. I became one because I felt I could find in
Orthodoxy a fullness - and I do very deliberately use that word.
'It's not that I think Orthodoxy has everything and the western churches
have nothing. I simply believe that the light I had already found in
Anglicanism - that I'm sure can be found also in Roman Catholicism - was to
be found in a fuller, purer form.
'So it is not that the west has nothing but that the Orthodox church has
more. Having said that, I would add that from an empirical point of view and
for historical reasons there are many human failings in Orthodoxy. I don't
deny that.
'That is why I think Orthodoxy could learn many good lessons from the west.
The west can help us to understand our faith better. And that's the great
benefit we could derive from talking to western Christians: not that we
would import a lot of western ideas that are foreign to us, but see better
who and what we are.
'Also, in becoming Orthodox I did not feel I was betraying my own western
culture but really discovering its true roots and true meaning. I know that
to my friends it seemed a highly eccentric action. But I feel it's not made
me less English, but more English.'
