FT  05 MAR 94 / UK edges closer to sending extra troops to Bosnia
Mr Douglas Hurd, the British foreign secretary, yesterday edged the London
government closer towards committing extra troops to the United Nations
force in Bosnia.
He said in a speech in Scotland that 'the need is clear, as is the strain on
British troops already there'. He stressed though that Britain would not act
alone if others refused to respond to the UN appeal.
His remarks came after General Sir Michael Rose, commander of UN forces in
Bosnia yesterday stepped up his pleas for more ground troops.
Gen Rose and his officers, who are increasingly concerned that the fragile
ceasefire will gradually break down, warned 'there are people who are
prepared to go back to war'.
'We are already strained and the thing will get more difficult as we go
ahead. All you need is one group opening fire,' he said in Vitez,
headquarters of the British forces.
A British Ministry of Defence official in London said growing reluctance by
western governments to send more ground troops would be 'simply exploited by
(the Bosnian Serb, Croat and Moslem) commanders on the ground. Our
hesitation will be perceived as weakness and indecisiveness.'
The UN High Commissioner for Refugees said yesterday that Serb militia were
raping and killing citizens in the northern city of Banja Luka.
No country has yet said it will unreservedly send more troops in response to
a request by Mr Yasushi Akashi, the UN's special envoy to the former
Yugoslavia. Mr Akashi called for at least 4,000 troops for the Bosnian
capital of Sarajevo, and a further 6,000 - a conservative estimate according
to military strategists - to shore up the ceasefire in Bosnia.
'We do not know how long we have to stay, and we still do not know what our
goal and mandate is,' a UK official said. Britain already has 2,500 troops
in Bosnia.
The French Defence Ministry is considering a 'roll-over' policy. Troops, due
to replace those on the ground, might be sent earlier to complement them.
'It would be a great help if this was the case, but it would be a temporary
solution,' a UN official said.
In Washington there are few signs the Clinton administration, Congress or
the public will support sending troops before any overall peace settlement
is in place.
Michael Littlejohns, UN Correspondent in New York, adds: The UN Security
Council last night approved a plan to break the siege of Sarajevo and
restore 'normal life' there.
Acting under the enforcement provisions of the UN Charter its resolution
requests freedom of movement for civilians in the city and unhindered relief
deliveries.
