FT  16 SEP 94 / Paddling upstream to avoid the falls
Investors' alarmed reaction to BTR's recent warning of pressures on profit
margins boiled down to a simple fear: if giants such as the UK-based
industrial conglomerate are suffering, how much worse might things be for
smaller companies, with weaker market positions?
Such forebodings were speedily fulfilled by APV, which has been trying to
restructure in a period of depressed order books and increased competition.
APV yesterday blamed its latest margins setback on the aggressive entry into
the food equipment business of GEA, the German company which has previously
concentrated on industrial products.
Unlike BTR, APV said higher raw material prices were not a big factor in the
equation: APV spends only about Pounds 10m per year on stainless steel, a
chief component in its products.
APV did say, however, that the threat to its own margins has been increased
by the pressure which retailers in Europe and the US are currently putting
on the group's main customers, the leading food processors.
APV has been restructuring since an an acquisitive binge in the 1980s. After
escaping a hostile Pounds 220m bid from Siebe in 1986, the group doubled its
turnover in three years by a series of purchases, but did little to
integrate the various businesses. When recession started, profits melted
away - last year the group made pre-tax profits of only Pounds 13.4m on
sales of Pounds 834m. That compared with a pre-tax profits peak of Pounds
60m achieved in 1989 on a similar level of sales.
Mr Clive Strowger, a former finance director at Grand Metropolitan, was
appointed chief executive in 1992. Since the departure of his acquisitive
predecessor, Mr Fred Smith, at the end of 1989, APV has cut its workforce
from 14,300 to 9,300 and cut the number of operating units from more than 75
to fewer than 50. Sales per employee have increased from below Pounds 65,000
to Pounds 88,000.
Mr Strowger said the proposed restructuring of APV's liquid-food equipment
side would only represent an acceleration of his existing strategy. That is
to move 'upstream' from low-margin manufacturing and contracting work, and
to focus on developing specific products and processes for important
customers. Engineering and products are being standardised and APV now does
a minimum amount of manufacturing.
That policy had begun to pay off in the group's continuing dry goods
business, which in the first half of the year swung back into profit. The
group claims a two-year lead in applying microwave technology to commercial
baking ovens, and has invested heavily in ohmic heating systems, which
produce food capable of long storage without refrigeration.
The aggressive entry of GEA into the food business could hardly come at a
worse time for APV. It has been restructuring while assuming no underlying
market growth - particularly in continental Europe, which accounts for 40
per cent of sales.
APV has been the subject of recurring bid speculation. In 1992, it emerged
that GEA had quietly built up a 2.8 per cent stake, but that holding has now
fallen to 1 per cent.
Mr Strowger has held discussions with GEA about swapping businesses, but
said the possibility of a full bid for APV by the German group had never
been broached. The group's other big competitor is Tetra Laval, the Swedish
food packaging and equipment group, but any bid from that quarter would face
formidable regulatory obstacles.
The chief executive said: 'We know it will be a long, hard haul - but we are
all absolutely committed to the strategy. There is no alternative.'
