FT  30 NOV 94 / Budget 94 (Public Spending): Authorities braced for a
decrease in outlays - Local government
Local authority associations braced themselves for a cut in spending, in
nominal terms, after the chancellor's announcement.
They also attacked Mr Clarke's assertion that local authorities' total
standard spending would rise by 2.2 per cent. Local authorities pointed out
that this did not take into account the extra costs created by councils' new
responsibilities for community care, or expenditure on transitional costs
created by local government reorganisation, which is due to start next year.
Mr John Gummer, environment secretary, admitted that if these were excluded,
the settlement represented a cash increase of only 0.8 per cent.
The Labour-controlled Association of County Councils also pointed out that
local authorities were currently spending far more than their total standard
spending assessment - a government projection used when allocating grants to
different local authorities.
At present, according to Mr Mike Grealy, the association's finance officer,
local authorities are spending about Pounds 45bn this year - so the new
total standard spending assessment of Pounds 43.511bn represents a cut of
Pounds 1.5bn.
This is before wage and price rises are taken into account. Mr Grealy also
predicted particular stress on the schools budget, which accounts for about
40 per cent of local authority spending. Demographic changes mean that local
authorities expect 110,000 extra pupils this year.
The shortfall was met in part this year by an unprecedentedly high draw on
reserves of Pounds 775m. Local authorities claim this is not repeatable, and
in a joint statement they predicted that council tax would rise by 6 per
cent next year, in combination with cuts in services.
Some authorities may receive more than they did last year because of changes
in the distribution of grant, while others may benefit from the transitional
scheme designed to smooth the introduction of the council tax in April last
year.
It is also possible that the government will loosen the criteria for
'capping' budgets, which it has used, so far successfully, to limit
increases in council tax.
Mr Gummer's decisions on both these issues will be announced in parliament
tomorrow. Local authorities are also likely to lobby the education
department to fund this year's rise in teachers' pay. Last year's rise, of
2.9 per cent, was met in full by local authorities, and they claim that
class sizes grew as a result.
Mr Gummer said that councils could maintain current spending levels by
'efficient housekeeping and efficient collection of the council tax'.
