FT  08 NOV 94 / Train companies attack long rental contracts
The companies which will run trains after British Rail is privatised are
being forced to sign inflexible contracts with the companies set up to lease
them rolling stock, according to South West Trains, which runs services from
London Waterloo to Southampton and Portsmouth.
The company said it was being asked to sign four and eight-year leases when
it would like at least some of its fleet to be on one-year leases.
Mr Peter Field, managing director of South West Trains, told a conference on
rail privatisation: 'If there is a recession, you need to be able to escape
quickly (from a long lease). In the last recession we had to withdraw 20 per
cent of our rolling stock.'
The long leases mean the rolling stock companies, which are early candidates
for privatisation, can forecast their revenues with a greater degree of
certainty. But train operators bear most of the risk of a downturn.
The train operators say they are being 'bounced' in negotiations with the
three rolling-stock companies which are attempting to conclude lease
negotiations by mid-December.
Mr Field said: 'I would be reluctant to sign up to their present offer but I
might have no choice.'
The train operators are also worried that they will have to meet the cost of
any design faults in the rolling stock they lease.
South West Trains has encountered problems with its modern air-conditioned
trains but has been told that the leasing companies will not take
responsibility for faults inherited from British Rail.
An official for the leasing companies said that the length of rolling stock
leases had been chosen as a reasonable compromise between the needs of the
train operators and the leasing companies. The cost of putting right known
design faults would be the responsibility of the train operator but would be
reflected in lower rental.
Rolling stock leasing charges will be the second biggest item on the profit
and loss account of the train operators. South West Trains faces an annual
leasing bill of Pounds 80m for the 250 trains it needs.
