FT  30 JUN 94 / World Trade News: ECGD to step up support for UK exporters
The Export Credit Guarantee Department yesterday announced changes to its
rules to improve support for British exporters participating in large
projects involving privatised enterprises, particularly in developing
countries.
The improvements are intended mainly to benefit British companies which
undertake and invest in long-term projects in industries such as oil and gas
production, power generation, construction and transportation.
The changes follow extensive consultations with leading British exporters,
which have complained that previous ECGD schemes were too restrictive to
provide adequate cover against the risks of selling to and investing in
privatised organisations in countries such as China, India and Russia.
Such business is growing rapidly, as privatisation spreads through the
developing world. By some estimates, British exporters and contractors stand
to win contracts worth about Pounds 9bn in China alone in the next five
years.
However, because national governments do not stand behind privatised
projects, their creditworthiness is assessed not on the basis of sovereign
risk but of their commercial viability and prospective cash flow.
The first change announced by the ECGD is to its hitherto little-used
project finance scheme, under which project cover was limited to 60 per cent
and a maximum of Pounds 70m.
In future, there will be no ceiling on the amount of cover, which will be
decided case by case on the basis of project size, financial commitment of
the parties involved, overall risk sharing and cover capacity for the export
market concerned.
Mr Brian Willott, chief executive of the ECGD, said the change would mean
the organisation would be more closely involved in evaluating prospective
project cash flows but would not reduce its risk standards.
The second change involves an expansion of the ECGD's overseas investment
insurance scheme to improve cover for British companies making equity
investments in privatised foreign enterprises. The change is expected to
cause the ECGD's exposure under the scheme, currently about Pounds 200m, to
increase several times in the next few years.
