FT  06 JUL 94 / Management: Lessons in education - John Authers on BP's
assessment of its projects in schools and colleges
What is to be gained from corporate involvement in education? Several
multinational companies, which have already poured funds into educational
programmes, have been asking this question with increasing urgency.
While the long-term aims may be self-evidently laudable, the precise nature
of what they are trying to achieve is not always clear.
BP believes it has now found a means of assessment.
Chris Marsden, BP's head of group community affairs, who unveiled the
results of applying the company's new system for assessing its education and
general community involvement at the International Conference on
Education-Business Partnership in Paris last week, admits that it is not
'measurement' of benefits in the hard sense. But, he claims: 'Our system
allows systematic subjectivity. It is putting numbers to values. Those
numbers are based on sound collective opinion and are therefore as valid as
anything else.'
The system has already led BP to drop some programmes completely while
adapting others for use elsewhere. Marsden's technique, devised with
Professor Alan Smithers of the University of Manchester two years ago,
obliges BP managers to form working groups with representatives of the
community and education schemes which the company is supporting.
They must then answer a series of questions, which will allow them to
position any project on a grid such as the one shown (right).
The format requires managers to analyse what they are trying to achieve for
the company and for the educational project. In the case of BP, discussions
led to the verdict that any programme should set the following five aims. It
should:
Contribute to the motivation and development of BP staff; Create
opportunities for the company to understand, influence and learn from
education;
Help recruitment;
Earn goodwill;
Give access to resources, expertise and facilities.
This represents a much more sophisticated approach than BP's earlier forays
into education, which were regarded largely as public relations exercises.
Managers are also expected to rank these five aims in order of importance to
their branch of BP, on a scale of one to five.
The benefits for education are analysed according to five 'matching'
criteria. These are almost identical to those used for the company, but make
relevant adjustments - for example, educationalists aim to develop their
pupils and students as well as staff, and to improve career choices rather
than recruitment.
Next, managers assess the impact of each educational project, allocating a
mark out of five for each criterion. Managers must also make a judgment on a
target audience - for example, they must decide how to rank a scheme which
is very successful, but in only one school.
The score for each criterion is then multiplied by the score for its impact.
When these are added together they give two scores - for the benefits to
education and to the business. That enables the project to be plotted on a
grid, as shown. Costs are also shown, to help investment decisions.
The object is to move further towards the top right-hand corner. The numbers
allow comparison between programmes and systematise decisions on whether
improvements can be made.
Marsden says participants should not only give a measure for a scheme's
current impact, but should also decide whether identifiable changes could
help achieve a higher mark. If such changes can be made, an arrow is added
to the grid, showing the direction in which a project could move.
Smithers also suggests that if the changes being sought are quantifiable
(for example, in short-term recruitment), there may be a case for
commissioning market research.
The subjective grid can therefore be used both to spot projects that should
be closed and those that need further investment.
Following a trial of the model by BP Malaysia, the company discovered that
Cabaran BP had been a big success, giving the pupil participants an
excellent learning experience. Cabaran is a scheme in which schoolchildren
are set ambitious technological challenges in return for prizes, However,
there were opportunities for better publicity by making challenges more
televisual.
A version of Cabaran has since been launched in BP Singapore, while several
southern Europe companies - Portugal, Spain, Greece and Turkey  - intend to
adopt it. The idea is that BP companies will be able to learn from - and
adapt projects pioneered by - others in the group.
The Pak Cipan range of sponsored glossy nature books, however, drew a
different reaction. Teachers and pupils found little use for them, and the
only benefits for the company came from limited public relations exposure.
The scheme, a typical example of the old PR-led corporate involvement in
education, has been dropped.
This reflects the company's business-like approach to education. Its
involvement is rooted in enlightened self-interest. As Russell Seal, chief
executive of BP Oil, puts it: 'This is not a charitable activity but a
business tool for enhancing our reputation and licence to operate, and for
investing strategically in social infrastructure which has impact on BP's
businesses.'
BP Malaysia assesses its community projects in the following ways:
Career Fairs. These provide a low-cost, much-valued activity, which students
use in big numbers. Staff are highly involved and committed - a classic
simple example of successful sponsorship.
Cabaran BP. This technological challenge programme was recognised as a
success, but the benefit to the community could be increased by wider
involvement of schools. Publicity for BP could also be improved.
Turtle Conservation. BP provided funding and some expertise for programmes
to protect the Malaysian turtle from extinction. The programme was
successful, and generated good publicity, but is now being wound down as the
threat to turtles has abated.
Pak Cipan Nature Books. This 'old-style' PR support for schools books was
'not achieving much value'. The books have since been discontinued.
Larian Hijau. Prizes were offered to science journalists under this scheme -
it had initial strong benefits for BP's recognition, but this is 'less
likely in future', while there is little serious community benefit, so the
scheme is being wound down.
Science &amp; Environment Camps. This direct form of education sponsorship
greatly benefited the community. However, it was decided the value to BP
could be raised by increasing staff involvement.
Assessing the Value, by Alan Smithers and Chris Marsden, BP Educational
Service, PO Box 934, Poole, Dorset, BH17 7BR. Pounds 10 inc p&amp;p.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Counting the cost: how BP values its projects
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
BP Malaysia assesses its community projects in the following ways:
 - Career Fairs. These provide a low-cost, much-valued activity, which
students use in big numbers. Staff are highly involved and commiteted -
a classic simple example of successful sponsorship.
 - Cabaran BP. This technological challenge programme was recognised as
a success, but the benefit to the community could be increased by wider
involvement of schools. Publicity for BP could also be improved.
 - Turtle Conservation. BP provided funding and some expertise for
programmes to protect the Malaysian turtle form extinction. The
programme was successful, and generated good publicity, but is now
being wound down as the threat to turtles has abated.
 - Pak Cipan Nature Books. This 'old-style' PR support for schools
books was 'not achieving much value'. The books have since been
discontinued.
 - Larian Hijau. Prizes were offered to science journalists under this
scheme - it had initial strong benefits for BP's recognition, but this
is 'less likely in future', while there is little serious community
benefit, so the scheme is being wound down.
 - Science &amp; Environment Camps. This direct form of education
sponsorship greatly benefited the community. However, it was decided
the value to BP could be raised by increasing staff involvement.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: BP
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
