FT  21 JUN 94 / Technology: Evening primrose in cancer fight - James Buxton
on promising trials with a dietary supplement
A pharmaceutical plant in the Outer Hebrides of Scotland is being expanded
to produce commercial quantities of new drugs, one of which is already
extending - in clinical trials - the lives of sufferers from a particularly
deadly cancer affecting the pancreas.
The location of the plant, at Callanish on the island of Lewis, is unusual;
so is the fact that it makes its products not from synthetic substances but
by extracting the active ingredient of the evening primrose plant.
The expansion of Callanish, costing Pounds 4.5m, is the latest step in a
long process of discovery and development led by David Horrobin, a scientist
and entrepreneur whose company Scotia Pharmaceuticals last year raised
Pounds 37m in its London stock exchange flotation.
Horrobin has been exploring the contribution to human health made by
essential fatty acids, an area of medicine on which the big pharmaceutical
companies have not focused heavily. He has found that sufferers from a wide
range of illnesses often have a deficiency of EFAs.
Scotia makes products aimed at making up this deficiency. Since 1979, it has
sold evening primrose oil as a dietary supplement under the name Efamol and
used the proceeds to finance the development of pharmaceuticals based on
EFAs. It has four licensed drugs, to treat breast pain and skin diseases.
It is also at different stages of developing drugs to treat a range of
diseases, from cancer and diabetes to rheumatoid arthritis, Alzheimer's
disease and schizophrenia. Horrobin has found that a common thread in
sufferers of all these diseases is a deficiency in EFAs.
Scotia's basic research is carried out in Nova Scotia with further work done
in Carlisle and Dundee. In 1986, it acquired for Pounds 300,000 a plant at
Callanish.
Since then, Callanish has perfected a process for extracting from evening
primrose oil its most important element - the EFA named gamma linolenic
acid.
The evening primrose itself is not grown commercially on the windswept
islands; the oil comes from a Scotia plant at Lincoln which processes seeds
grown by farmers in different parts of the world.
The remoteness of the Western Isles is not a problem, says Chris Corden, the
plant's manager. 'We use relatively small volumes of evening primrose oil,
and we benefit from the very high calibre of scientists and skilled
personnel on Lewis.'
The expansion at Callanish is intended to step up production of two
products, DLMG for diabetic neuropathy (nerve damage caused by diabetes) and
EF13 for cancer.
Horrobin is quietly excited about EF13. 'Most cancer drug treatments are
unsuccessful, prolonging survival time by only 10 to 15 per cent,' he says.
'Chemotherapy might increase a patient's life expectancy from five years to
5.5 years. And these treatments are highly toxic, causing nausea and
vomiting.' By contrast, he says, clinical trials of EF13 (phase II trials)
have shown encouraging results.
'Pancreatic cancer is the most devastating of all cancers,' Horrobin says.
Ninety per cent of cases are inoperable on diagnosis and life expectancy is
only three months. But patients given EF13 have found their survival time
increased four to sixfold, in other words from three to up to 18 months.
Horrobin says that the patients treated improve more the bigger the dose
they receive, while side effects are nil. The product is now moving on to a
randomised phase III trial which by the end of 1995 will involve about 30
hospitals in Europe and more than 400 patients. The next stage is to qualify
for a license.
Laboratory trials show that about 30 human cancer strains are killed by EF13
without harming normal cells, and beneficial effects are reported from phase
I and phase II trials on patients with breast, colo-rectal, brain, liver and
melanoma cancers. And a team at St Bartholomew's hospital in London has
found that EF13 selectively kills white blood cells infected with HIV, the
Aids virus.
