FT  03 FEB 94 / Scott may extend probe to more immunity certificates
The Scott arms-for-Iraq inquiry may examine the granting of public interest
immunity certificates in a 1990 case involving a Malaysian banker.
The certificates were issued in an appeal by Mr Lorrain Osman against
attempts to have him extradited to Hong Kong. This was the first time that
immunity certificates, preventing disclosure of government documents, had
been used in a criminal case.
A senior lawyer said last night that the use of immunity certificates in the
Osman case had formed the precedent for their subsequent use in the Matrix
Churchill case which is at the heart of the Scott inquiry.
Separately, Mr Paul Regan, a spokesman for the Scott inquiry, said that the
use of immunity certificates by government ministers fell within the scope
of the inquiry.
'We are aware that the Osman case has been cited as a legal authority on the
use of PII certificates,' he said. Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, told
the Scott inquiry last week that he had signed immunity certificates as home
secretary but made no mention of their signing by Foreign Office ministers
in the Osman case.
Whitehall officials confirmed last night that two former ministers, Mr
Francis Maude and Lord Caithness, applied for immunity certificates in 1990
and 1992 to prevent the release of documents relating to the collapse of
Bank Bumiputra, a Malaysian bank.  Mr Osman was in charge of the bank's Hong
Kong operations.
In November 1992 Mr Robert Parry, Labour MP for Riverside, alleged in an
early-day motion that the immunity certificates were used to conceal cables
transmitted to the Foreign Office relating to an alleged cover-up of the
involvement of senior Malaysian politicians in lending by the bank.
The early-day motion names the Malaysian prime minister Dr Mahathir Mohamad
as one of the politicians allegedly involved in lending to the failed
Carrian Corporation.
The Foreign Office confirmed that Mr Maude had applied for a certificate to
prevent the release of documents in the trial of Mr Osman. The banker was
accused of having had a main role in the loss of Pounds 600m by Bank
Bumiputra, which is now owned by the Malaysian Ministry of Finance.
The office said Lord Caithness had applied for the immunity certificates in
1992 'as a follow-up', and added that the certificates were issued 'to
protect privileged documents that had no bearing on the trial'.
Lord Justice Scott yesterday took evidence in private from Mr Andrew Collins
QC on the issue of disclosure of government documents.
