FT  07 NOV 94 / Arts: Dillane gets to the heartbeat of Hall's Hamlet -
Theatre
Not only is Stephen Dillane's Hamlet the freshest, most interesting, and
most peculiar ingredient of Peter Hall's new staging of Hamlet, he is also
the most modern. The production is curious in containing several dissimilar
acting styles, and Dillane's performance makes most of the other key
characters - Claudius, Gertrude, Ophelia, Polonius - seem somewhat
artificial. We, watching, may not feel that we are in their world, yet we
never doubt we are in his. His performance is close to the one he gave as
Prior, the Aids patient in Angels in America, and yet here it is far from
unstylish. He is alienated from the court about him, but with no Romantic
beauty about his alienation. He is ironic, self-critical, witty, passive,
but incisive.
I have never heard a Hamlet less concerned with vocal beauty or technique.
Fascinating to be hearing him alongside Michael Pennington, who here plays
both Claudius and Ghost, and who, 14 years ago, was an exceptionally
intelligent Hamlet whose gorgeous vocal virtuosity was geared to showing the
vast range of Hamlet's thought. Dillane is altogether smaller-scale, less
energetic, less varied, but immensely more spontaneous. Very simply, he uses
the rhythm of the verse to reveal its heartbeat. The most important thing
about him is that we hang easily on his every word. And yet the most
striking oddity about him is his voice - dry, unlovely. The dryness is
itself expressive; it tells us of Hamlet's detached, sardonic, attitude.
And the voice is the man. This is a hand-on-hip Hamlet, who shrugs, and
rolls his eyes in disbelief. (The latter is overdone.) We see the deliberate
lack of manly assertiveness, and we see how absurd he often finds his
society. Though it helps Hamlet if Hamlet is more visibly a prince, and more
evidently capable of virile ardour, these limitations scarcely troubled me
while I was in the theatre.
I did miss the bounding scale of Hamlet's thought; Dillane's Hamlet is
scarcely a philosopher at all. As for his wit, I wanted yet more; the energy
of Hamlet's mind should coruscate. But everything Dillane does is
spontaneous. When it comes to self, and family, and court, he reveals,
wonderfully, many things in Hamlet - not least his self-loathing. Then,
towards the end, he finds the right inner calm.
This Hamlet is not, however, the best vehicle for this Hamlet. Lucy Hall has
designed an attractive cyclorama of sea and clouds (and we hear the thumping
waves and whistling wind), while the centre of the stage is a forward-tilted
grey circle. All that, obviously, is Nature, and is meant to clash with the
court - for which long-stranded red curtains descend, and red furniture is
brought on. But the court is distractingly vulgar. And there is pointless,
dull muzak.
In theory, I like the way that the presence of Pennington and Donald Sinden
(Polonius) supplied the production with an immense wealth of Shakespearian
experience. Some of their lines have marvellous force, such as Claudius's
first fierce stab of guilt, 'How smart a lash that speech doth give my
conscience],' and Polonius's 'I do know, When the blood burns, how prodigal
the soul Lends the tongue vows ..'
Everything Pennington does is intelligent; and Sinden gives an interestingly
punitive edge to his scenes with Ophelia. But there is too much contrivance
about most of Pennington's utterance; and Sinden's standard vocal tricks -
especially the prolonged vowels and final consonants - remind us of his
canny old actorliness, at the expense of Polonius to us.
Ophelia is probably the most impossible role in Shakespeare, and Gina
Bellman is not the first to have been tripped over by it.
Yes, she is pretty; yes, she has presence. But, in her effort to show us the
perplexed suffering and repression of Ophelia's early scenes, she already
seems precious and insincere. That her mad scenes (menstrual blood staining
her dress, spastic gestures, pigeon-toed mock-ballet steps) are all artifice
is scarcely surprising. Gwen Taylor's Gertrude, brightly superficial at
first, gets better, as events force her to grow more honest; but with no
especial depth.
Although this production has been touring Britain for months, it feels
under-prepared. I never believed that Polonius, Laertes (Tom Beard), and
Ophelia were one family; or that Gertrude and Claudius could have slept
together; or that Hamlet and Ophelia had been in love; or that this Gertrude
and Hamlet were mother and son.
A further problem is that the Gielgud Theatre (formerly the Globe) does not
have the kind of comfortable seating to help us through a play as long as
Hamlet. (How ironic; the names Gielgud and Hamlet should go together like
bread and butter.) The production lasts considerably longer than four hours.
A second interval would help, but a more integrated production would help
much better.
