FT  18 APR 94 / Raw material prices alarm manufacturers
Prices of raw materials have supplanted the level of interest rates as the
main concern of west Midlands manufacturers, says the latest survey of
corporate opinion and performance from the area's Chambers of Commerce.
Isolated increases in metals prices have deepened concern about raw material
prices in general.
Manufacturers and stockholders have reported price rises for aluminium,
stainless steel and steel made from scrap metal in a region where economic
health is closely linked to the state of the engineering sector and where
there has been traditional reliance on the vehicle and aerospace industries.
The extent to which metal price rises, a source of sensitivity in the
engineering industry, are influencing national statistics and acting as a
guide to future inflation will be apparent today with the publication of the
producer prices index.
After a 30 per cent fall during the recession, prices for aluminium sheet,
bar and plate started to rise at the end of January. Over the past 10 weeks
the lead time for delivery from mills has increased from 2 1/2 months to six
months, said Mr Clive Orford, deputy managing director of Apollo Metals, the
Birmingham-based stockholder and processor.
He warned that 'if manufacturers are looking for material cost cuts, they
will be sorely disappointed'. Demand was rising and aluminium producers
hoped for higher margins after years of depressed returns.
Glynwed International, the diversified engineering group which is an
extensive user of steel, said that stainless steel prices had risen because
of the nickel surcharge imposed by producers. The level of this surcharge
depends on the movement of London Metal Exchange nickel prices.
There is also a scrap surcharge imposed on steel made in electric furnaces
and frequently used in the engineering industry. But, stressed Mr Nick
Boucher, Glynwed's group planning manager, 'there is no tightness in the
market; there is plenty of metal around'.
Pressure on steel prices remains downwards rather than upwards. British
Steel prices remain below 1990 levels despite attempts to impose rises on
the market. 'There are threats of price rises all the time, but I've not
seem them,' said Mr Robert Woolley, managing director of Frederick Woolley,
the Birmingham components manufacturer.
Generally the European steel market is oversupplied and steelmakers face
capacity cuts. But Mr Geoff Field, director of the National Association of
Steel Stockholders, whose members handle more than 60 per cent of the steel
bought by UK manufacturers, warned that there is a limit on how far steel
consumers can push prices down.
'It's a good situation for manufacturers, but there is a limit under which
the steel producers and stockholders cannot go,' Mr Field said.
The preoccupation of Midlands manufacturers with material prices does not
surprise Mr Woolley. He pointed out that materials account for between 40
per cent and 60 per cent of manufacturers' costs, and said: 'Get a saving
there and you'll be moving in the right direction.'
Mr Tony Bradley, the economist at the Chambers of Commerce, says diminishing
concern with interest and inflation rates has allowed manufacturers'
attention to switch to other cost pressures.
