FT  25 JUN 94 / Exports pick up as inflation fall continues
West German inflation is continuing its slow decline as industrial output
and exports pick up speed, according to official figures published
yesterday.
Consumer prices in the most populous state, North Rhine-Westphalia, rose at
an annual rate of 2.8 per cent in the month to mid-June, compared with 2.9
per cent in May. The month-on-month rate of 0.2 per cent has been unchanged
since June.
Similar trends were also reported in Baden-Wurttemberg and Hesse, with
year-on-year increases of 3.1 per cent and with monthly rises of 0.3 per
cent and 0.2 per cent respectively.
The sluggish trend is widely expected to remain broadly unchanged until
September or October, when the annual inflation rate is expected to dip
towards 2.5 per cent.
Economists said yesterday's preliminary figures supported their forecast of
an overall annual rate for June of 2.9 per cent, compared with 3 per cent in
May.
Meanwhile, the automotive and steel industries reported rising output and
federal statistics office figures showed visible exports continuing to rise
strongly.
The VDA vehicle makers' group said May passenger car production was 15 per
cent higher than a year earlier and exports were up 13 per cent. Adjusted
for the extra working day this year, the increases were 9 per cent and 7 per
cent.
New car orders in May were also higher than in 1993, while demand for
commercial vehicles was starting to recover, the VDA said. Production of
trucks up to six tonnes during the month was 9 per cent higher than a year
earlier, although output for the first five months was still down 1 per
cent.
The improvements were reflected in an 18 per cent increase in rolled steel
production during the month.
Although pan-German total visible exports and imports fell 9.4 per cent and
10.5 per cent respectively during April, the statistics office noted there
were four fewer working days than in March.
On an annual comparison, exports rose 8.6 per cent and imports were 1.2 per
cent lower.
The trade balance surplus of DM6bn (Pounds 2.43bn), unchanged on the month,
was well up on the DM1.2bn recorded in April, 1993.
Imports are expected to remain weak as domestic demand remains constrained
by lower disposable incomes but foreign orders for German goods are still
increasing sharply.
