FT  11 JUN 94 / UK Company News: Enterprise rules out underwritten cash -
Lasmo's final salvo brings in independent valuation of reserves
Enterprise Oil yesterday ruled out an underwritten cash alternative in its
hostile all-paper bid for rival explorer Lasmo, as the target company sought
to prove that its value was substantially higher than the Pounds 1.3bn on
offer.
The way is still open, however, for Enterprise to repackage the all-paper
offer before the deadline next week on the back of a higher share price, or
introduce a cash sweetener. This latter route appears unlikely, given
concerns over weakening the financial strength of an enlarged group.
Enterprise might also consider increasing the attraction of its bid by
raising the dividend promised to Lasmo shareholders. Currently, they are
offered the equivalent of 1p per Lasmo share for three years against
Enterprise's 16p payment to its own shareholders.
Enterprise has reserved the right to offer cash if there is an alternative
bid.
Whichever route Enterprise chooses, it is restricted by the concerns of its
own shareholders. 'It has limited room for manoeuvre and not much scope to
increase the number of shares,' said one institutional investor.
'If they can attract the other side by a bit of financial engineering then I
am relaxed.'
Enterprise's shares, which jumped by 25p following its announcement, closed
10p higher at 410p. Lasmo finished the day 3p up at 142p.
Enterprise's announcement followed Lasmo's final shot in the war of words.
Under takeover rules, Lasmo cannot release any new information after
yesterday.
Lasmo announced that an independent assessment of its reserves gave a net
asset value per share of between 180p and 211p, against Enterprise's offer
which values them at 132p on last night's close. This was based on a Brent
Oil price projection provided by Lasmo to the US-based petroleum
consultants, DeGoyler and MacNaughton, who carried out the valuation. This
assumed Brent prices of Dollars 15 a barrel in 1994 rising to Dollars 17.50
in 1996, and a nominal discount rate of between 10 and 12 per cent.
Lasmo also showed an upside case, which assumed average oil prices of
Dollars 2 higher. On this basis the valuation range was between 216p and
252p. In late trading yesterday Brent for July delivery was quoted at about
Dollars 16.40.
Mr Joe Darby, Lasmo's chief executive, admitted the price range was high
compared with assumptions in the UK. However, companies such as Shell, and
US analysts in general, were looking for higher price ranges than UK
observers.
The valuation showed proven and probable reserves of oil and oil equivalent
of 1.1bn barrels. The net asset per share valuation also takes account of
possible reserves - considered to be significantly higher risk - of some
262m barrels of oil and oil equivalent. These represented about 8 per cent
of the total valuation, said Mr Darby.
The company sought to crush once and for all allegations that it could not
fund future commitments, by setting out sources and uses of cash to 1996.
This showed Lasmo had a Pounds 435m cushion between its funding and
requirements. The group projected net year-end debt would rise from Pounds
540m in 1994 to Pounds 645m in 1995, falling to Pounds 415m in 1996 - 37 per
cent gearing.
Robert Fleming, Enterprise's adviser, said the valuation figures were
misleading by including possible reserves. 'Every way they go they are
looking for ways to boost their numbers in a desperate attempt to avoid
falling to Enterprise's offer', the merchant bank said.
Mr Rudolph Agnew, Lasmo's chairman, said shareholders had the right to know
about the company's potential. Most of the 'blue sky element', as Mr Agnew
described Lasmo's exploration potential, had not been included in the
valuation. 'We think the valuation is Rolls-Royce', he said.
See Lex
