FT  17 NOV 94 / Survey of Massachusetts (9): Foreigners provide impetus -
Boston worked hard for its rejuvenation
Over the past two decades, Boston has metamorphised from a sleepy parochial
town into a fashionable, cosmopolitan centre. Elegant Newbury Street, once a
residential enclave, is now a thriving mecca for designer shops and pavement
cafes. Snatches of French, Italian, Spanish, Japanese, and other languages
now drown out the once-dominant Bostonian dropped 'R'.
A flood of foreigners into New England's largest city has provided the
impetus for change. To diversify their student base and replenish their
coffers, Boston's universities have recruited surging numbers of candidates
from abroad, and foreigners have flocked to study at world-renowned
institutions such as Harvard, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and
Tufts.
A large and growing immigrant community has added diversity. Brazilians,
Irish, Haitians and others have decided to try their luck in Boston and the
area's high-technology companies have been a magnet for foreign scientists,
many of whom are alumni from the city's universities.
Tourism is also booming. Hotel occupancy for the month of August in Boston
was an impressive 89.9 per cent. Foreign visitors are increasingly drawn to
Boston's thriving arts scene, world-class restaurants, and well-preserved
red brick ambiance.
Boston has worked hard for its rejuvenation, although the results have not
always been desirable.
The city kicked off urban renewal in the 1960s with a still-mourned
destruction of the West End and the construction of a much-criticised
Government Centre.
In the 1970s, planners redeemed themselves with the successful renovation of
the old Faneuil Hall marketplace, which served as a prototype for similar
developments around the country, including the South Street Seaport in New
York.
Boston, now recovering from a devastating recession which sapped much of the
city's vitality, is tackling urban projects with renewed vigour. A new
sports centre for basketball and hockey is set to open early next year and
the North Station rail terminal is undergoing a major renovation. The city
is also in the middle of an Dollars 8bn project to put the city's elevated
Central Artery highway underground, in what is billed as the biggest urban
highway project in the country.
Boston's vision of its future is ambitious. Developers are pushing for the
construction of a new Megaplex, a combination sports stadium and conference
centre which would allow the city to host important conferences. Public
transportation should get an important boost from plans for new commuter
rail lines and an extension of Boston's already efficient subway system. The
city also hopes to host the Olympic Games in 2008.
To shore up its tourism market and renowned quality of life, Boston is
spending billions of dollars on the environment. Environmental measures have
at times caused resentment among the city's residents. A Dollars 4bn harbour
clean-up has been largely financed with local water tariffs, making the
area's water rates the highest in the country.
Owning a car in the city can be a nightmare. Boston discourages driving in
an attempt to control air pollution, and a freeze on the number of parking
spaces available has made the city one of the most difficult places to park
in the world.
On the whole, however, residents seem happy with the way things are going.
The downtown exudes an air of quiet self-confidence which the statistics
seem to justify. The city is one of the best educated in the country, with
some 46.7 per cent of residents over 25 in the metropolitan area having
completed a college degree. It is also one of the safest big cities, in
terms of violent crime, in the US.
Widespread satisfaction with the status quo led to a victory last year for
Thomas Menino, former Mayor Flynn's hand-picked successor.
The city's economy is also picking up, fortified by new sectors such as
biotechnology and enviro-technology. Those sectors feed on the brain power
of Boston's universities, which themselves provide an important economic
impetus. Alumni and professors from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology alone started more than 600 companies in the state, and students
are big spenders in the local economy. Harvard University is one of the
largest employers in Massachusetts.
Although the city has moved forward, remnants of a sleepier past are
evident. At times the city appears too staid. Boston has never had a black
mayor, for example, and Menino is the first non-Irish mayor to be elected in
decades. For a town with so many students - they account for about 17 per
cent of the population - Boston also goes to bed surprisingly early. It can
be difficult to get a meal in the city after 10pm.
Boston suffers from more serious blemishes as well. Despite its left-wing
traditions, the city has been unable to shake the image of racism earned
when it pioneered 'busing' in the 1970s. The practice, which sought to
provide a better racial mix in schools by transporting black children to
white neighbourhoods and vice versa, sparked off a series of riots and
deepened racial divisions.
In fact, critics say one reason Boston is relatively safe is because
residents tend to stay in their own neighbourhoods, exacerbating
segregation. They also complain that most of the urban renewal money has
been invested in the downtown and up-market residential areas, and has done
little to help poor enclaves such as Dorchester, Roxbury and Hyde Park.
Still, as so many US cities confront devastating crime, worsening pollution
and crumbling infrastructure, Mayor Menino feels he is in an enviable
position.
'I feel lucky sometimes, because Boston is still a city that works,' he
said. But the city wants to be more than just a nice place to live. Time
will tell if its ambitious plans for the future will be realised.
