FT  14 NOV 94 / UN condemns fighting in Bihac
The UN Security Council, meeting in emergency session after a joint request
by Bosnia and Croatia, yesterday condemned the escalation of fighting in
Bihac and demanded that Serbs in Croatia stay out of the conflict in
north-west Bosnia.
In a statement read at a formal session, the council said it 'views with
alarm the escalation in recent fighting in the Bihac area, and the flow of
refugees and displaced persons resulting from it'. To this end the council
demanded that 'all parties and others concerned, and in particular the
Krajina Serb force fully respect that border'.
In northern Bosnia, the Serbs appear to be set on punishing the Moslem-led
government army for its recent offensives by reducing Bihac to a small,
deprived outpost, as has happened with the Moslem enclaves to the east.
Bosnian government forces went on the offensive yesterday near Bijeljina, in
the north-east and around Mostar in the south-west. Several projectiles fell
on the Holiday Inn where many foreigners stay in Sarajevo.
The fighting will be one of the main preoccupations of ministers from the
nine members of the Western European Union (WEU) who gather at Noordwijk in
the Netherlands today to discuss how Europe could take more responsibility
for defence without US help. The US, increasingly out of step with its
European allies over Bosnia, has taken the lead in supporting an appeal from
the Bosnian and Croatian governments for a tougher UN policy to protect
Bihac. Its decision to withdraw from the enforcement of the arms embargo
against the Bosnian government entered force yesterday amid confusion about
what it would mean.
Nato officials said it had not been worked out how the US could continue to
co-operate with an arms embargo against most ex-Yugoslav republics while
letting weapons proceed to Bosnia. Since arms shipments to Bosnia are bound
to pass through Croatia, US inspectors would have to make hard judgments
about the ultimate destination of any cargoes they discovered.
France, the main advocate of greater European independence in defence, is
expected to redouble its efforts to persuade the WEU to commit the sums
necessary to develop its own satellite intelligence. A recent study said it
would cost the WEU about Pounds 11bn to establish a network of spy
satellites.
Britain has been doubtful of the need for this. Under its special
relationship with Washington, it is the only European ally to receive raw
satellite intelligence from the US.
However the new US statement that any data on arms shipments to Bosnia would
be classified as 'US only' has brought home to all European countries,
including the UK, the drawbacks of dependence.
Also attending the WEU meeting will be the nine ex-communist nations which
are 'associate partners' of the WEU. Supporters see the WEU as a vehicle for
drawing ex-communist states into the western security system without
upsetting Russia. However, nations like the UK and Portugal have warned
against this approach, saying that it could run into understandable
objections from both Moscow and Washington.
