FT  13 APR 94 / World Trade News: Kantor puts trade dispute ball in Japan's
court
Mr Mickey Kantor, the US trade representative, said yesterday it would be
'dangerous' to set deadlines for Japan to comply with US demands that it
open its markets further.
He also said Washington was not considering using Super 301 trade sanctions
against the European Union if the two sides failed in a last-ditch attempt
to reach an agreement by Friday to liberalise their public procurement
markets.
Speaking before a meeting in Marrakesh on Friday with Mr Tsutomu Hata, the
Japanese foreign minister, Mr Kantor said: 'As Japan has said many times,
the ball is in its court. It would be very difficult for the US to
articulate a time schedule. I hope to glean some clue from Mr Hata.'
Mr Kantor said that though he expected a productive discussion on a range of
international trade issues, he did not know whether it would be possible to
make progress in settling trade disputes between the two countries.
Though he dismissed deadlines for action as dangerous, he said the
recently-renewed Super 301 would come into effect at the end of this month,
and that the administration had until September 30 to name countries which
could be targets for unilateral trade sanctions.
Mr Hata's arrival at the four-day ministerial conference of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in Marrakesh has been delayed because of the
political crisis in Japan.
Meanwhile, US and EU officials were planning to negotiate through the night
on public procurement after Mr Kantor and Sir Leon Brittan, the European
trade commissioner, failed to make a decisive breakthrough in talks lasting
more than an hour yesterday. 'At this stage, it is just impossible to say if
we will reach an agreement or not,' Sir Leon said.
The Clinton administration insists that an agreement must be reached by
Friday so that it can be submitted to Congress under the US 'fast-track'
procedure, which provides for rapid legislative approval.
Success in the talks would enable US and European suppliers to compete more
freely in each others' markets for contracts worth an estimated Dollars
200bn a year. However, each sides accuses the other of not having made
sufficient concessions.
Brussels is pressing Washington to do more to liberalise procurement by
individual states, while the US wants the EU to provide more generous access
to markets for telecommunications and power supply equipment.
The European Commission fears that if no agreement is reached by Friday, the
US may impose sanctions against it under Super 301. However, Mr Kantor
denied yesterday that such action was planned and dismissed suggestions that
he might set a 'numerical target' for US sales of equipment to EU public
bodies.
