FT  24 JUN 94 / Arts: Page's 'Fearful Symmetries' - Ballet
For his new ballet, which I saw on Tuesday, Ashley Page has turned to a
score by the American minimalist composer John Adams. Its title, which Page
also uses, is Fearful Symmetries. After a very short time in its company, it
is tempting to call it Fearful Monotonies. Like so much minimalism, it wears
its clock-work mechanism on its sleeve. Round and round go the wheels.
Click, click go the little patterns. On and on go the gear changes, as
incidents wear themselves out and are replaced (but oh, how laboriously) by
other dull activities. It is the musical equivalent of the Chinese water
torture, and it serves its choreographer ill.
Ashley Page has made six large works, and many smaller pieces. In Pursuit
and Carmen Arcadiae, which I thought his most assured and convincing, he
revised academic classicism by sharpening its accents, honing its cutting
edge. The dance was bright, clear. In this new work he brings to the stage
certain recognisable qualities: an interest in revising balletic vocabulary,
and an affection for painterly (modern; abstract) design which echoes his
creative taste.
Thus we have a stage decorated by Antony McDonald - or rather,
over-decorated. A backdrop blazing with that crass magenta which
bougainvillea spreads over half the walls in the South of France. A huge
curved and pendant screen at stage left, the colour of which alters, but
always drearily. A battery of lights at ground level, also stage left. An
orange stick that makes a brief appearance. An acid green rectangle that
unfortunately doesn't.
Lighting, by Peter Mumford, that unsettles the action by changing too
frequently, and in the manner peculiar by William Forsythe, contrives to
obscure the dancers. Gloomy costuming that succeeds through acutest malice
in making the dancers look both ugly and foolish. The men boast mini-skirts
(exactly the gear for Mukhamedov, one realises) and the women are in
unflattering bodices and must also cope with fish-net tights that give their
legs a curiously gnarled look.
Thus accoutred, thus chained to his score, Page plunges in the Forsythian
deep end - much activity leading to further activity; a somewhat degage, not
to say cursory, manner for the dancers - and dog-paddles for half an hour.
The physical mood varies between pounding dynamics, with steps flung to the
wind, and strangely lethargic moments (as Adams' score draws breath) when
the cast slump from active to passive mood.
Mukhamedov comes off best. Page has devised a couple of outstanding entries
for him which make much of his strength and his powerful phrasing -
everything seamless, rich in tone, with great swathes of dancing cutting
across th stage. Mukhamedov also comes off worst by being involved in two
duets - with Deborah Bull and Ann de Vos - which are brutal in manner,
awkward in form.
The rest of the cast, who are some of the best of the Royal Ballet, run,
rampage, cower, are caught in tiny and inexplicable dramas, and look (thanks
to their glum outfits) distinctly sooty. The piece struck me as rodomontade.
Over-decorated, overpowered by its score, the choreography has an air of
anxiety, as if its brakes had failed. Page is an interesting choreographer,
but he has been misled by his design and by his choice of score. His gifts
need far more sympathetic support.
The programme also contains early and late MacMillan. Danses Concertantes is
as astonishing as it was in 1955 - classicism refreshed by the wittiest
means - and Winter Dreams explores Chekhov's world with rare sympathy. The
'farewell' duet for Masha and Vershinin was ideally done by Viviana Durante
and Irek Mukhamedov - their hearts spoke to us.
This triple bill can be seen again at Covent Garden on June 28,29,30.
