FT  13 JUL 94 / International Company News: Shareholders hand UAL to
employees
Shareholders of United Airlines, the biggest airline in the US, yesterday
voted by a large majority to hand control of their company to its 75,700
employees in return for wage cuts and other labour concessions worth Dollars
4.9bn.
Mr Stephen Wolf, chairman and chief executive, called the decision 'an event
of monumental proportions'.
He was speaking at the company's annual meeting in Chicago shortly before
stepping down in favour of Mr Gerald Greenwald, a former Chrysler
vice-chairman chosen by employees to become United's chairman and chief
executive.
Under the plan approved by shareholders, United's employees will get a
controlling stake of 55 per cent of the airline's equity - rising later to a
maximum of 63 per cent - in return for the concessions.
The aim is to lower the company's operating costs so it can compete on
short-haul routes in the US with smaller, low-cost carriers like Southwest
Airlines - currently the most profitable airline in the US.
United is heavily unionised and feared a labour confrontation if it started
cutting back operations and shedding staff. Its employee ownership plan,
destined to make it the biggest employee-owned company in the US, is
intended to win employees' consent to a cost-cutting drive by allowing them
to share in the benefits.
Some institutional investors had threatened to vote against the plan, saying
employee ownership would tempt workers to put their own interests above
those of other shareholders. However, as yesterday's meeting opened, Mr Wolf
said the 70 per cent of the shares represented by proxies had been voted in
favour of the proposal.
Existing shareholders will get one half share in the new company and Dollars
84.81 in cash for every United share held. United estimates the value of the
deal at Dollars 143 to Dollars 147 a share, but its stock has recently been
trading at under Dollars 130.
United Airlines yesterday reported net income of Dollars 55m for the second
quarter, up from Dollars 22m last time and including a Dollars 19m after-tax
charge relating to the buy-out. For the half year, before extraordinary
items, the net loss was Dollars 16m, against a loss of Dollars 115m.
