FT  04 OCT 94 / International Company News: S Africa wins investment grade
rating from Moody's
South Africa's foreign borrowing plans were given a boost last night when
Moody's, the US credit rating agency, gave the republic's sovereign debt an
'investment grade' rating.
However, Standard and Poor's, the other big US agency, awarded a lower
rating.
Mr Chris Liebenberg, South Africa's minister of finance, last night welcomed
Moody's Baa3 rating, saying it demonstrated 'confidence in the coherence of
the economic policies and political stability brought to the country by the
government of national unity'.
He noted that Standard and Poor's, which awarded a BB or sub-investment
grade rating, had also said it saw a 'positive outlook' for the country.
South Africa had been seeking an international credit rating since April's
elections brought President Nelson Mandela's government to power. However,
its first formal rating, from the European agency IBCA, was a disappointing
BB, putting it on a par with countries such as Mexico, Hungary and
Argentina.
Officials said they were pleased with Moody's higher rating, which rates
South Africa ahead of both Mexico and India.
Moody's said the rating was based on the country's low external debt, and on
the commitment by the new government to redirect spending to a comprehensive
development programme while reducing the public sector deficit.
Mr Carlos Cordeiro, a partner with Goldman Sachs, the investment bank which
is advising the government, said he was 'delighted' with the rating. It
would allow South Africa to 'access a wider range of capital around the
world', he said.
South Africa has borrowed money in European markets without an official
rating, but yesterday's news will permit it to re-enter the US market. In
its June budget, the government said it would raise R1.8bn (Dollars 504.8m)
from the international capital markets in the current financial year.
External debt has been paid down in net terms since 1985, when international
banks refused to roll over loans to the republic, in response to political
unrest.
South Africa's return to the international bond markets could be in the form
of a global bond of around Dollars 500m, said Mr Liebenberg, Reuter adds
from Madrid.
However, Mr Liebenberg, in Madrid for the IMF/World Bank meeting, said that
no firm decisions had been made and it was up to the markets to set the
parameters for the issue.
He said that apart from the global format, South Africa was considering a
plain eurobond and even a yankee bond.
