FT  22 OCT 94 / London Stock Exchange: Welsh Water ease
Expectations that Welsh Water would spend its Pounds 180m cash pile on
buying back shares were doused yesterday and the shares led the sector down
ahead of the sector's interim reporting season which begins next week.
Welsh held a meeting for industry analysts in which it announced that it
hoped to set up a fund for infrastructure investment in Asia. It also talked
of using its cash pile to expand in the UK and into Czechoslovakia.
This was a blow to analysts who had speculated that it might follow the
buy-back path of the Recs. Welsh shares fell 18 to 635p while North West
dropped 14 to 547p and Severn Trent 12 to 560p and Thames 5 to 518p.
High Street clearing bank Barclays performed strongly as NatWest Securities
upgraded its recommendation and Yamaichi published a very bullish note on
the sector.
NatWest moved its stance to 'add' from 'hold' arguing that worries over its
securities arm BZW were overdone. It added that Barclays had the strongest
dividend paying capacity in the sector and a share buy-back was a
possibility.
Also, Yamaichi cited Barclays as one of its core buys in a sector which the
Japanese securities house believes has more room to rise. The shares gained
2 to 572p.
Elsewhere, Standard Chartered rose 2 to 279p with dealers saying it had had
a meeting with one leading UK marketmaker. And tightly-traded merchant bank
Schroders improved 8 to 1363p with investors said to have been switching
from the non-voting shares.
Transport shares were mixed. Eurotunnel recovered 10 to 209p but British
Airways slipped 5 to 375p ahead of Monday's third-quarter results from
USAir. American Airlines managed bumper results this week but USAir, which
is 25 per cent owned by BA, is thought by analysts to be far less cushioned
against North American competition.
Coats Viyella , the UK's leading textile stock, fell 7 to to 197p after SG
Warburg cut its 1994 profit forecast.
Cashmere jumper company Dawson International was one of the most heavily
traded stocks in London with the overall turnover of 7.2m shares represented
a single deal carried out at 138p a share, early in the morning. There was
some suggestion that PDFM, the fund manger might have been involved, but
other dealers suggested it could have represented the second half of a
tax-related 'bed and breakfast' deal. Dawson closed unchanged at 139p.
Leading pharmaceuticals groups were buoyed by US buying but Zeneca was the
only net gainer on the day. The shares rose 4 to 841p ahead of a
third-quarter trading state ment on Tuesday.
The brewers put most of their takeover hopes to one side, moving down
smartly in line with market in negligible volume.
Greene King put on 2 to 531p as rumours of impending top management changes
gained ground.
Elsewhere in the drinks sector the story was one of dollar led weakness for
groups with big overseas earnings. GrandMet fell 11 to 404p and Allied
Domecq tumbled 13 to 576p.
Hazlewood Foods lost 6 to 122p as substantial line of stock hung over the
market. Dealers said attempts to place up to 5m shares had not been
successful.
Iceland recovered strongly on news that it plans to repurchase 10 per cent
of its equity. The shares moved up from 166p to close 1 lower at 169p.
Activity in Babcock International totalled a massive 16m shares following
the company's move to link up with a consortium set to bid for the entire
Ministry of Defence site at Rosyth in Scotland. Babcock dipped 2 1/4 to 29
1/4 p while Forth Ports, also in the consortium, held steady at 445p.
Vickers gained 2 1/2 to 173p for a two-day rise of more than 5 per cent as
market sentiment towards the luxury car market shrugged off the recent
weakness of the dollar and swung upwards on the back of improving US sales
of Rolls-Royce cars.
