FT  07 SEP 94 / Exchange reins back drive for deregulation
The London Stock Exchange yesterday took a step back from its most radical
ideas on trading in small company shares when it published a consultative
document on the new lightly regulated market.
An early draft of the exchange's proposals were to 'strip back' regulation,
but it has concluded that companies should provide interim financial results
as a requirement of a quotation on the planned Alternative Investment
Market.
The draft had argued for waiving this obligation, but the exchange judged
that the cost of compliance for companies was outweighed by the extra
security provided to investors and the need to boost liquidity.
'One of the things that most deadens a market is no information,' Mr Michael
Lawrence, chief executive of the exchange, said yesterday. 'We need periodic
information. I am afraid that we are going to require interim results.'
Yesterdays' proposals will also ensure that directors abide by relatively
strict rules on the trading of company shares. Directors would also be
locked into a company for two years after quotation to guard against
unscrupulous people using the AIM to defraud investors.
Companies will be subject to the normal requirement to publish
price-sensitive information promptly and inform the exchange simultaneously.
Trading on the AIM will be subject to the same standard of surveillance and
supervision as activity on the market for listed shares.
Regulation carries with it higher costs - the exchange had hoped that
companies on the AIM would have to pay an annual fee of only Pounds 1,000.
The cost is likely to be considerably higher.
In spite of the changes in the exchange's thinking, the overall tone of the
blueprint for the new market for small and growing companies, the successor
to the Unlisted Securities Market, remains generally liberal. Sponsorship of
quoted AIM companies will be optional in spite of pressure on the exchange
to make it compulsory. While companies must arrange for a member firm to
support trading, any further links will be left to the discretion of the
companies.
The deregulated small company market will also have what the exchange
believes to be the lowest barrier to entry of any stock market. No
thresholds are envisaged for market capitalisation, length of trading record
or the percentage of the shares in public hands.
While the regulators will ensure that companies do not fail to submit
documents, company directors will be left with the responsibility of
ensuring that documents are accurate, and investors with the task of
checking that they are.
Exchange officials said yesterday they had been motivated above all by the
desire to strike a balance between simplicity of entry for companies and
investors' need for regulation. 'We are not in a motherhood game here,' said
Mr Lawrence. But he added: 'If you have too open a market and the first two
or three companies that go through it crash, that kills the whole market.'
Organisations which the exchange is consulting said it was too early to give
a detailed reaction to the proposals, but most tentatively welcomed the
initiative. 'A clear attempt has been made to strike a balance,' said Mr Ian
Peters, deputy director of the Confederation of British Industry responsible
for small companies.
The Unlisted Securities Market, which grew quickly in the 1980s with 784
companies joining, was undermined by regulatory changes in the early 1990s
and is to be merged into the listed securities market at the end of 1996.
The continuing need for an alternative, lightly regulated market has been
underlined by the success of the 'Rule 4.2' market, exchange officials
maintain. On this, exchange members can trade unlisted and unquoted shares.
