FT  19 MAR 94 / Mayhew to slam Adams position
British ministers are preparing to exploit the St Patrick's Day call from
President Bill Clinton for Sinn Fein and the IRA to accept the Downing
Street declaration.
Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland secretary, is today expected to
drive home the political advantage created by the US administration's
decision to offer unequivocal support for the Anglo-Irish peace initiative.
In his first full-length speech since the IRA mortar attacks on Heathrow
Airport, Sir Patrick will directly attack Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein
president, saying that he has delivered only death and threats of death. The
Northern Ireland secretary will tell Conservative activists in south-east
England that the attacks at Heathrow Airport have enabled people to make up
their minds about the republican leader's true intentions.
Mr Clinton made it clear at a dinner in Washington on Thursday night that he
would not authorise a repeat visa for Mr Adams to visit America until the
IRA ended violence.
In another policy turnaround, he has dropped earlier controversial plans to
send a 'peace envoy' to Northern Ireland.
The president called on 'all those who practice violence for political aims
to lay down their arms'. He urged Sinn Fein and the IRA to endorse the joint
declaration as 'the only way forward'.
His remarks were backed up yesterday by Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime
minister, who was in Washington to join Mr Clinton for St Patrick's Day
celebrations.
He said the message of US support would have an important influence on the
outcome of the initiative.
Mr Reynolds said political leaders would have to 'show daring as never
before, fortitude as never before, in bringing about the goal of peace'.
Mr Adams, who on Thursday said the US administration could play an important
role in the search for peace, yesterday attacked the British government for
blocking progress. He said Downing Street's inflexible and unimaginative
attitude was the major obstacle to ending the current impasse.
The fight goes on, Page 9
