FT  09 NOV 94 / Survey of Finland (6): A chance to catch up / Profile,
Invest in Finland Bureau
Few people in Finland can have had more reason to celebrate the October 16
decision to join the European Union than Mr Nils-Christian Berg, head of the
government's Invest in Finland Bureau, writes Hugh Carnegy.
The bureau is charged with attracting direct foreign investment to the
country, so a referendum vote to stay outside the EU would have been a
severe handicap to its work. Finland already lags far behind most of
Europe's smaller peripheral countries in winning inward investment.
Inclusion in the inner circle of the continent's top political and economic
club is a vital step if Finland is to catch up.
'We have made several surveys outside Europe - notably in the US and Japan -
and we can clearly see that for a country like Japan it is a must for us to
be in the EU before companies even think about investing in Finland,' says
Mr Berg. 'They want you to be inside the EU market. That is a fact and you
cannot overcome it any other way except by joining.'
Now that Finland is set to become an EU member from January 1 - barring
unforeseen obstacles in parliament - the Invest in Finland Bureau can get on
with its job with much greater assurance and confidence. It faces a
formidable task.
The bureau was set up only in 1992, long after Ireland, Portugal and
Scotland, for instance, had established sophisticated agencies to pursue
foreign investment, armed with alluring inducements in the form of generous
tax breaks, subsidies and other incentives.
Indeed, while such countries were attracting multinational corporations to
their shores in the 1980s, Finland maintained barriers against foreign
investment, requiring any foreign investor to gain government or, in some
cases, parliamentary approval for the acquisition of more than 20 per cent
of a Finnish company. The last of these restrictions was dropped as recently
as the beginning of 1993.
Big names such as Asea Brown Boveri, the Swiss/Swedish engineering giant,
Sweden's Saab Automobile, Norway's Kvaerner and Britain's British-American
Tobacco have established a presence in Finland, but the list is not long.
Mr Berg's mission is to make sure that the list now starts to grow. The
extent to which he is successful will be an important element in restoring
long-term growth to an economy deeply scarred by recession. At last Finland
realises that it can no longer rely on protected home industries and a
privileged trade with a Soviet Union that no longer exists to sustain
employment levels.
The Invest in Finland Bureau is not attempting to lure foreign investors
with state incentives. Instead, it seeks to establish Finland as a centre
for investment in what Mr Berg calls 'New Northern Europe'. Central to this
concept is the geographical proximity and established trading links that
Finland has with other industrialised Nordic countries to the west and with
the newly emerging markets of the Baltic countries and Russia to the east.
The bureau describes New Northern Europe as a region of 80m people,
including more than 40m in north-west Russia. The bureau's sales pitch is
that Finland has all the geographic, economic, legal and cultural attributes
to be the hub of this region as its new markets take off. The most important
of these could well be St Petersburg, with its population of 8m, just 150km
across the Finnish border.
'Finland is the only place that can reach and deliver throughout this region
within 24 hours,' says Mr Berg.
The obvious potential weakness in this argument is that the concept may make
more sense in theory than in reality as western companies either prefer to
invest directly in Russia and the Baltics, or may shy away altogether from
such uncertain and unstable countries.
But Mr Berg insists that Finland is already becoming a popular stepping
stone for doing business in Russia. A number of western companies operating
in St Petersburg use Finland for forwarding mail and as a telecommunications
pivot. The bureau says western investors and Russians alike can benefit from
setting up joint ventures in Finland, where the legal structures lacking in
Russia are in place and transparency is assured.
Mr Berg says using Finland as a base can help speed up approval of projects
from financial backers such as the European Bank of Reconstruction and
Development, which worry about the security of such investments.
Above all, Finland believes it can offer the benefit of experience and
contacts in Russia gained by Finnish companies. 'Finland has always traded
with Russia - long before the creation of the Soviet Union,' says Mr Berg.
'In Czarist times, when we were ruled by Russia, Finland was a conduit for
trade with the west.'
He cites a joint venture project involving Conoco of the US in oil
production in Ardalin, western Siberia. The USDollars 400m project was in
danGer of falling behind schedule last year because Conoco ran into problems
inbuilding the infrastructure of roads, dwellings and rigs. The Finnish
contractor YIT was brought in to help and got the project back on schedule.
But to foster more such success stories, the Invest in Finland Bureau must
first reverse the old image Finland has of being hostile to foreign
investors. Being a member of the EU will help. But Mr Berg has a big
marketing task ahead of him. As one of the bureau's own brochures candidly
admits: 'Not many people know  .. the place to invest in now is Finland.'
