FT  15 SEP 94 / Survey of Northern Ireland (6): Invisible barriers start to
fall - North/South trade / Trade links are expected to be substantially
improved over the next five years as they are a priority in the Republic's
IRPounds 7bn National Development Plan
Trade between Northern Ireland and its nearest neighbour, the Republic of
Ireland, is abnormally low - and skewed heavily in favour of the Republic.
Northern Ireland's exports to the Republic represent just under eight per
cent of the total. Goods and services flowing the other way represent about
six per cent of the Republic's total exports.
The north's main exports to the Republic are live animals and food products,
including beverages, which accounted for around 40 per cent of the Pounds
468m exported in 1992. Other leading exports include fertiliser, textiles
and clothing.
Food products and live animals account for around 46 per cent of Northern
Ireland's imports from the Republic, which were Pounds 825m in 1992.
Manufactured goods, including chemicals, industrial machinery and road
vehicles, accounted for 47 per cent of imports.
The reasons for the low level of trade are both infrastructural and
historical. The antipathy of certain parts of the Northern Irish business
community to trading with the Republic, and the apprehension of companies in
the Republic about trading in Northern Ireland, are widely acknowledged, but
unquantifiable.
Current political developments may go a long way towards breaking down these
invisible trade barriers and complement the efforts made in recent years to
overcome the tangible, infrastructural barriers.
Over the last three years the two leading business organisations in Ireland,
the Confederation of British Industry in Northern Ireland, and the Irish
Business and Employers Confederation (Ibec) in the Republic, have undertaken
a number of joint initiatives aimed at boosting cross border trade.
Between them, Ibec and the CBI represent 4,000 companies and around 90 per
cent of manufacturing jobs in Ireland. The advent of the single market in
1992 is seen by many as the catalyst that led the two organisations to look
at ways of overcoming obstacles to trade.
The single market swept away the biggest of the the physical obstacles:
delays at the border for customs and security checks could at one time add
up to five hours to the three-hour journey between between Belfast and
Dublin.
The CBI and Ibec established a joint council in 1991, which drew up a three
year North-South market development programme.
The programme set out to address what the joint council perceived to be the
four biggest obstacles to trade, according to Mr William Poole, the
Confederation of British Industry's director of business development for
Ireland.
The biggest problem, according to Mr Poole, was the lack of available
information, in both the Republic and Northern Ireland, about opportunities
on the other side of the border.
The second main obstacle was perceived to be the poor state of road and rail
links between the two parts of Ireland.
The two other big problems identified by the joint council were the sort
that would be associated with any export market: the risk of adverse
currency movements and the difficulties of pursuing payment in a different
jurisdiction.
The problem of lack of information was addressed through the collation and
dissemination of as much information as was available, and the organisation
of contact meetings for various industry sectors.
'The core of activity was to bring together companies from North and South,
matching buyers with sellers and identifying and promoting market
opportunities,' explains Mr Poole.
In total, 25 meetings were held, involving 530 companies split more or less
evenly between Northern Ireland and the Republic.
'The key sectors in which we believed cross border trade could be encouraged
were textiles, food, engineering - including software - and selling to the
public sector,' Mr Poole explained.
The programme has been highly successful and highlighted the potential for
increased cross border trade, Mr Poole maintains. Six Northern Irish food
companies won orders worth Pounds 386,000, while four engineering companies
have got Pounds lm worth of business.
More than 60 sales leads and Pounds 390,000 worth of business were generated
by the software companies which took part in the programme, he adds.
The joint council is now completing a second programme, which will run for
five years and look particularly at the possibility of increasing
cross-border trade by small businesses, which are seen as vital creators of
new jobs. Northern Ireland's small business sector represents the province's
best opportunity for job creation and economic expansion.
'In marketing terms, it makes sound business sense to look at developing
export business with a trading partner on our doorstep,' explains Mr Bill
Jeffrey, chairman of the Federation of Small Businesses in Northern Ireland.
The joint council also commissioned management consultants to produce a
study on the potential for the development of an economic corridor between
Dublin and Belfast, and this is due for publication shortly.
Such a scheme has been mooted by businessmen for many years, with estimates
of the number of jobs it could create ranging from 7,000 to 70,000. The
report is expected to highlight once again problems in the area of
infrastructural links between Northern Ireland and the Republic.
The links, however, are expected to be substantially improved over the next
five years as they are a priority in the Republic's IRPounds 7bn National
Development Plan for spending the next tranche of European Union structural
funds.
The report is also expected to show that 'what is really lacking is normal
relationships between companies because of a lack of interaction,' explains
Mr Geoff MacEnroe, the director of IBEC's North-South Business Development
Programme.
The development of a corridor would give Northern Ireland companies better
access to the island's largest concentration of consumers, in Dublin and its
surrounding towns. Such a corridor might go some way to to help redress
Northern Ireland's trade deficit, which is a relatively recent development.
In 1981, Northern Ireland actually enjoyed a small, Pounds 2m trade surplus
with the Republic.
