FT  16 MAR 94 / Design Council to axe 75% of staff
The Design Council, the government-funded body which provides design
services to industry, is to cut its staff from 200 to 50, close its five
regional offices and transfer many of its industrial functions to the
national network of one-stop business service centres known as Business
Links.
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, said the council was
'out of keeping' with the government's aim to bring services to businesses
on a local level and announced yesterday that Pounds 6m was to be
ring-fenced over the next three years for the promotion of design through
the Business Links.
It is also understood that the Design Council's budget could be reduced from
about Pounds 7.5m a year to just under Pounds 4m beginning in 1995.
The announcement follows a four-month review led by the Design Council's
chairman, Mr John Sorrell, a designer and former chairman of the Design
Business Association.
The council will cease to provide services, many of which will pass to the
private sector. Instead, says a review document published yesterday, the
council will become 'an organisation with the attitude and capacity to
inspire and orchestrate action by others'.
The council will advise and monitor the 200 planned Business Links, which
will bring together the functions of Training and Enterprise Councils,
chambers of commerce, local authorities and the Enterprise Agency.
Mr Heseltine said that the regional Business Links would be better able to
cater for those small businesses which would not 'naturally find their way'
to the Haymarket offices of the council.
The restructured council, intended for relaunch in a December, its 50th
anniversary, will continue to act as the UK's authority on design. It will
also conduct research and develop design education and training.
Mr Sorrell said yesterday that the refocused council would build on the best
of the past. 'We are creating a new council which is smaller and will be
very fleet of foot,' he said.
The council is still in its consultation period on staff decisions, but
hopes to redeploy some of its central office workers into the private sector
or into Business Links. It is not yet known how many will be made redundant.
Mr Harminder Sing, regional officer for MSF, the union for the council's
workers, said: 'Our major concern is that the expertise that the Design
Council has built up is being dispersed. If it is fragmented then you lose
the benefits of one unit - the synergy, the effectiveness, and the
cross-fertilisation of ideas.'
The Confederation of British Industry and the Chartered Society of Designers
welcomed the review's conclusions yesterday, though both expressed
reservations about the details of passing on industrial services to Business
Links.
