FT  25 MAY 94 / Arts: Mose in Egitto - Opera
At the Royal Opera the Midland Bank Proms, now a great institution,
recommenced on Monday with a new production of rare Rossini. Mose in Egitto
(Moses in Egypt) was composed for the Lent season at the Teatro San Carlo in
1818. Hence its subject, and its billing as an 'azione tragica-sacra' -
though Rossini and his librettist Tottola had laced the Old Testament story
with a conventional love-interest: a pre-echo of the Aida situation, indeed,
but non-triangular.
In fact the work was played at Covent Garden in 1833 as a sacred oratorio,
with interpolated bits from Handel's Israelites in Egypt (and the
'love-interest' presumably trimmed). For Paris, the composer re-jigged and
elaborated the piece in 1827 as Mose et Pharaon, which went on to enjoy a
long popularity. This time the Royal Opera has preferred the Neapolitan
original, with only Rossini's 1819 additions. The production comes from
Bologna, with its conductor Paolo Olmi; the Teatro San Carlo has
collaborated on the version used. The director and the designer are one man,
Hugo de Ana.
That seemed to be part of the trouble on Monday, when Mose seemed
excessively tame for its length. Italians understand rocky landscapes very
well; de Ana's sets revel in great expanses of high-quality mock rock (never
mind the visible seams, feel the depth]) and evoke an oppressively parched
land. The enslaved Israelites are dressed as gypsy nomads; their Egyptian
overlords have shaven heads, strangely elongated to accommodate the singers'
hair under their skullcaps. (My companion remarked how much they resembled
the other-planet family in Roeg's The Man Who Fell to Earth.)
For all the tribal confrontations, however, the director de Ana contrives
little but static, formal patterns. A sinuous quartet of bare-breasted
dancers enlivens the action a bit, but there is rarely any sense of real
menace or danger. Nor does he give his principals much help: even in their
longest and most fraught numbers, he fixes them in languid art nouveau
poses, more decorative than dramatic. Authoritative singing and conducting
might easily make up the gap - but there was the rub, at least on this first
night.
Olmi was tasteful to a fault. A square beat, innocent of anything like
spontaneity or urgency; the orchestral attack soft-edged (characteristically
crisp Rossini dotted-notes were regularly smoothed into bland triplets);
none of the stark gravitas that the best of Rossini's score deserves and
needs. Its grandest passages involve not only some far-sighted chromatics,
but bold, obsessive play with single phrases, almost symphonic - which its
first audiences recognised as Teutonic 'learnedness' far beyond the Italian
norm. Olmi left all of that under-pointed, mild, ineffectual.
At least Ruggero Raimondi's Moses enjoyed ringing support from his four
trombones, though they nearly swallowed him towards the end when he was
audibly tiring. His majestic declamation is still splendid; but his bass was
cramped at the top, and effortful when negotiating the recurrent 'turns' in
his opening music. Simone Alaimo's Pharaoh - the competing bass here,
younger and lighter of timbre - maintained his sharp, energetic bite all the
way. He is a major asset to the show.
As his son and heir Osiride, inconveniently enamoured of an Israelite
maiden, the American tenor Bruce Ford sounded merely careful and correct
throughout Act 1, probably discouraged by the low prevailing temperature. It
took the distraught, non-confessional Act 2 duet with his father to show
this already distinguished Rossinian at full expressive stretch, secure at
the risky vocal heights of his role.
That might have been crowned by his next duet, in abortive flight with his
inamorata Elcia; but it wasn't, because his Elcia is the young
competition-winner Anna Caterina Antonacci. Her soprano boasts a lovely
clear ring, is beautifully even throughout its range, and gracefully adept
with all the ornamentation - but so far, too carefully polished and placid
to register any crises of loyalty or passion. When somebody cried 'Brava]'
after her main aria, I thought that kind of him; nonetheless, what she still
needs is a rudely demanding conductor-dramatist. Overnight, she might become
a far more exciting artist.
Fortunately for the opera, we had the mezzo Ann Murray in the secondary role
of the Pharaoh's wife, an anxious sympathiser with the Israelites - to spell
out what is embedded in Rossini's 'serious' music. She did that superbly. In
the less grateful role of Elcia's confidante Patricia Bardon leaves a
disproportionately vivid stamp. With still thinner material, Philip Doghan
makes something of the nasty High Priest. The tenor Aaron, who ought surely
to be more silver-tongued than anybody, sounded out-of-sorts and fragile.
What with his choked delivery and Raimondi's rusty creaks, the famous final
Prayer scored only a tame modicum of its proper effect. We wanted more.
Supported by the Peter Moores Foundation; further performances May 28
(another Prom) and 31, June 3, 6, 8 and 11
