FT  03 JUN 94 / UK Company News: Taking the City road - EuroDollar heads for
market
Over the past five years EuroDollar has quietly overtaken some of its
better-known rivals to become the UK's second largest car rental company
behind Avis.
Last year it claimed a 10 per cent share of the fragmented Pounds 583m UK
car hire market, a rise from 7 per cent in 1988.
EuroDollar, the subject of a Pounds 118m management buy-out from the TSB
Group in August, is coming to market through a placing and public offer
expected to value it at more than Pounds 100m. A pathfinder for the issue is
due to be published today.
EuroDollar's relatively low profile as a rental fleet operator is a clue to
its success - growth in the UK has been fuelled by its penetration of the
corporate market where it is now the market leader.
More than three quarters of its Pounds 78m turnover in the year to March 31
came from the corporate sector although in order to maximise fleet
utilisation, the group also cultivates the retail trade at weekends and
during holiday periods.
The main customers among 6,500 corporate accounts include BT, GEC,
Rolls-Royce, Rank Xerox and ICL along with fleet operators such as Cowie
Interleasing and breakdown services like the RAC.
EuroDollar has invested heavily in information technology, spending an
average Pounds 4m a year to build a real-time computer tracking and
reservation system which allows it to pinpoint cars and review their usage
at any time.
This enables the group to move cars from site to site as required and manage
its fleet of 12,000 cars and 1,000 vans more efficiently than competitors -
EuroDollar regularly achieves fleet utilisation rates of 70 per cent or
more.
The IT network also links together EuroDollar's 105 branches and has enabled
the group to pioneer the use of 'inplants' - EuroDollar employees who are
attached to large corporate customers and work on-site with them to manage
their rental requirements on-line.
The other key benefit of EuroDollar's IT system is that it enables the
group's fleet controllers to minimise vehicle holding costs which largely
depend on residual values and funding costs.
EuroDollar acquires more than 20,000 cars a year - each car remains in the
fleet for about 5 or 6 months. Because each rental effectively represents a
'test drive' by a potential car buyer, rental companies can negotiate
particularly good terms with manufacturers.
In most cases vehicles are acquired on finance leases or lease purchase
agreements funded either by a finance house or through the tied financing
division of a car manufacturer. EuroDollar has total credit lines of Pounds
111.5m - roughly Pounds 40m above its borrowings at the end of March - and
operates on the basis of no gearing before vehicle asset finance.
In order to further minimise risks, at least half of the group's fleet is
covered by guaranteed residual value programmes and it has managed to keep
overall disposal values at between 78 and 80 per cent of list prices.
The management's success in maximising fleet utilisation rates while
minimising holding costs is evident in the group's recent performance. Gross
profit margins have increased from 57 per cent in 1990 to 72 per cent in the
year to March 31 and over the same period operating profits have grown from
Pounds 6.2m to Pounds 17.8m
The management, led by Mr Ian Mosley, chief executive, has recently disposed
of lossmaking rental operations in France and Italy which are now part of
the group's franchised European network.
That move cleared the way for EuroDollar to become the first London quoted
car hire group since Avis Europe was acquired by a consortium in late 1989.
