FT  23 APR 94 / Societies hit by Pounds 653m saving outflow
The withdrawal of savings from building societies last month once again led
to a near-record net outflow in retail funds - with Pounds 653m taken from
societies.
At the same time, demand for mortgages rose sharply, providing further
evidence of recovery in the housing market, but highlighting the need for
societies to attract retail savings to fund lending.
Figures released by the Building Societies Association yesterday showed net
new commitments in March totalling Pounds 3.7bn, against Pounds 2.9bn the
previous month. Net advances were Pounds 960m against Pounds 652m in
February.
The fifth consecutive net monthly outflow was the highest since September
1986 when investors withdrew money for the TSB flotation.
Mr Adrian Coles, director-general of the Building Societies Association,
attributed the net outflows to a succession of one-off factors such as the
rush to pay fuel bills before the imposition of value added tax at the start
of this month.
More ominously for societies, there were signs of the continuing popularity
of other forms of savings which yield higher returns. Sales of unit trusts
are reported to have hit a record of more than Pounds 1bn.
Mr Coles said a similar outflow was unlikely in April, and emphasised that
interest automatically credited to accounts continued to increase balances
held by societies.
'Although societies remain mindful of the very competitive nature of the
savings market, there is no prospect of temporary pressures on retail
funding necessitating higher mortgage rates,' he said.
Mr John Wriglesworth, societies analyst at stockbrokers UBS, argued that
such a move could not be discounted. He expected a net inflow of funds in
April, but if this failed to occur 'societies will have run out of one-off
excuses'.
Societies' increased lending was achieved partly at the expense of banks,
according to figures published by the British Bankers Association. Banks'
mortgage lending rose by Pounds 596m in March compared with Pounds 669m in
February.
