FT  09 JUN 94 / UK Company News: Daily Mail Trust rises 14% to Pounds 24m
The Daily Mail and General Trust, yesterday produced pre-tax profits 14 per
cent higher at Pounds 24m and made an upbeat forecast that it was responding
well to 'the general improvement in the economy and in the advertising
markets in particular.'
Trading profits for the half year to April 3 increased by Pounds 6.8m to
Pounds 43.2m before exceptional items. Turnover rose to Pounds 368.3m
(Pounds 329.1m), with the group's three main newspapers, the Daily Mail,
Mail on Sunday and the Evening Standard - all with new supplements -
performing well, mainly because of increasing advertising revenues.
The Evening Standard's important classified business grew by 15 per cent.
Northcliffe Newspapers, the company's regional group, also increased
profits, although the revenue increase was not consistent across the
country.
Mr Derek Terrington, publishing analyst at stockbrokers Kleinwort Benson
said yesterday: 'Essentially this was a good trading performance on a rising
advertising market.'
Earnings per share rose from 12.1p to 13p or from 16.8p to 21.2p adjusted
before exceptionals.
The interim dividend has been increased by 11 per cent to 4p (3.6p).
The strong performance in the core newspaper business was not generally
mirrored in the company's other media activities.
As already announced, the DMGT faces an up to Pounds 20m share for the full
year of losses from Whittle Communications and Whittle Schools in the US.
One Whittle television network has had to be closed down and there are
considerable development costs at Medical News Network. A total of Pounds
12.2m will be charged in the accounts.
Development costs will also be incurred setting up Channel One, a new
television channel aimed at the cable television market in London.
The company said yesterday that the early losses 'should not exceed Pounds
40m in total' - Pounds 10m lower than earlier speculation.
The shares rose 33p yesterday to close at Pounds 12.13p.
COMMENT
The company's main newspaper businesses continue to forge ahead underpinned
by a commendable commitment to invest in editorial. The questions begin to
arise when the company strays away from print into the electronic media. It
was involved in the successful - and profitable - teletext franchise bid,
but has tended to come second in a number of commercial radio and television
contests. The losses at Whittle flow from a move from print to electronic
ommunication. The cable channel is clearly a long-term venture that will hit
short-term results. Analysts are looking for about Pounds 85m before
exceptionals for the full year and a bit over Pounds 100m for next year.
Next year's forecast of 65p earnings per share would give a 50 per cent
premium to the market.
