FT  11 JAN 94 / Yeltsin aide fears clash with legislature: Russia's new
parliament convenes for the first time today
Russia's new parliament convenes today amid warnings from President Boris
Yeltsin's aides of the dangers of fierce new confrontation between the
executive and the legislature.
'Unfortunately we have information that some factions, including the
Communists, are planning a new onslaught on the president and government,'
Mr Vyacheslav Kostikov told a press conference.
He appealed to the Communists, however, 'to look at the bloody consequences
of your own heritage when you criticise Russia's democracy and accuse the
president and government of anti-democratic behaviour'.
The warning came amid claims that five of the main Russian parties have
agreed to nominate Mr Vladimir Zhirinovsky, leader of the ultra-nationalist
Liberal Democratic party, as chairman of the parliament's foreign affairs
committee.
The appointment, in the wake of Mr Zhirinovsky's strong showing in last
month's elections, would send a further ominous message, especially to
Russia's neighbours.
Mr Sergei Shakhrai, the leader of the reformist Russian Party for Unity and
Accord, says in an interview in today's daily newspaper Sevodnya that the
Liberal Democrats, the Communists, the Agrarians, the Women of Russia and
the Democratic party have agreed a slate of candidates. As these parties
command around half the seats in the lower chamber, or state duma, they have
a good chance of success.
Mr Shakhrai has proposed himself as speaker.
Meanwhile, Mr Yeltsin unveiled a long-heralded streamlining of the
government. Although the reorganisation itself appears to be little more
than cosmetic, its announcement has cleared the way for the appointment of a
new cabinet.
The composition of the cabinet will be the first real indicator of the
government's level of commitment to fully-fledged market reforms, following
the strong anti-reform vote in the December 12 elections. It is to be
proposed by Mr Victor Chernomyrdin, the prime minister, and endorsed by Mr
Yeltsin.
Yesterday's restructuring reduced the number of deputy prime ministers from
nine to four. Itar-Tass news agency, quoting a senior government official,
said the two new first deputies were likely to be Mr Oleg Soskovets, a
middle-of-the-road industrialist, and Mr Yegor Gaidar, who launched radical
reforms two years ago.
Itar-Tass also reported that Mr Alexander Zaveriukha, the conservative first
deputy prime minister responsible for agriculture, and Mr Boris Fyodorov,
the radical finance minister, who has vowed to resign from the government if
Mr Victor Gerashchenko is kept on as central bank governor, were being
proposed for the other two deputy prime minister posts.
Three new ministries have been created, some old ministries and government
committees have been abolished or merged, and others have been renamed.
Mr Kostikov also confirmed a presidential decision to spend Dollars 500m on
a new parliament building, despite criticism that it would be a waste of
money when the state has other buildings to choose from and has sharply
reduced spending on the population.
The construction of a new building showed optimism in Russia's prospects for
democracy, he said.
