FT  23 NOV 94 / Business and the Environment: Alternative waste treatment -
Brazil is enthusiastic about plasma-based disposal
A pilot project to dispose of hazardous waste is planned to start at a
hospital in the densely-populated city of Sao Paulo, Brazil, using
technology developed by Nasa scientists.
Brazilian researchers will use plasma - super-heated gases - at the
University of Sao Paulo hospital to provide cheaper and safer disposal to
traditional incinerators or landfills.
Hospitals in Sao Paulo, South America's largest city with a population of
15m, produce 115 tonnes of waste a day which contains blood, syringes and
body parts.
Because of the risk of disease this waste must be incinerated, an expensive
process as its humidity content is 40 per cent to 60 per cent. There are
additional health risks from normal gas or oil-fired incineration, in
particular the release of carcinogenic dioxins and toxic ashes.
Roberto Szente, head of plasma research at the Sao Paulo state-funded
Technology Research Institute, says: 'Because gas is a relatively poor
conductor the plasma can heat up to 10,000`C'
The technology was developed by Nasa, the US space agency, to simulate the
heating experienced by rockets re-entering the atmosphere. Plasma forms at
extremely high temperatures, when atoms of gas split into a mixture of
positive ions and electrons. It can be made by transferring energy from an
electric arc to a gas such as air or nitrogen.
It is only with the growth in environmental awareness that the IPT, along
with other research centres around the world, started applying it to
hazardous waste.
'With plasma, the temperature is so high that everything, including metals,
melts and becomes a liquid pool,' says Szente.
This pool solidifies as slabs of residues, basically blocks of glass and
iron, that can be used in construction or disposed of in landfill. Because
the result is a molten state which later solidifies, there is less risk of
dioxins being dispersed than with
ashes.
Erasmo Tolosa, hospital superintendent, says the city council contracts out
collection and treatment of waste. 'We don't have a great deal of confidence
in the current system and we know that in some parts of Brazil the waste is
just dumped,' he says, referring to news reports of human limbs being found
on rubbish dumps in the poor north-east of Brazil.
The IPT is applying plasma technology to another pilot project to deal with
the galvanised waste produced by companies in the metal-coating industry, a
spin-off from Sao Paulo's booming car industry.
Companies used to discharge the liquid residues from galvanisation straight
into the Tiete River, one of the most polluted in the world. But with the
introduction of pollution controls to clean the river, the companies are
left with a mud - the by-product of galvanisation - containing heavy metals
such as iron, silica, calcium and zinc, as well as cyanide.
IPT tests show that when plasma is applied to the mud it destroys the
cyanide and the end result is non-toxic slabs of metal, 96 per cent iron,
says Szente.
Marco Antonio Barbieri, director of a chrome company and spokesman for
around 100 small galvanisation companies involved in the project, says
plasma treatment is likely to cost Dollars 40-Dollars 70 a tonne compared
with about Dollars 200 for landfill, Dollars 400-Dollars 800 for cement
kilns and Dollars 1,500 for use of private incinerators.
Despite all its apparent advantages, plasma's progress so far in waste
disposal has been piecemeal. Szente says this is partly because it is still
a relatively unknown technology, and also because companies are unwilling to
decommission expensive incinerators to spend more money building plasma
units.
