FT  16 SEP 94 / Weatherstone hands over JP Morgan reins
Sir Dennis Weatherstone, chairman and chief executive of JP Morgan, will
retire at the end of this year after five years in which the US institution
has transformed itself into a leading international investment bank.
Sir Dennis' retirement after he turns 64 in November, and the appointment in
his place of Mr Douglas Warner, who is 48, comes a year before most
observers had expected.
However, analysts and rivals said the timing did not appear to be the result
of internal dissent. Mr Warner, who has been the bank's president since the
start of 1990, had been expected to take over.
Sir Dennis, who described the transition as 'boringly uneventful' and
planned for some time, said: 'I am very healthy, very happy. The bank is in
very good shape.'
Sir Dennis yesterday won plaudits from Wall Street for JP Morgan's advances
in investment banking. Mr George Salem, an analyst at Prudential Securities,
said: 'He executed the plan to transform the organisation, from one that was
becoming an anachronism to one that was a leader in global finance. I would
give him very high grades.'
The past year, though, has seen Morgan's reputation sullied by its
entanglement with Banesto, the Spanish bank taken over by the Bank of Spain
at the end of last year. The controversy raised questions about the bank's
ability to expand internationally without diluting its blue-chip customer
base and reputation for quality.
'With the benefit of hindsight it (the Banesto investment) doesn't look too
good,' Sir Dennis said. 'I don't think it was our most glorious moment . . .
But it was a long-term investment, and we realised it was high-risk. We're
not going to go through our business and not make any mistakes, anywhere.'
He added, though, that investors in JP Morgan's Corsair fund, which invested
in Banesto, may yet do 'very nicely' out of the deal.
Sir Dennis also played down the suggestion that profits have become more
volatile under his tenure, as the bank relies more on income from trading in
financial markets. 'It may be that in times of (market) volatility the
earnings will go down,' he conceded, though he added: 'Some of what is seen
as volatility isn't there,' as much of the bank's trading was for customers.
Mr Warner fits the Ivy League mould of JP Morgan executives better than Sir
Dennis, a Briton who left school at the age of 15. Mr Warner, educated at
Yale, has been with the bank throughout his career. He ran the bank's London
operations in the late 1980s and headed its corporate finance business from
New York. In the past five years he has been involved more on internal
matters as chief operating officer.
Austria's bank adviser, Page 16
