FT  22 MAR 94 / Survey of Jersey (2): Profits up 15% staff down 5% - The
recession has opened the way to a new growth period free of the constraints
of labour and property shortages / Banking
Jersey is one of the premier offshore banking centres of Europe - still no
rival to Switzerland but not so far behind Luxembourg as a private banking
centre.
Moreover it is poised to expand again, after a period of consolidation.
Mr Roger Bignall, the banking and insurance regulator, says that four new
institutions are in the process of setting up in Jersey, and the year's
total could be six. At present, 71 banks are established including nine
so-called 'managed' banks which have no separate physical presence but
operate through other banks or accountancy firms.
Bank deposits actually fell last year from Pounds 53.4bn to Pounds 52.9bn
but this gives a misleading picture of the strength of the industry.
With dollar interest rates so low, and sterling rates falling too, many
investors switched into the securities markets.
'There are no unhappy faces. Everyone is happy with the amount of business
coming in,' says Mr Julian Bub, head of Chase Manhattan's Jersey operation
and president of the Jersey Bankers Association.
In recent years, Jersey bankers have focused primarily on the booming market
in services to private clients. A survey by Chase Manhattan Private Bank
last year concluded that worldwide some Dollars 2,100bn is placed 'offshore'
outside the investor's domicile. Of this, some 6 per cent is in the Channel
Islands, with Jersey significantly larger than Guernsey, its neighbouring
rival.
Economic overheating in Jersey caused problems in the late 1980s but the
recession has opened the way to a new growth period free - at least for the
time being - of the constraints of labour and property shortages. Jersey's
banking industry has shared in the labour shake-out common to banking
throughout Europe but it missed the problems of bad debts which hit banks
generally.
Thus in 1992, the latest year for which figures are available, Jersey's
banks actually increased their profits by 15 per cent while staff numbers
fell by 5 per cent. Consequently the average profit per employee, a key
measure tracked by the island's authorities, jumped by a fifth to Pounds
116,300.
Productivity has been boosted by technology upgrades and by the shift
towards investment funds and securities where margins can be higher and
there is more scope to earn fees.
A recent survey of the Channel Islands banking industry by accountants
Arthur Andersen found that most banks expected their profits to grow by at
least 10 per cent a year over the next few years but the labour force could
eventually shrink by up to another 10 per cent from current levels. Slightly
surprisingly, bankers expected more growth from corporate business and
institutional investors than from private clients.
Many banks earn a prosperous living around the English-speaking expatriate
circuit. 'There is more opportunity than we can possibly cope with,' says Mr
Trevor Falle, marketing director of ANZ Grindlays. 'The investment side is
stretched at the moment.'
There remains the challenge of continental Europe, where tighter
harmonisation could play into Jersey's hands.
'We should raise our level of awareness as Offshore Europe,' says Mr Peter
Williams, managing director of Lazard Brothers. 'But with Europe, Jersey's
main problem is a language barrier.'
