FT  02 APR 94 / Hosokawa comes under mounting fire
A group of parliamentarians travelled in pouring rain yesterday to the home
town of Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, the Japanese prime minister, to inspect his
ancient mansion in Kumamoto, southern Japan.
The opposition Liberal Democratic Party members were trying to disprove Mr
Hosokawa's claim that he used a Y100m (Pounds 653,000) loan from the Sagawa
Kyubin trucking company to mend his gate and walls.
They allege the prime minister instead used the money to secure his
candidacy for gubernatorial elections in 1983.
Revelations that Sagawa bribed politicians for favours helped to bring down
the long-ruling LDP last year, enabling Mr Hosokawa to take power.
In the latest offensive, LDP and communist parliamentarians are blocking Mr
Hosokawa's Y73,080bn (Pounds 477.4bn) budget for the business year which
started yesterday.
They are refusing to allow deliberations on the budget until the prime
minister brings in his former secretary to testify before parliament and
proves that he repaid the loan to Sagawa.
The situation is beginning to resemble that of 1989, when Mr Noboru
Takeshita was forced to resign as prime minister over links with the Recruit
stocks-for-favours scandal in exchange for passage of the annual budget
bill.
The wrangling is getting more public attention than Mr Hosokawa's handling
of trade tensions with the US or the faltering domestic economy.
Economic implications of the budget boycott are severe. A provisional budget
for the first 50 days passed through the upper house last night, but lack of
a full budget jeopardises planned tax cuts that are the centrepiece of Mr
Hosokawa's package aimed at reviving the economy.
Some members of Mr Hosokawa's coalition are even suggesting that the prime
minister give in to the opposition demands, since they believe LDP scrutiny
can only damage his credibility.
The purchase of 300 Nippon Telegraph and Telephone shares by the prime
minister's father-in-law in 1986 is also being questioned by the LDP.
Mr Hosokawa supplied the collateral for loans to buy the shares, but he has
denied any involvement in the purchase.
While stock purchases by politicians are not illegal, Mr Hosokawa's
continued denials, in spite of claims by a stock consultant that he had
arranged the deal for the prime minister, has made the issue an ideal target
for the opposition parties.
Some political analysts believe that, as much as they would like to, the LDP
does not have the clout to force Mr Hosokawa to resign. 'They can only drag
him through the mud,' says Mr Jeff Young, political analyst at brokers
Salomon Brothers in Tokyo.
But Mr Hosokawa's image as a clean politician dedicated to reform has been
tarnished and his popular support is declining. Until now, his high ratings
in the opinion polls have provided bargaining power and helped bolster his
political position. Already, the prime minister's opponents are taking
advantage of that dwindling support.
