FT  12 NOV 94 / Outdoors: Headlights shine on midnight run - FT Ski
Expedition
Arnie Wilson and Lucy Dicker are attempting to ski every day of 1994 on a
round-the-world trip. They are now in the US on the last stage of their
odyssey.
It was snowing quite hard outside and the last thing we wanted to do after
an excellent dinner in Mammoth Lakes was to go skiing. But after a week on
Mammoth Mountain's slopes we had a flight to catch.
We were on our way to an unscheduled return to Summit County, Colorado,
where Keystone shared with Mammoth the distinction of being the only resort
we could find in the US with lifts operating.
This meant a five-hour drive through the desert to Los Angeles the next
morning - and to get in our skiing for the day, we had either to ski after
midnight or at 5am.
In the event, it was exhilarating. Although the great, brooding mountain was
in darkness, it certainly was not quiet. Teams of snow-makers were busy
monitoring the snow-guns blasting three trails - Fascination, Broadway and
Far West - with a fresh carpet of instant snow.
Tim Russell and Eric Gehrung, complete with snowmobiles and miners-style
helmets equipped with lamps, met us at the bottom of the slopes. 'Why don't
you ski during the day?' asked Russell, genuinely confused by our desire to
ski at 1am. We explained. Then, each of us hanging on to a snowmobile, Lucy
and I were zooming up to the top of Lift 1. Our two drivers followed us
down, their headlights sending our shadows across Broadway as we made fresh
tracks in the night's new snow.
It was just as well we skied at night: at dawn we headed for the airport in
a blizzard.
It was not to be our day. Gremlins in the system meant that authorisation by
American Airlines, our sponsors, of our flight from Los Angeles to Denver
did not show on the computers in Los Angeles. In the confusion we managed to
upset another sponsor, Avis, by having to leave our vehicle outside the
departure lounge.
When we finally reached Denver, we thought we were in good hands: Ski The
Summit - our main sponsors - had booked a room for us at Stouffer's hotel.
More gremlins. The hotel had no record of our booking. By this time - 2,214
miles and 17 hours after leaving Mammoth  - the weary FT skiers were
beginning to experience symptoms of paranoia.
But tomorrow was another ski day. To our delight, although Copper Mountain
was not yet officially open, we were invited to join race teams hurtling
down Main Vein, a vertical drop of 1,425ft served by Copper's American Eagle
high-speed quad lift.
Inspired by our fellow skiers, we skied almost 25,000 vertical feet in three
hours.
During one descent, a skier flashed past. We were sharing the run with
Olympic downhill silver medallist Picabo Street. Suddenly, our rate of
descent seemed snail-like.
