FT  14 JUL 94 / Survey of Merseyside (6): Campus is no longer remote -
Higher education
An old industry has been mushrooming anew in the heart of Liverpool. It is
higher education and its local turnover is almost Pounds 300m a year and
rising.
That is at least four times more than 10 years ago. Partly, it is the result
of the expansion of higher education places and the metamorphosis of
Liverpool Polytechnic into Liverpool John Moores University, but it is also
the result of radical changes in attitude.
Merseyside has two universities - the new 'JM' and the 'old' Liverpool
University, the first of the civic redbricks. What characterises each of
them is an obvious and vigorous sense of entrepreneurship.
It was very different 12 years ago, when Liverpool University often appeared
trapped in its own precinct at the top of Brownlow Hill, quite literally a
stone's throw from the 1981 Toxteth riots, from which it was insulated and
aloof.
At the same time, the polytechnic suffered from the second-class status
conferred on colleges of its ilk by local authority control, fewer resources
and a national, externally-controlled, bureaucratic system for validating
its degrees.
Today, Liverpool University turns over Pounds 150m a year on its own, a
third of it on research, with three-fifths of this latter amount
discretionary money won in a tight marketplace from industry and various
research councils.
Liverpool JM has been regenerating much of the elegant Georgian section of
the inner city on its own. Originally a conglomeration of technical, art and
commercial colleges dotted about the place, the dots are spreading, becoming
blobs and coalescing, reversing the spread of a spotty dereliction that was
threatening an overall, seedy decline.
Professor Peter Toyne, who stresses his entrepreneurial orientation with the
combined title of vice-chancellor and chief executive, has rescued a fine
old terraced small mansion in Rodney Street - Merseyside's Harley Street -
as the JM's headquarters.
'Vision is all-important,' he says. 'We are in the business of being a new
kind of university. We have compacts with local schools and are trying to
harmonise the area's potential. We cannot become a remote campus and we
don't want to be. We are all over the city and growing into it osmotically.'
He believes in out-reach - and keeping access open to anyone who can benefit
from higher education and pass the exams at the end. This means that
although there are more than 10 applications for every place now, the JM has
resisted the urge merely to move academically upmarket.
A few mature adults without conventional school-leaving qualifications can
still get in if they can prove their ability in a rigorous interview.
Admission tutors counsel other routes elsewhere, such as vocational courses,
if they think an applicant might fail.
The JM has also modularised its courses so students can mix and match them
over three or four years, studying in bites. This brings Prof Toyne to what
he calls his 'bite and megabyte' philosophy, using information technology
more effectively in education.
So the JM does not have a conventional library, but an architecturally
impressive new Pounds 8m learning resource centre. This has been partly
endowed by the Canadian-born Mr Aldham Robarts, one of the UK's pioneers of
free newspaper publishing when he founded the Wirral Globe, initially an
advertising freesheet, in 1973.
The centre is a library in one sense, but every carrel has a terminal -
there are 700 of them - for access to any database a student might need. It
can also be accessed remotely by modem from personal computers. The JM is
already planning a second centre and other universities are looking to copy
the model.
A few hundred yards away from Rodney Street in Senate House, Liverpool
University's vice-chancellor spells out a complementary philosophy. Prof
Philip Love's greatest selling point is his university's academic reputation
and record as one of Britain's top research institutions.
While Chadwick's pioneering work splitting atoms 60 years ago has been
superseded by a nationally funded interdisciplinary surface science centre
and a Leverhulme-backed catalysis research institute, a university can only
get such prestigious projects if it has a widespread, rock-solid academic
base.
'Our theme is partnership with industry, commerce and the community,' Prof
Love says. 'We have lots of very expensive facilities which we intend to
make increasingly available locally, with emphasis on wealth creation.'
For example, there is a rapid prototypes laboratory which he believes should
be used more by small companies than by large ones. He is also trying to
ensure that Liverpool's graduates are never thought unworldly by industry
and commerce.
'All learn problem-solving skills as part of their courses,' he says. 'We
try to produce people with multi-competences. Instead of just having a
degree in a particular subject, we try to equip them with competences for a
lifetime in work - and with entrepreneurial skills, if possible.'
