FT  05 FEB 94 / Travel: A life of piracy and pillage on the ocean wave -
Rough, unruly and enchanting. Nicholas Woodsworth on the Sulu Sea gipsies
Like most people on an ocean cruise, I enjoy starting the day with a
peaceful and leisurely breakfast. I did not mind leaving the Lady Ruth as it
off-loaded cargo at the port of Jolo, and wandering into town to find
something to eat. I was only too happy to escape for a while.
I did not mind, either, that there were no eggs and bacon for breakfast. In
this militantly Moslem part of the Philippines, bacon goes against the
grain. I am as happy with cassava cakes as the next man.
Nor, when four young soldiers sat beside me, did I object to their company,
but I do mind when fellow diners put their M-16 assault rifles on the table.
When military street patrols feel the need to post one man at the restaurant
door while the others are eating, I get twitchy.
Twelve hundred miles away, in the Indonesian capital of Jakarta,
representatives of the Philippine government were that very morning sitting
down to peace negotiations with the Moro National Liberation Front, the
Moslem rebel group that has kept the southern Philippines in a state of
low-level war for more than 20 years. But here, in the Sulu archipelago, a
stronghold of the MNLF, no one seemed to know or care.
Perhaps it was because locals become a bit cynical when ideas of peace and
order are mentioned: for more than four centuries, the Sulus have been the
most lawless islands in the eastern seas.
The Spanish, who colonised and Christianised the Philippines in the 1500s,
were unable to impose their rule on the Moslem pirates who terrorised the
Sulu Sea between Mindanao island and Borneo. Not even the Americans, who
took over the colony from the Spanish at the turn of this century, could
gain a foothold on this 200-mile-long string of islands.
Until now, efforts to bring stability and order had failed and, ever since
boarding the Lady Ruth, my fellow passengers - between noisy bouts of
snacking on cold, boiled crab - had provided endless chronicles of violence
for my entertainment.
'Was that June or July the government platoon was ambushed and beheaded near
Jolo?' one passenger would ask to my left, cracking a crab leg between his
teeth.
'And what about that Spanish priest kidnapped on Basilan? Didn't he escape?'
another would say to my right, spitting shell on to the deck.
On and on it went: attacks on foolhardy missionaries trying to peddle
bibles; rampages by 'lost commands' - troops in remote areas who have turned
and taken the law in their own hands; entire villages held up by bandit
gangs; depredations by another rebel group, the communist New People's Army;
on-going vendettas between neighbouring islands; piracy and pillage on the
high seas. The MNLF was the least of it.
Even the Lady Ruth, it seemed, merited protection. Aboard was a military
escort who strolled about cradling their weapons. There were also
hard-looking young men in mufti and dark glasses who wore .38s stuck in
their belts. God knows who they were; I was not about to ask.
Far more disconcerting than all these guns, though, was the Lady Ruth
itself. It was precisely as the song has it - no lady, but a tramp. I could
make out from the painted-over lettering on its stern that, in a previous
life, it had been the Kashima Maru, out of Nagasaki. Worn out and abandoned
by the Japanese, renamed, its bows crumpled by a collision, its engines
weary, today it limps around the Sulus with 500 passengers, 37 crew and 200
tonnes of cargo.
It would not satisfy more discerning cruise enthusiasts. It has no cabins,
just long rows of canvas cots 5ft long and 18in wide. My feet stuck out over
the ship's railing and my arms flopped over the cots touching my own on
either side. The fluorescent lights that burned all night on the roof
overhead were one obstacle to sleep; worse was the rooster tethered to the
railing three cots away. Like all roosters he woke early and, by 4.30 on the
second morning, I was ready to make my own contribution to murder and mayhem
in the Sulus.
But when there is no sleep, there is always conversation. The pair of
middle-aged women sleeping to one side of me looked like two dears on a
shopping spree and, in a way, they were. They were professional smugglers,
they proudly told me. They were going to Sitangkai, the last port in the
Sulu chain; from there it was just a four-hour ride by speed-boat to Sabah,
in Borneo, where they would buy gold to bring back and sell.
Were they not afraid of being caught, I asked. 'Not at all,' one smiled,
comfortingly. 'Naval and customs patrols are all paid off.'
What about pirates?
'Yes, they are a little more trouble,' said the other. It was as if we were
discussing nothing more sinister than avoiding bores at cocktail parties.
'You just have to choose a boat fast enough to out-run them.'
The hours passed. One steamy port of call followed another through odd hours
of darkness and light. Like the rest of the passengers on the Lady Ruth, I
fell into a tropical heat-induced stupor. When we arrived at Sitangkai, I
did not even realise it. I thought we were still far out at sea. Much to my
confusion, so we were.
Sitangkai is not an island at all but a town of 10,000 people perched on
stilts 8ft over the water of a giant coral reef. The Lady Ruth had to dock
two miles away in deep water at a concrete wharf attached to nothing; with
brightly-coloured parasols held up against the sun, we buzzed over the
turquoise sea towards the town in motorised dug-out canoes.
Sitangkai's central thoroughfare might be 6ft deep in water but it gets as
congested as any main street ashore. Canoes, sail-boats, outriggers,
outboards - everything cruises the channels of downtown Sitangkai, from
naked little boys in 4ft punts to mean-looking, forward-raked smuggling
boats that can out-run anything.
I was slightly nervous as I wandered around on the raised wooden walkways
linking shops and houses, schools and mosques. With long hair, tank-tops and
bandannas tied Rambo-style, some of these smugglers looked as mean as their
boats. I was fast attracting a crowd. 'Milikan] Milikan]' children shouted,
pointing. To them, every white face was American. Presumably, every white
face was also rich.
Was Sitangkai as rough and unruly as the other towns of the Sulu Sea? Was I
an easy picking that had drifted in on the current? I was not. Within an
hour, I was sitting comfortably on a split-bamboo platform eating sea mantis
and seaweed salad while warm salt water slopped gently below.
Like many inhabitants of Sitangkai, my host, Hadji Yusef Malabong, is a
Badjao - a sea gipsy. The most pacific, and poorest, of communities in the
Sulus, the Badjaos spend their entire lives on the water. Some try smuggling
but, generally, get pushed out by tougher tribes. Others fish or collect sea
cucumbers, the repellent-looking marine slugs so prized by Chinese epicures.
Most, however, are underwater farmers. They grow agar-agar, the glutinous
seaweed from which extracts are used in everything from cosmetics to ice
cream.
It took a few days to get used to life with Hadji's family. I am not
especially shy, but life with 18 souls in a four-room house of paper-thin
partitions has its problems. Bathing meant crouching on the platform beside
the house and sluicing jugs of rainwater over my head. The lavatory was a
curtain surrounding a hole cut through bamboo decking, and best used on an
outgoing tide.
But I enjoyed it all tremendously - everything from watching the Badjaos
collect their bright green harvest in the agar-agar fields to their strange,
gyrating, gong-and-cymbal dances held under the light of the moon.
My favourite times were expeditions about the reef with Idris, Yusef's
eldest son. Over the water we would shoot towards tiny, stilt-borne hamlets
marooned on a vast, liquid plain. Here, far even from the relative
civilisation of Sitangkai, schools and electricity, hospitals and plumbing,
cars and solid land, were alien elements.
I met people whose hair was burned as blond by the sea and sun as their skin
was burned black. I met people who had never set foot on a pavement but made
daring leaps from house to house, like marine monkeys. Just getting to these
places was exotic. We floated under huge skies of drifting cloud. We
overtook lazy, slow-drifting boats with triangular sails of crimson and
mauve. I might have been on Mars, or on drugs, or both.
I was enchanted. It came to an end only when, a few days later, the Lady
Ruth called at Sitangkai again.
There were the same tiny cots, the same smelly cargoes, the same men with
guns. But the news was good. The MNLF had agreed to yet another cease-fire.
The government was prepared to negotiate peace one more time. And my two
smuggling friends, now on their way home, had enjoyed a most profitable
trip.
Nicholas Woodsworth flew to Manila with British Airways, which visits the
Philippines twice a week at a Pex return fare of Pounds 865 and full economy
fare of Pounds 1,328. In Manila, he stayed at the Mandarin Oriental Hotel
(tel: 632-816 3601, fax: 632-817 2472.
Not all the Philippines is as wild as the Sulus and the Moslem-contested
island of Mindanao. The Visaya group of islands welcomes holiday-makers to
sea-side resorts that are not only safe but as appealing and economic as any
in south-east Asia and the Pacific. Information on holidays and
accommodation can be obtained in London from the Philippine Tourist Office,
17 Albemarle St, W1X 7H8, tel: 071-499 5443.
