FT  10 DEC 94 / Weekend Money (Budget Fallout): New blow to investors
The small print of the chancellor's main Budget last week dealt a big blow
to two forms of investment popular among those averse to risk: guaranteed
income bonds (Gibs) and guaranteed equity bonds (Gebs).
Gibs are fixed-rate investments which either pay a regular income for a set
number of years or roll up the income and pay it back with the original lump
sum at the end of their life.
Gebs come in several forms. They usually last for around five years and
guarantee a pay-out linked to the rise in a particular stock market index,
such as the FT-SE.
In the event of a market fall over the period, investors are promised the
return of their original capital, sometimes with some guaranteed growth.
While the return on these investments is reasonably easy to understand, the
way they they are constructed and taxed is notoriously complicated. The
chancellor last week closed a loophole which could cut future returns on
these bonds. The move has led to some life companies withdrawing from the
market.
Most of the products are written as single premium, whole-of-life policies.
The regime under which they are taxed is impenetrable to nearly everyone -
except their designers and the Inland Revenue.
Life companies must pay basic-rate tax on the investment returns, and any
pay-out is considered to be net of basic-rate tax in the hands of the
investor. Higher-rate taxpayers must pay the extra higher-rate tax on the
proceeds. But some life companies have avoided basic-rate tax, allowing them
either to boost their own margins or increase the return to the investor, or
both.
The companies have taken advantage of a system under which assets could be
passed to an offshore re-insurance company which paid no tax on the
investment returns. Now, this loophole has been plugged and, in future, life
companies will have to pay tax on the profit they make through contracts
they have re-insured.
Not all life companies are affected; the rate of tax a company pays depends
on the type of business it does and its asset structure.
Amanda Webster, of Save &amp; Prosper, says: 'We have known for a while that the
Inland Revenue was looking at this. A large part of the guaranteed bond
market could be decimated. The change will have a dramatic effect on the
terms that can be offered. Effectively, we are looking at moving from a
gross to a net return, and that could mean a reduction of around 25 per cent
in returns.'
Derek Wright, spokesman for Laurentian - one life company which has
withdrawn its products - reckons the Revenue is unlikely to earn any extra
tax. 'It is ordinary consumers who will pay more because they are more
likely to divert their savings to less tax-efficient bank and building
society accounts,' he says.
