FT  06 SEP 94 / Costly slip of the tongue: Angus Foster on the resignation
of Brazil's finance minister
Mr Fernando Henrique Cardoso, Brazil's former finance minister who left the
government in April to contest next month's presidential elections, was
hoping a quiet September would help consolidate his lead in opinion polls.
He must be disappointed.
On Sunday his successor at the finance ministry, Mr Rubens Ricupero,
resigned after making embarrassing comments in an interview which was
transmitted by mistake on satellite TV. During the interview Mr Ricupero
suggested he, and the government, were using Brazil's latest anti-inflation
plan and its main component, a new currency, the Real, to help Mr Cardoso
win votes.
Many observers long suspected the plan had electoral as well as economic
objectives. But Mr Ricupero's admission of support for Mr Cardoso - which is
illegal under Brazilian laws restricting the state's role in elections - has
ignited the election campaign. Though attempts by Mr Cardoso's main
opponents to have him disqualified are unlikely to succeed, their threat of
a legal challenge has put his campaign on the defensive for the first time.
Until now, Mr Cardoso has had a strong opinion poll lead over Mr Luiz Inacio
Lula da Silva of the leftwing Workers Party (PT). A survey by polling agency
Datafolha, last week gave Mr Cardoso 45 per cent and Mr da Silva 23 per
cent. Mr Cardoso's advisers are still confident of victory. Mr Antonio
Carlos Magalhaes, one of his main backers, insisted on Brazilian radio:
'This won't upset the campaign. People want stability and that is what they
have with the Real plan.'
But Mr Ricupero's resignation has raised questions about the future
effectiveness of the Real. Not only has his departure created uncertainty at
an early stage of the new currency, but the political motives behind its
introduction have been exposed. In turn, that has led to questions about
whether the chances of Mr Cardoso's opponents have improved.
Mr Cardoso and Mr Ricupero have been the two men most closely associated
with the Real. The currency is part of an economic package which has been
praised by economists for its emphasis on spending restraint and a balanced
budget, rather than political objectives. Since the new currency was
introduced on July 1, the monthly inflation rate has fallen from 50 per cent
to about 5 per cent.
The Real's success so far has led to a rush of support for Mr Cardoso, who
was polling only 20 per cent before the currency's launch. For Brazilians,
the fall in inflation has made a big difference to life styles. When monthly
inflation was high, people spent their salaries immediately rather than see
their purchasing power fall daily. Once inflation dropped, they could plan
purchases, consume more or start to save. Mr Luiz Pedone, a political
scientist at the University of Brasilia, says: 'Among the poor, many
families have not had the chance to eat this well since 1986.'
But the good news that has flowed since the Real's introduction came to a
halt last week when the inflation figures for August did not show as steep
as fall as expected. Mainly for technical reasons connected with rent
increases, the rate of price increases in the four weeks to August was 5.46
per cent.
The figures prompted powerful unions such as the Sao Paulo metal workers to
call for immediate pay rises to make up for the impact of inflation on real
wages since the Real's launch. This is a threat for the government, since
pay rises could feed into higher prices.
The job of countering that threat falls to Mr Ciro Gomes, the governor of
the northern state of Ceara who succeeded Mr Ricupero as finance minister.
He is respected for his successful - and honest - governorship of Ceara. Mr
Gomes rushed to stress no policies would be changed.
But the switch of minister will lead to uncertainty. More damaging will be
Mr Ricupero's admission that he did not 'have any scruples' deciding when or
whether inflation indices were released according to his own advantage. In
his interview, Mr Ricupero also suggested some indices may have been
doctored by opponents of the government that work in the department which
gathers the figures.
Inflation figures are important in Brazil because until July they were used
regularly - usually each month - to adjust salaries, taxes and prices to
keep pace with inflation. The government hopes that under the Real, such
adjustments will be made only once a year - and has so far been largely
successful. The danger of Mr Ricupero's comments is that if they undermine
the credibility of the inflation indices, the private sector will
reintroduce regular adjustments, and Brazil's inflationary cycle could start
again.
The prospect of a rise in inflation would be damaging to Mr Cardoso, given
his close association with the Real. But the chances of a big pick up in
inflation before the October 3 contest is slim and many Brazilians,
including most of the 33m illiterate and semi-literate voters, may ignore
the weekend's incident. They may back Mr Cardoso because of the Real's
success so far, rather than its prospects.
But Mr Ricupero's admission of the government's support for Mr Cardoso have
been seized on by Mr da Silva and his Workers' Party. Alleging a wider
conspiracy between the government, business and media to elect Mr Cardoso,
they have questioned the 'ethics' of Mr Cardoso's campaign. This is a
promising theme for the opposition party because most Brazilians agree
former president Fernando Collor, who resigned amid corruption allegations
in 1992, won the 1989 election against Mr da Silva thanks to business and
media backing. If the opposition can persuade voters that Mr Cardoso is
being backed by the same alliance of interests, Mr da Silva's campaign would
be transformed.
The Workers' Party leader only needs to persuade some of Mr Cardoso's voters
to switch camp at this stage. Under Brazil's election rules, a candidate can
win outright in the first round only if he or she attracts more votes than
all their competitors combined. If not there will be a run-off between the
two leading candidates on November 15. According to last week's Datafolha
poll, Mr Cardoso has only a 6 per cent lead over his combined opposition,
scarcely a comfortable margin.
The events of the weekend may, therefore, force Mr Cardoso into fighting a
second contest. Though opinion polls taken last week suggest he would still
be the clear favourite to win, time might start to play against him. If the
government is unsuccessful in holding off wage claims and price increases in
the next few weeks, inflation may even start to rise and undermine voters'
confidence in Mr Cardoso.
Mr Cardoso spent yesterday calming his campaign workers and assuring them
his lead in the polls was safe. Even he would agree, however, that thanks to
Mr Ricupero, September will now be a nervous rather than tranquil month.
