FT  10 SEP 94 / UK Company News: Too many chasing too little - The problems
facing the UK contractors
Some of the worst financial results to be published by Britain's
construction companies were announced this week.
The contracting arms of Wimpey, John Laing, Amec and Costain between them
produced a profit of just Pounds 8.3m from a combined turnover of more than
Pounds 1.5bn in the first six months of this year.
Published profits would have been even worse but for the inclusion by Wimpey
and Costain of interest earned on advance payments for construction work.
John Laing and Amec, which did not include interest, managed only to break
even on a combined turnover of Pounds 834m.
Annual UK construction output fell by 12 per cent between 1990 and the end
of 1993. Contractors which won work during that period on lossmaking or
non-existent margins to boost cash flows are now paying the price.
The scale of the downturn has prompted renewed calls for mergers and
acquisitions to rationalise a UK industry which still has too many companies
chasing too little work.
Mr Martin Laing, chief executive of John Laing, has blamed banks for helping
to sustain over-capacity in the industry, propping up UK contractors which
would otherwise have failed during the recession.
But reducing the number of general contractors will be difficult to achieve,
says Mr Alan Cockshaw, Amec's chairman. Many balance sheets have been sapped
during the recession, while companies which can afford it 'will be reluctant
to purchase skills they already possess simply to reduce capacity and
benefit competitors as much as themselves.'
UK contracting margins, therefore, are likely to remain depressed with
construction demand expected to rise only modestly in the next two years.
Companies like Laing, Amec, Wimpey and Costain, therefore, are looking to
international work and private investment in infrastructure to increase
profitability of their contracting operations.
Competition in overseas markets, however, is also tough and likely to become
increasingly so, as contractors in other countries, particularly in east
Asia, develop new skills.
South Korea, when it began its nuclear power programme 15 years ago,
imported up to 90 per cent of the value of the works. Today imports have
been cut to 10 per cent while Korean construction companies have broken into
international markets, particularly in the Middle East, where they have been
highly competitive.
Martin Laing says: 'It has long been recognised that being proficient in
pouring concrete and erecting steel is not enough and that British and other
international companies need to bring something else to the party if they
are to be successful in overseas markets.
'Far Eastern countries have shown themselves very quick to learn new skills
which they then use to win work in other export markets, further increasing
competition.'
Laing and other large British contractors in a bid to resolve this dilemma
are pursuing privately-financed domestic and international infrastructure
projects where returns, because of the investment risks involved, are
expected to be much higher than for traditional contracting.
Europistas, the Spanish toll road company in which Laing has an 18 per cent
interest, is expected to generate dividends this year of Pounds 3.4m,
against a book cost of Pounds 3m. The group's five per cent stake in a
Malaysian power station project is expected to yield returns of at least 15
to 20 per cent from dividends, the construction management contract and the
increased value of its equity.
Mr Joe Dwyer, chief executive of Wimpey, this week argued that rates of
return on privately-financed UK infrastructure projects will need to be
between 10 and 15 per cent if investors are to persuaded to support them.
This figure, he admits, is higher than the British government wishes to
concede, although the 'gap between us has narrowed.'
He is strongly supported by Martin Laing, who says contractors with
housebuilding operations, such as Wimpey, Amec and Laing, can choose to
invest their money elsewhere if the returns offered on UK private
infrastructure projects are insufficient.
Laing has recently been buying UK housing land on the basis of achieving an
operating margin of between 10 and 12 per cent, which would produce a return
on capital of about 20 per cent, says Mr Jim Armstrong, the finance
director.
British infrastructure investments will also have to compete with
international projects seeking private investment, such as the Pounds 300m
first phase of privately-financed light rail system in Kuala Lumpur in which
Taylor Woodrow has taken a 15 per ent stake.
Contractors such as Taylor Woodrow have taken the lead in bidding
individually and forming consortia to tender for privately-financed UK
roads, railways, hospitals, prisons and student accommodation. Companies,
however, will need sound balance sheets if they are to make headway in this
market.
Laing, which had net cash of Pounds 16.2m at the end of June is more
advanced than many of its rivals in establishing a portfolio of private
infrastructure investments. These include the Pounds 300m privately-financed
new Severn bridge, which it is building jointly with GTM Entrepose of
France.
The problem for shareholders is that projects are unlikely to start making
significant returns until the mid to late 1990s. Meanwhile general
contracting margins will remain depressed and construction companies will
have to continue to rely on a recovering UK housing market to bail them out.
