FT  12 DEC 94 / Summit of the Americas: Pledging a market partnership -
Stephen Fidler and George Graham sum up a summit of unequals that came good
For a gathering that was being dismissed a few weeks ago as little more than
a grand photo-opportunity, the summit of the 34 elected leaders of the
Americas delivered more of substance than almost anyone had expected.
Its commitments to begin work next month towards negotiating a Free Trade
Area of the Americas, to make substantial progress towards that end by the
turn of the century and to complete negotiations by 2005, were all
unexpected a few weeks ago. The separate announcement that talks would begin
right away to bring Chile into the North American Free Trade Agreement of
the US, Canada and Mexico added substance to the promises.
The host, President Bill Clinton, described a open free trade area that
'will stretch from Alaska to Argentina' as the 'key building block in our
creation of a partnership for prosperity.' If current trends continued, he
said, 'this hemisphere will be the world's largest market  - more than 850m
consumers buying Dollars 13 trillion of goods and services.'
Such high-flown ambitions are customary summit fare. When the presidents of
the Americas last met, in 1967 at Punta del Este in Uruguay, they resolved
to 'create progressively, beginning in 1970, the Latin American Common
Market' which would be 'substantially in operation in 15 years'. Nothing
came of that.
However, the differences between then and now are substantial, not only
because the US is now pledging itself as part of the proposed free trade
zone, rather than as a supportive onlooker in 1967.
Mr Enrique Iglesias, president of the Inter-American Development Bank, was a
young diplomat 27 years ago. He has observed both meetings and says the
difference is profound. Washington, the Uruguayan says, has realised the
potential in its own hemisphere; Latin American states have ousted their
military leaders and have become less hostile to the US and more
outward-looking in economic policy.
Yet these changes do not explain the difference between the summit's outcome
and its dim prospects a few weeks ago. Part of the explanation may lie in
what seems to have been a sincere US wish not to impose an agenda, which
meant that discussions only gelled as the summit deadline approached.
Participants in the pre-summit deliberations suggest that three other
factors were influential: the Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation (Apec)
forum, the European Union, and the Congressional elections in the US last
month.
US officials say that the decision, by Apec leaders in Jakarta last month,
on the establishment of a Pacific free trade zone, with two target dates of
2010 and 2020, helped to goad larger Latin American countries into accepting
a deadline in their region.
'The mood began to shift at the first meeting after the Apec summit,' a
senior Clinton administration official said.
Furthermore, just two weeks ago, the EU announced its intention to negotiate
a free trade accord with Mercosur, the trade pact which groups Brazil,
Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay, and is due to become a customs union at the
start of next year. One sherpa preparing the Miami summit declaration said
that this had galvanised the preliminary negotiations.
But the most significant change may have come via US voting booths. First,
without Congressional ratification of the Uruguay Round of trade talks, not
obtained until 10 days ago, any trade pledges by the US would have looked
hollow. Second, because of Republican party victories in the mid-term
elections last month, the administration may find it easier, after next
month, to win Congressional agreement to extend Nafta to Chile than if the
legislature were still full of fellow Democrats, many of them suspicious of
free trade.
Many issues, of course, remain to be resolved before the summit trade
pledges become a reality. Mr Gert Rosenthal, head of the UN Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, says the 2005 deadline has
little practical effect but the pledge to start talks immediately 'is what
is important.'
In contrast to Apec's vague promises, the talks in the Americas should
involve governments in practical trade discussions at a relatively early
stage and, say officials, keep integration moving forward. 'What we don't
want is to lose momentum,' said the US trade representative, Mr Mickey
Kantor.
Even so, many who have agreed to the date also see it as an ambitious,
perhaps unrealistic, target. It will be hard, for example, to make existing
Latin American trade zones - some of them customs unions with common
external tariffs - compatible with Nafta, although the summit pledged
efforts to reduce the inconsistencies among the various groupings.
Most problematic will be the single-product economies of the Caribbean. Mr
Roy MacLaren, Canada's trade minister, said that, while the small states of
central America want to move quickly into Nafta, 'I sense that some of the
small countries of the Caribbean will have the most difficulty meeting the
timetable,' the minister added.
There is also a likely clash over the Nafta side agreements on environmental
protection and workers' rights. Some Latin Americans are bound to see them
as an excessive invasion of sovereignty, even though there is little
evidence that they have had much practical impact within Nafta.
The US administration fought hard to win the inclusion of labour and
environmental language in the trade clauses of the Miami declaration, and
administration officials say there can be no question of lower standards in
the future free trade area.
'Nafta becomes a benchmark and we build from there. Clearly everyone
understands that Nafta is the floor, in all respects', including labour and
environment, a senior administration official said.
However, while there is consensus among the three Nafta governments that the
main agreement should not be reopened, there are differences about the
importance of the side accords.
Some Republican congressmen have already indicated they back extending the
free trade zone to Chile, but want the side accords dropped.
The administration will seek from Congress, next spring, 'fast track'
negotiating authority to let it negotiate a trade pact without having
Congress tinker with the details later. Before then, the administration must
decide how broad a fast track authority to propose: whether to limit it to
Chile's accession to Nafta, and whether to include the labour and
environmental side agreements.
The worry for Latin America is that its rapprochement with the US has been
forged with a weak administration in Washington. If Mr Clinton cannot win
fast track for Chile, his ability to fulfil the US side of the hemispheric
free-trade agenda will be severely, if not fatally, weakened. Then the
central American president, who said on Saturday that the Miami meeting had
'broken 27 years of solitude', will be forced to eat his words.
See Observer
