FT  30 AUG 94 / Falklands rivalry tests quick tempers: Diplomats in Buenos
Aires must learn the mating and migratory habits of squid
Argentina reacted furiously when the UK government last week announced a
seemingly innocuous decision to extend control over a 547 square mile patch
of ocean outside fishery control areas around the Falkland Islands.
The Argentinians declared they would not 'tolerate, accept and much less
consent' to the move.
The UK claimed poachers used this so-called 'Gap' area as a bolt-hole. Even
though the Gap lies within Falklands territorial waters, British officials
say they tried to discuss the issue with Buenos Aires all year. The
Argentinians kept postponing talks and the British decided to act
unilaterally.
President Carlos Menem angrily said he would send patrol ships into the Gap,
even though it lies outside Argentina's 200-mile territorial limit.
Although he played down the issue later in the week, the Falklands remain a
contentious and sensitive issue.
British diplomats posted in Buenos Aires must master the intricacies of
fishing data and develop a thorough understanding of the mating and
migratory habits of Illex squid, the islands' main resource.
The Illex travels through Argentine and Falkland waters, so both sides now
hold talks to share the catch.
They have learned to co-operate over protecting squid, to preserve what has
become a very big industry.
They swap catch data, establish quotas and keep each other posted about the
position of poachers.
Although Falklanders sneer at Argentina's inability to patrol its waters
effectively, the coast guard is notoriously aggressive. Trigger-happy
captains often pepper poachers with gunshot.
Last May, a Taiwanese ship sank after fleeing into Falkland waters when a
coast guard cutter fired on it.
Licence sales are a vital revenue source for the Falklands. This year's fish
licence sales of Pounds 24.1m make up nearly two-thirds of government
revenues. However, this is a far cry from the boom years of the 1980s. In
1989, the islands raked in a record Pounds 28.8m from fisheries. Next year,
the islands do not expect to sell more than Pounds 16.6m worth of licences.
The main reason for this is competition from Argentina which recently
launched a rival licence regime of its own, selling 60 licences this year,
priced to undercut the Falkland licences.
Furthermore, this year's Illex season was exceptionally bad. Ships caught
only 67,000 tonnes in Falklands waters against an historical average of
165,000 tonnes. Both Argentina and the islands closed the Illex season early
to preserve the stocks.
In addition, a fisheries agreement between Argentina and the European Union
has led to a big increase in catches.
The pact allows European vessels to enter Argentine waters once closed to
foreign ships in exchange for grants and privileged access to EU markets.
Brussels wants to find new fishing grounds outside European waters, mainly
to benefit Spain's big fishing fleet.
In 1993, 915,500 tonnes of fish were caught in Argentine waters, 126 per
cent more than five years earlier. Although these statistics are not
reliable, they do indicate a rising trend in fishing effort.
Argentina now exports more fish than beef. Fish export revenues last year
rose 18 per cent to Dollars 660m.
Hake accounted for nearly half Argentina's 1993 catch of 422,000 tonnes, an
increase of 14 per cent over 1992. Squid volumes rose 150 per cent to
194,000 tonnes.
But Mr Julio Torre, the editor of Redes, a fishing trade publication, warns:
'Catches are reaching their limits for several species, especially hake.
Blue whiting and squid are also approaching their limits. For the first
time, this region is reaching its limit.'
Although fishing has become a big earner for Argentina, its under-funded and
overstretched navy, air force and coast guard are unable to prevent
poaching.
It is anyone's guess how much fish is really caught in the South Atlantic.
