FT  06 MAY 94 / Panama party of dictators set for victory: Stephen Fidler
looks at the main runners competing in Sunday's presidential election
The party of Panama's two military dictators, Omar Torrijos and Manuel
Noriega, is heading into Sunday's presidential elections as favourite to
provide the country's next head-of-state.
Front-runner is Mr Ernesto Perez Balladares, 47, who has in the past four
years masterminded the rebuilding of the Revolutionary Democratic party
(PRD) which was shattered by the December 1989 US invasion which ousted Gen
Noriega, now serving 40 years in a Miami jail for drugs offences. He was a
financial advisor to Gen Torrijos and campaign manager for Gen Noriega's
candidate for the 1989 elections, which the dictator later annulled.
Although it invaded the country less than five years ago, Washington has
made it plain it can live with whichever of the seven candidates wins the
one-round election. But Mr Balladares, a former banker with Citibank and a
Wharton School MBA, has only been partly successful in distancing himself
from the party's militarist past.
His task was made tougher by a videotape shown nationally last month by
President Guillermo Endara which reminded people of the military-sponsored
violence surrounding the last election.
If any of Mr Balladares's six opponents has gained from the tape, it seems
to have been a political outsider, Mr Ruben Blades, and none of the past or
present members of Mr Endara's anti-militarist coalition.
Mr Blades, now the closest contender to the PRD, has spent most of the last
two decades in the US, acting - he appeared in Robert Redford's Milagro
Beanfield War - singing and qualifying as a lawyer. His absence appears to
be, on balance, an electoral asset because he - if not all of his party -
has no association with government corruption.
The main question over his candidature is what he and his makeshift
political movement, Papa Egoro - it means Mother Earth in a local indian
dialect - stand for. Its broad themes are issues such as improving popular
participation in government and improving peoples' self-esteem, but what
this would translate into in policy terms is far from clear.
The fact that the two front-runners are outside Mr Endara's civilista
coalition is widely seen as testimony to the government's unimpressive
performance.
The government of Mr Endara, who cannot by law stand in the election, has
been seen as indecisive. Although, it has overseen rapid growth that has
brought the economy back to its level of 1987, before US sanctions on the
Noriega government sent the economy into a tailspin, his government has not
received much credit for it.
In part this is because growth has been concentrated in a few sectors -
including the free zone at Colon which now does an annual Dollars 11bn of
business - and the trickle down to the poorest has been limited.
Unemployment stays high at 14 per cent. A construction boom is under way in
Panama City, for example, but it has been financed in part by drugs money
and is largely of high-priced apartments.
While allegations of corruption and involvement in drugs trafficking have
been less prevalent than in the military years, the probity of the
government has also been called into question. The president's reputation
was not helped when his young wife, Ana Mae Daz de Endara, won the jackpot
in one Christmas lottery - the biggest of the year.
Rising crime is also perceived as a problem. 'Endara's government has failed
to adhere to the old PRD maxim of keeping the country safe and stealing
everything themselves,' said one banker.
The main achievements, say bankers, have been some movement towards
settlement of the Noriega-era foreign debt defaults and strict control over
the budget, though neither has much electoral appeal.
Critics say the coalition united around only one issue - ousting Noriega and
the military. Once that was achieved and the military abolished,
factionalism took over. The civilistas could not agree on a common
presidential candidate. Their leading contender is probably Mr Ruben Carles,
73, the budget minister in the current government and a former Chase
Manhattan banker, but he is widely considered to be too far behind in the
opinion polls to be in contention.
None of the candidates is promising much new on the economy, which has been
one of the few in Latin America where there has been no significant move
towards lower tariffs and market-oriented reforms. There is some talk of
privatisation of the telephone and electricity systems, the ports and the
hardly-functioning trans-isthmus railway, but it has not been an important
campaign issue.
The centre-left PRD lays more emphasis on government spending and popular
public works projects. But its ability to spend will be constrained by the
government's inability both to print money (the economy is dollar-based) and
to borrow it, because of a continuing default on its bank debt. Mr
Balladares's supporters say he is more likely to confront the local business
oligarchy, which favours a continuation of protectionism.
The central issue facing the new government will be how it handles the
takeover of some 80,200 acres of land and facilities - including 4,800
buildings, schools, houses and airports - which will be handed to the
Panamanian government as the US pulls out of the country in 1999. The 10,000
US troops there now contribute an estimated Dollars 250m to the economy,
around 5 per cent of GDP.
These properties - which are full of infrastructure that the rest of the
country desperately lacks - are valued anywhere between Dollars 8bn and
Dollars 30bn. Some Panamanians worry the handover will be managed badly and
the prizes will be allotted to the cronies of the next government.
Mr Ricaurte Vasquez Morales, treasury and then planning minister between
1982-88, says: 'This is at the core of what the real political struggle is
about: who takes control of these properties. It's like winning a war.'
