FT  16 MAY 94 / Business Travel: Setting sights high - Paul Betts on the
competitive strategy of British Midland
With its latest ticket code-sharing and marketing agreement with Air Canada,
British Midland Airways, the UK's second largest scheduled carrier, is
extending its net of international co-operation agreements to compete
against its much bigger rival, British Airways.
The Air Canada move follows a string of other code-sharing deals - which
enable two airlines to use each other's ticketing code on each other's
flights, making arrangements simpler - and commercial agreements between
British Midland and bigger international carriers. These include the two
biggest US carriers, United Airlines and American Airlines, as well as Japan
Airlines and All Nippon Airways.
British Midland also co-operates with Virgin Atlantic and is planning a
code-sharing agreement with Malaysian Airlines later this year. 'We are also
working with South African Airways over possible co-operation,' says Mr
Austin Reed, the airline's managing director.
Although British Midland has steadily been expanding its own international
operations, Mr Reed emphasises that the airline is continuing to concentrate
on developing its European short-haul route network. 'Any plan to expand
into longer-haul flights are at this stage very much in the future,' he
adds.
The growing number of international marketing alliances are part of British
Midland's efforts to offer its passengers services comparable with those
offered by BA. British Midland's attraction for its international partners
is its strong position at London's Heathrow airport, where it has built up
the second biggest pool of take-off and landing slots - 14 per cent - after
BA, which has about 38 per cent.
British Midland's strong position at Heathrow was one of the main reasons
behind Scandinavian Airlines Systems' decision to buy a 35 per cent stake in
the UK carrier. SAS is expected to increase its holding to 40 per cent this
summer.
In Europe, British Midland has challenged the big flag carriers by taking
advantage of the newly liberalised air transport market and driving down
business-class air fares on five of the busiest routes it serves from
Heathrow: Paris, Frankfurt, Dublin, Brussels and Amsterdam. Sir Michael
Bishop, chairman, claims that, where his company has taken on the big
European airlines, business air fares have fallen by about 40 per cent.
The problem, he says, is that 95 per cent of European Union air routes
continue to be operated through state-owned airline monopolies or duopolies.
'Only 26 routes are served by more than three carriers. Of the 15 busiest
cross-border routes in Europe, 10 continue to be served only by the two
national airlines of the countries concerned.'
Real fare competition has occurred only on routes served by at least three
carriers. Where just two carriers serve a route, their tendency is to offer
similar frequencies, provide similar services and apply identical fare
structures.
Sir Michael is also a vociferous campaigner against state aid for airlines,
which he argues is continuing to help prop up bankrupt carriers, distorting
competition in the European market. 'A number of smaller airlines are going
bust, while the bigger companies which are really bust are being allowed to
carry on through artificial supports.'
British Midland, like other UK carriers including BA and Air UK, has
fulminated against French government proposals to inject a further FFr20bn
into Air France.
It is also angry over the French government's decision to try to stop UK
airlines flying today into Orly, Paris. But unlike BA or Air UK, British
Midland has decided not to seek an immediate confrontation with France.
Instead, it intends to start flying from Heathrow into Orly in September,
when it hopes the dust will have settled.
In the longer term, British Midland sees another threat emerging from the
Channel tunnel. 'We expect it will lead to a drop in some short-haul air
traffic,' Mr Reed says. British Midland is thus already drawing up plans to
serve longer-distance European routes which would not face direct
competition from the tunnel, to maintain the momentum of its steady
international expansion in the European market.
