FT  15 OCT 94 / A prize too many for peacemakers: David Horovitz argues that
giving the Nobel peace award to Rabin, Arafat and Peres is premature
The selection of Israel's prime minister Yitzhak Rabin, foreign minister
Shimon Peres, and the Palestine Liberation Organisation's chairman Yassir
Arafat as this year's winners of the Nobel peace prize is a clear gamble.
One of the members of the prize committee, Kaare Kristiansen, even announced
his resignation on Friday in protest at the decision.
Quite apart from any doubts over how deserving the winners may be, or how
appropriate the prize is in view of their backgrounds, the decision is based
on hopes of peace, rather than peace itself.
There is little doubt that these three men have been the dominant figures
associated with the introduction of limited self-rule for the Palestinians
of Gaza and Jericho - a process that holds out the prospect of an eventual
permanent resolution to decades of conflict.
And there is little doubt, too, that the three men deserve praise and
respect for shaking hands on a deal that involves risks and painful
compromises on both sides.
But what is most certainly in doubt is whether that deal will bring lasting
peace between the two peoples, and real rehabilitation to the impoverished
occupied terri-tories.
Extremism, on both sides, remains a huge problem, as the events of this week
have demonstrated.
On Sunday, two Palestinian gunmen from the Hamas Islamic fundamentalist
group rampaged through central Jerusalem, firing hundreds of bullets along a
row of crowded restaurants and bars, miraculously killing only two people
before they were themselves shot dead.
Members of the same organisation later kidnapped a 19-year-old Israeli
soldier, Nachshon Waxman - demanding the release of 200 Palestinian
prisoners for his return - but he was found dead when rescuers stormed the
Hamas hideout where he was being held.
Meanwhile, Israeli courts have indicted four Jewish settlers in the past
fortnight for their alleged involvement in plans to attack Arabs - through a
suspected underground movement.
Few are the peacemakers who do not have extremist opponents to contend with.
But while Mr Rabin and Mr Arafat have criticised their respective
rejectionists for doing their utmost to derail the peace process, both
leaders have been criticised for their lack of direct action.
Mr Rabin was accused by many Palestinians of doing too little to curb
settler violence - until he was shocked into action by the February massacre
at Hebron's Cave of the Patriarchs, when a settler slaughtered 29
Palestinians kneeling in prayer.
And many Israelis, including Mr Rabin, feel that Mr Arafat is still pursuing
far too soft a line against Hamas. The PLO leader, they argue, has failed to
disarm a relatively small number of violent militants for fear of sparking
confrontation.
Indeed, at the height of the Waxman kidnap crisis, the Israeli leader told
his peace partner starkly that he had to make 'a strategic choice' between
abandoning the autonomy process or facing up to Hamas.
With the Cairo talks, at which Israel and the PLO had been discussing the
next phases of the autonomy programme, suspended by Israel in the wake of
the Waxman kidnapping, the timing of the Nobel award may have been
ill-judged. The process of Israeli-Palestinian reconciliation looks far too
vulnerable for its protagonists to receive the honour.
Israeli troops have handed over authority in much of the Gaza Strip and in
Jericho to Palestinian policemen, but most of the complex stages of the
phased transfer of power still lie ahead.
Democratic Palestinian elections, the first real test of Mr Arafat's ability
to mature from being the symbol of a liberation movement to a statesman
ready to accept the will of his people, were supposed to have taken place
this summer, were then postponed until the autumn, and are now unlikely to
be held this year at all. The suspension of the Cairo talks, which had been
focusing on unresolved central issues such as voter eligibility and the
nature and powers of the body to be elected, will mean an even longer delay.
And the Israeli army's redeployment outside Arab population centres in the
West Bank, an exceptionally complicated logistical operation given the need
to maintain protection for 130,000 Jewish settlers, has also been repeatedly
post-poned.
Last year, the Nobel committee selected another pair of peacemakers, Nelson
Mandela and FW de Klerk of South Africa, for the prize. And the advocates of
a Rabin-Peres-Arafat award doubtless argued that, just as with the
transitions in South Africa, the Israeli-Palestinian accommodation could
only be boosted by recognition from Oslo.
But while Mr Mandela and Mr de Klerk clearly respect each other and quickly
forged a trusting, genuine working relationship, the awkward body language
whenever Mr Rabin and Mr Arafat meet points to a deep mutual antipathy. They
rarely look at each other, much less embrace. Even the handshake that
launched the autonomy process at the White House 13 months ago was an
uncomfortable affair, with an obviously reluctant Mr Rabin grudgingly and
only briefly proffering his hand to the more demonstrative Mr Arafat.
Moreover, Mr Arafat's performance since the accords has been unimpressive.
Crucially, in Israeli eyes, he has failed to honour a central element of the
peace deal - his commitment to ensure the deletion of sections of the PLO
Charter that call for Israel's destruction.
Put another way, the Nobel committee is honouring Mr Arafat for signing a
peace deal with a state that his own movement remains formally determined to
elim-inate.
Of more practical significance, Mr Arafat's continuing insistence that he
should oversee the disbursement of international aid for the redevelopment
of Gaza is gravely undermining rehabilitation efforts. Would-be donors and
investors are holding back their funds, while vainly demanding the
establishment of democratic, accountable Palestinian financial institutions.
Such reservations are echoed within the PLO. Abu Ala, a leading figure in
the autonomy negotiations, came close to resigning his post as Palestinian
economics minister last month, in frustration at Mr Arafat's reluctance to
delegate financial authority.
There is a pleasing consistency to the notion of Mr Rabin and Mr Arafat
following the late prime minister Menachem Begin and the assassinated
president Anwar Sadat, architects of Israeli-Egyptian peace 15 years ago,
into Nobel history. But, all in all, it might have been prudent for the
committee to have waited at least another year, to have given peace in the
occupied territories more of a chance to prove itself.
David Horovitz is the managing editor of The Jerusalem Report news magazine
