FT  24 JUN 94 / Tietmeyer defends monetary policies
Germany's monetary policies cannot be blamed for the recent turbulence in
international capital markets, Mr Hans Tietmeyer, president of the
Bundesbank, said yesterday.
Speaking at the end of the regular fortnightly meeting of the Bundesbank's
central council, held once a year in eastern Germany, Mr Tietmeyer also
confirmed that German interest rates would remain unchanged. The discount
rate and the Lombard rate were last reduced on May 11 to 4.5 per cent and
6.00 per cent respectively.
His statement coincided with warnings by both Germany's industrial
federation, the BDI, and the federation of German banks, that the present
economic recovery is still extremely hesitant.
The banks also warned that the flight of foreign investors from the German
bond market in recent months, compounded by the high level of public sector
borrowing, would maintain pressure for rising long-term interest rates. The
country was now far more dependent than it used to be on foreign capital
inflows, the commercial banks said. Rising capital market interest rates
were inevitable, to maintain the flow of funds to finance the public sector
deficit.
Mr Tietmeyer said it was the Bundesbank's role to provide a stable
background for financial transactions. 'Market players must make their own
decisions about how to react to developments,' adding that volatility in the
bond markets appeared to have calmed in recent days.
On the money supply question, Mr Otmar Issing, Bundesbank chief economist,
described recent M3 data as 'better but still not good enough.' The
Bundesbank would undertake its routine mid-year review of money supply
policy and will decide at the July 21 council meeting what strategy to
follow in the second half, he said.
Money supply grew at a lower-than-expected annual rate of 13.7 per cent in
May, down from 15.4 per cent in April. But economists said there was no
chance the Bundesbank would meet its 4-6 per cent target for M3 growth for
the year.
On a brighter note, Mr Tietmeyer said the economy of eastern Germany is
showing gradual signs of growth but warned that the high level of financial
transfers to the region would have to continue 'for some time.' He insisted
that the transfers from western Germany to the east, which last year
totalled DM140bn (Pounds 56bn), must be used 'for purposes of investment.'
Several indicators pointed to a slow recovery in the east, he said. These
included inflation which had 'approached to a large extent' west German
levels. Last month, eastern German inflation was 3.4 per cent compared to
3.0 per cent cent in western Germany. In addition, the rate of unemployment
is slowing down, and the number employed would probably 'stabilise' at
around 6m - compared with almost 10m before unification.
In west Germany, the BDI warned that a continuing squeeze on disposable
incomes would mean that private households would be hard pressed to maintain
their level of consumption in the coming months.
'In view of the declining savings quota, which has been sinking for four
years, and the continuing decline in employment, the room for manoeuvre will
remain very narrow,' the BDI concluded.
