FT  02 AUG 94 / An outsider breaking in
To mention the words Swiss Bank Corporation in the City of London these days
is to provoke a sharp intake of breath, writes John Gapper. 'They did
nothing exceptional, and then I picked up the newspapers the next day and
found them claiming all the credit,' says one merchant banker who worked
with SBC on a financial deal. 'They are very clever, very sharp indeed, but
they will step over the line one day unless they are careful,' says another.
A succession of disputes with the City's venerable investment banks over
deals such as the underwriting of Eurotunnel's recent Pounds 858m rights
issue and Enterprise Oil's failed bid for Lasmo have given SBC a reputation
for aggression and opportunism. It is hardly the traditional image of a
Swiss bank, but its directors are insouciant about putting noses out of
joint.
'Sometimes we find a solution that is cost-effective for a company, and we
upset a traditional relationship. Tant pis,' says Mr Hans de Gier, the SBC
director who with fellow board member Mr Marcel Ospel has built the bank's
international business over the past four years. They have used its capital,
and expertise in trading securities and financial derivatives, to propel it
forcibly towards the first division of investment banks.
They have made the most waves in London, where SBC made a flawed attempt to
build a base in the run-up to the 1986 Big Bang deregulation of the City by
buying the broker Savory Milne. It was trying to buy a place among the
integrated firms which would mediate between large companies and
institutional investment funds. It soon found it had made a unwise choice.
'We bought it to improve our trading skills and ability to distribute
equity, but we took a good look and discovered that it was mediocre,' says
Mr de Gier, 'We had to redesign and overhaul our business completely.'
It was not just in London that SBC felt inadequate. In 1990, when the two
men devised the bank's international strategy, there were few solid building
blocks in place.
'We had a pretty clear idea of where we wanted to go, but it was not easy
for us in the early days. We faced quite a few handicaps,' says Mr Ospel.
SBC foreign operations were far smaller and less sophisticated than they
wanted them to be. They tried to show the SBC board the scale of the task by
telling directors they should consider spending between Dollars 2.5bn and
Dollars 3bn on the acquisition of a global investment bank.
In practice both men preferred a more gradual approach. 'If we had gone for
a large acquisition, we would really have been betting the farm. If it went
wrong, it could have endangered the bank,' says Mr de Gier. They persuaded
the board to expand through both organic growth and selective acquisitions.
The most important was the purchase in 1992 of O'Connor Associates, a
Chicago firm specialising in trading equity derivatives.
This gave SBC a chance to push into London in an untraditional way by
importing O'Connor's expertise. Rather than struggling to gain relationships
with companies that already had established merchant bank advisers, it built
a trading business based on derivatives, instead of the underlying bonds and
equities, and used its edge to devise innovative one-off deals both for
companies and institutional investors.
'It took us a long time as a bank to realise that we simply did not have the
sort of relationships we were aiming at. We were not going to beat Warburg
and Schroders,' says Mr de Gier. Instead, SBC decided to make its core
profits by trading, and mount ambushes on the better-established investment
banks by approaching their clients with corporate finance deals sometimes
involving derivatives.
Not unnaturally, this has hardly endeared SBC to the banks whose business it
is raiding. 'We don't seek conflict with other banks, but if that it what it
takes we are not going to slink away from it,' says Mr de Gier.
In one sense, SBC has little to lose from provoking such conflict, since it
gains from the image of being an outsider breaking into the City. Yet it is
a mark of how far SBC has travelled in four years from the conservatism of
its domestic culture. 'The bank is very comfortable with what is happening
in London,' says Mr de Gier, 'We are not just two wild guys running away
with the business.'
