FT  10 FEB 94 / Letters to the Editor: The badly advised should be
reinstated
Sir, Publication of the results of the inquiry commissioned by the
Securities and Investments Board (SIB) about pension scheme transfers has
rightly caused enormous public concern. That a staggering number of people
have been wrongly advised to transfer the value of their company pensions to
personal pension plans is indisputable.
Attention must now turn to how these wrongs should be put right. For most
members, the most satisfactory solution would be to reinstate benefits as if
membership had never ceased. The Mineworkers' Pension Scheme (MPS) has
stated its willingness to do this where personal pension providers accept
poor advice was given and are prepared to meet the full cost of
reinstatement. A number of former members have already been reinstated.
However, it seems this willingness is not shared by other occupational
schemes. A recent survey by an independent pensions consultant revealed that
no other schemes were prepared to accept reinstatements. This approach will
do nothing to help those disadvantaged and nothing to help improve the
tarnished image of the pensions industry.
A commonly held view is that because members taking a transfer legally sever
all links with their former scheme this means that schemes can justifiably
wash their hands of bad advice cases. Members who took transfers should not
be regarded as exceptionally rash or gullible. They had the assurance that
they could rely on the Financial Services Act to ensure that best advice was
being given. If they were advised to transfer there was supposed to be no
doubt that it would be in their best interests to do so. Until recently,
regulatory bodies refused to accept there was a problem. Under these
circumstances I think that occupational schemes have a part to play in
ensuring rights are restored.
Company schemes are set up with the expectation that a pension will have to
be provided for all former employees. Restoring a member to the position he
would have been in had he not taken a transfer should present no additional
risks as long as the full costs of reinstatement are met by the personal
pension provider.
I accept there may be some technical difficulties with reinstatement but
doing nothing in the expectation that the outcome of the SIB review will
take away the problem seems an inadequate response. Until then those who
have taken transfers will be worried about future retirement provisions and
an increasing number of former occupational scheme members and their
families will suffer real financial loss as pensions come into payment and
deaths occur. Where the opportunity to reinstate benefits exists, pension
schemes should grasp the nettle and welcome members back now.
Paul Trickett,
head of pensions,
Mineworkers' Pension Scheme,
105 Queen Street,
Sheffield S1 1GF
