FT  22 FEB 94 / Institute says tax rises will delay upturn
Tax rises will slow the pace of the recovery, but not for a year to 18
months, says a study from the National Institute of Economic and Social
Research published yesterday.
In its latest economic review, the institute says growth will be supported
during the next 12 to 18 months by the impact of lower interest rates and
the devaluation of the pound that has occurred since 1992. These factors
will outweigh the effects of this April's tax increases.
From then on the burden of higher taxes will dominate, assuming that 'there
is no relaxation in policy', and the influence of taxes will continue to be
felt for some 'considerable time to come'.
The institute predicts that the economy will grow by 2.7 per cent this year,
just ahead of government forecasts.
But growth next year will slow to 2.6 per cent, below the government's
prediction of 2.75 per cent, and growth is then predicted to drop towards
2.25 per cent, significantly lower than the chancellor's medium-term
projection of 3 per cent.
Inflation is forecast to be running at an annual rate of 3.7 per cent by the
end of this year and is expected to rise to 4.6 per cent by the end of 1995,
well outside the government's target range of 2 per cent to 4 per cent.
The institute sees interest rates being cut to 5 per cent in the second
quarter of this year, possibly in April to coincide with the tax increases,
but then rising to 6.5 per cent in the medium term to counter the rise in
inflation.
The institute's is the second influential study to be published within a
week which expresses misgivings about the government's growth targets.
Last Friday the London Business School predicted that tax rises would cause
growth to slow to 2.2 per cent in 1995, after 2.5 per cent this year. Both
the institute and the London Business School have representatives on the
chancellor's panel of independent advisers, the so-called 'wise men', whose
latest report is due tomorrow.
However, the institute does find some reasons to be optimistic about the
state of the UK economy.
'It is too soon to speak confidently of a general improvement in the
underlying performance of the economy, but there are indeed some encouraging
signs,' the report says.
In particular, productivity is rising unusually quickly and wages and prices
have shown an unusually subdued response to the sharp fall in the exchange
rate.
The institute says the UK has made improvements in economic efficiency.
It says that 'in some industries a better performance and use of resources
is obvious'.
It is this improvement in efficiency, combined with a shift in policy
priorities towards greater price stability, that has given the UK an
inflation prospect which, it says, now compares favourably with those of
other countries.
Unemployment, according to the institute, will level off to about 2.5m, a
'disappointingly high figure', with a considerable change towards part-time
employment and the majority of these part-time jobs being filled by women.
It expects to see a significant rise in company spending on investment and
on stocks. Although it sees real personal disposable income barely rising
thanks to Budget tax rises and spending cuts, the savings ratio is expected
to fall again quite sharply thanks to increased asset prices and an improved
employment out-look.
National Institute of Economic and Social Research, 2 Dean Trench Street,
Smith Square, London SW1P 3HE.
