FT  08 FEB 94 / Business and the Law: 'Clinique' name can be used - European
Court
National marketing regulations are still subject to Rome treaty rules on
free movement of goods, even if applied indistinctly to imports and domestic
products, the European Court of Justice ruled last week.
In a decision which clarifies its recent ruling in the Keck case, the Court
said national marketing rules would only be lawful when they could be
justified on a public interest ground which took precedence over the free
movement of goods principle.
In the Keck case, the Court said the Rome treaty ban on import restrictions
did not apply to national marketing rules which merely concerned domestic
'selling arrangements' applicable to all goods.
The ECJ said treaty rules on free movement of goods and the 1976 directive
harmonising national laws on cosmetics precluded the application to those
Estee Lauder cosmetics sold under the trademark 'Clinique' of German laws
prohibiting the sale of goods with a name that could mislead consumers as to
their properties.
The Court ruling was a response to a question referred by the Berlin
Landgericht about the interpretation of the free movement of goods rules in
the context of proceedings brought against Estee Lauder for using the name
'Clinique' on its products marketed in Germany. The company had originally
used the name 'Linique' in Germany but had changed to 'Clinique', the name
used in all other member states, to cut packaging and advertising costs.
A German business association brought proceedings to stop the use of the
name 'Clinique', relying on German laws prohibiting misleading advertising
and the marketing of cosmetics under names likely to mislead consumers as to
their effects. The name 'Clinique' was said to mislead consumers into
thinking the products had a therapeutic effect.
The ECJ pointed out that it was entitled to consider relevant Community law
provisions which had not been referred to it by the national court. In
particular, it said, the 1976 directive harmonising national laws on
cosmetics provided for full harmonisation.
However, as contended by the Commission, the directive, like all secondary
legislation derived from the treaty, had to be interpreted in the light of
the treaty, including the free movement of goods rules.
The directive covered marketing rules for cosmetics. It required member
countries to prevent the use of a name or information which was misleading
about the properties of the goods. The aims of the directive included
protecting consumers, preventing unfair competition and protecting health.
Hence, said the Court, it was necessary to check whether German laws which
implemented the directive in this respect complied with treaty rules on free
movement of goods and, in particular, whether the prohibition of the name
'Clinique' was proportionate to the original objective.
Following previous case law, the Court said that the German prohibition of
marketing cosmetics under the name used in all other member countries was in
principle an obstacle to interstate trade, because it forced the company to
adopt a different name in only one member country and so incur additional
advertising and packaging expense.
The ECJ also said prohibition of the name 'Clinique' in Germany was not
necessary to satisfy the objectives of consumer and health protection. It
said the German court found Estee Lauder only marketed its products in
Germany through perfume shops and in the cosmetic sections of department
stores, not pharmacies. The products were presented as cosmetics and not
medicaments. Moreover, the products were sold in this way under the name
'Clinique' in other countries without causing confusion for consumers.
C-315/92, Verband Sozialer Wetteberb v Estee Lauder Cosmetics GmbH, ECJ 5CH,
February 2 1994.
Belgian work rules discriminate
Belgian legislation providing exceptions to the ban on night working which
differ between men and women infringes the 1976 equal treatment directive on
access to employment.
C-12/93, Office National de l'emploi v Minne, ECJ 6CH, February 3 1994.
BRICK COURT CHAMBERS, BRUSSELS
