FT  14 JAN 94 / UK sees little hope of early end to IRA violence
The British government has concluded that the odds are now stacked heavily
against an early end to the IRA's 25-year campaign of violence in Ulster.
The underlying assessment in Whitehall is that the 'peace' faction within
the IRA has not won over the advocates of violence in the Republican power
struggle that has followed last month's Anglo-Irish peace initiative.
Mr John Major has yet to reach a final judgment on the reaction of the IRA
and its political wing, Sinn Fein, to the Downing Street declaration. But
unless there is an unexpected volte-face by the powerful IRA faction still
backing terrorism, the prime minister is expected soon to relaunch talks
without Sinn Fein on the province's future. Officials expect that move
within weeks.
Monitoring of secret deliberations within the IRA since the declaration have
led to strong suggestions in Whitehall that Mr Martin McGuinness, a
prominent member of Sinn Fein, also heads the IRA's military command.
Mr McGuinness, whose views recently are said to have straddled those of the
opposing peace and war factions in the Republican movement, has been
identified as the IRA's chief of staff.
The mood of pessimism was reinforced yesterday by demands from Mr Gerry
Adams, the Sinn Fein leader, for Mr Major to open an 'unconditional
dialogue'.
Blaming Mr Major for an 'intolerable stalemate', Mr Adams said that up to
now he had not been offered 'any political package with which to approach
the IRA'. But Mr Major told MPs at Westminster he would not be drawn
'bit-by-bit' into negotiations with Mr Adams while violence continued.
The British government believes that Mr Adams, regarded still as a 'dove' in
the Republican movement, is unwilling to contemplate the split in the IRA
senior ranks which would follow a cessation of violence.
That view has apparently been confirmed by Mr Adams' recent letter to Major.
The letter, which has not been published, demands direct negotiations as
well as clarification of some aspects of the Downing Street declaration.
Despite the present mood of pessimism, Mr Major will make it clear that the
opportunity for the IRA to renounce violence will remain on the table - as
will the offer of an eventual place in negotiations for Sinn Fein.
The government, anxious not to weaken the commitment of Dublin and the
mainly Catholic SDLP led by Mr John Hume to a settlement excluding Sinn
Fein, insists there is no question of revoking the declaration.
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, and Mr Hume have invested
enormous political capital in the effort to end the IRA's campaign of
violence. Mr Major will meet Mr Hume for talks today. He will indicate the
IRA cannot be allowed to hold up indefinitely the search for internal
political settlement.
There is a strong suspicion in Whitehall that the recent IRA attacks on
Northern Ireland security forces mark an attempt by the IRA hawks to provoke
a harsh British reaction, which the IRA would then use as an excuse to
intensify its campaign.
The government's view is that both sides of the IRA leadership feel it would
be disastrous to split the movement.
Hopes begin to fade, Page 8
