FT  02 JUN 94 / Floodgates open to admit a steady trickle: Foreign
investment in South Africa
When South Africa's soon-to-be president Mr Nelson Mandela issued his public
plea last autumn for foreign investment in his country, it created a frisson
within the global investment community. US institutional investors generally
and pension funds in particular, barred for more than a decade from
investing in South Africa, seemed poised to rise to the challenge.
So far, of the near 180 US cities, counties and states which had imposed
bans on pension fund investment in South Africa, all but 35 have acted to
lift them, according to the Washington-based Investor Responsibility
Research Center. Meanwhile, several leading US money managers, including
Morgan Stanley and Alliance Capital, have set up specialist funds for South
African investment.
Wilshire Associates, the California-based pension scheme consultants, will
lead a group of investment directors and money managers on a South African
tour later this month. And just last week, two leading UK firms, Smith New
Court and SG Warburg, announced ties with South African stockbroking firms
to help them sell specialist services to US investors.
But for all the cheerleading, it is not clear how much money US institutions
are prepared to invest. Mr Paul Moses, who monitors South African investment
for the IRRC, says those who count on a sudden inflow of funds are probably
mistaken. 'Institutions are thrilled that they are allowed to invest in
South Africa again. But they feel no moral obligation to do so.'
Most investors are likely to take the line of the Ford Foundation. Mr Clint
Stevenson, investment director, says that it will be up to the external
managers of its international portfolio to decide whether to invest. The
TIAA-CREF pension scheme, with more than Dollars 125bn (Pounds 83.3bn) in
assets, has similarly lifted its ban on South African investment but made no
formal commitment.
Investment bankers concede they may be gearing up for a boom that will never
come. Mr Steve Oke, head of South African research and sales at Smith New
Court, says that only when South African stocks and bonds look like a good
buy will cash migrate there. But investment experts point to two encouraging
imminent developments.
First, two leading world stock indices - by Morgan Stanley and the
International Finance Corp, the private sector arm of the World Bank - are
to include a South Africa country weighting. 'This means that passively
managed funds which track indices will have to invest in South Africa,' says
Mr Oke. A spokeswoman for Morgan Stanley said it would probably be included
in its emerging markets index, rather than its country index, 'because of
the political uncertainties'.
With a market capitalisation of roughly Dollars 200bn, South Africa is the
world's 10th largest stock market, according to Mr Ken Costa, managing
director at SG Warburg. It could account for 15-20 per cent of the emerging
markets index and, at that level, US fund managers would need to put up to
Dollars 6bn into the country to maintain a neutral weighting.
Second, a credit rating for the country's debt and a debut on the world
capital markets are likely this autumn. The government has retained Goldman
Sachs to assist in gaining a rating.
Investment bankers expect South Africa to win the minimum investment grade
rating of BBB. While the credit rating will mean more for fixed interest
investors, an investment grade would provide some comfort to equity
investors debating the political and economic risks.
However, years of economic isolation have led to structural shortcomings in
the South African stock market. 'You can't buy anything,' Mr Moses says. The
top handful of companies own large stakes in each other, leaving little
available for institutional investors. The cross-holdings were encouraged by
local rules forbidding investment outside the country.
Data from the Johannesburg Stock Exchange show that total turnover in 1992
was 4 per cent, rising to 7 per cent in 1993. Since the early part of 1994,
aided partly by 'unbundling' by some conglomerates, turnover has risen to
around 11 per cent.
Although there are 638 companies listed on the JSE, buying shares below the
30 largest will be problematic, Mr Oke says. 'It will be difficult for an
institution to get a line in any of the medium-sized stocks.'
Moreover, the pattern of cross-holdings raises questions about corporate
governance and management accountability to shareholders. Mr Moses points
out that while an institutional investor with a 5 per cent stake may have
considerable influence over a US corporate board, 'a 5 per cent stake in
Johannesburg is nothing because there is somebody else who has 30 per cent'.
The JSE has appointed a panel to examine corporate governance. Mr Michael
Katz, a partner at the Johannesburg law firm of Edward, Nathan and Freedlund
and chairman of the panel, suggests one remedy: the abolition of exchange
controls which force large domestic corporations to invest in each other. If
Mr Mandela's government lifts these, as expected, liquidity in shares should
improve. However, the government would have to be convinced that domestic
corporations would not respond by instantly sending their cash abroad.
