FT  13 OCT 94 / Technology: New era for MS treatment / A look at two drugs
which may slow down the disease
Multiple sclerosis patients and a handful of small drug companies developing
treatments for the disease may be about to enter a new era.
Sufferers of MS - the second most common neurological disease among young
adults - have this week been able to take heart from the results of clinical
trials on two new drugs revealed at the American Neurological Association
meeting in San Francisco.
Those results were good enough to make it likely that by 1996 there will be
several MS drugs on the market, compared with just one today. None is a cure
for the condition, but all appear to slow sharply the disease's progress.
For the suppliers, the results herald a period of tough competition. The
market will be worth Dollars 1.4bn (Pounds 930m) annually by 1998, says
stockbroker Lehman Brothers. The battle for that revenue will centre on the
clinical trial results and the mesh of patents in the area.
There are four main suppliers: Germany's Schering which sells Betaseron,
Israel's Teva with Copaxone, and Switzerland's Ares Serono/Biogen of the US,
both with beta interferon.
For the past year only Betaseron has been approved for the treatment of MS.
It works by interfering with the immune system, thought to be at fault in
MS.
Betaseron is made by genetically engineered bacteria and is not quite
identical to beta interferon produced naturally in the human body.
Biogen and Ares Serono, on the other hand, use genetically engineered mammal
cells to make beta interferon that is chemically identical to the human
version. In principle, this should mean the drug works better in the human
body with, perhaps, fewer side effects.
The data published this week were the first large-scale trials, beta
interferon and Copaxone.
The results of the Biogen trial, on 301 MS sufferers, were probably not as
clear as the company would have liked. Direct comparisons with the results
of earlier Betaseron trials are difficult because the drugs are not compared
directly, only against placebos.
Side effects - flu-like symptoms - seem to be fewer with beta interferon.
But this could have been because patients in the Biogen trials were also
given paracetamol (Tylenol) to depress their fevers. Furthermore the
effectiveness of Biogen's drug was gauged by how fast patients' condition
deteriorated - it slowed the progress of the disease by almost half.
But Betaseron was tested by measuring the frequency of MS attacks. Here,
however, there was little to choose between the two drugs.
The US Food and Drug Administration and regulatory bodies elsewhere are
likely to examine closely such data. Biogen, whose shares fell after the
trials results were published, faces some tough questioning if it claims
superiority over Betaseron.
The patents covering beta interferon also seem set to be fought over. There
is a cascade of licensing agreement starting at research institutions in
Japan and California and involving Ares Serono sub-licencing one patent to
Biogen while Schering tries to use beta interferon (not Betaseron) in
another disease area, hepatitis.
Standing aloof from this is Teva, the Israeli company, whose Copaxone
appears to work in a different and ill-understood way. But it too achieved
only modestly encouraging results, cutting the number of MS attacks but by
less than that achieved by Betaseron. It may be safer than Betaseron or beta
interferon and could have a market for patients who have reacted badly to
the other two.
The message that emerged from San Francisco was that the principle of
interferons helping MS sufferers is good and life for those who take the
drugs may get a little easier. However, the drug companies face a bruising
battle with each other to win sales.
