FT  07 APR 94 / International Company News: Eli Lilly set to benefit from
new heart drug
The biggest clinical trials yet conducted for Centorx, a new heart drug to
be marketed by US company Eli Lilly, show it helps up to 35 per cent of
patients, according to results published today in the US and tomorrow in the
UK.
US and European approval and launch of Centorx are likely during 1995.
More than 350,000 patients a year are potential recipients of Centorx, said
Mr Robert Califf of Duke University Medical Centre, one of the authors of
the two papers.
Annual sales will be up to Dollars 150m a year, according to Dr Jonathan
Gelles, an analyst with Wertheim Schroder, securities house, and further
applications for the drug are being studied.
Similar products are being developed by Merck, the biggest US drugs company,
Roche, of Switzerland, and Cor Therapeutics, a northern California
biotechnology company, said Dr Califf.
Centorx was developed by Centocor, a US biotechnology company in which Lilly
has a near 5 per cent stake. The marketing rights to the drug reverted to
Lilly when another of Centocor's drugs, the sepsis treatment Centoxin,
failed to make it through clinical trials more than a year ago.
The success of the drug is important to Centocor. The failure of Centoxin
pulled its stock market capitalisation down to just over Dollars 200m from
Dollars 1.2bn in August 1992. It has now recovered to Dollars 500m.
The clinical trial results, published in today's New England Journal of
Medicine and in Saturday's The Lancet, show that Centorx improves the
success rate of a common procedure called coronary angioplasty, in which a
small balloon is used to widen a partially blocked artery.
Angioplasty is cheaper than either of its two main alternatives: bypass
surgery and treatment with the drug TPa. TPa is the most successful product
from Genentech, another biotechnology company, say doctors from the
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Centre, writing in the New England
Journal of Medicine today.
The clinical trials studied the effects of the drug in 2,099 patients. They
indicate that the drug cut the failure rate of coronary angioplasty in high
risk patients to 8 per cent from 13 per cent after 28 days and by slightly
less over six months.
