FT  31 OCT 94 / Business Travel: In S Korea, it is better to arrive  ..
Bridges fall apart. Boats catch fire. Aircraft crash. Trains collide.
Ferries capsize. The past year in South Korea has been bad enough to make
any traveller nervous. But the frequency of disasters during 'Visit Korea
Year' is especially grim news, writes our Travel Staff.
The collapse of one of Seoul's main river bridges, the Songsu, during the
morning rush hour on October 21 killed at least 32 people and cast a shadow
over South Korea's reputation as a world leader in construction.
As the embarrassed government expressed contrition for lax safety
procedures, a pleasure boat packed with local tourists caught fire on
Chungju Lake south of Seoul three days later, killing at least 25.
Yet the combined toll from these two accidents pales in comparison with the
numbers killed on the roads during an average long holiday weekend.
The latest accidents have reinforced a widespread impression that travelling
anywhere in South Korea - by any type of transport - is exceptionally
dangerous.
Ask Yoo O-kun, a bank employee who went to Chungju Lake to recover from the
Songsu Bridge nightmare - he lost his closest friend - and ended up helping
to rescue people from the burning boat.
'I now reckon there's no safe place in our country,' he said. 'How could
disasters take place in succession like this? I'm too scared to travel now.'
The boat disaster happened just over a year after a ferry capsized off the
west coast, killing 292.
Those who think that train or air travel might be more reassuring are wrong.
In August, 160 passengers and crew aboard a Korean Air Lines Airbus had a
remarkable escape when it crash-landed in a rainstorm on the southern
tourist island of Cheju.
In July last year, 64 were killed when an Asiana Airlines Boeing crashed on
the south-west coast. And air force chief General Cho Kun-hae was among six
people killed when a helicopter crashed south of Seoul last March.
Two months ago, three were killed and 50 hurt when two express trains
collided head on. A driver had ignored a signal. Last March, 79 were killed
in a train accident in the southern city of Pusan.
Observers blame lax safety standards, non-enforcement of regulations - and
corruption - for many accidents in South Korea.
Korea plans to spend Dollars 100bn (Pounds 67bn) on infrastructure over the
next eight years. However, MPs, the media and engineers warn of more bad
accidents to come. The lesson is clear: in South Korea, it is always better
to arrive than to travel.
