FT  24 SEP 94 / Food &amp; Drink: Broking bread, 90s style - Where there's a
product, there's a market - and our daily bread is no exception
How the customer forms his or her first - and perhaps most lasting -
impression of a restaurant is a question which all chefs must address.
The key criterion for me is the bread. Invariably, if the restaurant offers
good bread, the rest of the meal will be a pleasure.
Yet, like all the seemingly simple things in life, offering fresh,
appetising bread twice a day presents chefs with one of their biggest
challenges. A challenge that incorporates culinary skills, logistics, timing
and cost appraisal.
At a busy restaurant, such as The Greenhouse in west London, the annual
bread bill is Pounds 25,000, an outlay which does not generate any obvious
profit. Supplying bread to restaurants is a highly competitive business in
which suppliers are judged by the quality of the last delivery.
Ideally, all chefs would like to bake their own bread but, aside from a
shortage of skilled bakers, bread-making requires kitchen space and time.
The dough has to be mixed, rested, proved, moulded and developed before
being cut, baked and rested again. To be ready for the lunch service this
work must start at 7am and be repeated again in the late morning for the
dinner service.
In south London, Gordon Ramsay, the chef at Aubergine, Park Walk, London
SW10, has decided that he will bake his own bread, some 160 rolls a day, and
is already aware of one of the pitfalls - that the staff might eat it before
it even reaches the restaurant customers.
Other chefs who bake their own include: Pierre Hoffman, at La Tante Claire,
in Royal Hospital Road, London SW3; Sally Clarke, of Clarke's in Kensington
Church Street, London W8, who now has a separate bakery in Notting Hill
Gate; and Michel Roux, at The Waterside Inn, Bray, Berkshire.
Until the early 1990s chefs had two other possible sources of bread. The
first was to deal directly with a commercial bakery and the second to buy in
partly-cooked bread.
But, however good the quality, it does mean that the first food a customer
eats is made outside the restaurant. And because there is usually only one
delivery, bread that has been made at 5am and delivered at 7am will be
offered as late as 10pm to a customer.
To some extent the problem can be solved by using part-baked rolls and
breads which are pre-cooked and warmed immediately before serving. But these
rolls are bulky and present considerable storage difficulties for a small
kitchen.
A new option for chefs presented itself in 1990 with the formation of Gail
Force, London's first 'bread brokers'.
It was founded by Gail Stephens, who grew up in Israel, trained in catering
at Westminster College and went on to cook at the Garrick Club, in Covent
Garden, London.
A chance encounter at a food exhibition in Wembley, north London, with a
specialist baker who was unable to supply all the interested outlets, led
Stephens to realise that here was a market waiting to be established:
uniting London's small new bakeries with the increasing number of chefs and
delicatessens who wanted to offer high-quality freshly-baked breads.
To make this market requires expertise and dedication.
Stephens' day begins at 3.15am so that she can meet her drivers at Park
Royal, in west London, at 4am. All the orders for the various breads are
then made up. Traditional Italian breads, pugliese, ciabatta and grissini
are boxed alongside English farmhouse loaves, while French ficelles,
baguettes and boules de campagne nestle next to Jewish chollas.
The best, from the ovens of Bakoven, in Coburg Road, London N22, Neal's
Yard, in Covent Garden and Beverley Hills Bakery, Brompton Road, London SW3,
which makes American muffins, are then on their way to the tables of the
capital's restaurants and delicatessens, such as Riva, in Church Road,
Barnes and Randall &amp; Aubin, in Soho.
Stephens' comments on her work are succinct. 'It's a crazy business. Most of
our customers are in central London but rents and rates there are
prohibitive. We have to work on the periphery and organise our deliveries as
best we can. Every half hour lost at the beginning of the day results in 1
1/2 hours delay at the end of the morning.
'Every chef wants their bread delivered at the same time, never later than
7am, and they all want the best quality at the lowest price. I can offer a
delivery of a second bake in the afternoon but that is no guarantee that I
will keep the business.
'One late afternoon Quaglino's needed 500 rolls and I drove through London
with them straight out of the oven. There was so much steam that I had to
roll the windows down to see where I was going. Quaglino's got their bread
but shortly afterwards I lost their account.'
Stephens believes that the 'bread revolution' which Britain has undergone
over the past five years will continue and the only way forward is to pursue
quality.
She has now invested in the baking skills of Philippe Dade and his new
bakery, The Bread Factory, in Stanmore, Middlesex,which will bake three
times a day, at 4.30am, 9.30am and 3pm, and whose rolls are already gracing
the tables of the Ritz and the Inn on the Park in central London.
In spite of all the inherent problems Stephens is delighted to be dealing
with a product that is so fundamental to the enjoyment of a good meal and
our general well-being. She would like to see a baker's skills more widely
appreciated, to be able to operate on bigger margins herself and find the
one supplier missing from her price list - someone who makes particularly
good doughnuts.
Gail Force, 336 West End Lane, London NW6 1LN. Tel: 071-431 5469, fax
071-431 6725.
