FT  18 JUL 94 / International Company News: Hyundai plans Won600bn
investment in steel plant
Hyundai, South Korea's largest conglomerate, is planning to enter the steel
sector with the construction of a plant by 1997.
The project, however, is being opposed by the government, which fears it
would cause a glut in steel supplies and threaten the profitability of
state-owned Pohang Iron &amp; Steel, the country's dominant steel producer and
the world's most profitable steel company.
Hyundai Pipe said it planned to invest Won600bn (Dollars 743m) in a steel
plant to produce 1.3m tonnes of cold-rolled coils annually for Hyundai car,
shipbuilding and transport equipment subsidiaries.
Production of the plant, which will be built in either Ulsan or Pusan in
south-eastern Korea, will be later expanded to 2.3m tonnes.
Hyundai plans to purchase production facilities from Japan or Germany, with
plant construction to begin in 1996.
The government believes the announcement is only the first stage of a bigger
Hyundai project to build facilities that could produce 10m tonnes of steel,
resulting in an oversupply.
The ministry of trade, industry and energy says Korea will suffer a steel
demand shortfall of 1.5m tonnes by the year 2001, which could easily be
covered by imports.
But Hyundai says the government has underestimated domestic demand for
steel. It predicts that the growth of the manufacturing and chemical
industries and increased use of steel for the construction of buildings and
bridges will increase steel demand. Any excess steel supplies could be sold
to China, it adds.
The government may try to block Hyundai's steel project by denying a land
acquisition licence for the steel plant and barring the import of steel
production facilities. It may also rule against Hyundai on environmental
grounds. Samsung, the South Korean conglomerate, has acquired control of
Korea Fertilizer, the state-controlled fertiliser and specialty chemicals
company, in one of the country's biggest privatisation sales.
Samsung bid Won230bn, almost twice the expected auction price, to increase
its stake in Korea Fertilizer to 67 per cent from 32.4 per cent by acquiring
the shareholding of state-owned Korea Development Bank.
Samsung retained a minority stake in the company after being forced to give
up management control of Korea Fertilizer to the then military government in
1967. Korea Fertilizer reported net profits of Won5bn on sales of Won211.6bn
last year.
Samsung said it hoped to increase the company's turnover to Won1,200bn by
2000 by expanding its specialty chemicals business through a Won1,000bn
investment programme.
