FT  04 MAR 94 / Life houses face steep rise in Lautro fines
The scale of fines faced by life insurance firms which fail to meet
standards set by their regulator will rise sharply and is likely to start at
more than Pounds 200,000.
For the longer-term, however, Lautro, the self-regulating organisation for
the life insurance industry, is considering a regulatory system providing a
commercial incentive for firms to reach high levels of compliance.
'I believe that in the next year or so, regulators will need to start
introducing a system based on incentives as well as penalties,' Mr Kit
Jebens, Lautro chief executive, said yesterday.
Lautro's warning that fines for those with seriously inadequate compliance
procedures would increase substantially comes within a week of its imposing
a record fine of Pounds 180,000 on Legal &amp; General, one of the largest UK
life and general insurance companies, for a widespread and systemic failure
in its compliance systems. L&amp;G also had to pay Lautro's costs of Pounds
220,000.
Mr Jebens said that, given the extensive guidance issued, there could be
'little excuse for failures to come up to standard' in the second round of
inspection visits which has already begun.
Lautro remains conscious, however, that the fines it imposes will bear
directly or indirectly on a life office's policyholders, and so is keen not
to embark on a practice that leads inexorably to ever-rising penalties.
It believes that the adverse publicity suffered by a fined firm is a
powerful weapon in itself.
Mr Jebens said that one possible way of providing an incentive was a system
of grading life companies in accordance with their record on compliance and
customer care.
Those which achieved the highest grade would be given greater room for
manoeuvre than the other categories in the structures and procedures for
achieving satisfactory standards. This would give them greater flexibility
in deciding how they meet the regulator's requirements.
A pilot study into devising effective and accurate ways of measuring a
firm's service to customers is under way at Lautro.
The results are to be passed to the Personal Investment Authority, the new
regulator for retail financial services, which is due to come into operation
in July.
Yesterday's tough stance was signalled in November 1993 when Mr Barry
Sherlock, Lautro chairman, said that the one-in-six failure rate in first
inspection visits was unacceptable, and that penalties would be heavier for
those failing in the second round.
