FT  04 JUN 94 / Bank adjustment plan criticised
A note of controversy has emerged over UK monetary statistics after the Bank
of England announced yesterday that it would change its system of seasonal
adjustment next month.
City analysts and banking officials fear that revising the monetary figures
monthly, instead of six-monthly, could add more uncertainty to the monetary
series and undermine public confidence in the data.
The Bank argues that monthly revisions to its estimates will be relatively
small and insists that the updating system will provide accurate data more
quickly.
The British Bankers' Association said it had reservations about the new
system, which is being forced on it as a result of the Bank's changes. It
admitted that the system would pick up seasonal trends more quickly, but
said it would make it harder for City analysts to produce forecasts.
The association added: 'The big disadvantage, especially to commentators who
are expected to analyse the latest month's figure, is that they will not
necessarily know where they are starting from, since the previous month's
figures will have been revised - perhaps significantly.'
These fears were echoed by City analysts. Mr Michael Saunders, UK economist
with Saloman Brothers, said: 'I would rather that (the revisions) were done
every year, not every six months. Doing it every month will add more
uncertainty.'
Mr Bob Pannell, economist at the Building Society Association, said: 'In my
own view this is an unhelpful development. You get to a stage where the
markets are reacting to second revisions and it becomes more remote from the
real economy.'
Bank officials insist these fears are exaggerated. After running test
dummies of the new system for the past two years, it predicts that revisions
will initially change M0, the narrowest measure of money supply, by 0.3 of a
percentage point a month. M4, the broadest measure of money supply, is
likely to change by 0.1 percentage point a month.
'Instead of having one big revision every six months, we have smaller
revisions more regularly - the advantage is that we can arrive at the final
resting place quicker,' the Bank said. The only monetary figure that will
not be updated will be December's M0, which is highly volatile due to
Christmas spending, it added.
The first data that will incorporate the changes will be M4 figures on June
20.
